Assessment of the Effects of Student Response Systems on
Student Learning and Attitudes over a Broad Range of
Biology Courses
Ralph W. Preszler, Angus Dawe, Charles B. Shuster, and Miche`le Shuster
Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003-8001
Submitted September 14, 2006; Revised December 18, 2006; Accepted December 20, 2006
Monitoring Editor: Marshall Sundberg
With the advent of wireless technology, new tools are available that are intended to enhance
students’ learning and attitudes. To assess the effectiveness of wireless student response systems
in the biology curriculum at New Mexico State University, a combined study of student attitudes
and performance was undertaken. A survey of students in six biology courses showed that
strong majorities of students had favorable overall impressions of the use of student response
systems and also thought that the technology improved their interest in the course, attendance,
and understanding of course content. Students in lower-division courses had more strongly
positive overall impressions than did students in upper-division courses. To assess the effects of
the response systems on student learning, the number of in-class questions was varied within
each course throughout the semester. Students’ performance was compared on exam questions
derived from lectures with low, medium, or high numbers of in-class questions. Increased use of
the response systems in lecture had a positive influence on students’ performance on exam
questions across all six biology courses. Students not only have favorable opinions about the use
of student response systems, increased use of these systems increases student learning.
INTRODUCTION
Many efforts to improve science education involve enhancing the social context of learning. Traditional lectures and
textbooks primarily rely on one-way communication from
instructors and authors to students. This approach assumes
that students are able to assimilate the information and
integrate it into their existing understanding of a topic and
are also able to adjust their understanding of related concepts. It also assumes that individual students are able to
resolve conflicts between the information presented in the
course and their preexisting understanding and beliefs. This
extensive integration of knowledge within appropriate cognitive structures, the process of meaningful learning, is necessary to develop the ability to apply understanding of
scientific knowledge to unique problems. Few students are
able to accomplish this in the traditional structure of university science courses . As a result, universities are producing graduates who are unable to apply a meaningful understanding
of science to the solution of personal and societal issues
 .
Our failure to help students learn to integrate scientific
knowledge across cognitive domains also may account for
the lack of graduates who are able to contribute to the
information-rich, interdisciplinary process of modern biological research . Efforts to address this problem
through increasing the frequency and quality of interactions
within university science courses include enhancing student-to-instructor communications , expanding instructional teams to include peer instructors , and promoting cooperative learning activities among students . Implementation of these reforms ranges
from the addition of interactive activities to traditional
courses to the complete restructuring of
courses . These efforts share a set of related
objectives: developing more engaging courses that increase
students’ interest in and appreciation of science, helping
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.06–09–0190
Address correspondence to: Ralph W. Preszler ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 6, 29–41, Spring 2007
© 2007 by The American Society for Cell Biology
students learn to work more effectively in problem-solving
teams, and improving students’ understanding of scientific
knowledge.
Educational technology provides many opportunities for
communication
increasing
interactivity
within science courses. It can be used to support individualized learning activities, thereby opening up time in lecture
courses for interactive sessions. For example, electronic student response systems have been used to quiz students at
the beginning of lectures to encourage students to carefully
read the textbook so that the basic information in the text
does not need to be repeated in lecture . However, the most exciting potential of educational technology is to facilitate interactions
between students and instructors and among students
 . In this study,
we have investigated wireless student response systems that
may enhance student-to-instructor interactions by providing
instructors with immediate formative assessments of students’ understanding . Additionally, these
systems may facilitate cooperative learning among students
 .
In a thorough review of student response systems, including current wireless systems (clickers) as well as earlier
wired systems, Judson and Sawada concluded that
three decades of studies have consistently documented positive student evaluations of the use of student response
systems in lecture courses. They found that when used in the
stimulus–response, operant conditioning, approach to learning prevalent in the 1960s and 1970s, students claimed student response systems increased their level of interest and
their learning; however, this increased interest was not reflected in measures of student performance. When coupled
with constructivist, student-centered learning strategies in
physics, the use of wireless student response systems (clickers) has been associated with measurable conceptual gains.
Judson and Sawada also concluded that it was simply
too early to tell whether clickers would enhance learning in
other sciences, but they recommended that this technology
should be used to promote student-centered learning. Since
the review of Judson and Sawada , the use of clickers
to promote learning in biology has produced mixed results.
Knight and Wood increased student learning by using peer instructors and clickers to facilitate cooperative
learning in a developmental biology course. Studies of the
use of clickers in microbiology and
physiology describe some encouraging
trends, but they did not find clearly significant effects of
clickers on students’ exam performance. Currently, there is
strong evidence that students have positive opinions about
the use of clickers in biology courses; however, the effects of
clickers on student learning remain unclear.
In this study, we have explored student opinions regarding the use of clickers and the effects of the frequency of
clicker use on student performance. A challenge of using
student-centered teaching methods, such as clickers, is that
the application of these methods should be centered on and
responsive to the learning environment of each group of
students. Each method needs to be compatible with the
students’ approach to learning, the instructor’s teaching
style, and the course content. We investigated the robustness
of using clickers by evaluating their effectiveness across six
biology courses ranging from freshman- to senior-level
classes. We also explored how students’ opinions about this
technology vary in association with their course grades and
with their preference for studying individually or cooperatively. In addition to investigating students’ opinions about
the use of clickers in biology courses, we investigated the
impact of clickers on students’ exam performance. This impact was tested by systematically varying the frequency of
clicker questions among lectures within six biology courses
and comparing this variation in clicker question frequency
to students’ performance on exam questions from lectures
associated with different numbers of clicker questions. This
comparison allowed us to determine whether the frequency
of clicker use within a course influenced students’ performance on exams as well as whether this influence was
consistent across courses.
Student response systems enable each student with a
uniquely registered clicker to answer questions posed by the
instructor by sending his or her response to the receiver
attached to the instructor’s computer. This approach engages each student as he or she commits to the answer and
has the potential to provide a dramatic improvement over
the traditional approach of the instructor orally posing a
question and waiting while most students passively watch
the few who are willing to respond. The instructor can
immediately display a histogram of the class responses
while maintaining the anonymity of each individual’s answer. Projecting the histogram of class responses allows
students to gain a better understanding of their class, and it
provides the instructor with an immediate measure of students’ understanding of a topic. The instructor can use this
rapid formative assessment to move on if most students
understand; if students are confused, the class can break into
a discussion or a review. When clickers are used to stimulate
discussion and cooperative problem solving, they may enhance meaningful learning in lecture courses of any size
 . We often allowed students to
discuss the problem before transmitting their individual
answers to clicker questions; we also used the histogram of
students’ responses as a catalyst to trigger discussion. Therefore, our lectures that included more clicker questions also
incorporated more interactions and cooperative learning
among students. We have evaluated the hypothesis that
students learn more effectively during these higher clicker
frequency, more interactive lectures. Specifically, we tested
the prediction that average student scores on exam questions will increase with low, medium, to high frequencies of
clicker use in corresponding lectures.
In fall 2005, six courses in the Department of Biology at New Mexico
State University (NMSU) used wireless student response units. The
number of clicker questions posed was systematically varied within
courses. This variation in clicker questions was subsequently compared with students’ performance on exam questions tied to low-,
medium-, or high-clicker lectures. At the end of the semester, students’ opinions about the use of these clickers were surveyed. The
surveys were analyzed to determine students’ impressions of the
use of clickers in biology courses and to explore how these opinions
varied among courses, among students who preferred to study
individually for exams in contrast to those who studied cooperatively, and to evaluate variation in the opinions of students based on
R. W. Preszler et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
their course grades. Our protocol for using human subjects in this
research was approved by the NMSU Institutional Review Board
(NMSU IRB 6136).
Biology Courses and Student Response Units
The six biology courses participating in this study included four
lower-division courses (Biology 101, 111, 211, and 219) and two
upper-division courses (Biology 311 and 377). Table 1 describes the
demographic characteristics of each course. Biology 101 is a nonmajors introductory biology course that uses an issues-based approach to help students develop an understanding of the application of scientific knowledge to personal and societal issues.
Although this is a freshman-level course, many of the students in
Biology 101 are not freshmen. Biology 111 and 211 are introductory
biology courses that include science majors as well as students with
a professional need for training in biology, such as the prenursing
students in Biology 211. Biology 219 is an introductory microbiology
course specifically developed to meet the needs of allied health
(prenursing and related fields) majors. Biology 311 is an upperdivision general microbiology course targeting, but not limited to,
science majors. Last, Biology 377 is a cell biology course composed
primarily of senior biology, microbiology, and biochemistry majors.
Biology 101, 211, and 219 were taught by the same instructor. This
instructor had used clickers in three courses before this study.
Biology 111 and Biology 311 were taught by instructors who were
using clickers for the first time. The instructor of Biology 377 had
used clickers in one course before this study.
All courses used the most current radio frequency Classroom
Performance System available from eInstruction (Denton, TX)
( in fall 2005. Students purchased
the remote handsets at the university bookstore, except for Biology
111 students who were given the handsets. Students in all courses
registered their wireless remotes at the eInstruction website and
paid a registration fee at the same website. Instructors downloaded
eInstruction software and student registration information onto the
laptop computers that they used in lecture. Two of the six courses
(Biology 311 and 377) used Macintosh computers in lecture. Instructors presented multiple-choice questions in lecture on PowerPoint
slides, often allowing students to discuss the question before transmitting their answers. Receivers connected to the instructors’ laptops recorded each student’s response. Immediately after the question, instructors presented a histogram of the distribution of
students’ responses. Instructors adjusted their lectures on-the-fly to
students’ comprehension of each concept explored with a clicker
question. If many students did not answer the question correctly,
the instructors moved to a discussion or review; if students generally understood the material, instructors moved on to the next topic.
The eInstruction software recorded each student’s response to
each question. After class, instructors set each correct answer at
100% of the possible points, each incorrect answer at 80%, and
unanswered questions at 0%. Although all courses were using the
wireless response units by the second week of classes, students did
not receive credit for their responses until near the time of the first
exam. This delay in assigning credit to clicker responses was made
to provide students with sufficient time to purchase and register
their clickers. The proportion of total course points associated with
Table 1. Course descriptions
Course (Biology)
Student category
Demographic
Female (%)
Ethnic minority (%)
Class size
Originally enrolled
Completed exams
Completed survey
Class (% by course)
Discipline (% by course)
Agriculture
Arts & Letters
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Health & Social Services
Social Sciences
Undeclared
Gender, class size, ethnicity (percentage of underrepresented ethnic minority), class, and discipline are listed for each course. Two class sizes
of each type are listed for Biology 111 because it was taught in two sections. Discipline categories includes some individual colleges
(Agriculture, Dona Anna Branch Community College DABCC, Education, and Health and Social Services), groups of related departments
within the College of Arts and Sciences (Arts & Letters includes arts as well as various English and communications majors; Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology; and Social Sciences) as well as the individual Department of Biology.
Student Response Systems
Vol. 6, Spring 2007
clicker points varied among courses from 8.5 to 19% (Biology 101,
10.4%; 111, 19.23%; 211, 9.6%; 219, 8.5%; 311, 10.9%; and 377, 13.5%).
This study evaluated the responses of approximately 550 students
(the number of responses varied slightly between questions) to 12
multiple-choice questions about the use of wireless student response units in biology courses (Appendix A in the Supplemental
Material includes the text of each question and its answer categories). These questions included three questions about students’
overall impression of clickers, three questions exploring students’
impressions of specific benefits of using clickers, three questions
related to students’ recommendations regarding how instructors
should use clickers, and two questions asking about the frequencies
of technical problems students experienced while using clickers.
One question asked whether students prefer to study individually
or cooperatively while preparing for exams; responses to this question as well as course and students’ course grades were used to
explore variation in students’ opinions about the use of clickers.
The students were introduced to the survey in lecture, and the
survey was posted on the course websites 7 d before finals week.
The survey was left open for 2 wk. Both announcements in lecture
and a preamble at the entrance to the surveys in the websites
explained that participation in the surveys was completely voluntary and that responses would be reported at the population, rather
than individual student, level. Students’ participation rates (percentage of students taking the final exam who completed the clicker
survey) ranged from 60 to 85% (Biology 101, 60.7%; 111, 72.5%; 211,
61.3%; 219, 80.0%; 311, 84.5%; and 377, 84.7%).
Analytical Methods: Survey Responses among Courses. For each of
the 12 survey questions, stepwise chi-square contingency table analyses were used to compare the distribution of students’ answers
across courses. Because very few students chose the more negative
responses to some questions, these answer categories had to be
pooled to maintain adequate subsample sizes for the chi-square
analyses. Appendix A in the Supplemental Material indicates which
survey answer categories were pooled during the analyses. The first
step of each of these analyses asked whether the distribution of
students’ responses across the answer categories differed among the
six courses. If the answers to a survey question were not significantly different among the six courses, the pooled answers across all
courses were described. If the distribution of answers differed
among courses, the course with the most divergent distribution of
answers was removed, and the course by answer interaction of the
remaining five courses was analyzed. This stepwise removal of
courses was repeated until the remaining courses were not significantly different; the answers of these remaining courses were then
pooled and described. If more than one course had been removed
during this initial sequence of contingency table analyses, the stepwise process was repeated starting with the removed courses to
determine whether they differed in students’ responses to the survey question. If students’ responses to a question separated into two
groups corresponding to lower- and upper-division courses, a follow-up analysis limited to students who earned an “A” grade was
conducted. Probability values equal to or 0.01 were considered
significant in these stepwise contingency table analyses of the survey questions across courses. Because of the many factors that may
influence differences in students’ responses among courses, we
used the 0.01  level to focus on larger, more meaningful, differences in the distribution of students’ answers among courses.
The two upper-division courses were the only courses using
Macintosh computers; these computers were found to be less compatible with eInstruction software. Therefore, consideration of differences by academic level in students’ responses to survey questions was confounded by the increased number of in-class problems
by using clickers in upper-division courses. When the chi-square
contingency table analyses of students’ responses by course
grouped responses to a survey question into upper- and lowerdivision courses, post hoc log-linear analyses were used to compare
the amount of variation in students’ responses to the survey questions that was associated with academic level to that which was
associated with the frequency of in-class problems by using clickers.
The log-linear models were based on three-way tables of student
survey responses by academic level (upper- or lower-division
course) and by the frequency of in-class problems by using clickers
(no problems, 1 or 2 problems, 3 or more problems). The fit of the
full log-linear models including the three-way interaction as well as
all two-way interactions and main effects was estimated with a
chi-square value. The fit of these full models was compared with
that of the models after removing the two-way interactions involving students’ responses by academic level; the full models also were
compared with that of the models after removing the two-way
interactions involving students’ responses by the frequency of inclass problems . The magnitude of the
change in the fit of the models was used as an indication of the
amount of variation in students’ responses associated with academic level in comparison with that associated with in-class problems.
Analytical Methods: Survey Responses by Student Grades. To determine whether students’ opinions about the use of clickers differed among students receiving different course grades, it was first
necessary to determine whether grades represented similar performance categories relative to peers across the six courses. Before the
analyses of the relationships between grades and survey responses,
stepwise chi-square contingency table analyses also were used to
determine which courses had roughly similar grade (“A,” “B,” “C,”
“D,” and “F”) distributions and so could be included in the same
analysis of the relationships between student survey opinions and
their course grades. This initial analysis used the more rigorous 
value of 0.01, because the goal was to group courses with roughly
similar grade distributions rather than to identify all differences in
grades across courses. After grouping courses with similar grade
distributions, for those groups with sufficient subsample sizes, simple chi-square contingency table analyses were used to determine
whether students’ answers to survey questions differed by course
grades. The more standard  level of 0.05 was used in this analysis
because any significant differences by grade in students’ responses
to survey questions was of interest.
Analytical Methods: Survey Responses by Exam Study Preference.
Simple chi-square contingency table analyses (  0.05) also were
used to determine whether variation in responses to the survey
question asking whether students preferred to study for exams
individually or cooperatively was associated with variation in students’ responses to survey questions about clickers.
Effects of Clicker Frequency on Content Acquisition
The number of clicker questions asked in each lecture was systematically varied to evaluate the effects of the frequency of clicker
questions on students’ ability to answer associated exam questions.
Within each course, students experienced low-, medium-, and highclicker lectures. The number of clicker questions associated with
these three levels was set within each course, but it was allowed to
vary slightly between courses so that each instructor could use
clickers at frequencies that were within his or her comfort level
(Biology 101, 211, 219, and 311: low-clicker frequency lectures, 0–2
clicker questions; medium, 3–4 questions; high, 5–6; Biology 111:
low, 0–1; medium, 2–3; high, 4–6; and Biology 377: low, 0–1;
medium, 2; high, 3–5). To avoid biasing variation in clicker frequency in a pattern that might covary with students’ performance,
such as lecture topic, day of the week, or proximity to exams, clicker
frequencies followed a temporal Latin square design. For example,
if there were nine lectures before an exam, the clicker level of the
first lecture would be randomly determined (e.g., medium) and the
remaining lectures of a course with Monday, Wednesday, and Friday lectures would follow a pattern similar to a 3  3 Su Do Ku
puzzle (e.g., week 1: medium, high, low; week 2: high, low, me-
R. W. Preszler et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
dium; and week 3: low, medium, high). Four courses (Biology 101,
111, 211, and 219) followed this pattern throughout the semester
with the minor exception of setting 1 of the Latin squares in each
course so that a low (no-clicker) day coincided with a guest lecture.
Instructors of the remaining two courses (Biology 311 and 377)
found that following a predetermined clicker level interfered with
developing optimal lectures for each topic. Although the instructors
of these two courses continued to vary clicker frequency, they did
not follow a predetermined sequence. During the set of lectures
before exam 1 of each course, students were purchasing and registering clickers, and the instructors and students were adjusting to
the use of clickers. The experiment began after exam 1 and ran
through the last week of the semester.
Analytical Methods: Content Acquisition
The effect of variation in the frequency of clicker questions on
students’ exam performance across all courses was evaluated with
an analysis of variance (ANOVA). The dependent variable was the
percentage of students who correctly answered multiple-choice
exam questions tied to specific lectures. The analyses included
questions from the second midterm exams through noncomprehensive questions in the final exams. Across all courses, the analysis of
exams included 659 exam questions. The ANOVA used three main
effects to investigate variation in students’ performance across these
exam questions: 1) course (6 different biology courses), 2) exams
(exams 2, 3, and 4), and 3) number of clicker questions in associated
lecture (low, medium, or high). This analysis also included each
two-way interaction term that included the effects of clickers: 1)
clicker by exam, which determined whether the effects of clickers on
scores varied among exams; and 2) clicker by course, which determined whether the effects of clickers on exam scores varied among
courses. Although the main effect of clickers in the ANOVA was
used to determine whether exam scores significantly differed
among the three levels of clicker use, polynomial contrasts were
used to ask more specific questions. These contrasts evaluated the
significance of linear and quadratic variation among the mean exam
question scores of the three clicker levels. The linear contrast determined whether there was a significant linear increase (or decrease)
in exam scores associated with low-, medium-, and high-clicker use.
This linear contrast was the statistical test most closely associated
with our hypothesis that content acquisition increases with increased use of clickers. The quadratic contrast determined if exam
scores significantly varied among clicker levels in a curved quadratic pattern.
Survey Responses among Courses
General Value. Students’ responses to the three questions
probing their general view of the value of using clickers in
biology courses were positive. Across all six courses (averaged across lower- and upper-division courses, which are
shown separately in Figure 1), 48% of students categorizing
the overall value of clickers found them to be a great addition to the class (the “yes” category in Figure 1A; see Appendix A in the Supplemental Material for complete survey
text), whereas only 8% found them to be a distraction or very
detrimental. When asked whether they would recommend a
clicker class, 62% selected yes, absolutely, and only 10%
would not recommend a clicker course (Figure 1B averaged
across lower- and upper-division responses). When asked
whether clickers were worth the cost, 69% responded yes or
probably, whereas 31% felt they were not (Figure 1C averaged across lower- and upper-division responses).
The distribution of students’ responses to each of these three
questions significantly differed between lower- and upperdivision courses (Table 2, General value questions). As
shown in Table 2, the chi-square contingency table analyses
showed that the distribution of students’ answers across the
three answer categories was significantly different among
the courses until the lower- and upper-division courses were
partitioned into separate analyses. These distributions of
students’ answers across the three answer categories, for
each of the questions addressing students’ general impression of clickers, did not differ among the four lower-division
courses, nor did they vary between the two upper-division
courses (Table 2, General value questions). They only differed between lower- and upper-division courses. Students
in the lower-division courses had more favorable responses
to each of the three questions evaluating their general impression of clickers than did students in upper-division
courses (Figure 1). Follow-up analyses, limited to “A” stu-
Each panel represents students’ responses to individual
survey questions. The bars within each panel show the percentage
of lower-division students and the percentage of upper-division
students who chose each answer category.
Student Response Systems
Vol. 6, Spring 2007
Table 2. Stepwise chi-square contingency table analyses of student responses to survey questions across courses
Survey questions by category
All coursesa
Analyses of courses remaining
after the sequential removal of
Stepwise analyses of
removed coursesc
General Value
Overall, I found the clickers to be
x2  33.59, df  10, p 
101, 111, 211, 219, 311, (377),
311, 377, p  0.738
Note: Because this p value is
0.01, it indicates a
significant difference
among the six courses.d
Note: This step indicates that
after removing the course
with the most divergent
answers (377), the
remaining courses (101, 111,
211, 219, 311) are still
significantly different.
Note: This indicates that
students in the
courses removed in
the previous analyses
(311, 377) had similar
answers to this
101, 111, 211, 219, (311, 377),
Note: This step indicates that
after removing the two
most divergent courses (311,
377), the distribution of
student answers to this
question do not differ
significantly among the
remaining courses (101, 111,
211, 219).
I would recommend a clicker class
to a friend
x2  65.54, df  10, p 
101, 111, 211, 219, 311, (311),
p  0.002;
101, 111, 211, 219, (311, 377),
The cost of  the clicker
x2  42.47, df  10, p 
101, 111, 211, 219, 311, (377),
p  0.001; 101, 111, 211, 219,
(311, 377), p  0.118
Benefits of Clickers
The clickers kept me more
interested
x2  21.15, df  15,
The clickers made it more likely
that I would attend class
x2  29.92, df  15,
111, 211, 219, 311, 377 (101),
The clickers helped me
understand and/or learn 
x2  31.44, df  15, p 
101, 111, 211, 311, 377 (219),
How should we use clickers?
How many clicker questions do
you recommend 
x2  27.93, df  10,
101, 111, 211, 219, 311, (377),
The number of clicker points is
x2  21.13, df  10, p 
I prefer to answer clicker
x2  47.48, df 
10, p  0.001
101, 111, 211, 219, 377, (311),
p  0.003;
101, 111, 211, 219, (377, 311),
Problems with clicker use
Did you have any problems
registering your clicker?
x2  28.81, df  10, p 
101, 211, 219, 311, 377, (111),
 problems getting your clicker to
work in class?
x2  83.66, df  15, p 
101, 111, 211, 219, 311, (377),
p  0.001;
101, 111, 211, 219, (311, 377),
p  0.005;
101, 111, 211, (219, 311, 377),
219, 311, 377,
p  0.001;
a Column 2 describes the significance of the initial step determining whether student answers to a question differed among the six courses.
b If there was a significant difference among the six courses (column 2), the first line associated with each question in the third column shows
the results of the analysis of the remaining five courses (listing the removed column in parentheses). If the remaining five courses differed,
the second line in the third column describes the results of the analysis of the remaining four courses. In the one case of a significant difference
among the remaining four courses, the third line in column 3 showed the analysis of the remaining three courses.
c The far-right column describes the significance of differences among student answers in the courses removed from the first group.
a–c In these analyses, p values equal to or 0.01 are considered significant.
d Notes in the results of the analyses of this question provide an illustrated example of how to interpret this table.
R. W. Preszler et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
dents, of lower-division courses in comparison with upperdivision answers to these three questions revealed similar
patterns as the analyses that included all students. Lowerdivision answers differed from upper-division answers in
each case (overall assessment, 2  8.39, df  2, p  0.015;
recommend to a friend, 2  17.85, df  2, p  0.001; cost of
clickers, 2  8.22, df  2, p  0.016). For each of these three
questions, the responses of “A” students were similar to
those illustrated for the entire classes in Figure 1.
Specific Benefits. Eighty-one percent of students across all
courses agreed or strongly agreed that using clickers increased their interest in their course; only 5% of the students
did not think clickers improved their interest in the course
(Figure 2A). Students’ responses to this question about the
effect of clickers on their interest in their course did not vary
among biology courses (Table 2, Benefits of clickers, analysis
of “The clickers kept me more interested”).
A majority of students responded that using clickers in
their course improved their attendance (71% of students
across all courses selected strongly agree or agree to the
statement that clickers made it more likely that they would
attend class). The responses of students in the nonscience
majors introductory biology course (Biology 101) differed
from, and were slightly less positive than, students in the
remaining five courses (Table 2, Benefits of clickers, analyses
of “The clickers made it more likely that I would attend
class”; and Figure 2B).
Averaged across all courses, 70% of students agreed or
strongly agreed with the statement that using clickers improved their understanding of course material; only 6% of
students disagreed with this statement. Students in the microbiology course for allied health majors (Biology 219) had
a significantly more positive response to this question (Table
2, Benefits of clickers, analysis of “The clickers helped me
understand and/or learn . . . ”). Ninety-two percent of these
students claimed that using clickers improved their understanding of course content (Figure 2C combining strongly
agree and agree responses of Biology 219 students).
How Should We Use Clickers? Students in the most advanced course in this study, Biology 377, had a different
distribution of answers regarding the optimal number of
clicker questions in a lecture than did students in the other
five courses (Table 2, How should we use clickers?, analysis
of “How many clicker questions do you recommend . . . ”).
A majority of students in all courses recommended three or
four questions per lecture (Figure 3A). A majority of the
remaining students in Biology 377 preferred one to two
questions over five to six questions; in contrast, a majority of
the remaining students in Biology 101–311 preferred five to
six questions over one to two questions (Figure 3A). Although the percentage of the total course grade derived from
clicker questions varied among the courses, there was no
significant variation among courses in students’ satisfaction
with the number of points associated with clicker questions
(Table 2, How should we use clickers?, analysis of “The
number of clicker points is . . . ”). Overall, 71% of the students agreed with the number of points allocated to clicker
questions in their particular course.
The third question about how we should use clickers in
our courses asked students whether they preferred to answer clicker questions without discussion, after discussion
with classmates, or first by themselves and then again after
discussion. The responses to this survey question significantly varied between lower-division and upper-division
courses (Table 2, How should we use clickers?, analysis of
“I prefer to answer clicker questions”). Students in upperdivision courses showed a stronger preference for an-
Each panel illustrates students’ responses to individual
questions about specific benefits associated with the use of clickers.
(A) Percentage of students’ responses in each answer category
across all courses. (B) Responses of students in Biology 101 separately from those of students in the remaining five courses. (C)
Responses of students in Biology 219 separately from those of
students in the remaining courses.
Student Response Systems
Vol. 6, Spring 2007
swering questions after discussion with their classmates
(Figure 3B).
Mechanical Problems with Registering, Paying for, and Using Clickers. Students in Biology 111, the course with the
highest proportion of freshmen (Table 1), had significantly
more problems with Web-based registration and payment
than did students in the other courses (Table 2, Problems
with clicker use, analysis of “Did you have any problems
registering your clicker?”). Nearly one-third of Biology 111
students had problems registering or paying for their clickers (Figure 4A). In the other courses, 84% of students had no
problems registering or paying for their clickers (Figure 4A).
There also were significant differences among courses in the
frequency of students who had problems in class with their
clickers (Table 2, Problems with clicker use, analysis of “. . .
problems getting your clicker to work in class?”). This category includes problems with students’ individual wireless
response units or with the instructors’ receivers and associated software. More students experienced these problems in
our two upper-division courses; students in Biology 219 had
the fewest in-class problems using clickers (Figure 4B).
Class Level and Frequency of In-Class Problems. As described above, students’ responses to four survey questions
differed by class level (the 3 questions exploring students’
general impression of clickers and the question about their
interaction preference). Also, as described in the preceding
section, students in upper-division courses, which used
Macintosh computers, had more in-class problems using
clickers. The results of the log-linear analyses show that the
differences in the responses of students to the four survey
questions is better explained by considering course level
than by considering the frequency of in-class problems. In
each of these four questions, more of the variation in students’ responses to the survey questions was associated with
their academic level than with their estimate of the frequency of in-class problems. As a result, when academic
level was removed from the log-linear models predicting
students’ answers the fit of the models changed more significantly than when the frequency of in-class problems was
removed (Table 3).
Survey Responses by Grades
Course Grade Distributions. To determine whether we
could pool students across courses when analyzing the relationships between students’ course grades and their survey responses, we first determined whether grades represented the same performance category, relative to peers,
across the six courses. Contingency table analyses revealed
significant differences in grade distributions across all six
courses (2  86.47, df  20, p  0.001). Stepwise removal of
courses revealed that the two microbiology courses (Biology
219 and 311) had similar grade distributions (2  4.42, df 
2, p  0.110; “C,” “D,” and “F” grade categories were pooled
(A) Percentage of students from Biology 101 through
Biology 311 who prefer specific number of clicker questions in each
lecture compared with the preferences of students in Biology 377.
(B) Interaction preferences of students in lower- and upper-division
(A) Percentage of students in Biology 111, and in the
remaining courses, who had no problems or had problems registering or paying online for their clickers. (B) Percentage of students in
Biology 101, 111, and 211 in contrast to students in Biology 219, or
students in the upper-division courses, who had various frequencies of problems using their clickers in class.
R. W. Preszler et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
to maintain sufficient subsample sizes). Analyses of the remaining courses (Biology 101, 111, 211, and 377) found that
their grade distributions significantly differed (2  52.40,
df  12, p  0.001) until Biology 377 was removed. The
remaining three courses (Biology 101, 111, and 211) had
similar grade distributions (2  1.74, df  8.00, p  0.011).
These analyses identified three groups with similar course
grade distributions: group 1: Biology 101, 111, and 211;
group 2: Biology 219 and 311; and group 3: Biology 377.
Only group 1 had sufficient numbers of students across all
grades to allow contingency table analyses of associations
between grades and students’ responses to survey questions. Therefore, the following analyses of the associations
between grades and survey answers were limited to students from Biology 101, 111, and 211.
General Value. Students’ opinion of the overall value of
clickers differed by their course grade (2  15.90, df  8,
p  0.044). The percentage of students who felt that clickers
were a distraction or were detrimental to the class gradually
increased as grades decreased, although it never reached
15% of students in a grade category (Figure 5A). A majority of students claimed that clickers were a great addition to
their course in each grade category, except for students who
failed the course (Figure 5A, category labeled “bad”). However, when asked whether they would recommend a course
using clickers to a friend, student responses did not vary by
their course grade (2  6.37, df  8, p  0.606). There also
was no difference among students in the five different grade
categories in their assessment of the cost of clickers (2 
12.97, df  8, p  0.113).
Specific Benefits. Students consistently felt that clickers improved their interest in the courses; this opinion did not vary
by course grades (2  11.20, df  12, p  0.512). Students’
opinions of the effect of clicker use on their attendance did
vary by their course grades (2  30.7, df  12, p  0.002).
The percentage of students who strongly agreed that clickers
motivated them to attend lecture increased from “A” to “D”
students; as the percentage who claimed they would have
attended anyway declined, these trends reversed with students who failed the course (Figure 5B). Students’ opinions
of the influence of clickers on their ability to learn the course
material also varied by grade (2  21.40, df  12, p  0.045).
Whereas 25–30% strongly agreed that clickers helped them
learn across all grades, the number of students who simply
agreed that clickers helped them learn declined with their
course grade (Figure 5C).
Table 3. Log-linear analyses of variation in student responses associated with academic level and frequency of in-class problems with clickers
Change in fit of the log-linear model due to removal of the two-way interactions of
each variable with each survey question
Survey question
Class problems
Academic level of course
x2  17.32, df  4, p  0.0017
x2  54.35, df  2, p  0.0001
Recommend clickers
x2  17.46, df  4, p  0.0016
x2  80.08, df  2, p  0.0001
Cost of clickers
x2  10.33, df  4, p  0.0352
x2  18.07, df  2, p  0.0031
Interaction preference
x2  9.27, df  4, p  0.0547
x2  54.35, df  2, p  0.0001
Each panel represents the pooled responses of students
from Biology 101, 111, and 211 to specific survey responses. The
bars illustrate the percentage of students in each grade category
who chose each answer category.
Student Response Systems
Vol. 6, Spring 2007
How Should We Use Clickers? Students’ recommendations
regarding the number of clicker questions that we should
ask in each lecture varied by grade (2  24.28, df  8, p 
0.002). Students who earned an “A” in Biology 101, 111, or
211 more consistently (81%) recommended three or four
clicker questions, whereas students in each of the “B”
through “F” grade categories had increasingly more diverse
recommendations (Figure 5D). Students’ recommendations
regarding the proportion of course points associated with
clickers did not vary by grade (2  11.62, df  8, p  0.169).
Students’ preference for answering clicker questions individually or after discussion with classmates also did not
vary by their course grade (2  9.63, df  8, p  0.292).
Mechanical Problems with Registering, Paying for, and Using Clickers. Although the proportion of students who had
problems registering or paying for their clickers online did
not vary by course grade (2  8.90, df  8, p  0.351), the
frequency of problems using clickers in class did vary across
course grades (2  16.42, df  8, p  0.037). Students who
failed the class were more than twice as likely to claim that
they had trouble using their clickers in three or more lectures. Nearly one third of these students had this type of
problem in three or more lectures.
Survey Responses by Study Preference
A slight majority (55%) of students preferred to study individually for exams. Many students (42%) preferred to study
in groups of two or three students. Very few students (3%)
preferred to study for exams with four or more students.
Because so few students preferred to study in larger groups,
when analyzing the relationships between exam study preference and responses to the clicker survey, we collapsed the
study preference responses into two categories: 1) prefer to
study individually and 2) prefer to study cooperatively.
Students’ responses to each of the three questions assessing
their general impression of clickers did not vary between
students who preferred to study for exams individually and
those who preferred to study cooperatively (overall value:
2  3.02, df  2, p  0.221; recommend clickers: 2  2.36,
df  2, p  0.307; and cost: 2  1.12, df  2, p  0.571).
Students’ responses to each of the questions exploring specific benefits of clickers also did not vary by exam study
preference (interest: 2  1.23, df  3, p  0.746; attendance:
2  3.15, df  3, p  0.370; and understanding: 2  0.363,
df  3, p  0.948). Students’ recommendations regarding the
number of clicker questions and the number of points associated with clickers did not vary between students who
preferred to study for exams individually and those who
preferred to study with other students (number of questions:
2  1.06, df  3, p  0.787; points: 2  4.85, df  2, p 
0.088). However, students who preferred to study individually for exams also were more likely to prefer to answer
clicker questions without discussion than were students
who preferred to study cooperatively for exams (2  23.82,
df  2, p  0.001). Of students who preferred to study
individually, 29.8% also preferred to answer clicker questions without discussion; of students who preferred to study
cooperatively for exams, only 13.4% preferred to answer
clicker questions without discussion.
Content Acquisition
The significance of the effects of course, exams, and clickers
on scores on exam questions is shown in Table 4. The
ANOVA was run across all courses as well as separately for
lower- and upper-division courses. The test of the main
effect of clickers on exam scores, which asks whether exam
scores differed among the three clicker levels, was significant when all courses were included in the analysis, was
significant when only lower-division courses were included,
and was inconclusive when only the two upper-division
courses were included (Table 4, Analyses of clickers). The
linear contrasts of the effects of clickers on exam scores
asked the more specific question of whether there was a
consistent linear change in exam scores from low-, to medium-, to high-clicker lectures. When considered across all
courses as well as separately for lower- and upper-division
courses, there was a significant linear increase in exam
scores across the three levels of clicker frequencies (Table 4,
Analyses of linear contrast of clickers; and Figure 6). Although exam scores generally differed among courses, the
positive linear relationship between clicker frequency and
exam scores was consistent across all courses (Table 4, analyses of Clickers  course).
Table 4. Analyses of variance of effects on student scores on
exam questions
Effects by course group
F statistic
Probabilitya
All courses
Clickers  course
Clickers  exam
Linear contrast of clickers
Quadratic contrast of
Lower-division courses
Clickers  course
Clickers  exam
Linear contrast of clickers
Quadratic contrast of
Upper-division courses
Clickers  course
Clickers  exam
Linear contrast of clickers
Quadratic contrast of
a All significant effects are indicated with an asterisk. The test of the
main effect of clickers in upper-division courses is inconclusive (i);
remaining effects are insignificant (  0.05).
R. W. Preszler et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
DISCUSSION
Our three survey questions probing students’ general impression of clickers revealed that students in all six biology
courses had positive overall opinions about the use of clickers. However, students in lower-division courses had more
positive overall impressions than students in upper-division
courses (Figure 1, A–C). Studies of clickers in lower-division
courses describe strongly positive student evaluations of the
value of clickers . In contrast,
studies of the use of clickers in upper-division courses have
generated more varied student responses . Studies of the use of clickers in
multiple courses describe more favorable student opinions
in the first semester of two-semester courses in physics and
in business and describe more favorable student
opinions in nonmajors compared with science majors
courses . Our analyses of lower-division compared with upper-division courses were confounded by the use of Macintosh computers only in the
upper-division courses. Students experienced increased inclass problems using clickers in these courses due to compatibility problems between eInstruction and Macintosh systems . However, the
log-linear analyses showed that course level had a stronger
impact on student’s opinions than did their number of inclass problems using clickers (Table 3, the significance of
changes of the fit of the model associated with removing
academic level are greater than those associated with removing the frequency of in-class problems), suggesting that the
course-level effect is not simply an artifact of the type of
computer used by the instructors. Additionally, our results
indicate that the lower general impression of clickers expressed by students in upper-division courses is not due to
these courses having a higher proportion of successful science students. Fortunately, assigning lower overall value to
the use of clickers does not seem to be an initial preference
of successful students as they work their way through introductory science courses. Students who earned an “A” in
the lower-division courses had much stronger overall impressions of clickers than did students who earned an “A” in
the upper-division courses. Students’ survey responses seldom varied across students’ course grades in our introductory courses; when there was significant variation in responses across grade categories, it was due to more negative
responses of students with very low grades. Collectively,
these results suggest that initially students have positive
overall impressions of clickers across grade levels, but students who have successfully progressed to upper-division
science courses place less value on the use of clickers. Most
of these students reached their upper-division courses without having consistently used clickers in their previous
courses (this was the first clicker class for approximately two
thirds of the students in Biology 311 and 377). Clickers
represented
pedagogical
Whereas upper-division students’ overall assessment of the
value of clickers was not as strong, they readily agreed (as
strongly as lower-division students) that clickers made lectures more interesting, and improved their attendance and
their understanding of the material.
Although upper-division students may be hesitant to embrace more interactive instruction methods, they may be the
students most in need of the type of learning associated with
these methods. There is often a disconnect between students’ perceptions of the course learning objectives (based
on experience taking term-recognition exams) and the instructor’s expectations of the level of student learning
 . As students progress
from introductory to advanced science courses, they are
expected to learn at increasingly difficult levels progressing
from term recognition and simple memorization to synthesis
and interpretation. Unfortunately, this transition may not be
clearly previewed to students. Therefore, students attempt
to apply strategies sufficient for accomplishing tasks associated with lower-order learning skills to more challenging
learning tasks in upper-division courses. In longitudinal
analyses of student exam performance in Pathophysiology
and Therapeutics in a Doctor of Pharmacy program, Slain et
al. found that students did not perform better on
simple memorization questions when the course was taught
using clickers to encourage discussion than when the course
was taught by the same instructors without clickers; however, they did perform better on analytical questions when
the course was taught using clickers. This difference in the
impact of interactive learning methods on lower- and higher-order learning is not limited to advanced students. In a
convincing analysis of the effects of cooperative learning on
ninth-grade earth science students, Chang and Mao 
found that cooperative learning did not improve students’
performance on questions requiring only lower-level cognitive skills, but cooperative learning did improve student
performance on higher-level questions. Our survey results
suggest that upper-division students who have successfully
progressed through science courses, many of which are
taught using traditional methods, are less enthusiastic about
new pedagogical methods associated with increasing interactions in the lecture course. However, if they avoid adopting cooperative learning methods and continue to apply
traditional study methods to the more challenging expectations of advanced courses, and ultimately to professional
positions, they may struggle with the higher-order thinking
skills required to be successful in these courses and positions. We suggest that the solution to this dilemma is the
Each cluster of three bars shows the effects of clicker
levels on student performance on associated exam questions. The
height of the bars is the mean score on exam questions, and the line
shows the SE above and below the mean.
Student Response Systems
Vol. 6, Spring 2007
consistent use of interactive learning strategies throughout
the curriculum with a concurrent emphasis on the development of, and assessment of, higher-level thinking skills.
Although the positive effect of clickers on student performance was consistent across all courses, a higher proportion
of students in the microbiology course for allied health
majors (Biology 219) correctly thought that using clickers
improved their understanding. This course is primarily
composed of prenursing students who hope not only to pass
their required microbiology course but also to learn the
material well enough to pass the National Council Licensure
Examination. This strong extrinsic motivation of prenursing
students to succeed in the course may be paired with less
confidence in their ability to learn science than is typical of
science majors. Interactive teaching methods, such as the use
of clickers, may be particularly effective at improving the
confidence level, as well as the performance, of nonscience
majors who are under strong pressure to succeed in a science course. Instructors may need to introduce and present
the use of clickers differently depending on the nature of
their course: students in upper-division science courses may
need more convincing that the effective use of clickers will
improve their grades than students in lower-division science
courses, and students in applied science courses may be
most receptive. Fortunately, we found only minor differences of opinion about the use of clickers when students
were categorized by their course grade, or by their preference for studying individually or cooperatively. Instructors
may need to present clickers differently between courses;
however, they will be received in a similar manner by most
students within each course.
Although we found differences among courses in students’ opinions about the use of clickers, clickers improved
student performance in all courses. Students in both lowerand upper-division courses performed significantly better
on exam questions associated with high-clicker-use lectures
than on exam questions associated with low clicker use
(Figure 6). This conclusion adds a new level of specificity to
our understanding of the effects of clicker use on student
performance. Latitudinal comparisons of concurrent sections of courses taught with and without wired student
response units have found no improvement on exam performance associated with the use of this technology . As Judson
and Sawada point out, classrooms in the 1970s, such
as those in the latitudinal studies discussed above, tended to
use wired student response units to enhance student-toinstructor communication, but not to enhance discussion
and cooperative learning among students. More recent longitudinal studies comparing courses taught with clickers to
the same courses taught without clickers have shown significant conceptual gains associated with clicker use ; significant gains limited to specific courses
and question types ; and no significant
differences in performance, but some encouraging trends in
the face of confounding factors . The strength
of these latitudinal and longitudinal comparisons is that
they evaluate the total effect of a course innovation on
student performance; the limitation is that they do not necessarily isolate the effects of a specific method, such as
clickers. By varying clicker frequency within courses, our
experimental design was not confounded by extraneous factors contributing to variation in student performance between sections of a course in latitudinal comparisons and
between semesters in longitudinal comparisons. However,
the fine scale of our comparisons did not allow us to consider course-level effects of the use of clickers on student
performance due to factors such as improved overall attendance or student attitudes. In spite of excluding these
course-level impacts of using clickers, but perhaps due to
the increased specificity of our experimental design, we
found that increased clicker use across a variety of biology
courses resulted in improved performance on exam questions. Although our study experimentally demonstrated that
increased use of clickers is associated with increased learning, this study was not designed to reveal the underlying
mechanism of this effect. However, establishing this relationship helps set the stage for investigations of more mechanistic hypotheses. For example, this positive impact of
clicker use on student learning may be due to a variety of
factors associated with using clickers: increased student engagement associated with each student committing to an
answer rather than many passively waiting while a few
students answer verbal questions; higher attention levels
due to more periodic breaks from lecture; immediate formative assessments benefiting both instructors and students
throughout the lectures; and increased discussion among
students and between students and the instructor of concepts that students find challenging. Our study also reveals
variation in students’ impression of clickers, although not in
the effects of clickers on their learning, between courses.
Future research could investigate explanations of these differences among courses. For example, if the lower overall
impression of clickers expressed by upper-division students
is due to presenting them with a change in pedagogy when
they have been successful in more traditionally taught
courses, then this difference should attenuate as students
who have been introduced to these methods in their lowerdivision courses begin to move into the upper-division
courses. Students’ impression of clickers also may be influenced by class size, causing students in large lower-division
courses to express particularly strong preferences for the use
of clickers. The strong preference for clicker use shown by
students in our microbiology course for allied health majors
suggests that the nature of students’ motivation and their
attitudes toward science may influence their responses to
the use of clickers in science classrooms. Although the mechanisms that mediate the impacts of clickers on student learning are not well established, we recommend using clickers to
improve student attitudes and learning.