IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
A Multilevel Context-Based System for Classiﬁcation
of Very High Spatial Resolution Images
Lorenzo Bruzzone, Senior Member, IEEE, and Lorenzo Carlin, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper proposes a novel pixel-based system
for the supervised classiﬁcation of very high geometrical (spatial) resolution images. This system is aimed at obtaining accurate and reliable maps both by preserving the geometrical
details in the images and by properly considering the spatialcontext information. It is made up of two main blocks: 1) a novel
feature-extraction block that, extending and developing some concepts previously presented in the literature, adaptively models the
spatial context of each pixel according to a complete hierarchical
multilevel representation of the scene and 2) a classiﬁer, based on
support vector machines (SVMs), capable of analyzing hyperdimensional feature spaces. The choice of adopting an SVM-based
classiﬁcation architecture is motivated by the potentially large
number of parameters derived from the contextual featureextraction stage. Experimental results and comparisons with a
standard technique developed for the analysis of very high spatial
resolution images conﬁrm the effectiveness of the proposed system.
Index Terms—Hierarchical feature extraction, hierarchical
segmentation, multilevel and multiscale analysis, spatial-context
information, support vector machines (SVMs), very high spatial
resolution images.
I. INTRODUCTION
NE of the most challenging problems addressed by the
remote sensing community in current years is the development of effective data processing techniques for images
acquired with the last generation of very high spatial resolution
sensors. The development of these kinds of techniques appears
even more important in light of recently launched commercial
satellites (e.g., Ikonos and Quickbird), with on-board sensors
characterized by very high geometrical resolution (from 2.5 to
0.60 m). The availability of images acquired by these sensors
leads to a new set of possible applications, which require mapping the Earth surface both with great geometrical precision and
a high level of thematic detail. In this context, great attention
is devoted to the analysis of urban scenes, with applications
such as road network extraction and road map updating, transportation infrastructure management, the monitoring of growth
in urban areas, and discovering building abuse , . Other
applications are related to the monitoring of forests, like the
deﬁnition of selective cutting planning and the analysis of forest
status health , . In addition, high-resolution remote sensing images can be used by public administrations to monitor,
manage, and prevent natural disasters, to analyze evacuation
Manuscript received July 11, 2005; revised March 7, 2006. This work
was supported by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
The authors are with the Department of Information and Communication Technology, University of Trento, 38050 Trento, Italy (e-mail: lorenzo.
 ).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGRS.2006.875360
planning in areas with high probability of ﬂoods or ﬁres ,
etc. However, these are only a few examples of the wide range
of potential applications of high geometrical resolution data.
The signiﬁcant amount of geometrical details present in a
high-resolution scene completely changes the perspective of
data analysis compared with moderate-resolution images provided by previous-generation multispectral sensors [such as the
Thematic Mapper (TM) and Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus
(ETM+)]. In particular, the improvement in spatial resolution
simpliﬁes the problem of mixed pixels1 present in standard
multispectral images, but at the same time, it increases the
internal spectral variability (intraclass variability) of each landcover class and decreases the spectral variability between different classes (interclass variability). Thus, on the one hand, the
resulting high intraclass and low interclass variabilities lead to
a reduction in the statistical separability of the different landcover classes in the spectral domain, which in turn involves high
classiﬁcation errors , . In addition, the limited spectral
resolution of very high geometrical resolution sensors, which
depends on technical constraints, further increases the complexity of the classiﬁcation problem , . On the other
hand, due to the high spatial resolution of the images, the
geometrical information of the scene can also be considered in
the classiﬁcation process according to proper feature-extraction
methodologies.
In the recent literature, many papers have addressed the
development of novel techniques for the classiﬁcation of highresolution remote sensing images. In , the authors present
a technique for the identiﬁcation of land developments across
large-scale regions. The proposed technique uses straight lines,
statistical measures (length, orientation, and periodicity of
straight line), and a spatial coherence constraint to identify
three classes, namely: 1) urban; 2) residential; and 3) rural. In
 , a standard maximum-likelihood classiﬁer is used to discriminate four spectrally similar macroclasses. Subsequently,
each macroclass can be hierarchically subdivided according
to class-dependent spatial features and a fuzzy classiﬁer. The
main problem of these techniques is that they are highly problem dependent. This means that they cannot be considered as
a general operational tool. In , the authors analyze the
effectiveness of the gray-level cooccurrence matrix (GLCM)
texture features in modeling the spatial context that characterizes high-resolution images. However, the fact that the analysis
1Mixed pixels are pixels that represent the spectral signature of more than
one class due to the insufﬁcient geometrical resolution of the sensor (more than
one land-cover class is included in the ground-projected instantaneous ﬁeld of
view (GIFOV) of the sensor).
0196-2892/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
depends on a square window and different heuristic parameters
and the intrinsic inability to model the shape of the objects do
not yield satisfactory classiﬁcation accuracies.
A more promising family of approaches to the analysis
of high spatial resolution images, which is inspired by the
behavior of the human view system, is based on object-oriented
analysis and/or multilevel/multiscale strategies. The rationale
of these approaches is that each image is made up of interrelated
objects of different shapes and sizes. Therefore, each object
can be modeled both with shape and topological measures
which can be used and integrated with spectral features to
improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. Objects can be extracted
from images according to one of the standard segmentation
techniques proposed in the literature , . In greater detail,
the main idea of multilevel analysis is that for each level
of detail, it is possible to identify different objects that are
peculiar to the considered level and that should not appear
in other levels. In other words, each object can be analyzed
at its “optimal” representation level. Moreover, other aspects
considered in this analysis are: 1) that objects at the same level
are logically related to each other and 2) that each object at a
generic level is hierarchically related to those at the higher and
lower levels , , , . For example, in the multiscale
analysis of a high-resolution image, at ﬁner levels, we can
identify houses, gardens, streets, and single trees; at higher
levels, we can identify urban aggregates, groups of trees, and
agricultural ﬁelds; ﬁnally, at the coarser level, we can identify
towns and cities, forests, and agricultural areas as one single
object. The exploration of the hierarchical tree results in a
precise analysis of the relations of objects. For example, we can
count the number of houses that belong to an urban area .
In , the authors propose an approach based on the
analysis of a high-resolution scene through a set of concentric
windows. The concentric windows analyze the pixel under
investigation and the effects of its neighbor system at different
scales of resolution. To reduce the computational burden, the
information contained in each analysis window is compacted
using a Gaussian pyramidal resampling approach. The classi-
ﬁcation task is accomplished by a soft multilayer perceptron
neural network that can be used adaptively as a pixel-based or
an area-based classiﬁer. One of the limitations of this approach
is the ﬁxed shape and choice of size of the analysis window.
In , an object-based approach is proposed for classiﬁcation
of dense urban areas from pan-sharpened multispectral Ikonos
imagery. This approach exploits a cascade combination of a
fuzzy pixel-based classiﬁer and a fuzzy object-based classiﬁer.
The fuzzy pixel-based classiﬁer uses spectral and simple spatial
features to discriminate between roads and buildings, which
are spectrally similar. Subsequently, a segmented image is
used to model the spectral and spatial heterogeneities and to
improve the overall accuracy of the pixel-based thematic map.
Shape features and other spatial features (extracted from the
segmented image) as well as the previously generated fuzzy
classiﬁcation map are used as inputs to an object-based fuzzy
classiﬁer. In , morphological operators (such as opening
and closing) are exploited within a multiscale approach to
provide image structural information for the automatic recognition of man-made structures. In greater detail, the structural
information is obtained by applying morphological operators
with a multiscale approach and analyzing the residual images
obtained as a difference between the multiscale morphological
images at successive scales. A potential problem of this technique is the large feature space generated by the application
of a series of opening and closing transforms. In , the
authors overcome this problem by proposing the use of different
feature-selection algorithms. An adaptive and supervised model
for object recognition is presented in , where a scale-space
ﬁltering process that models a multiscale analysis for feature
extraction is integrated in a uniﬁed framework within a multilayer perceptron neural network. This means that the error
backpropagation algorithm used to train the neural network
also identiﬁes the most adequate ﬁlter parameters. The main
problems of this technique are related to the choice of the
number and type of ﬁlters to be used in the input ﬁltering
layer (ﬁrst layer) of the neural network. In , an algorithm
based on selective region growing is proposed to classify a
high-resolution image. In the ﬁrst step, the image is classiﬁed
by taking into account only spectral information. In the second
step, a classiﬁcation procedure is applied to the previous map
by taking into account not only spectral information but also
a pixel distance condition to aggregate neighbor pixels. By
reiteration, neighbor pixels that belong to the same class grow
in a selective way, obtaining a ﬁnal classiﬁcation map.
Nevertheless, at present, the few techniques speciﬁcally developed for the automatic analysis of high spatial resolution
images (compared with the very large literature on the classiﬁcation of moderate-resolution sensors) do not exhibit sufﬁcient
accuracy to meet end-user requirements in all application domains. For this reason, it is important that the remote sensing
community invests further efforts to deﬁne advanced effective methods for the classiﬁcation of the aforementioned type
In this paper, we propose a novel pixel-based approach to
the classiﬁcation of very high spatial resolution images, which
is based on two modules (see Fig. 1): 1) a feature-extraction
module that exploits an adaptive, multilevel, and complete
hierarchical representation of the spatial context of each pixel
in the scene under investigation and 2) a classiﬁcation module
based on support vector machines (SVMs). In greater detail,
extending and developing concepts previously presented in
the literature, a strategy for deﬁning the spatial context of a
pixel at different levels in an adaptive way is presented. The
multilevel spatial-context information is then used to drive
the feature-extraction phase. The resulting high-dimensional
feature vectors are then analyzed according to a proper SVMbased multiclass architecture. The choice of the SVM depends
on the effectiveness of this machine-learning methodology to
manage classiﬁcation problems in hyperdimensional feature
spaces , . It is worth noting that the contribution of
this work concerning the importance of SVM in the classiﬁcation of very high resolution images goes beyond the speciﬁc
methodologies presented in this paper because the classiﬁcation of high-resolution images generally requires the analysis
of hyperdimensional feature vectors (e.g., when multiscale
morphological ﬁlters are used, we can obtain a large feature set)
and, thus, the exploitation of a classiﬁcation technique robust
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Block scheme of the proposed approach.
to the Hughes phenomenon. Unlike other methods presented
in the literature, the proposed approach is general2 and can be
applied to any kind of very high geometrical resolution image.
Experimental results, obtained on two different data sets
made up of very high spatial resolution images acquired by the
Quickbird satellite in signiﬁcantly different scenes (i.e., urban
and rural areas), point out the effectiveness of the proposed
This paper is organized in ﬁve sections. Section II presents
a detailed description of the proposed adaptive multilevel
context-driven feature-extraction technique. Section III addresses the classiﬁcation module and describes the adopted
SVM-based classiﬁcation architecture. Section IV presents the
data sets used for the experiments and reports on experimental
results. Finally, Section V provides a discussion on the proposed approach and draws the conclusion of this paper.
II. PROPOSED ADAPTIVE MULTILEVEL CONTEXT-DRIVEN
FEATURE-EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE
The rationale of the proposed feature-extraction technique
consists of adaptively modeling the spatial context of each pixel
according to a multilevel strategy. Each context level is deﬁned
according to predeﬁned spectral and spatial constraints.
A. Adaptive Deﬁnition of the Multilevel Spatial Context
To adaptively characterize the spatial context of each pixel by
taking into account a complete hierarchical multiscale context
representation, extending and developing some concepts previously presented in the literature, we propose to decompose
the scene under investigation from the pixel level to the highest levels of representation of its spatial context. A complete
hierarchical modeling allows to capture and exploit the entire
information present in the scene by working with adaptive
context/neighborhood systems at different scales. This task is
based on the application of a segmentation technique with a
set of properly deﬁned parameters that take into account both
spectral and spatial constraints. This decomposition results in
a multilevel representation of the spatial context of each pixel
in the investigated scene. To satisfy a tree-based hierarchical
2It is worth noting that, in this paper, the words “general” and “problem
independent” mean that the proposed technique has not a priori constraints
on the kinds of objects present in the scene, but it can be used with any kind
of high-resolution image and in any application domain. On the contrary, many
techniques proposed in the literature are not general and are problem dependent
as they are speciﬁcally developed for addressing particular applications (e.g.,
analysis of urban areas) and are based on feature-extraction procedures and
processing algorithms that cannot be applied to other scenes.
Hierarchical multilevel segmentation applied to a multispectral
Quickbird image. From (a) to (c), we use three different sets of parameters
in the segmentation algorithm to adaptively model (at different levels) the
context of the pixels in the image in (d). The selected rule guarantees that
precise hierarchical relations between different levels are established.
requirement, this process is accomplished according to a speciﬁc set of rules. In this way, precise hierarchical relationships
between each pixel in the image and the regions that adaptively
deﬁne its context at different levels are established. In other
words, we obtain a set of segmentation maps (one for each
level) that characterize the context of each spatial position in
the image hierarchically and in a nonambiguous way (Fig. 2).
It is worth noting that, unlike other approaches proposed in
the literature and brieﬂy described in Section I, hierarchical
segmentation does not aim to identify the best level of representation of each object, but simply models the multilevel
spatial context of each pixel. This should be considered as a preprocessing stage aimed at driving the feature-extraction phase.
A formal deﬁnition of the adopted segmentation procedure
is given in the following. Let I denote the investigated image and Hl the homogeneity predicate at the generic level l
(l = 1, . . . , L). Varying the homogeneity predicate means varying the level of deﬁnition of the adaptive spatial context of
the pixel. This homogeneity predicate is deﬁned according to
different spatial and spectral attributes at different levels. According to the literature, the segmentation of I at a generic level
l is a partition P l in a set of N l regions Ol
i (i = 1, 2, . . . , N l),
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
i = I with Ol
n ̸= m (1)
m adjacent.
These three rules are valid for objects at a generic level l.
To establish a precise hierarchy between the contexts of a pixel
deﬁned at different levels, we consider the following additional
constraint:
This simple relation states that the adaptive neighborhood of a
pixel at level l −1 cannot be included in more than one adaptive
neighborhood at level l (it has only one father node). It is worth
noting that level 1 represents the pixel level, i.e., the pixel for
which the context is hierarchically deﬁned.
We would like to stress that the idea of using hierarchical
segmentation to represent the objects that compose the scene at
different levels of abstraction is not a new contribution of this
paper, but the novelty of this paper consists in the technique
adopted for exploiting the results of the hierarchical segmentation. In this respect, any segmentation algorithm that satisﬁes
the aforementioned constraints can be used in the proposed
system (see, for example, and ).
The multiresolution segmentation algorithm we adopted is
a bottom-up region-merging technique starting from the pixel
level (at the ﬁrst step, each pixel represents an object). In an
iterative way, at each subsequent step, image objects are merged
into bigger ones. The aim of this procedure is to minimize the
homogeneity predicate when two different objects are merged
together (this constraint must be valid for all the couple of
objects in the image). If the smallest growth exceeds a threshold deﬁned by the user (the so-called “scale parameter”), the
process stops. As brieﬂy mentioned before, the homogeneity
predicate takes into account spectral and spatial constraints. In
detail, it can be deﬁned as follows:
spectral·hl
spectral ∈[0, . . . , 1], wl
shape ∈[0, . . . , 1] are userdeﬁned parameters and wl
shape = 1 −wl
spectral. The ﬁrst part of
(5) is a cost criterion for the spectral component of the objects,
whereas the second part is a shape cost criterion. Hence, we can
deﬁne an information loss function when two closest objects Ol
j, at a certain level l, are fused together as
spectral·Cl
i,j,spectral+
i,j,shape.
We can stop the segmentation algorithm when Cl
TH is a level-dependent user-deﬁned threshold deﬁned
for each level. The greater the value of Hl
TH, the greater the
dimension of obtained objects. (In other words, we decrease
the sensibility of the homogeneity predicate in the fusion of
two adjacent regions.) The spectral information loss function
i,j,spectral in (6) can be deﬁned as
i,j,spectral =
i,j · σl,d
where wl,d, d = 1, . . . , B (B is the number of spectral bands),
represents the weight associated to the dth spectral channel
at level l in the combination process, and B
d=1 wl,d = 1;
i,j represents the number of pixels of the object obtained by
merging Ol
j, and σl,d
i,j represents its standard deviation
on the spectral band d. N l
j represent the number of
pixels that compose objects Ol
j, respectively, and σl,d
represent their standard deviations calculated on the
spectral band d.
The spatial information loss function, Cl
i,j,shape in (6), takes
into account the compactness and smoothness of the shape of
the obtained object by merging Ol
j. It is deﬁned as
i,j,shape = wl
i,j,smooth (8)
i,j,cmp = N l
i,j,smooth = N l
cmp ∈[0, . . . , 1] is a user-deﬁned parameter to weight
the smoothness of the obtained objects with respect to the compactness; el
i,j represents the perimeter of the object obtained by
merging Ol
j, whereas rl
i,j represents the perimeter of
the rectangle containing it; el
j represent the perimeter
of the objects Ol
j, respectively, whereas rl
represent the perimeter of the rectangles that contain Ol
j, respectively. It is worth noting that the basic criteria of the
aforementioned segmentation strategy are also implemented in
commercial software packages .
The choice of the range of variation of the parameters deﬁning the homogeneity criterion affects the number of levels3 in
which the scene is decomposed. The number of levels to be used
for characterizing the spatial context of each pixel depends on
many factors. The most important issues to take into account
are: 1) geometrical resolution of the image [e.g., given a speciﬁc
scene, Quickbird images (GIFOV equal to 0.6 m) require higher
numbers of decomposition levels than SPOT 5 images (GIFOV
equal to 2.5 m)] and 2) size of the objects present in the scene.
An empirical rule, for obtaining indications on the number of
levels to use, consists in computing the mean size of the regions
at different decomposition levels and comparing this size with
3In this paper, we refer to a multilevel representation of the scene and not to
a multiscale decomposition. This is due to the use of a segmentation procedure,
which is driven not only on geometrical criteria but also on spectral parameters,
for accomplishing the image decomposition task.
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
the expected average size of the objects in the scene, which can
be deﬁned by the end user. In greater detail, all the levels in the
decomposition have to satisfy the following condition:
where N l is the number of objects at level l, Al
i represents the
area of object i at level l (in pixels), and EAth is a user-deﬁned
parameter that corresponds to the expected average size of the
objects in the scene (in pixels). It is also possible to deﬁne
the quantity EAth,m2 = EAth · GIFOV2, which represents the
expected average size of the objects in square meters. Accordingly, (11) can be rewritten as
· GIFOV2 ≤EAth,m2.
The deﬁnition of the value of EAth (or EAth,m2) is relatively easy in homogeneous scenes (e.g., urban areas). In
heterogeneous scenes, the problem can be addressed according
to two different strategies: 1) consider a tradeoff between the
average sizes of different classes of objects and 2) select the
aforementioned parameters according to the average size of
the greatest class of objects (implicitly assuming the use of
context information including more objects for the smallest
components of the scene). Both strategies are consistent with
the proposed approach. The choice of one of them should be
based on end-user requirements.
It is worth noting that, in the discussion above, we considered
the pixel level as the lowest level of the hierarchy, but it is also
possible to deﬁne any level of the multiscale segmentation maps
as the lowest level of the tree (in the latter case, we consider an
object and its adaptive context).
B. Multilevel Context-Driven Feature Extraction
Given the hierarchical tree structure, it is then possible to
exploit the relationships between pixels and regions at different levels to extract an effective set of features that describe
each pixel and its adaptive context at each level. Depending
on the level considered, different kinds of features can be
extracted to characterize the spatial context with the most
reliable attributes for the speciﬁc analyzed “scale.” We can
extract spectral, spatial, or relational features. Spectral features
are derived analyzing directly the spectral information of a
pixel and that of its adaptive neighborhood at different levels.
Simple spectral features (such as mean and standard deviation)
or more complex measures (such as entropy and high-order
statistics) can be easily extracted to characterize both spaceinvariant and texture properties associated with the pixel. In
addition, geometrical and relational measures can be computed
to characterize the shape, size, and interrelation of the adaptive
neighborhood of a pixel. In greater detail, geometrical features
are related to the description of the shape and size of the spatial
context at different levels of analysis (e.g., we can compute the
area, the shape factor, and the perimeter of a generic region m
Example of the features extracted for objects that, at different levels,
characterize the context of the pixel under investigation. “Mean” and “StDev”
represent the mean value and the standard deviation of pixels in a generic object,
respectively. “Area” and “SF” represent the area and the shape factor (the ratio
between length and width) of an object, respectively. “Number of sub-objects”
represents the number of objects at level l −1 that make up an object at level l.
at level l).4 Concerning relational parameters, they can be
expressed by a contextual analysis of neighboring regions at the
same level or at different levels to model the relation between
the spatial context of a pixel at the same or at different levels.
Thus, we can deﬁne the feature vector xi, which describes the
pixels and, through the hierarchical tree, the spatial context
(objects) in which the pixel is included.
For a generic pixel i under analysis, we can write
2, . . . , f i
l, . . . , f i
l is the feature vector associated with the contextual
information of pixel i at generic level l of the hierarchical tree,
and L is the number of segmentation levels. It is worth noting
that the components of f i
1 are the features that characterize the
spatial position i in the image at pixel level. The subvector f i
is deﬁned as
l,1, . . . , f i
l,j, . . . , f i
l,j is the jth feature that models the context of pixel i at
level l, and NFl is the number of features extracted at level l.
As stated before, the component f i
l,j can be a spectral, a
geometrical, or a relational feature. An important observation
concerns the criterion to adopt for deﬁning the set of features
to be used at each level. As shown in the example reported in
Fig. 3, at the pixel level, it is possible to use only the pixel spectral signature (there are no regions, and hence, it is not possible
to compute any geometrical feature). At intermediate levels, the
regions are typically small and represent only portions of the
objects; thus, we recommend avoiding the use of geometrical
features, as they do not contain relevant information about
the geometry of the true objects present in the scene. At the
higher levels, instead, the objects are better modeled by the
4Examples of these parameters are reported in Section IV-B.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
segmentation algorithm, and geometrical and relational features
can be properly used.
It is worth noting that the main ideas of the proposed approach are that: 1) all the segmentation levels, which should
be selected according to the aforementioned general guidelines,
can be used to obtain a complete hierarchical representation of
the spatial context of each pixel and 2) all the features extracted
to characterize the context information of each pixel at different
levels can be used as input to the classiﬁcation module. However, although this approach provides the classiﬁer with a large
amount of information, it has the disadvantage of leading to a
very high dimensional (hyperdimensional) feature vector. This
problem should be addressed in the classiﬁcation module.
III. SVM CLASSIFICATION APPROACH
To achieve a good characterization of the spatial context of
each pixel, we should use a sufﬁcient number of segmentation
levels. [The number of levels depends on the scene under
analysis; see the criterion deﬁned in (11).] As mentioned earlier,
from the adaptive neighborhood of a pixel at each single level l,
we can extract a large number of features that characterize the
spectral, geometrical, and relational attributes of the regions.
Hence, the number of components of the feature vector extracted from the hierarchical tree may be very high.
To obtain proper learning of the classiﬁer and to achieve
a good generalization capability while avoiding the course of
dimensionality problem (the so-called Hughes phenomenon
due to the small ratio between the number of training samples
and the number of features ), we should collect a large
number of independent training set samples to characterize
all the possible spectral variations of each land-cover class.
Although it is quite simple to collect ground truth samples by
photo interpretation on very high resolution images, it is rather
time consuming. In addition, the spatial autocorrelation of each
sample reduces the spectral information of the neighboring
samples and violates the sample-independent condition. This
can lead to the so-called unrepresentative sample problem
 that increases the complexity in the deﬁnition of training
The following two possible alternatives to the problem of
collecting a very large number of training samples can be considered: 1) applying a feature-selection procedure and 2) using
a classiﬁer intrinsically robust to the Hughes phenomenon.
Concerning feature selection, in the considered problem, it is
quite difﬁcult to deﬁne a criterion function (aimed at evaluating
the effectiveness of the considered subset of features) capable
of dealing with the heterogeneity of the statistical models that
characterize the different parameters extracted in the previous
phase. Many feature-selection techniques assume Gaussian (or
monomodal) distributions for the analyzed features, which do
not ﬁt some of the considered measures. For this reason, in
the proposed approach, we prefer to avoid feature selection and
to adopt a classiﬁcation technique intrinsically less sensitive to
the high dimensionality of the feature space. In particular, we
consider a machine-learning classiﬁer based on SVMs, which
have been recently proved to be effective in hyperdimensional
problems , .
Developed by Vapnik, SVMs are based on the structural risk
minimization principle , and their popularity within the
remote sensing community is constantly on the increase ,
due to their properties and intrinsic effectiveness. In the following, we brieﬂy describe the main concepts of the mathematical
formulation of SVMs for binary classiﬁcation problems.
Let us consider a binary classiﬁcation problem, with N
training patterns in a d-dimensional feature space. Each pattern
is associated with a target yi ∈{+1, −1}. The nonlinear SVM
approach consists of mapping the data into a higher dimensional feature space, i.e., Φ(x), where a separation between the
two classes is looked for by means of an optimal hyperplane
deﬁned by a weight vector w and a bias b. The decision rule is
deﬁned by the function sign[f(x)], where f(x) represents the
discriminant function of the hyperplane and is deﬁned as
f(x) = w · Φ(x) + b.
The optimal hyperplane is the one that minimizes a cost
function that expresses a combination of two criteria, namely:
1) margin maximization and 2) error on training samples minimization. It is deﬁned as
Ψ(w, ξ) = 1
and it is subject to the following constraints:
yi (w · Φ(x) + b) ≥1 −ξi,
i = 1, 2, . . . , N
i = 1, 2, . . . , N
where ξi are called slack variables and are introduced to take
into account nonseparable data. The constant C represents
a regularization parameter that allows to tune the shape of
the discriminant function. The above minimization problem
can be reformulated through a Langrage functional for which
the Lagrange multipliers can be found by means of a dual
optimization leading to a quadratic programming solution. The
ﬁnal result is a discriminant function described (in the original
feature space) by the following equation:
αiyiK(xi, x) + b
where K(., .) is a kernel function that should satisfy the
Mercer’s theorem. The set S is a subset of the indices
{1, 2, . . . , N} corresponding to the nonzero Lagrange multipliers αi. The training vectors associated with these multipliers are
called support vectors. The solution of the dual-optimization
problem avoids the problem of deﬁning optimal transformation
from the original to the hyperdimensional feature space. The
most widely used kernel functions adopted in the remote sensing problems are
Polynomial kernel
K(xi, xj) = (xi · xj + 1)d
Radial basis function (RBF) kernel
K(xi, xj) = exp
−γ∥xi −xj∥2
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
where d is the order of the polynomial kernel function, and γ is
the spread of the RBF kernel.
To solve the multiclass problem, we propose to deﬁne an
architecture made up of as many binary SVMs as the number
of information classes. Each single SVM solves a one-againstall problem . In greater detail, let Ω= {ω1, . . . , ωc} be
the set of information classes that characterize the considered
problem. The ith SVM solves a binary problem between classes
ωA = ωi and ωB = Ω−ωi (ωi ∈Ω). A generic pattern x is
labeled according to a winner-takes-all rule, i.e.,
x ∈ω∗⇔ω∗= arg
i=1,...,C {fi(x)}
where fi(x) is the output of the ith SVM. However, other
multiclass strategies could be considered (see ). We refer the reader to , , , and for greater detail
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed approach, two
different sets of experiments were conducted on two different
data sets composed of Quickbird satellite images. The ﬁrst data
set represents a complex urban scene related to the city of Pavia
(Italy), whereas the second data set represents a rural area close
to the city of Trento (Italy).
A. Pavia Data Set: Urban Area
The image used in the experiments refers to the downtown
area of the city of Pavia (northern Italy) and was acquired
on June 23, 2002 from the Quickbird satellite. In particular,
we used a panchromatic image (Fig. 4) and a pan-sharpened
multispectral image obtained by applying a proper fusion technique to the panchromatic channel and the four bands of the
multispectral image. The adopted technique is based on the
Gram–Schmidt procedure implemented in the ENVI software
package . The ﬁnal data set is made up of a panchromatic
image and four pan-sharpened multispectral images of 1024 ×
1024 pixels with a spatial resolution of 0.7 m. It is worth
noting that the multiresolution fusion task artiﬁcially increases
the spatial resolution of the multispectral channels on the one
hand, whereas on the other, it may affect the spectral signatures
of pixels. Nevertheless, this process was used both with the
proposed method and with the standard approach adopted for
comparison. We therefore do not expect it to affect the assessment of the effectiveness of the proposed approach compared
with the standard method.
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed method in challenging classiﬁcation problems, we deﬁne classes in a very
detailed way, by considering land covers with similar spectral and/or geometrical attributes (e.g., buildings with different spectral signature). Table I shows the distribution of the
samples (in pixels) in the training and test sets among the
eight land-cover classes that characterize the considered scene.
These samples have been collected by an accurate photo interpretation of the image for training and test samples and
Panchromatic image (1024 × 1024 pixels) acquired by the Quickbird
satellite on the city of Pavia (northern Italy).
NUMBER OF SAMPLES (IN PIXELS) IN THE TRAINING
AND TEST SETS (PAVIA DATA SET)
according to the following guidelines: 1) they have been extracted from different spatial positions in the image to properly represent classes in different portions of the scene and
2) training and test samples have been selected from different
regions to have patterns as more uncorrelated as possible. In
addition, unlike in standard accuracy assessment protocols,
to better evaluate the performance of the proposed system in
both homogeneous and edge (or boundary) areas, we have
split the test set samples in two subsets. This allows to
better understand the effectiveness of the different classiﬁcation
approaches in dealing with pixels with different properties in
the image and results in a more precise accuracy assessment
procedure.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we
conducted two different sets of experiments. One was aimed
at assessing the effect of the number of context levels (segmentation levels) on classiﬁcation accuracy. In the other set of
experiments, we compared the performances of the proposed
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
Representation of the hierarchical modeling of the context at different
levels. (a) Four. (b) Five. (c) Six levels of segmentation (Pavia data set).
system with those of a standard pixel-based classiﬁer and of
an alternative technique based on a classical feature-extraction
method based on the generalized Gaussian pyramid decomposition of the image.
1) Experiment 1—Analysis of the Effectiveness of the Proposed Approach: In our experiments, we carried out several
trials with hierarchies made up of a different number of levels
(up to six levels). The ﬁrst level is the pixel level, whereas the
other ﬁve levels are obtained using the presented multiscale
hierarchical segmentation technique with different parameters
to tune the homogeneity predicate. On the one hand, the levels
between two and four are characterized by very small regions.
This means that from a general point of view, objects in these
levels are highly oversegmented, as shown in Fig. 5(a). In other
words, a small neighborhood system is adaptively deﬁned for
the pixel. On the other hand, the levels between ﬁve and six are
characterized by regions of medium size [Fig. 5(b) and (c)].
In particular, at level 6, a single region deﬁning the context
of a pixel may contain different objects belonging to different
information classes. Although this models the complex context
of the object to which the pixel belongs, it may lead to classiﬁcation errors.
We assessed the effectiveness of the proposed approach
versus the number of levels considered (from two to six). The
features extracted for the ﬁrst level (i.e., the pixel level) were
only the values of each spectral channel and the panchromatic
image. For level 2, we only considered the mean value of the
digital numbers of pixels deﬁning each region in each spectral
band and the panchromatic image. From levels 3 to 6, for each
region and for each band, we considered the mean value and
the standard deviation of the digital numbers. On the whole,
10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 features were considered for experiments
with two, three, four, ﬁve, and six levels, respectively. In the
experiments, we used an SVM classiﬁer with RBF kernels,
which have been proved effective in a number of different
classiﬁcation problems. According to a proper model selection
technique , we have identiﬁed the best values of parameters
(i.e., the regularization parameter C and the spread factor of
Gaussian kernels γ) using the training samples and the global
test samples (edge and homogeneous areas jointly) for validation. The highest accuracies obtained, as well as the related
parameters, are shown in Table II.
These results conﬁrm that the proposed classiﬁcation system
always exhibited a much greater overall accuracy compared
with that obtained using only the pixel level. In detail, the
greater increase in overall accuracy (i.e., about 13%) obtained
with the presented approach relates to edge areas. Classiﬁcation
accuracy increased also on homogeneous areas, although the
(a) KAPPA ACCURACY AND (b) OVERALL ACCURACY PROVIDED BY THE
PROPOSED APPROACH ON EDGE, HOMOGENEOUS, AND GLOBAL TEST
AREAS VERSUS THE NUMBER OF CONSIDERED CONTEXT LEVELS.
THE OPTIMAL VALUES OF THE REGULARIZATION PARAMETER C
AND OF THE SPREAD γ OF THE KERNEL FUNCTIONS
ARE REPORTED (PAVIA DATA SET)
improvement is signiﬁcantly smaller (i.e., about 2%) than that
in edge areas.
The proposed criterion for the adaptive selection of the
number of levels [see (11) and (12)] resulted in the choice of
ﬁve levels. [The value of EAth used in (11) was related to the
expected average size of buildings present in the scene.] This
conﬁrms the effectiveness of this simple criterion that selected
the number of levels that provided the highest classiﬁcation
accuracy on the global test set. It is worth noting that the
proposed approach provided stable accuracies for a number of
levels close to the one identiﬁed by the automatic procedure
(in the range between four and six levels), exhibiting Kappa
values between 0.71 and 0.74 on edge areas and between 0.94
and 0.96 on homogeneous areas. This conﬁrms its ability to
model the spatial context of each analyzed pixel. As one can
see from Table II, six context levels lead to a slight decrease
of classiﬁcation accuracies. This behavior is due to the signiﬁcant undersegmentation of real objects at level 6, which
may affect classiﬁcation accuracy both on edge and homogeneous areas.
In the second part of this experiment, according to the
obtained results, we considered only four, ﬁve, and six context
levels, as they gave the highest classiﬁcation accuracy. To better
evaluate the performance of the proposed classiﬁcation system,
we also analyzed the classiﬁcation maps obtained in all trials.
We report only on a small representative portion of the obtained
maps, to present examples that show both the advantages and
the limitations of the proposed system.
Fig. 6 shows a small portion of the classiﬁcation maps
obtained with (a) four, (b) ﬁve, and (c) six segmentation levels
and (d) with only the pixel level.
As can be seen, whereas the crossroad in the center of the
images (within the red rectangle) is well modeled in Fig. 6(b)
and (c), the results are inaccurate in Fig. 6(a) because of high
fragmentation in the modeling of the spatial context at the
higher level. In the map obtained using only the pixel level
(without contextual information) reported in Fig. 6(d), we can
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Detail of classiﬁcation maps obtained with (a) four, (b) ﬁve, and (c) six
segmentation levels and (d) with only the pixel level. The real-color Quickbird
image is reported in (e). The red rectangle shows an example of the effects of
the different levels of the spatial context. The legend of the maps is reported in
the caption of Fig. 8 (Pavia data set).
see that the shape of the buildings is not well modeled, and in
many cases, homogeneous areas are not correctly classiﬁed. In
addition, the crossroad is not properly recognized.
On the other hand, in some areas, using fewer levels (i.e.,
very small regions to characterize the adaptive neighborhood)
leads to a better deﬁnition of small details. For example, in
Fig. 7(a), small roads are well classiﬁed, whereas in Fig. 8(b)
and (c), by exploiting more context levels, we obtain a poor
representation of objects in the scene under investigation.
It is worth noting that we carried out also some trials by
using geometrical (minimum rectangular ﬁt, width-to-length
ratio, etc.) and relational (number of neighbors of an object
and number of sub-objects that compose an object at the upper
level) features. These kinds of features were extracted only for
the higher levels of the representation (levels 5 and 6). The
obtained results did not improve both the classiﬁcation accuracies and the quality of the classiﬁcation maps. This behavior
mainly depends on the criterion adopted for the deﬁnition of
classes. Inasmuch as many classes share the same geometrical
features (e.g., different kinds of building are discriminated only
on the basis of the spectral signature), in this case, the use of
the geometrical and relational information does not increase the
separability among classes in the feature space.
2) Experiment 2—Comparisons With a Feature-Extraction
Module Based on a Generalized Gaussian Pyramid Decomposition: The aim of the second set of experiments is to compare
the proposed system with a different approach to multilevel
Classiﬁcation maps obtained with (a) four, (b) ﬁve, and (c) six levels of
segmentation and (d) with only the pixel level. The real-color Quickbird image
is reported in (e). The legend of the maps is reported in the caption of Fig. 8
(Pavia data set).
feature extraction of very high resolution images based on
the generalized Gaussian pyramid decomposition. In detail,
the panchromatic and pan-sharpened images are iteratively
analyzed by a Gaussian kernel low-pass ﬁlter, with 5 × 5 square
analysis window, and are undersampled by a factor of 2. In this
way, it is possible to obtain a simple multiscale decomposition
of the scene. In our experiments, we exploit ﬁve levels of
pyramidal decomposition (this is the number of levels that gives
the highest accuracy between two and six) to characterize the
spatial context of pixels and to label each pixel of the scene
under investigation. The extracted feature vector was made up
of 25 spectral features. The SVM classiﬁcation module was also
used in these trials.
The best accuracies obtained for the proposed technique and
for the reference feature-extraction technique are reported in
terms of Kappa coefﬁcient and overall accuracy in Table III.
These results show that the proposed feature-extraction technique provided an accuracy higher than the reference method.
The accuracy obtained on test edge areas conﬁrms the greater
ability of the proposed approach (which increased Kappa values
by 8.5% compared with the generalized Gaussian pyramid
method) to model the geometrical details of objects in the
scene, such as roofs and roads. A comparison between the
accuracies obtained on homogeneous areas points out a gap
of 2.4%. To better assess the effectiveness of the investigated
methods, Fig. 8(a) and (b) shows the classiﬁcation maps obtained using the proposed classiﬁcation system and the reference system.
A qualitative analysis of the maps conﬁrms the previous
consideration based on the quantitative results. The adaptive
and multilevel properties of the proposed feature-extraction
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
Classiﬁcation maps obtained by an SVM classiﬁer (a) with the
proposed feature extraction module and (b) with a feature extraction algorithm
based on a pyramidal Gaussian decomposition (Pavia data set).
technique can better model the edge of objects in the scene,
especially in areas with small details. The great complexity of
the analyzed scene, which includes different types of buildings
of different sizes and different types of roads, shows that the
low-pass ﬁlter used in the generalized Gaussian pyramid decomposition is not suitable to model the boundaries of objects
(a) KAPPA ACCURACY AND (b) OVERALL ACCURACY ON EDGE,
HOMOGENEOUS, AND GLOBAL TEST AREAS VERSUS THE PROPOSED
FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE (ADAPTIVE HIERARCHICAL CONTEXT
MODELING) AND THE REFERENCE TECHNIQUE (GENERALIZED GAUSSIAN
PYRAMID REDUCTION) (PAVIA DATA SET)
and complex structures accurately. On the contrary, when a
multilevel segmentation algorithm is used to adaptively model
the neighborhood of a pixel, a proper representation of the
edges of the objects is obtained.
B. Trento Data Set: Rural Area
The image used in these experiments refers to the rural
area of Trento (northern Italy) and was acquired on March 30,
2004 from the Quickbird satellite. The data set consists of a
panchromatic image (Fig. 9) and four pan-sharpened images
of 512 × 512 pixels with a spatial resolution of 0.7 m. The
pan-sharpened images were obtained with the Gram–Schmidt
procedure .
Table IV shows the distribution of the samples (in pixels) in
the training and test sets among the eight land-cover classes that
characterize the considered scene. We have selected the ground
truth according to the guidelines followed in the previous data
set on the Pavia area.
As in the case of the Pavia data set, to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, we conducted two
different sets of experiments. The ﬁrst one was aimed at assessing the effects of both the number of context levels and
the different kinds of extracted features on the classiﬁcation
accuracies. The second one compared the performances of the
proposed system with those of the feature-extraction method
based on the generalized Gaussian pyramid decomposition of
the image.
1) Experiment 1—Analysis of the Effectiveness of the Proposed Approach: In our experiments, we carried out several
trials with hierarchies made up of two to seven context levels.
The ﬁrst level is the pixel level, whereas the other six levels
are obtained according to the presented multiscale hierarchical
segmentation technique with different parameters to tune the
homogeneity predicate. As in experiments on the urban data
set, levels between two and three are characterized by very
small regions. This means that from a general point of view,
objects in these levels are highly oversegmented. Levels 4 and
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Panchromatic image (512 × 512 pixels) acquired by the Quickbird
satellite on the city of Trento (northern Italy).
NUMBER OF SAMPLES (IN PIXELS) IN THE TRAINING
AND TEST SETS (TRENTO DATA SET)
5 are characterized by regions of medium size. Levels 6 and 7
contain regions that represent (or include) the objects present
in the scene. The features extracted for the ﬁrst level (i.e.,
the pixel level) were only the pixel values in all the spectral
channels and the panchromatic image. For level 2, we only
considered the mean value of the digital numbers of pixels
deﬁning each region in each spectral band and the panchromatic
image. From levels 3 to 7, for each region and for each band,
we considered the mean value and the standard deviation of
the digital numbers. On the whole, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60
features were considered for experiments with two, three, four,
ﬁve, six, and seven levels, respectively. In all the experiments,
we used an SVM classiﬁer with RBF kernels. According to a
proper model selection technique , we identiﬁed the best
values of the regularization parameter C and the spread factor
of Gaussian kernels γ using the training set samples and the
global test set samples for validation. The highest accuracies
obtained, as well as the related parameter values, are shown
in Table V.
These results conﬁrm the effectiveness of the proposed classiﬁcation system, which always exhibited a greater overall
accuracy compared with that obtained using only the pixel
(a) KAPPA ACCURACY AND (b) OVERALL ACCURACY PROVIDED BY THE
PROPOSED APPROACH ON EDGE, HOMOGENEOUS, AND GLOBAL TEST
AREAS VERSUS THE NUMBER OF CONSIDERED CONTEXT LEVELS.
THE OPTIMAL VALUES OF THE REGULARIZATION PARAMETER C
AND OF THE SPREAD γ OF THE KERNEL FUNCTIONS ARE
REPORTED (TRENTO DATA SET)
level (much greater starting from three levels of context representation). In detail, the greatest increase in overall accuracy (i.e., about 10%) was obtained on edge test areas with
six levels. With this number of levels, classiﬁcation accuracy
increased also on homogeneous test areas with an improvement
of about 3%. It is worth nothing that these results conﬁrm
the effectiveness of the empirical criterion for the selection
of the number of levels described in (11), which on this data
set identiﬁed an optimal number of decomposition levels equal
to six.5 By analyzing Table V, one can see that the proposed
approach provided stable accuracies versus the number of levels
considered in the neighborhood of the optimal number of scales
identiﬁed with the proposed empirical criterion (in the range
between ﬁve and seven levels). In particular, it exhibited Kappa
values between 0.62 and 0.64 on edge areas and between 0.97
and 0.98 on homogeneous areas. This conﬁrms the ability of
the presented methodology to model the spatial context of each
analyzed pixel.
According to the previous results, in the second part of this
experiment, we considered only ﬁve and six levels, as they gave
the highest classiﬁcation accuracies on the overall test set. To
assess the importance of the use of geometrical features on this
data set, we computed some geometrical parameters from the
regions extracted at levels 5 and 6. We considered the following
1) Width-to-length ratio. It can be calculated as the ratio
between the length and the width of the bounding box
that contains the object under investigation.
2) Shape index. It can be obtained by the ratio of the border
length of the object under analysis and four times the
square root of its area.
5In this case, we used a hybrid approach for deﬁning the EAth parameter, by
considering an average of the size of the objects that compose the rural scene
(i.e., buildings and crops).
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006
(a) KAPPA ACCURACY AND (b) OVERALL ACCURACY PROVIDED BY THE
PROPOSED APPROACH ON EDGE, HOMOGENEOUS, AND GLOBAL TEST
AREAS VERSUS THE NUMBER OF CONSIDERED CONTEXT LEVELS
WHEN GEOMETRICAL FEATURES WERE ALSO CONSIDERED.
THE OPTIMAL VALUES OF THE REGULARIZATION PARAMETER C
AND OF THE SPREAD γ OF THE KERNEL FUNCTIONS ARE
REPORTED (TRENTO DATA SET)
3) Rectangular ﬁt. It can be obtained as the ratio between
the area not covered by a rectangle with the same area
and proportion of the object under investigation, and the
area of the object.
On the whole, 46 and 56 features were considered for experiments with ﬁve and six levels, respectively. Table VI reports the
best accuracies obtained with these features after performing a
new model selection for the SVM classiﬁer.
These results point out that, on this data set, the use of
geometrical features increases the accuracy on edge areas with
respect to that obtained by using only spectral features, at the
expense of a slight decrease of accuracy in homogeneous areas.
In greater detail, in the six-level case, we obtained an increase
of about 3% in terms of Kappa accuracy over edge areas and
a decrease of 1% over homogeneous areas. This interesting
result, which does not seem intuitive, can be explained as
follows. On the one hand, the use of geometrical features
allows a better characterization of pixels close to the border
areas, which are better “attracted” from the geometry of objects
to which they belong. On the other hand, oversegmentation
errors slightly affect the accuracy on homogeneous areas, where
spectral and textural features are sufﬁcient for obtaining high
accuracies.
2) Experiment 2—Comparisons With a Feature-Extraction
Module Based on a Generalized Gaussian Pyramid Decomposition: Also, on this study area, the aim of the second set
of experiments is to compare the proposed system with a
multilevel feature extraction based on the generalized Gaussian
pyramid decomposition. As in the previous case, we used ﬁve
levels of pyramidal decomposition to characterize the spatial
context of pixels (ﬁve levels resulted in the highest accuracies
on the global test set) and adopted an SVM-based classiﬁcation
module. The extracted vector was made up of 25 features.
The best results (in terms of Kappa and overall accuracies)
obtained with the proposed technique (with six levels and the
same feature vector extracted in the ﬁrst part of the previous
experiment) and with the generalized Gaussian pyramid technique are reported in Table VII.
These results conﬁrm the better capability of the proposed
approach to model the geometrical details of objects in the
scene. In greater detail, it increased the Kappa value on the
(a) KAPPA ACCURACY AND (b) OVERALL ACCURACY ON EDGE,
HOMOGENEOUS, AND GLOBAL TEST AREAS VERSUS THE
PROPOSED FEATURE-EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE (ADAPTIVE
HIERARCHICAL CONTEXT MODELING) AND THE REFERENCE
TECHNIQUE (GENERALIZED GAUSSIAN PYRAMID
REDUCTION) (TRENTO DATA SET)
edge areas by about 19% compared with the generalized
Gaussian pyramid method. In addition, a slight increase of
accuracy on homogeneous areas was obtained (i.e., about 2%).
To better assess the effectiveness of the investigated methods,
Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the classiﬁcation maps obtained using
the proposed classiﬁcation system and the system based on the
Gaussian pyramid feature extraction.
A qualitative analysis of maps in Fig. 10 conﬁrms the previous consideration based on the quantitative results. The adaptive and multilevel properties of the proposed feature-extraction
technique can better model the edge of objects in the scene. In
greater detail, the map in Fig. 10(b) shows that the generalized
Gaussian pyramid decomposition is not suitable to accurately
model the boundaries of objects and complex structures due to
a blurring effect. On the contrary, when the proposed multilevel
segmentation algorithm is used to adaptively model the neighborhood of a pixel, a proper representation of the edges of the
objects is obtained.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel system for the classiﬁcation of very
high resolution images has been presented. The system is
made up of: 1) a feature-extraction module that adaptively
models the spatial context of each pixel according to a complete
hierarchical multilevel representation of the scene under investigation and 2) a proper classiﬁer based on SVMs. In greater
detail, a hierarchical segmentation is applied to the images
to obtain segmentation results at different levels of resolution according to tree-based hierarchical constraints. In this
way, precise hierarchical relationships are established between
each pixel in the image and the regions that adaptively deﬁne
its context at different levels. Each pixel is characterized by
a feature vector that includes both the pixel-level information in the spectral channels of the sensor and the attributes
of all the regions, which represent the multilevel relationships of the pixel and deﬁne its spatial context adaptively.
BRUZZONE AND CARLIN: PIXEL-BASED SYSTEM FOR VERY HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Classiﬁcation maps obtained by an SVM classiﬁer (a) with the
proposed feature extraction module and (b) with a feature extraction algorithm
based on a pyramidal Gaussian decomposition (Trento data set).
Depending on the level considered, different kinds of features
are extracted to characterize the regions with the most reliable attributes for the speciﬁc scale analyzed and the speciﬁc
scene considered. It is worth noting that in our technique,
unlike other approaches proposed in the literature, all features
associated both with the pixel level and all the region levels are
jointly considered in the classiﬁcation phase to label a pixel.
This hierarchical representation allows to capture and exploit
the entire information in the scene by working with adaptive
regions at different scales. To deal with the large number of
feature-vector components to be given to the classiﬁer as input,
we used a machine-learning classiﬁer based on SVMs. This
choice depends both on the effectiveness of SVMs classiﬁers
and on their capabilities to analyze a high-dimensional feature
space with a reduced effect of the Hughes phenomenon.
Experimental results, obtained on two very high geometrical resolution Quickbird images acquired on a complex
urban area and on a rural area, conﬁrm the effectiveness of
the proposed classiﬁcation system. In detail, two main experiments have been carried out. In the ﬁrst, we focused on the
number of levels to be used to model the context of a pixel.
The results show that varying the number of levels used to
characterize the spatial context adaptively, in a range close to
the “optimal” level identiﬁed by the empirical criterion proposed in (11) and (12), does not critically change the overall accuracy and the quality of classiﬁcation maps. In the second set
of experiments, we compared the proposed feature-extraction
technique with a standard feature-extraction algorithm based
on a generalized Gaussian decomposition pyramid. The SVM
classiﬁer was also used in these experiments. The experimental
results conﬁrm that the proposed feature-extraction module
outperforms the reference method based on the Gaussian pyramidal reduction. This is due both to the adaptive and to the
multilevel nature of the proposed feature-extraction module,
which by exploiting a hierarchical segmentation algorithm can
model the objects (shapes and relationships at different levels
of resolution) in the scene under investigation better, compared
with the feature-extraction module based on the generalized
Gaussian pyramid decomposition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank A. Garzelli (University of Siena,
Italy) for providing the Quickbird image of Pavia, R. Rigon
(University of Trento, Italy) for providing the Quickbird image
of Trento (which was acquired in the framework of the project
ASI 175/02 funded by the Italian Space Agency), and A.
Baraldi (Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy) for useful discussions about the segmentation algorithm. The authors are
also grateful to the anonymous referees for their constructive