HAL Id: hal-04079360
 
Submitted on 24 Apr 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Measuring Article Quality in Wikipedia using the
Collaboration Network
Baptiste de La Robertie, Yoann Pitarch, Olivier Teste, Baptiste De La
To cite this version:
Baptiste de La Robertie, Yoann Pitarch, Olivier Teste, Baptiste De La Robertie.
Measuring Article Quality in Wikipedia using the Collaboration Network. IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining , ACM SIGKDD: Special
Interest Group on Knowledge Discovery in Data; IEEE, Aug 2015, Paris, France.
pp.464-471,
￿10.1145/2808797.2808895￿. ￿hal-04079360￿
Open Archive TOULOUSE Archive Ouverte (OATAO)
OATAO is an open access repository that collects the work of Toulouse researchers and
makes it freely available over the web where possible.
This is an author-deposited version published in : 
Eprints ID : 15351
The contribution was presented at ASONAM 2015 :
 
To cite this version : De La Robertie, Baptiste and Pitarch, Yoann and Teste, Olivier
Measuring Article Quality in Wikipedia using the Collaboration Network. In:
2015 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining , 25 August 2015 - 28 August 2015 (Paris, France).
Any correspondence concerning this service should be sent to the repository
administrator: 
Measuring Article Quality in Wikipedia using the
Collaboration Network
Baptiste de La Robertie
Universit´e de Toulouse
IRIT UMR5505
F-31071, France
 
Yoann Pitarch
Universit´e de Toulouse
IRIT UMR5505
F-31071, France
 
Olivier Teste
Universit´e de Toulouse
IRIT UMR5505
F-31071, France
 
Abstract—Collaboratively edited articles such as in Wikipedia
suffer from well-identiﬁed problems regarding their quality,
e.g., information accuracy, reputability of third-party sources,
vandalism. Due to the huge number of articles and the intensive
edit rate, the manual evaluation of article content quality is
inconceivable. In this paper, we tackle the problem of automatically establishing the quality of Wikipedia articles. Evidences are
shown to consider the interactions between authors and articles
to assess the quality score. Collaborations between authors and
reviewers are also considered to reinforce the discriminative
process. This work gives a generic formulation of the Mutual
Reinforcement principle held between articles quality and authors
authority and take explicitly advantage of the co-edits graph
generated by individuals. Experiments conducted on a set of
representative data from Wikipedia show the effectiveness of our
INTRODUCTION
Context. The free encyclopedia Wikipedia probably constitutes the most well-known collaborative system where any
user can create and edit articles. Recent statistics1 report
almost 35 millions of articles in more than 280 languages,
among which close to 2 and 5 millions of French and English
articles respectively. This collaborative process, involved by
more than 55 millions of contributors, generates 10 millions
of edits each month, that is approximately 10 edits per second.
This continuously increasing production of text data leads
to various scientiﬁc challenges, among which the automatic
quality assessment of the generated content.
The main strength of Wikipedia is to allow anyone to
contribute to its content. Potential pitfall of such an open
collaborative editing process is the emergence of doubtful or
even radically poor quality contents, e.g., hoaxes, publicity,
disinformation or acts of vandalism, that can be available
for consultation for several weeks before being detected and
corrected. A well-known example has concerned the involvement of the journalist John Seigenthaler in the Kennedy
assassination, i.e., a fake content appeared in the wikipedia
biography page of the former in 2005. The biography had
also spread to the websites Answers.com and Reference.com
and the erroneous content remained online for more than ﬁve
months .
To overcome these limitations, various works tackle the
problem of automatically assessing the quality of articles. Our
1 
work falls into this problem category. However, while substantial efforts have been made using explicit features such as
length of the articles or implicit ones such as life cycles of
texts , little attention has been paid to indicators in
the co-edit graph of authors. As motivated in the next section,
we do think that considering some structural properties of the
co-edit graph can signiﬁcantly help in assessing the quality of
Wikipedia articles.
Motivations. Besides the features considered by the state-ofthe-art approaches, we motivate the need for considering the
co-edit graph in the quality score calculation by answering
the following questions:
Are the co-edit graphs of top quality articles denser than
of poor quality articles? To answer this question, we built the
co-edit graph for each of these 2 categories2 according to the
following principles: editors having authored some contents in
at least one article of the desired quality represent the set of
vertices. It exists an undirected edge between two editors if
they have co-edited at least an article. Edges are weighted
by the number of articles the pair of author has co-edited
normalized by the number of documents in the category. The
answer to this question as well as others basic statistics on the
graphs are shown in Table I: the graph associated with high
quality articles is 12 times denser than the one associated with
poor quality articles.
SOME STATISTICS ABOUT THE CO-EDIT GRAPHS PER
ARTICLE QUALITY LEVEL
Type of articles
Poor quality
High quality
Collaborations
Density (10−5)
Avg. Degree
Med. Degree
Because comparing the density of very different size
graphs might be legitimaly discussed, the average and the
median degree are also reported: nodes associated with users
collaborating in high quality articles have twice as many
neighboors than those associated with poor articles. Based on
these observations, we can suspect that high quality articles
2As stated in Section IV-A the Wikipedia Editorial Team Assessment has
manually labelled 30K articles. This enables the possibility to build some
statistics on these categories.
!"#$"%&'()'"*+",'
-./0"#'()'$(1"*2&'3"#'342#'()'4.&5(#,'
)**+",-./012".345/67"
8**3",-./012".345/67"
The histogram of edges per weight on high quality articles (white)
and poor quality articles (black).
involve much more collaboration than poor quality articles.
Thus, considering the collaborative process between users
looks to be a promising track to assess the quality of an article.
Are the co-editors used to work together on top quality
articles? Besides the density of the co-edit graphs, we would
like to analyze the nature of the relations between the editors in
order to determine in what extent authors collaborate together.
Our intuition is that the higher the quality of an article is, the
more frequent the interactions between co-editors are. The
percentage of edges per weight per category is shown in Fig.
1. For readability purpose and because we aim at emphasizing
on the impact of high weights, weights lower than 20 where
omitted. Our intuition is obviously conﬁrmed since high
weights signiﬁcantly appear more in the graph associated
with high quality articles. Such an observation may indicate
that good articles are authored by editors who should rely
upon themselves since they are used to work together. Thus,
considering the strength of the relation between co-editors
looks to be a promising track to assess the quality of an article.
Contributions. We base our approach on the Mutual Reinforcement principle which assumes the interconnection between the author authority and the article quality and
propose the following contributions:
We propose a generic formulation of the Mutual
Reinforcement principle. In this way, state-of-the-art
approaches can be seen as instances of this general
model. This makes the comparison much easier at a
theoretical point of view;
We instantiate our model by incorporating features
extracted from the co-edit graph;
We evaluated our approach and empirically demonstrate that it signiﬁcantly perform better than the stateof-the-art approaches.
Paper Organization. Related work is discussed in section II.
Our proposed model is presented in section III. Section IV
presents our experimental results. Finally, we conclude and
give some perspectives in section V.
RELATED WORK
One of the earliest work has shown that the number of
words in a document is a good predictor for article quality.
More particulary, a speciﬁc class of articles in Wikipedia,
known as Features articles, is easily predictable using the
number of words in the article. Others correlations between
simple features such as the number of edits and unique editors
are empirically demonstrated . While these results are
persuasive, both previous works consider the task as a binary
classiﬁcation problem where all non Features articles are considered as negative examples. Various works make use of the
notion of lifespan to infer the quality or thruthness of elements
in the documents. Adler et al. introduce an approach that
consists in measuring the reputation of the editors. The more an
edit is preserved by subsequent reviewers, the more its author
gains in reputation, and conversely, authors can lose reputation
when their edits are reverted or deleted. The intuitive heuristic
is that high-quality contributions survive longer throw the edit
process because all subsquents editors implicitly approved the
contribution simply by leaving it . Hu et al. also model
the authority of the authors and the reviewers to compute the
quality of each word in the article. Three models based on the
mutual dependency between articles quality and contributors
authority are proposed such as the Peer Review model which
takes advantage of the implicit approbation of the reviewers,
and the Prob Review model, which applies a decaying function
over the authority of the reviewers around each approved word.
Experiments show good results but are conducted over solely
200 documents. Moreover the structure between editors is not
explicitly used. Adler et al. also propose to credit each
word with the reputation of the reviewers in proximity of
the word and observe that words with low-trust assignment
have high probability of being edited. In , the quality of
an article is modeled as a time-dependent function, allowing
quality of articles to evolve during time. In their work, only
two states are considered making the study speciﬁc to the
binary classiﬁcation problem. Wohner et al. propose to use
the editing intensity during a period of time but once gain,
experiments are conducted over 200 articles and consider only
two classes : Features articles i.e. good articles and articles for
deletion i.e low quality articles. A more recent work reuses
the mutual dependency concept between editors and texts and
integrates the concept of lifespan as well as an adjustment of
the authority of the reviewers in order to reduce the impact on
text quality by vandal edits. A very recent work explicitely
formulates the mutual dependency between authors and articles
with an Article-Editor network. The proposed model computes
the quality of a document according to the editing relationships
between article nodes and editor nodes using a variant of the
PageRank algorithm . Experiments are performed over only
two classes of articles and none consider the relations between
users. Finally, Suzuki implicitly uses the structure of the
co-edit network via the h-index measure in order to calculate
the authority of the editors, but the quality of an article is
directly computed using solely the derived authorities. In the
conclusion, the author emits some doubts about the uniqueness
of a quality function to distinguish good from bad articles.
RELATED APPROACHES
References
Considered relations
Authors/Articles
Reviewers/Articles
Authors/Reviewers
 
These approaches are summed up in Table II according
to the type of relations they consider to address the article
quality evaluation problem. Most of the works consider the
task of assessing the quality of Wikipedia article as a binary
classiﬁcation problem whereas six different grades have been
proposed by the Editorial Team of Wikipedia. Our work
can interestingly deal with a non-predetermined number of
classes by formulating the problem as a ranking problem.
Moreover, none of the previous work has explicitly exploited
the author interactions. However, as pointed out in Section I,
some evidences exist to integrate the author interactions in
the process. In this work we properly make use of these
interactions in our model as described in the next section.
PROPOSED MODELS
Our work is grounded on 2 intuitions :
(1) Good articles are likely to be written by good editors,
and conversely, good editors are more authorative if they
participate, by writing and reviewing, good articles . In
our model, we capture this intuition postulating that the more
authoritative users participate to the ellaboration of the article,
the more the article is likely to be of good quality. The intrinsic
dependency between quality and authority inevitably leads to
an interdepedant pair of equations, where the quality of an
article is deﬁned over the qualities of its individuals piece of
contents, and the authority of a user over the individual piece of
contents he/she authored and approved. With our formulation,
the amount of contribution of each editor in each article is
catched in order to quantify the notion of implicit approvement,
saying that if many authoritatives users who widely participate
in an article leave previous edit on place it is because they
judge it as good quality.
(2) Good articles are the result of a grouping of expert
users. This second intuition seems to be particulary true for
specialized topics. The proposed model quantiﬁes in what
extent these experts are used to collaborate together. Reviews
between these authors are very expressive because probably
much more trustworthy. Hence, we postulate that an article
has a much more quality efﬁciency when these experts work
together, and express that intuition using the co-edit graph
between the authors. More formally, one can express this
intuition using the probability PX(k) that two editors have
together edited at least k articles belonging to a given class X
of articles. To illustrate the intuition, let suppose 3 classes of
articles A, B and C such as articles of class A are of better
quality than those of type B and those belonging to class B
of better quality than articles in class C. If editors of class A
collaborate more than editors of class B and C, we should have
k PC(k). It should be noted that
this unequality might not hold for close classes on real data
for all k. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, it does hold when
considering the two classes “good” and “poor” quality articles.
The cumulative sum of edges weigth of good quality articles
is indisputably greater than those of poor quality articles. This
will be sufﬁcient to push upward the scores of good quality
A. Notations
Let X = {1, 2, ..., N} be the set of N articles and U =
{1, 2, ..., M} the set of M users. Each article i is modeled
by a sequence of char sequences ⟨xk
i ⟩1≤k≤ni, where ni is the
number of sequences in the article. We denote by yi ∈Y the
quality of an article i. The author j of a sequence xk
i.e., j = ak
i . The set of sequences that a user j has authored
Example III.1. Let Xtoy = {1, 2, 3, 4} be a set of 4 articles
authored by Utoy = {1, 2, 3, 4} a set of 4 editors. Corresponding char sequences are illustrated on Fig.2. For instance,
the article 1 is composed by 4 sequences ⟨x1
The ﬁrst one x1
1, i.e., the beginning of the article, has been
authored by the user 1, i.e., a1
1 = 1. The set of sequences that
have been authored by the user 1 (in gray in the picture) is
S(1) = {x1
Four articles and their respective char sequences. For instance, article
4 (bottom) is composed of 2 sequences authored by users 4 and 3 respectively.
Let G = (V, E) be the co-edit graph deﬁned by the set of
nodes V = U and the edges set E, where edges eij ∈R+
between each pair of users (i, j) ∈U2 measure the number of
articles both users i and j have co-edited, formally :
eij = |{k ∈X : ∃(u, v) : au
Example III.2. Let Gtoy = (Utoy, Etoy) be the co-edit graph
constructed using the previous example (see Fig. 3). The
weight of the edge between 1 and 2 is e1,2 = 3 because they
have been co-authors in the articles 1, 2 and 3.
Representation of the co-edit graph Gtoy associated with Xtoy and
Utoy. For instance, e4,3 is 1 because users 4 and 3 have co-edited only one
article (article 4).
Finally, the quality of a sequence xk
i and the authority
of a user j is Aj. Score calculations are discussed in the next
B. Deﬁnitions
We ﬁrst introduce the notion of lifespan of a sequence with
is necessary to deﬁne the anterior and posterior neighborhood
of a sequence and the notion of approvement.
Deﬁnition III.1. (Lifespan of a sequence) The lifespan lk
a sequence xk
i is the number of revisions it survives until the
latest version of the article.
Deﬁnition III.2. (Anterior neighborhood) The anterior neighborhood of a given sequence xk
i , denoted by N −(xk
i ), is the set
of sequences in the article i such that ∀xk′
III.3. (Posterior neighborhood) The posterior
neighborhood of a given sequence xk
i , denoted by N +(xk
is the set of sequences in the article i such that ∀xk′
Deﬁnition III.4. (Approved sequence) The sequence xk
approved sequence w.r.t. the user j (the user j has approved the
sequence xk
i ) if the user j has authored at least one sequence
in the posterior neighborhood of xk
i , i.e, if ∃xk′
Example III.3. The above deﬁned concepts are illustrated on
Fig. 4. It illustrates the edit process of the article 1 from the
initial commit of the user 1 (top of the ﬁgure) to the latest
revision (bottom of the ﬁgure). Let us consider the sequence
1 in the latest version of the article. Since it appears three
revisions before the latest version of the article (the sequence
1 has been authored by the user 2 in the second revision),
its lifespan is 3, i.e., l2
1 = 3. The anterior neighborhood of
the sequence x2
1 is N −(x2
1} and its posterior
neighborhood is N +(x2
1}. Finally, the sequence x2
has been approved by the author 1.
First revision
Latest revision
Fig. 4. Illustration of an edit history of an article. Neighborhoods of sequence
1 are computed considering the latest version of the article.
When an authoritative user writes a content which is
successively reviewed and approved by authoritative users, it is
likely to be of good quality. This is even reinforced when many
reviewers approved it and even more when these reviewers
have widely participated to the article, e.g., the user 1 in
Fig.4. The more a reviewer throws himself/herself in an article,
the more he/she is susceptible to see new edits and perform
modiﬁcations if he/she judges the quality insufﬁcient. This
assumption becomes stronger when the number of authoritative
reviewers increase. In other words, the amount of contributions
of each reviewer seems to be fundamental to measure the
concept of approvement. To formalize this intuition, the ﬁnal
quality Qk
i of an individual sequence xk
i is expressed by an
approvement function which generically reﬂects the weighting
schemes (or relations) between authors and reviewers. The
quality of the sequence xk
i is formally deﬁned as:
j→i : R+ × R+ →R+ is the generic approvement
function quantifying the implicit approvement by the user j of
the sequence authored by the user i. Two forms of functions
will be discussed in Section III-D. In a symmetric way, the
authority Aj of the author j is based on the quality of the
sequences he/she authored and on those he/she approved and
is deﬁned as:
Again, K must be instantiated in order to capture the approvement of a sequence by its reviewer. Finally, the global
quality Qi of article i is simply deﬁned over the quality of the
sequences it contains in the latest revision, formally :
The computation of the model is described in Section III-E.
It calculates for each article i a score Qi ∈R+. The obtained
list should be ranked to obtain the documents in decreasing
(predicted) level of quality.
D. Approvement functions
The core of our model is the deﬁnition of the approvement act of a sequence by a reviewer. In this section, two
approvement functions between an author i and a reviewer j
are introduced and discussed:
1(a, b) = a + b
2(a, b) = (ab)λ(1−eij)
Equation (5) (in short K1) is a slight but crucial variation
of the Peer Review model. In the original formulation 
the quantity Qk
i is computed as the sum over the authority
of the author and the authorities of each distinct reviewer
who approved xk
i . More formally, if {z1, z2, ..., zp} is the set
of p distinct users (including the author herself/himself) who
approved the sequence xk
i , then the computed quality of the
sequence is indeed :
i = Az1 + Az2 + ... + Azp
One can demonstrate that this expression is a result of a
particular instantiation of our model.
Lemma 1. Let z1 be the author of the sequence xk
{z2, ..., zp} be the set of p −1 distinct reviewers who have
approved xk
i (including eventually the author himself/herself).
Under our model, the use of the approvement function K1
leads to a linear combination of the authority of the reviewers:
i = θ1Az1 + θ2Az2 + ... + θpAzp
where ∀j > 1, θj = |{xk′
i ) ∩S(j)}| i.e. number of
sequences of user j bellonging to the posterior neighborhood
i ), and θ1 = |S+(xk
i )| + |{xk′
i ) ∩S(1)}|.
Proof: Let N +(xk
i ) = {xk1
i , ..., xks
i } be the set of
s sequences authored by a set {z1, z2, ..., zp} of p distinct
reviewers who approved sequence xk
i . With K1 to compute
the quality Qk
i , by deﬁnition :
+ ... + Aaks
By regrouping the identical reviewers, i.e., by identical akj
i = s · Aak
+... + Aaks
we ﬁnally obtained :
i = θ1Az1 + θ2Az2 + ... + θpAzp
Hence, the Peer Review model is a particular case of
our model assuming all θi equals 1 (no weighting scheme is
considered between the reviewers).
Our model enables the quality of a sequence to increase
with the number of authoritative reviewers who have approved
the sequence and also with the amount of contributions θ they
have authored in the article. The desired intuition is captured: if
many authoritative users who have predominantly participated
to the article have approved a given sequence, its quality will
fairly increase.
The co-edits relations between users are captured by equation (6) (K2 in short). When eij is close to 0 (none or very
few relations between author j and reviewer i), the quality of
a sequence increases only when both authors and reviewers
are authoritative. Hence, unlike function K1, K2 causes the
approvement of an unauthoritative user to be almost unconsidered (ﬁnal quantity is bounded by max(ui, uj) because
of the normalization of the authority score). Strong relations
notably enable new registered users to rapidly gain in authority,
and even more if they collaborate with authoritative users. To
control the strength of the co-edit weights and consequently
the quality scores, the user-parameter λ ∈ is introduced.
When λ is close to 1, the function is elitist and tends to disfavor
isolated users. Conversely, when λ is close to 0, the function
is permissive and tends to encourage unauthoritative users. It
should be noted that λ, being a hyperparameter, is not aimed to
be learned but to be ﬁxed before the execution of the algorithm
in order to build a permissive or elitist function.
E. Calculation
The system formulated by the interdependent pair of equations 2 and 3 is solved by an iterative process that consists in
alternatively computing authorities A and qualities Q. More
details about the theoretical computation of the associated
eigen values problem can be found in . The following
generic process is used:
Initialize randomly both authorities and qualities
Compute quality scores with equation 2
Compute authority scores with equation 3
Normalize scores
The last three steps are repeated until convergence. Let
Qt ∈RN, resp. At ∈RM, be the vector of quality scores,
resp. authority scores, at the tth iteration of the algorithm. The
convergence is reached when d(Qt, Qt−1) + d(At, At−1) < ǫ,
where d is a distance function and ǫ is aimed to control the
convergence. In the experimentations, the L2 norm was used
as distance measure. For ǫ = 10−3, the convergence is rapidly
reached (less than 10 iterations). Details about the computation
are given by the following algorithms.
Algorithm 1 Quality(X)
1: for all i ∈X do
for all xk
Qi ←Qi + Qk
7: end for
Algorithm 2 Authority(U)
1: for all uj ∈U do
for all xk
i ∈S(j) do
6: end for
With a basic implementation of the anterior and posterior
neighborhood search, the quality computation is performed in
O(Nn2), where n = maxi≤N{ni} and the Authority computation is performed in O(Msn) where s = maxj≤M{|S(j)|}.
EXPERIMENTS
This section is dedicated to the presentation of our result.
We ﬁrst properly introduced the methodology used for these
experimentations. Quantitative results are then presented followed by a qualitative interpretation of two representative coedit graphs.
A. Protocol
Dataset description. We used a set of English documents
from Wikipedia articles that have been reviewed by the Editorial Team Assessment of the WikiProject. Each article has
been labelled according to the WikiProject quality grading
scheme, and belongs to one of the following class Y =
{S, C, B, GA, A, FA}. The user preferences are deﬁned over
Y as follows :
FA ≻A ≻GA ≻B ≻C ≻S
The label S stands for Stub Articles (very bad quality articles
with no meaningful content) while FA stands for Featured
Articles (complete and professional articles). This scale is used
as a ground truth for evaluation. It should be speciﬁed that
labels were given according to the latest version of an article.
We developed a crawler in Java to parse grades, topics and
articles (from its ﬁrst revision to the latest version). The history
of edits are stored in a relational database. The raw dataset
represents almost 130 Gb of text data. Statistics over these
data are summarized in Table III.
TABLE III.
RAW DATASET STATISTICS
Preprocessing. A diff tool was developed in Python to extract
the sets of sequences that survive until the last revision.
During this preprocessing step, the lifespan of each sequence is
updated. For each pair of consecutive revisions, the sequences
are propagated, split and/or removed according to the possible
sequence operations an editor can perform (replace, insert and
delete characters). This preprocessing step is applied over a
stratiﬁed random collection of the raw data of nearly 23,000
articles (a ﬁx number of articles per category is randomly
selected). More than 110,000 distinct users have produced
around 2.8 million sequences. The co-edit graph built over
this dataset is composed by more than 111,000 nodes and 5
millions of edges. Statistics about our dataset and resulted coedit graphs are synthesized in Table IV.
Authors per article (mean)
Lifespan per article (mean)
Sequences (mean)
Sequences length (mean)
Nodes (103)
Edges (103)
Evaluation Metrics. Performances are evaluated using both
standard ranking and classiﬁcation evaluation metrics. To evaluate the ranking, the Normalized Discount Cumulative Gain
at k (NDCG@k) was used . It computes a normalized
score based on the degree of relevance of each document and
a decaying function of their rank. In our case, the degree of
relevance of a document is directly associated with its label
: from 0 for documents belonging to class S (poor quality
articles), to 5 for documents in class FA (very good articles).
A score equals to 1 indicating a perfect ranking. Once the
permutation is computed by the model and documents ranked
in decreasing order of (predicted) quality, one can split the
list of documents in 6 categories according to the repartition
of articles per grade in the ground truth. Hence, the number
of positive examples per grade is evaluated using the Recall
metric. A recall of 1 indicating a perfect classiﬁcation.
Competitors. We compare our model to the following competitors :
Naive model. Final ranking is obtained by sorting articles by
Basic model. The effect of the reviewers is not taken in
consideration.
Peer model. Reviewer effects are considered as important as
the author ones. Final authority of an author is the sum of the
authority of the distinct reviewers.
Prob model. Authority of the reviewer is slightly decreasing
with the distance between author and reviewer words. In the
following experiments, the best decaying function f(d) =
max(0,d−β)+1 in was used. In the formulation, d is the
distance between the words of the author and the closest
word of the reviewer and β is a user-parameter to control the
maximum distance over which authorities of reviewers are not
fully considered. In the experiments, parameter β was set to
1000 (distance in characters), corresponding to the best run
among different values of the parameter.
B. Quantitative experiments
The four competitors are compared with the two instantiations of our model, i.e., with approvement functions K1 and
K2. First, NDCG@k metric is used to compare the rankings
over the articles at different levels, i.e., values of k are directly
derived from the repartition of the article quality in the dataset
(cumulative sum beyond the number of articles per class).
Second, the recall for each of the 6 classes is used to compare
to the competitors. The ﬁrst class (FA) is evaluated using the
ﬁrst 245 documents, the second class (A) is evaluated using
the next 51, and so on. Because K2 depends on the parameter
λ, only the best run (at least for k < 642) is used for the
comparison (λ = 0, 7).
Experiments are conclusive: both proposed functions outperformed competitors for k ≤642. Both the amount of
the contributions and the co-edits weights of the reviewers
seem to be interested indicators to discriminate good to very
good articles. Interestingly, the performances of K1 using
the NDCG@k (see Fig. 5) increase faster with k than K2,
making the former globally more persuasive for k ≥642.
The discrimination of articles of mid-quality using the co-edit
relations seems to be more challenging. Nonetheless, when we
examine the metrics considering all the articles (k = 22.423),
K2 again seems to beneﬁt from the co-edit weights. The very
few numbers of co-edit relations betweens authors of poor
quality articles might be one factor which explains this sudden
increase in the NDCG value.
This behavior can also be noted on Fig. 6. We plotted
the evolution of the NDCG@k for the K2 model in function
of λ. We choosed to display the evolution for the top of
the list documents (k = 245) and for the queue of the
list (k = 3.600). The evolution clearly indicates that K2 is
much more competitive to discriminate very good articles for
high values of λ (best NDCK@245 for λ = 0, 7), while the
performances for the queue of the list (k = 3.600) remains
globally constant.
RECALL PER CLASS
Finally, Table V summarizes the capacity of the models to
discriminate the six class of articles. Even if the ranking is not
Evaluation with the NCDG@k metric for k ∈{245, 296, 642, 1.654, 3.600, 22.423} of the competitors and the proposed model with 2 approvement
functions K1 and K2.
optimal as we just already said it, the separation induced by
K2 is incomparable with the others competitors.
It is interesting to see that the articles belonging to class A
are very badly discriminated by every competitors (see Table
V). Even if they are under-represented in the dataset (there
are very few A articles in the English version of Wikipedia),
they are even though considered in a drastically different way
by K1 and K2. By analyzing the ranks of each A article in
the returned list by both models, we found that mean rank
produced by K1 is 1.194 (it roughly corresponds to B articles)
while it is 382 for K2 (closer to GA articles). Moreover, the
dispersion of the ranks of A articles is 1.000 times smaller for
the latter than for the former: considering co-editions seems
to improve the precision.
Results conﬁrm that combining different structural properties of the Wikipedia co-edit graph is beneﬁcial and make the
solution closer to the optimal solution : the co-edit graph is
clearly discriminating to capture authoritative users and thus,
good articles.
 
Evaluation of the proposed model using approvement function K2
for different values of λ.
C. Qualitative interpretation
We now present the two co-edit graphs associated with
a representative poor quality article (see Fig. 7 (left)) and
The ﬁltered co-edit graphs of the articles related to A. Hillgruber and
a top quality article (see Fig. 7 (right)) according to our
proposed metric. The former is dedicated to A. Hillgruber3,
a conservative German historian, and has been labelled as a
C-class article by the Editorial Team Assessment because of
its partisanship. The latter is dedicated to Kaga4, a Japanese
aircraft career, and has been labelled as a FA-class article. Both
graphs have been obtained using the following methodology:
vertices are the union of the authors and their respective coeditors (in all the dataset). For ease of reading and because
very weak co-edit relations are not of interest in this study,
edges with weight equals 1 have been ﬁltered out as well as
subsequent isolated vertices. Table VI sums up some statistics
on these two graphs. In the following we will refer to the non-
ﬁltered graph related to A. Hillgruber, resp. Kaga, as GC, resp.
GF A and to its ﬁltered version as G′
C, resp. G′
Since less than 1% of the edges have weights greater than
1, authors most often collaborate one time only whatever the
quality of the article. This observation can though be sharpened
by carefully analyzing the two graphs. On the one hand G′
shows the following characteristics: (1) it is very sparse, (2)
very few edges connect two author nodes, and (3) very fews
non-author nodes remain in G′
C after the ﬁltering step. On the
3 Hillgruber
4 aircraft carrier Kaga
SOME STATISTICS ABOUT THE CO-EDIT GRAPHS OF THE
ARTICLES RELATED TO A. Hillgruber AND Kaga
A. Hillgruber
#vertices (ﬁltered)
70 (0.17%)
93 (0.66%)
#edges (ﬁltered)
87 (0.07%)
420 (0.76%)
Class repartition
FA: 4.3 / A: 0 / GA: 5.6
B: 1.4 / C: 85 / S: 3.7
FA: 55.7 / A: 0.8 / GA: 3.6
B: 25.3 / C: 8 / S: 6.6
other hand G′
F A shows some opposite characteristics: (1) it is
denser than G′
C , (2) much more edges connect two author
nodes, and (3) more non-author nodes remain in G′
the ﬁltering step. These observations conﬁrm the soundness of
our approach. Indeed, in poor quality article, the collaboration
is punctual only; the added value of reviews is thus lower
than for top quality articles where authors are more used to
collaborate. Additionally, we compute the class of articles in
which authors mostly participate. The repartition per class is
given in the last line of Table VI. This shows that top quality
articles, resp. low quality articles, are mostly written by authors
who are used to write such good quality articles, resp. low
quality articles. This is a clear evidence of the pertinence of
the Mutual Reinforcement Principle.
CONCLUSION
Crowdsourcing platforms provide the possibility for anyone to freely contribute to their publicly available content.
One inherent drawback of this collaborative process is the
emergence of poor quality content. In this paper, we tackled
the problem of automatically assessing articles quality in the
particular case of Wikipedia. We proposed a generic formulation of the quality assessment problem based on the Mutual
Reinforcement principle. We generalized previous works by
introducing the notion of approvement functions which can
take advantage of the relations between the editors. Such a
formulation facilitates the theoretical comparison with stateof-the art approaches which can naturally be expressed as
instances of our model. Motivated by some strong hints that
legitimate the importance of considering the co-edit graph, two
novel approvement functions were designed. The ﬁrst function
reinforces the quality of a content as a function of both the
authority of the reviewers and the amount of their contributions
in the article. The second function aims at capturing the
relation between the authors and the reviewers since we have
considered that the reviews of editors who are used to work
together are more trustworthy. For this purpose, the co-edit
network between editors was constructed and has appeared to
have very interesting features. Experiments conducted on real
Wikipedia articles are very conclusive. The proposed model,
by improving state-of-the-art methods, empirically conﬁrmed
our two intuitions and open several perspectives.
In future work, we ﬁrst plan to extend our model by
generalizing the notion of neighborhood. Indeed, we think
it would be beneﬁcial to consider both horizontal (time)
and vertical (documents) aspects of the neighborhood of a
sequence. Notably, such an operator would enable to even more
generalize our model and to reformulate other state-of-the-art
works, e.g., the Prob Review model. Scalability is a major
concern. We plan to study the possibility to adapt our model to
a Big Data environment using some parallelization strategies.
Finally, because of the intensive edit rate of Wikipedia articles,
adapting our model to a streaming environment would enable
the quality calculation on the ﬂy.