KATHOLIEKE
UNIVERSITEIT
DEPARTEMENT TOEGEPASTE
ECONOMISCHE WETENSCHAPPEN
RESEARCH REPORT 0114
BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORK LEARNING FOR
REPEAT PURCHASE MODELLING IN DIRECT
B. BAESENS
D. VAN DEN POEL
J. VANTHIENEN
0/2001/2376/14
Bayesian neurai network learning for repeat
purchase modelling in direct marketing
Stijn Viaene1, Bart Baesensl, Dirk Van den Poel2,
Jan Vanthienen\ Guido Dedene1
lK.U.Leuven, Dept. of Applied Economic Sciences,
Naamsestraat 69, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
{Stijn.Viaene; Bart.Baesens; Jan.Vanthienen; Guido.Dedene }@econ.kuleuven.ac.be
2Ghent University, Dept. of Marketing,
Hoveniersberg 24, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
 
Accepted for publication in the European Journal of Operational Research.
Abstract. We focus on purchase incidence modelling for a European direct mail
company. Response models based on statistical and neural network techniques are
contrasted. The evidence framework of MacKay is used as an example implementation of Bayesian neural network learning, a method that is fairly robust with respect to
problems typically encountered when implementing neural networks. The automatic
relevance determination (ARD) method, an integrated feature of this framework, allows to assess the relative importance of the inputs. The basic response models use
operationalisations of the traditionally discussed Recency, Frequency and Monetary
(RFM) predictor categories. In a second experiment, the RFM response framework
is enriched by the inclusion of other (non-RFM) customer profiling predictors. We
contribute to the literature by providing experimental evidence that: (1) Bayesian
neural networks offer a viable alternative for purchase incidence modelling; (2) a combined use of all three RFM predictor categories is advocated by the ARD method;
(3) the inclusion of non-RFM variables allows to significantly augment the predictive
power of the constructed RFM classifiers; (4) this rise is mainly attributed to the inclusion of customer/company interaction variables and a variable measuring whether
a customer uses the credit facilities of the direct mailing company.
Keywords: Neural networks, Marketing, Bayesian learning, Response modelling, Input ranking
Introd uction
It is well established in the literature that customer retention is at least as important
as customer acquisition in the current context of competitive markets, not in the least
for (direct) mail-order companies. Mail-order companies typically are in the business
of sending out catalogs to a selected number of prospective buyers. The selection
of whom to include in the mailing list rests on an assessment of the individual's
propensity to buy. The prospects or customers to be mailed are typically selected
following the results of statistical models including behavioural, demographic and
other customer profiling predictors in order to optimise the prospective buyer response
rate. Commonly used target variables for these mailing response models are purchase
incidence, purchase amount and interpurchase time. In this paper, we focus on the
purchase incidence, i.e. the issue whether or not a purchase is made from any product
category offered by the direct mail company.
Conceptually, the purchase incidence response modelling issue reduces to the
general problem category of binary classification: repurchase or not. Among the
traditional (statistical) techniques that have been widely used are logistic regression,
linear and quadratic discriminant analysis models. However, their pre-determined
functional form and restrictive (often unfounded) model assumptions limit their usefulness . In this paper, we use neural networks (NNs) for response modelling.
Their universal approximation property makes them a very interesting alternative for
pattern recognition purposes. Unfortunately, many practical problems still remain
when implementing NNs, e.g. How to choose the appropriate number of hidden neurons'? What is the impact of the initial weight choice'? How to set the weight decay
parameter'? How to avoid the network from fitting noise in the training data'? These
issues are often dealt with in an ad-hoc way . Nevertheless, they are crucial to the
success of the NN implementation. A Bayesian learJ?ing paradigm has been suggested
as a way to deal with these problems during NN training . Here, all prior
assumptions are made explicit and the weights and hyperparameters are determined
by applying Bayes' theorem to map the prior assumptions into posterior knowledge
after having observed the training data. In this paper, we use the evidence framework
of MacKay as an example implementation of Bayesian learning . An
interesting additional feature of this framework is the automatic relevance determination (.{d.l.RD) method vvhich allows to assess the relative importance of the various
inputs by adding weight regularisation terms to the objective function. In this paper,.
it is shown that training NNs using the evidence framework (with the ARD extension) is an effective and viable alternative for the response modelling case at hand
when compared to the three benchmark statistical techniques mentioned above.
The empirical study consists of two subexperiments. Initially, only standard Recency, Frequency and Monetary (RFM) predictor categories will underly the
purchase incidence model. This choice is motivated by the fact that most previous
research cites them as being most important and because they are internally available at very low cost . It is shown for this case that, from a predictive
performance perspective, Bayesian NNs are statistically superior when compared to
logistic regression, linear and quadratic discriminant analysis classifiers. Predictive
performance is quantified by means of the percentage correctly classified (PCC) and
the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). The latter basically illustrates the behaviour of a classifier without regard to class distribution
or error cost, so it effectively decouples classification performance from these factors
 . The ARD method is used to shed light upon the relative importance
of all variables operationalising the RFM response model. In a second experiment,
the response model is extended with other potentially interesting customer profiling
variables. It is illustrated that the Bayesian NNs still perform significantly better
than the three statistical classifiers. Again, the relative importance of the inputs is
assessed using the ARD method.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we provide a concise overview
of response modelling issues in the context of direct marketing. Section 3 discusses
the theoretical underpinnings of NNs for pattern recognition purposes. The Bayesian
evidence framework for classification is presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the
ARD extension of the evidence framework. The design of the study, including data
set description, experimental setup and used performance criteria are presented in
Section 6. Results and discussion of the basic and extended RFM experiment are
covered in Sections 7 and 8.
Response modelling in direct marketing
For mail-order response modelling, several alternative problem formulations have
been proposed based on the choice of the dependent variable. The first category is
purchase incidence modelling . In this problem formulation, the main question is
whether a customer will purchase during the next mailing period, i.e. one tries to
predict the purchase incidence within a fixed time interval (typically half a year).
Other authors have investigated related problems dealing with both the purchase
incidence and the amount of purchase in a joint model . A third alternative
perspective for response modelling is to model interpurchase time through survival
analysis or (split-)hazard rate models which model whether a purchase takes place
together with the duration of time until a purchase occurs .
This paper focuses on the first type of problem, i.e. purchase incidence
modelling. More specifically, we. consider the issue whether or not a purchase is
made from any product category offered by the direct mail company. This choice is
motivated by the fact that the majority of previous research in the direct marketing
literature focuses on the purchase incidence problem . Furthermore, this is
exactly the setting that mail-order companies are typically confronted with. They
have to decide whether or not a specific offering will be sent to a (potential) customer
during a certain mailing period.
Cullinan is generally credited for identifying the three sets of variables most
often used in response modelling: (R)ecency, (F)requency and (M)onetary .
Since then, the literature has accumulated so many uses of these three variable categories, that there is overwhelming evidence both from academically reviewed studies
as well as from practitioners' experience that the RFM variables are an important
set of predictors for modelling mail-order repeat purchasing. However, the beneficial
effect of including other variables into the response model has also been investigated.
In Table 1, we present a literature overview of the operationalisations of both the independent and dependent variable( s) in direct marketing response modelling studies.
It shows that only few studies include non-RFM variables. Moreover, these studies
typically include only one operationalisation per variable.
The substantive relevance of response modelling comes from the fact that
an increase in response of only one percentage point can result in substantial profit
increases, as the following real-life example of an actual mail-order company illustrates. Suppose that the mail-order company decides to mail to 75% of its current
mailing list of 5 million customers, i.e. 3,750,000 mailings are sent out. Suppose
that the overall response rate when mailing to all of their current customers is 10%
during a particular mailing period, i.e. if everyone would be mailed, 500,000 orders would be placed. Suppose further that the average contribution per customer
amounts to 100 Euro, which is the typical real-life situation of a large mail-order company. Table 2 compares the economics of several alternative response models. When
no model is available, we can expect to obtain 75% of all potential responses (i.e.
0.75 x 500,000 = 375,000 responses) when 75% of 5 million people are mailed (i.e.,
3.75 million mailings are sent out). The ideal model (at the specific mailing depth)
is able to select the people from the mailing list in such a way that the 500, 000 potential customers all receive a mailing, i.e. even though 25% of the mailing list is not
mailed, not a single order is lost. Suppose further that the current response model
used by the company, by mailing to 75% of their mailing list, allows to obtain 90% of
the responses, i.e. even though 1,250,000 people on the list do not receive a mailing,
only 10% of the 500,000 potential customers are excluded. This will result in 450, 000
orders, which represents a substantial improvement over the 'null model' situation.
If a better response model can be built, which achieves 91 % of the responses instead
of 90%, the contribution of this change will directly increase the contribution over
the null model from 7.50 million Euro to 8 million Euro, i.e. by 500,000 Euro (1%
of 10% of 5 million customers xl00 Euro average contribution).
Given a tendency of rising mailing costs and increasing competition, we can
easily see an increasing importance for response modelling . Improving the target-
Independent variable
Dependent variable
Relationship behavioural demographic
and Amount and Timing
Berger and Magliozzi 
Bitran and Mondschein 
Bult and Wittink 
Bult 
Bult 
Bult et al. 
Desarbo and Ramaswamy 
Goniil and Shi 
Kaslow 
Levin and Zahavi 
Magliozzi and Berger 
Magliozzi 
Rao and Steckel 
Trasher 
Van den Poel 
Van der Scheer 
Zahavi and Levin 
Table 1: Literature review of response modelling papers.
No. of Customers
No. of Mailings
Total Contribution
Additional Contribution
sent out (million)
Contribution (Euro)
(million Euro)
over 'No model' (million Euro)
Null Model
Ideal Model
90 % model
91 % model
Table 2: Economics resulting from performance differences among response models.
ing of the offers may indeed counter these two challenges by lowering non-response.
Moreover, from the perspective of the recipient of the (direct mail) messages, mailorder companies do not want to overload consumers with catalogs. The importance
of response modelling to the mail-order industry is further illustrated by the fact that.
the issue of improving targeting was among the top three concerns with 73.5% of the
catalogers in the sample mentioned in .
In this study, we contribute to the literature by providing a thorough investigation into: (1) the suitability of Bayesian neural networks for repeat purchase
modelling; (2) the predictive performance of alternative operationalisations of RFM
variables and their relative importance; (3) the issue whether other (non-RFM) variables add predictive power to the traditional RFM variables.
Neural networks for pattern recognition
Neural networks (NNs) have shown to be very promising supervised learning tools
for modelling complex non-linear relationships . NNs are designed to deal
with both regression and classification tasks. This, especially in situations where one
is confronted with a lack of domain knowledge. As universal approximators, they
can significantly improve the predictive accuracy of an inference model compared to
mappings that are linear in the input variables . In what follows, the discussion
will be limited to the binary classification problematic. Typical application areas
include medical applications , business failure prediction 
and customer credit scoring .
NNs are mathematical representations inspired by the functioning of the
human brain. A NN is typically composed of an input layer, one or more hidden
layers and an output layer, each consisting of several neurons (layer units). Each
neuron processes its inputs and generates one output value which is transmitted to
the neurons in the subsequent layer. In a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), all neurons
and layers are arranged in a feedforward manner. For a binary classification problem
one commonly opts for an MLP with one hidden layer and one output unit. This
lnpuJl.ayer
Figure 1: A multi-layer perceptron with one hidden layer and one output unit.
neural network then performs the following non-linear function mapping
where x E IRn and y E IR is the MLP produced output. WI and W2 are weight vectors
of the hidden and output layer, respectively. The weight vectors WI and W2 together
make up the parameter vector w, which needs to be estimated (learned) during a
training process. II and 12 are termed transfer functions and essentially allow the
network to perform complex non-linear function mappings. An example of an MLP
with one hidden layer and one output unit is presented in Figure 1.
Given a training data set D = {x{m), tim) 1m = 1, ... , N}, where x{m) is an ndimensional input vector corresponding to a specific data instance m that is labelled
by a target variable t{m), the weight vector w of the NN is randomly initialised and
iteratively adjusted so as to minimise an objective function, typically the sum of
squared errors (SSE)
En = ! £: (t{m) _ y{m»)2.
The backpropagation algorithm originally proposed by Rumelhart et al. is probably
the best known example of the above mechanics . It performs the optimisation
by using repeated evaluation of the gradient of ED and the chain rule of derivative
calculus. Due to the problems of slow convergence and relative inefficiency of this
algorithm, new and improved optimisation methods (e.g. Levenberg-Marquardt and _
Quasi-Newton) have been suggested to deal with the latter. For an overview, see .
For a binary classification problematic it is convenient to use the logistic
transfer function
J(z) = 1 + exp(-z)
as transfer function in the output layer (J2), since its output is limited to a value
within the range . This allows the output y(m) of a neural network to be interpreted as a conditional probability of the form p(t(m) = llx(m)) . In that way, the
neural network naturally produces a score per data instance, which allows the data
instances to be ranked accordingly for scoring purposes (e.g. customer scoring). It
has to be noticed that for classification purposes the sum of squared error function
ED (see Eq.2) is no longer the most appropriate optimisation criterion because it was
derived from maximum likelihood on the assumption of Gaussian distributed target
data . Since the target attribute is categorical in a classification context, this
assumption is no longer valid. A more suitable objective function is the cross-entropy
function which is based on the following rationale . Suppose we have a binary
classification problem for which we construct a NN with a single output representing the posterior probability y(m) = p(t(m) = llx(m)). The likelihood of observing
t(m) E {O, I} given x(m) is then given by
The likelihood of observing the training data set is then modelled as
The cross-entropy error function G maximises this likelihood by minimising its neg-
ative logarithm
G = - L {t(m)ln(y(m)) + (1 - t(m))ln(1 _ y(m))}.
It can easily be verified that this error function reaches its minimum when y(m) = t(m)
for all m = 1, ... , N. Optimisation of G with respect to w may be carried out by using
the optimisation algorithms mentioned in .
For decision purposes, the posterior probability estimates produced by the
NN are used to classify the data instances into the appropriate (predefined) classes.
This is done by choosing a threshold value in the scoring interval . The optimal
choice of this threshold value can be related to the probabilistic interpretation of the
network outputs as follows. Suppose we have two classes, class 1 (t(m) = 1) and class
o (t(m) = 0). As mentioned above, the output of the NN represents the estimated
probability that a particular data instance m belongs to class 1 given its input vector
x(m). The misclassification percentage is then minimised by assigning an instance
x(m) to the class c E {0,1} (i.e. tim) = c) having the largest posterior probability
estimate p(t(m) = clx(m)). This simply comes down to choosing a threshold value of
0.5. A data instance is assigned to class 1 if its output (posterior) probability exceeds
this threshold and to class 0 otherwise. Notice that this reasoning is contingent on a
situation in which equal misclassification costs are assigned to false positive and false
negative predictions.
The ultimate goal of NN training, and eventually of every inference mechanism, is to produce a model which performs well on new, unseen test instances: If this
is the case, we say that the network generalises well. To do so, we basically have to
avoid the network from fitting the noise or idiosyncracies in the training data. This
is most often realised by monitoring the error on a separate validation set during
training of the network. When the error measure on the latter set starts to increase,
training is stopped, thus effectively preventing the network from fitting the noise in
the training data (early stopping). A superior alternative is to add a penalty term
(weight regulariser) to the objective function as follows [4, 58J
F(w) = G + aEw
whereby, typically
with i running over all elements of the weight vector w. This method for improving
generalisation constrains the size of the network weights wand is referred to as
regularisation. When the weights are kept small, the network response will be smooth.
This decreases the tendency of the network to fit the noise in the training data.
The success of NNs with weight regularisation obviously depends strongly on
finding appropriate values for the weight vector wand the hyperparameter a. In the
next Section, we discuss the evidence framework of MacKay as our method of choice
for training the NN weight vector wand setting the hyperparameter a .
The evidence framework
Bayesian learning essentially works by adapting prior probability distributions into
posterior probability distributions guided by the training data [4, 33, 34, 35, 42J.
Relying on probability distributions stresses the importance of capturing the inherent
uncertainty while learning the true relationship from a finite data sample. In a
Bayesian context, all implicit assumptions, i.e. prior knowledge encoded in the form
of prior probability distributions, have to be made explicit and rules are provided
for reasoning consistently given those assumptions. More specifically, in a Bayesian
NN learning framework, the weights of the neural network are considered random
variables and are characterised by a joint probability distribution. In this Section, we
restrict our attention to the evidence framework for Bayesian learning as introduced
by MacKay in [33, 34, 35J. Other implementations of Bayesian learning have been
presented in e.g. [12,42, 68J.
Let p(wla, H) be the prior probability distribution over the weight vector w
given a neural network model H and the hyperparameter a. p(wla, H) expresses our
initial beliefs about the weights w before any data has arrived. This will typically be
a flat (uniform) distribution in the weight space when all weight values are a priori
equiprobable. When the data D are observed, the prior distribution of the parameter _
vector w is adjusted to a posterior distribution according to Bayes' theorem (level-1
inference). This gives
H) = p(Dlw,H)p(wla,H)
In the above expression p(Dlw, H) is the likelihood function, which is the probability
of the data occurring given the weights w and the functional form of the neural
network H. The denominator of the expression in Eq.(9), i.e. p(Dla, H), is the
normalisation factor that guarantees that the right hand side of Eq.(9) integrates to
one over the weight space. The latter is often referred to as the evidence for a. Hence,
Eq.(9) can be restated as
likelihood x prior
posterIor =
Obtaining good predictive models is dependent on the use of the right prior
distributions. MacKay uses Gaussian prior distribution functions in his operationalisation of Bayesian learning to approximate the posterior p(wID, a, H). In e.g.
 other types of prior distributions have been used. When assuming a Gaussian prior for the weights w with zero mean and variance equal to ~, the probability
distributions in the numerator of the right hand side of Eq.(9) can be written as
p(Dlw,H) =
lIm (y(m»)t(m) (1 _ y(m»)I-t(m)
p(wla,H) =
Z~(Oi)exp(-aEw)
with Zw (a) = (2;) ~ and I standing for the number of weight parameters. By substi-
tuting these probabilities into Eq.(9), we obtain
p(wID, a, H) =
~exp(-(G+aEw))
z:(a)exp( -F(w)).
The most probable weights w MP can then be chosen so as to maximise the posterior
probability p(wID, a, H). This is equivalent to minimising the regularised objective
function F(w) = G + aEw , since ZM(a) is independent of the weights w. The
most probable weight values w MP (given the current setting of a) are thus found
by minimising the objective function F(w). Standard optimisation methods may be
used to perform this task . This concludes the first level of Bayesian inference.
Notice how Eq.(9) assumes that the value for the hyperparameter a is known,
since the probability distributions were formulated as being contingent on the values
of a. The hyperparameter a may again be optimised by applying Bayes' theorem,
which is typical in an optimisation framework governed by Bayesian reasoning (level-2
inference). This yields
( ID H) = p(Dla, H)p(aIH)
Starting from Eq.(13) and assuming a uniform (non-informative) prior distribution
p( aIH), the most probable a, aMP, is obtained by maximising the likelihood function
p(Dla, H). Notice that this likelihood function performs the role of the normalising
constant in Eq.(9), where it was referred to as the evidence for a. Making" use of
Eq.(9) and making the Gaussian prior explicit, we can rewrite the normalisation
p(Dlw,H)p(wla,H)
p(wID,a,H)
exp( -G) ~exp( -aEw)
Z~(,,)exp(-F(w))
ZM(a) exp(-G-aEw )
Zw(a) exp(-F(w))
Zw(a) is known from its definition in Eq.(ll). The only part we need to determine
in order to be able to optimise Eq.(14) is ZM(a). The latter may be estimated by
demanding that the right hand side of Eq.(12) integrates to one over the weight
space and approximating F(w) by a second order Taylor series expansion around
w MP. The hyperparameter aMP may then be found by setting the derivative of the
logarithm of Eq.(14) with respect to a to zero yielding
where '"Y = l - aTrace(HMP)-l is called the effective number of parameters in the
neural network. For more mathematical details see MacKay (33, 34, 35]. H MP stands
for the Hessian matrix of the objective function F(w) evaluated at w MP. The effective
number of parameters in a trained neural network is the number of well determined
weights indicating how many parameters of the NN are effectively used in reducing
the error function F(w). It can range from 0 to l. The a parameter is randomly
initialised and the network is then trained in the usual manner by using standard
optimisation algorithms , with the novelty that training is periodically halted for
the weight decay parameter a to be updated. The latter may be done at each epoch
of the NN training algorithm or after a fixed number of epochs. Notice that, since
no validation set is required, all data can be used for training purposes.
An aspect of Bayesian learning we have not mentioned yet is model selection (level-3 inference). It is possible to choose between network architectures in a
Bayesian way by using the evidence attributed to an architecture H referred to as
p(DIH) in . Network models may then be ranked according to their evidence. However, in it was empirically shown tha~t for large data sets, the training
error is as good a measure for model selection as is the evidence. For further de-_
tails on Bayesian learning for neural networks we refer to . In the
next Section, we present another aspect of the evidence framework that plays an important role in the setup of this paper: input ranking using the automatic relevance
determination method.
Input ranking using automatic relevance determination (ARD)
Selecting the best subset of a set of n input variables as predictors for a neural
network is a non-trivial problem. This follows from the fact that the optimal input
subset can only be obtained when the input space is exhaustively searched. When
n inputs are present, this would imply the need to evaluate 2n -
1 input subsets.
Unfortunately, as n grows, this very quickly becomes computationally infeasible .
For that reason, heuristic search procedures are often preferred. A multitude of
input selection methods have been proposed in the context of neural networks . These methods generally rely on the use of sensitivity heuristics, which
try to measure the impact of input changes on the output of the trained network.
Inputs may then be ranked (soft input selection) and/or pruned (hard input selection)
according to their sensitivity values. In this paper, we focus on input ranking as a
means to assess the relative importance of the various inputs for the direct marketing
case at hand. This is done by using the automatic relevance determination method
 . The ARD model is easily integrated within the evidence framework outlined
in the previous Section. It allows to perform soft input selection by ranking all inputs
according to their relative importance for the trained network.
The ARD model introduces a weight decay hyperparameter for each input.
For an MLP with one hidden layer and one output neuron, three additional weight
decay constants are introduced: one associated with the connections from the input
bias to the hidden neurons, one associated with the connections from the hidden
neurons to the output neuron and one associated Vi lith the connection from the hidden bias neuron to the output neuron. This means that n + 3 weight classes, each.
associated with one weight decay parameter O!k, are considered when n inputs are
present. This setup is illustrated in Figure 2. All weights of weight class k are then
assumed to be distributed according to a Gaussian prior with mean 0 and variance
d = ,L (see Eq.(ll)). The evidence framework is thereupon applied to optimise all
n + 3 hyperparameters ak by finding their most probable values a~p.
The most probable weights w MP are found by minimising the altered objective function
F(w) = G + I>kEW(k)
where EW(k) = ! I:i w;, with i running over all weights of weight class k. Analogous
to the results obtained in the previous Section, one obtains (level-2 inference)
"Yk is the number of well determined parameters for weight class k with "Yk = lk akTracek(HMP)-l. lk is the number of parameters (weights) in weight class k and
the trace is taken over those parameters only. All inputs may eventually be ranked
according to their optimised ak values. The most relevant inputs will have the lowest
O!k values, since ak is inversely proportional to the variance around 0 of the corresponding Gaussian prior.
One of the main advantages of ARD is that it allows to include a large
number of potentially relevant input variables in the model without damaging effects
[43J. Furthermore, it is integrated into the optimisation mechanism and completely
rests upon the inspection of the optimised ak parameters. Illustrations of ARD for
input ranking can be found in [6, 13, 36, 42, 43, 67J.
InputLayer
Figure 2: Overview of the Ok hyperparameters introduced by the ARD method.
Design of the study
From a major European mail-order company, we obtained data on past purchase
behaviour at the order-line level, i.e. we know when a customer purchased what
quantity of a particular product at what price as part of what order. This allowed
us, in close cooperation with domain experts and guided by the extensive literature
(see Section 2), to derive all the necessary purchase behaviour variables for.a total
sample size of 100,000 customers. For each customer, these variables were measured
in the period between July pt 1993 and June 30th 1997. The goal is to predict
whether an existing customer will repurchase in the observation period between July
pt 1997 and December 31"t 1997 using the information provided by the purchase
behaviour variables. This problem boils down to a binary classification problem:
Will a customer (data instance m) repurchase (t(m) = 1) or not (t(m) = 0)7 Again
notice that the focus is on customer retention and not on customer acquisition. Of
the 100,000 customers, 55.18% actually repurchased during the observation period.
Experimental setup
The experiment consists of two sub-experiments. In Section 7, we start by concentrating on RFM variables only. Using these variables, we compare the performance
of NNs trained using the evidence framework with that of three benchmark statistic- al classification techniques i.c. logistic regression, linear and quadratic discriminant
analysis. We then discuss the relevance of the RFM variables using the ARD method
presented in Section 5. In an attempt to further enrich the RFM response model, the
same experiment is repeated with the input of other, potentially interesting customer
profiling predictors which were handpicked by domain experts.
All performance assessments are computed on 10 bootstrap resamples generated from the original data set. Each bootstrap consists of 100,000 instances which
are divided into a training set (50,000 instances) and a test set (50,000 instances). The
former is used to train the classifier and the latter is used to estimate its generalisation behaviour. As a form of preprocessing, the inputs are statistically normalised to
zero mean and unit variance by subtracting their mean and dividing by the standard
deviation . This is needed in order to be able to compare the relative importance
of the various inputs by means of the ARD hyperparameters.
All neural network classifiers have one hidden layer with hyperbolic tangent
transfer functions. A logistic transfer function is used in the output layer. The
architecture of the MLP is determined by varying the number-of hidden units between
2 and 14 in steps of 2. The hidden units have connections to all input units and also
have a bias input. The single output is connected to all hidden units and agai? has a
bias input. The number of epochs is set to 1,000. The hyperparameter a is initialised
to 0.2. All neural networks are trained with the Quasi-Newton method to minimise a
regularised cross-entropy error function. The hyperparameter a is updated every 100
epochs. All trained classifiers are evaluated by looking at their performance assessed
on the independent test sets of all 10 bootstraps. All neural network analyses were
done using the Netlab toolbox for Matlab implemented by Bishop and Nabney . In
the following Subsection we provide an overview of the performance measures which
were used in this paper.
Performance criteria for classification
The percentage correctly classified (PCC) cases, also known as the overall classification accuracy, is undoubtedly the most commonly used measure of the performance
of a dassifier. It simply measures the proportion of correctly classified cases on a·
sample of data D. Formally, it can be described as
o(y(m) t(m»)
where y~~) is the predicted class for instance m, t(m) is its true class label and 0(.,.)
stands for the Kronecker delta function which equals 1 if both arguments are equal,
o otherwise.
In a number of cases, the overall classification accuracy may not be the most
appropriate performance criterion. It tacitly assumes equal misclassification costs for
false positive and false negative predictions. This assumption is problematic, since
for most real-world problems (e.g. fraud detection, customer credit scoring) one type
of classification error may be much more expensive than the other. Another implicit
assumption of the use of pee as an evaluation metric is that the class distribution
(class priors) among examples is presumed constant over time and relatively balanced
[46). For example, when confronted with a situation characterised by a very skewed
class distribution in which faulty predictions for the underrepresented class are very
costly, a model evaluated on pee alone may always predict the most common class
and, in terms of pee, provide a relatively high performance. Thus, using pce alone
often proves to be inadequate, since class distributions and misclassification costs are
rarely uniform. However, taking into account class distributions and misclassification
costs proves to be quite hard, since in practice they can rarely be specified precisely
and are often subject to change [21). In spite of the above, comparisons based on
classification accuracy often remain useful because they are indicative of a broader
notion of good performance .
Descriptive statistics such as the false positives, false negatives, sensitivity
and specificity can provide more meaningful results. Class-wise decomposition of the
classification of cases yields a confusion matrix as specified in Table 3. The following
True Positive (TP)
False Positive (FP)
False Negative (FN)
True Negative (TN)
Table 3: The confusion matrix for binary classification.
performance metrics can readily be distilled from Table 3
sensItivIty = TP + FN
speer CIty = FP + TN
The sensitivity (specificity) measures the proportion of positive (negative) examples
which are predicted to be positive (negative). Using the notation of Table 3, we may
now formulate the overall accuracy as follows
PCC = TP + FP + TN + FN
Note that sensitivity, specificity and PCC vary together as the threshold on a classifier's continuous output is varied between its extremes within the interval . The
receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) is a 2-dimensional graphical illustration
of the sensitivity ('true alarms') on the Y-axis versus (I-specificity) (,false alarms')
on the X-axis for various values of the classification threshold. It basically illustrates
the behaviour of a classifier without regard to class distribution or error cost, so it
effectively decouples classification performance from these factors .
Figure 3 provides an example of several ROC curves. Each ROC curve passes
through the points (0,0) and (1,1). The former represents the situation whereby
the classification threshold exceeds the highest output posterior probability value
(meaning all instances are classified in class 0). In the latter case, the classification
threshold is lower than the lowest posterior probability value (meaning all instances
are classified in class 1). A straight line through (0,0) and (1,1) represents a classifier
with poor discriminative power, since the sensitivity always equals (I-specificity) for
all possible values of the classification threshold (curve A). It is to be considered
as a benchmark for the predictive accuracy of other classifiers. The more the ROC _
curve approaches the (0,1) point, the better the classifier will discriminate (e.g. curve
D dominates curves A, B and C). ROC curves of different classifiers may however
intersect making a performance comparison less obvious (e.g. curves B and C). To
overcome this problem, one often calculates the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUROC). The AUROC provides a simple figure-of-merit for the
performance of the constructed classifier. An intuitive interpretation of the AUROC
is that it provides an estimate of the probability that a randomly chosen instance
of class 1 is correctly rated (or ranked) higher than a randomly selected instance of
class a .
Figure 3: The receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC).
In what follows, we consistently multiply AUROC values by a factor of 100 to
give a number that is similar to PCC, with 50 indicating random and 100 indicating
perfect classification.
Basic RFM experiment
Predictors used in the basic RFM experiment
We used two time horizons for all RFM variables. The Hist horizon refers to the fact .
that the variable is measured between the period July pt 1993 until June 30th 1997.
The Year horizon refers to the fact that the variable is measured over the last year.
Including both time horizons allows us to check the argumentation that more recent
data is much more relevant than historical data. All RFM variables are modelled
both with and without the occurrence of returned merchandise, indicated by Rand
N in the variable name, respectively. The former is operationalised by including the
counts of returned merchandise in the variable values, whereas in the latter case these
counts are omitted. Taking into account both time horizons (Year versus Hist) and
inclusion versus exclusion of returned items (R versus N), we arrive at a 2 x 2 design
in which each RFM variable is operationalised in 4 ways.
For the Recency variable, many operationalisations have already been suggested. In this paper, we define the Recency variable as the number of days since the
last purchase within a specific time window (Hist versus Year) and in- or excluding
returned merchandise (R versus N) . Recency has been found to be inversely related to the probability of the next purchase, i.e. the longer the time delay since the
last purchase the lower the probability of a next purchase within the specific period
In the context of direct mail, it has generally been observed that multi-buyers
(buyers who already purchased several times) are more likely to repurchase than
buyers who only purchased once . Although no detailed results are reported
because of the proprietary nature of most studies, the Frequency variable is generally
considered to be the most important of the RFM variables . Bauer suggests to
operationalise the Frequency variable as the number of purchases divided by the time
on the customer list since the first purchase . We choose to operationalise the
Frequency variable as the number of purchases made in a certain time period (Hist
versus Year) while in- or excluding returned merchandise (R versus N).
In the direct marketing literature, the general convention is that the more
money a person has spent with a company, the higher his/her likelihood of purchasing
the next offering . l'Jash suggests to operationalise 1110netary value as the highest
transaction sale or as the average order size . Levin and Zahavi propose to use the _
average amount of money per purchase . We model the Monetary variable as the
total accumulated monetary amount of spending by a customer during a certain time
period (Hist versus Year) while in- or excluding returned merchandise (R versus N).
Table 4 gives an overview of the different operationalisations of the RFM variables.
Table 4: Operationalisations of RFM variables used in the basic RFM experiment.
Results and discussion of the basic RFM experiment
The upper three rows of Table 5 contain the results for three benchmark statistical
techniques: logistic regression, linear and quadratic discriminant analysis. The mean
and standard deviation for the pee and AUROe performance criteria are reported
for training and test set over all 10 bootstrap resamples. The logistic regression
classifier yields a mean classification accuracy of 70.3% and the mean area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve amounts to 77.4% on the test set. It
is clearly dominating both the linear and quadratic discriminant analysis classifiers
when looking at the performance in terms of pee and AUROe. This is confirmed
by a series of paired student's t-tests using a significance level of 0.01. In all cases
the resulting p-values proved to be smaller than 0.01. Notice the small difference
between the test set and training set results for all statistical classifiers.
Results for the Bayesian NN classifiers are presented in the second part of
Table 5. The performance increases only slightly as the number of hidden neurons is
varied between 2 and 6. From that point on, adding more hidden neurons seems to
have no extra beneficial effect on both performance measures. Again, notice the small
differences between the training and test set performances. This is a clear indication.
of the fact that no significant overfitting on the training set occurs while learning the
NN (hyper )parameters. This may be attributed to the Bayesian way of learning the
NN parameters, the weight regularisation mechanism, and the fact that both training
and test sample size are rather large. Note that a NN with 2 hidden neurons already
gives quite satisfying results. As noted above, we perform model selection using the
training set error. Hence, we choose a NN with 6 hidden neurons yielding a mean
pee of 71.3% and a mean AUROe of 78.6% on the test set. Both the pee and
AUROe are significantly better for the Bayesian NN than for the logistic regression
classifier. This is confirmed by the corresponding paired student's t-tests. The 1%
point difference between the mean pee of both classifiers is important from a direct
marketing perspective as discussed in Section 2. The final part of Table 5 depicts
the performance results of a NN ARD classifier with 6 hidden neurons. The ARD
method yields a mean pee of 71.2% and a mean AUROe of 78.5% on the test set,
which is comparable to the NN non-ARD results reported in the second part of the
Figure 4 reports the error bars representing the 95% confidence intervals for
the Cik (on a logarithmic scale) ofthe various inputs over the ten bootstrap resamples.
The Cik coefficients of the NN ARD classifiers are also used to obtain a ranking of
the importance of all 12 weight classes corresponding to the RFM inputs. A1112 Cik
coefficients are mapped into a ranking from 1 to 12 for each of the 1D runs of the
ARD experiment. The weight class corresponding to the lowest Cik is ranked first
because it is considered most important according to the ARD semantics. Insight
into the rankings produced by aUlD runs of the experiment is then obtained in the
following way. We created a 12 x 12 matrix R with elements R(i,j) indicating how
many times weight class i was ranked at the /h position aggregated over all1D runs.
We visualise the matrix R in the fOfm of the contour plot presented in Figure 5.
There is broad agreement between both plots concerning the relative importance of the inputs. The dark zone in the contour plot at the intersection of rank 1
and the RecHistR variable clearly indicates its importance. This variable was 10
times ranked first. The RecYearR and RecYearN variables seem to be very useful as
well. Note that the RecYearR variable was always ranked second over all 10 runs.
These findings are confirmed by the relatively low mean log(ak) values and narrow
confidence intervals for the RecHistR, RecYearR and RecYearN variables as depicted
in Figure 4. The rankings of the variables belonging to the Frequency category are
concentrated in the zone covering ranks 4 to 8. This suggests that these variables are
of medium importance to the NN prediction. The ranking of the Mon YearN variable
is concentrated around rank 4. The other Monetary variables are ranked between
ranks 8 and 12. Figure 4 also indicates that the Mon YearN variable is the most
important among the set of Monetary predictors. Notice that neither plot clearly
indicates the irrelevance of predictors included in the study. Therefore, we conclude
that a combined use of predictors of all three categories is desirable for response
modelling. Moreover, it can be stated that the way a variable is operationalised has
a substantial impact on its predictive performance.
logistic regression
70.3 ± 0.1
70.3 ± 0.2
77.5 ± 0.1
77.4 ± 0.2
linear discriminant analysis
68.9 ± 0.1
68.9 ± 0.2
76.0 ± 0.1
75.9 ± 0.2
quadratic discriminant analysis
63.6 ± 0.4
63.2 ± 0.4
74.4 ± 0.2
74.3 ± 0.2
NN 2 hidden neurons
71.2 ± 0.1
71.2 ± 0.1
78.5 ± 0.1
NN 4 hidden neurons
71.3 ± 0.2
71.2 ± 0.1
78.8 ± 0.2
78.5 ± 0.2
NN 6 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.3 ± 0.2
78.9 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
NN 8 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.3 ± 0.2
78.9 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
NN 10 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.3 ± 0.1
78.9 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
NN 12 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.3 ± 0.1
78.9 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
NN 14 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.3 ± 0.1
78.9 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
NN ARD 6 hidden neurons
71.4 ± 0.2
71.2 ± 0.1
78.7 ± 0.2
78.5 ± 0.2
Table 5: Performance assessment of all classifiers for the basic RFM experiment.
1:RecHistN
2:RecHIsl:R
3:RecYearN
4:RecYearR
9:MonHlstN
10:MonHlstR
11 :MonYearN
12:MonYearR
Figure 4: Error bars for the loge (tk) parameters for the basic RFM experiment.
Figure 5: Contour plot of the matrix R for the basic RFM experiment.
Extended RFM experiment
Predictors used in the extended RFM experiment
Apart. from the RFM variables discussed in Subsection 7.1, we now include 10 other·
customer profiling features (referred to as 'Other' in Table 6) .
The type and frequency of contact which customers have with the mail-order
company may yield important information about their future purchasing behaviour.
The Genlnfo and GenCust are binary customer/company interaction variables indicating whether the customer asked for general information respectively filed general
complaints. Since customer (dis ) satisfaction may not only be revealed by general
complaints but also by returning items, we included two extra variables. The Ret-
Merch variable is a binary variable indicating whether the customer has ever returned
an item that was previously ordered from the mail-order company. The RetPerc variable measures the total monetary amount of returned orders divided by the total
amount of spending. The N days variable models the length of the customer relationship in days. It is commonly believed that consumers/households with a longer
relationship with the company have a higher probability of repurchase than households with shorter relationships. IncrHist and IncrYear are operationalisations of a
behavioural loyalty measure. We propose to perform a median split of the length of
the relationship (time since the household became a customer). This enables us to
compare the number of purchases (i.e. frequency) between the first and last half of
the time window. The following formula is used
purchases second half-purchases first half
purchases first half
If the above measure is positive, this may give us an indication of increasing loyalty
by that customer to the (mail-order) company, and ipso facto satisfaction with the
current level of service. Remember that the suffix Hist reflects that the whole purchase
history is used, whereas in the case of the suffix Year, only transactions from the last
year are included. The mail-order company has internal records whether a customer
uses the credit facilities. This may function as an indicator of the extent to which the
customer values the financial convenience of mail-order buying. Therefore, we also
include the binary Credit variable. The ProdclaT respectively ProdclaM variables
represent the total (T) respectively mean (~.,1) forvv"ard=looking '\rveighted productindex.
The weighting procedure represents the 'forward-looking' nature of a product category _
purchase, derived from another sample of data.
Frequency Monetary
Table 6: Operationalisations of both RFM and non-RFM variables used in the extended
RFM experiment.
Results and discussion of the extended RFM experiment
The performance measurements of the extended RFM experiment are presented in
Table 7. The setup of this table is analogous to that of Table 5. In general, both the
PCC and A UROC of the three benchmark statistical classifiers rise about 1 % point
due to the inclusion of the 10 extra variables. Again, this is a result which may not
be underestimated in terms of profit increases for the direct marketing company (see
Section 2). As confirmed by the corresponding paired student's t-tests, the logistic
regression classifier still yields the best performance of all three statistical cla~sifiers.
In this case, we opt for a Bayesian NN with 8 hidden neurons as our NN
model of choice, since at this point adding more hidden neurons seems to provide no
extra performance gains. Also notice that for the Bayesian NN, performance again
increases about 1% point when compared to the basic RFM experiment. This results
in a mean pce of 72.4% and a mean AUROC of 79.8% on the test set. Training a
NN ARD with 8 hidden neurons yields a mean pee of 72.4% and mean AUROe of
79.7% on the test set, a result that is comparable to the NN non-ARD results.
Again, Figure 6 presents the 95% confidence intervals for the Cik values on a
logarithmic scale. The matrix R associated with the weight class rankings is depicted
in the contour plot given by Figure 7. Among the RFM variables, the sarile relevance
patterns are present as for the basic RFM experiment, thus essentially confirming _
the latter. The rankings of the RetPerc, Ret Merch , ProdclaT, ProdclaM, Ndays,
IncrHist and IncrYear variables are concentrated in the region of lesser importance
in the contour plot. When looking at both plots, it can be observed that the Credit,
Genlnfo and GenCust variables are definitely more relevant to the trained networks.
The 1% point performance rise may thus be especially attributed to the inclusion of
these three variables in the extended RFM response model.
When comparing the results of this study to those on similar data sets from
the same anonymous company, reported in , we observe that the insight
gained using Bayesian neural network methods generally confirms previous findings.
Most noticeably they also highlight: (1) the importance of a combined use of all
three RFM predictor categories in predicting mail-order repeat purchase behaviour;
(2) the performance gains by including non-RFM variables into the response model.
However, there is some disagreement considering the relative importance of some of
the RFM and non-RFM variables. These differences may be due to: (1) different
data sets from different countries, resulting in a.o. diverging class proportions (i.e.,
38% buyers in compared to 55% buyers in this study); (2) inclusion of other
predictors or alternative transformations (e.g. logarithmic transformation to reduce
the skewness in ); (3) the use of other classification techniques (e.g. support
vector machines in ) and input selection heuristics (e.g. hard sensitivity based
pruning in ).
Conclusion
In this paper, we focus on purchase incidence modelling for a major European direct mail company. The case boils down to a binary classification problem: Will
the customer repurchase or not? Response models based on statistical and neur-
logistic regression
71.4 ± 0.2
71.4 ± 0.2
78.7 ± 0.2
78.6 ± 0.2
linear discriminant analysis
69.7 ± 0.2
69.7 ± 0.2
76.9 ± 0.2
76.8 ± 0.2
quadratic discriminant analysis
65.0 ± 0.8
64.9 ± 0.7
73.3 ± 1.2
73.2 ± 1.2
NN 2 hidden neurons
72.3 ± 0.3
72.2 ± 0.2
79.7 ± 0.2
79.5 ± 0.2
NN 4 hidden neurons
72.5 ± 0.2
72.4 ± 0.2
80.0 ± 0.2
79.7 ± 0.2
NN 6 hidden neurons
72.6 ± 0.3
72.3 ± 0.2
80.2 ± 0.2
79.7 ± 0.2
NN 8 hidden neurons
72.8 ± 0.3
72.4 ± 0.2
80.4 ± 0.2
79.8 ± 0.2
NN 10 hidden neurons
72.8 ± 0.3
72.4 ± 0.2
80.4 ± 0.2
79.8 ± 0.2
NN 12 hidden neurons
72.8 ± 0.3
72.4 ± 0.2
80.4 ± 0.2
79.8 ± 0.2
NN 14 hidden neurons
72.8 ± 0.3
72.4 ± 0.2
80.4 ± 0.2
79.8 ± 0.2
NN ARD 8 hidden neurons
72.5 ± 0.3
72.4 ± 0.3
80.0 ± 0.3
79.7 ± 0.2
Table 7: Performance assessment of all classifiers for the extended RFM experiment.
1:RacHls1N
2:RecHistR
3:RecYearN
4:RecYearR
9:MonHlsIN
10:MonHlstR
11 :MonYearN
12:MonYesrR
13:RetPerc
14:ReIMerch
15:ProddaT
16:ProdclaM
19:Genlnfo
2O:GenCust
21 :lncrHlst
o 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 :~~ 13 14 15 18 17 t8 19 20 21 22 23 22:lncrYear
Figure 6: Error bars for the log(ak) parameters for the extended RFM experiment.
1\ '\':;::
:/< 1':'1'
.. ""-. " ~
1/ I'\, 1/
i',.. h:::-'
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Figure 7: Contour plot of the matrix R for the extended RFM experiment.
al network techniques are developed and contrasted. The latter are trained using
Bayesian neural network learning, a method that is fairly robust with respect to the
problems of overfitting and (hyper )parameter choice, problems that are typically encountered when implementing neural networks. The evidence framework of MacKay _
is used as an example implementation of Bayesian learning. The automatic relevance determination (ARD) method is an additional feature of this framework that
allows to assess the relative importance of the inputs. The basic response models use
operationalisations of the traditionally discussed Recency, Frequency and Monetary
(RFM) predictor categories. In a second experiment, the RFM response framework
is enriched by the inclusion of other (non-RFM) customer profiling predictors. In
this study, we contribute to the literature by providing a thorough investigation into:
(1) the suitability of Bayesian neural networks for repeat purchase modelling; (2) the
predictive performance of alternative operationalisations of RFM variables and their
relative importance; (3) the issue whether other (non-RFM) variables add predictive
power to the traditional RFM variables. By means of experimental evaluation, it
is illustrated that, from a performance perspective, Bayesian neural networks offer
an interesting and viable alternative for purchase incidence modelling. Performance
of the trained classifiers is measured using the percentage correctly classified (PCC)
and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). TheARD
results advocate a combined use of all three RFM predictor categories for response
modelling. Finally, as illustrated by a second experiment, the inclusion of non-RFM
variables allows to further augment the predictive power of the constructed classifiers. The ARD results mainly attribute this rise to the inclusion of customer/company
interaction variables and to a variable measuring whether a customer uses the credit
facilities of the direct mail company.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly carried out at the Leuven Institute for Research on Information
Systems (LIRIS) of the Dept. of Applied Economic Sciences of the K.U.Leuven in
the framework of the KBC Insurance Research Chair, set up in September 1997 as a
pioneering cooperation between LIRIS and KBC Insurance. We thank prof. J.A.K.
Suykens (K.U.Leuven) for his comments and suggestions. V-Ie are also grateful to
prof. Marnik Dekimpe (K.U.Leuven) and prof. Joseph Leunis (K.U.Leuven) for their _
numerous useful comments on earlier versions of parts of this document.