Lung Cancer: Epidemiology, Etiology, and Prevention
Charles S. Dela Cruz, MD, PhDa,*, Lynn T. Tanoue, MDb, and Richard A. Matthay, MDc
aPulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, 300 Cedar Street, TAC S441-C, New Haven, CT 06519, USA
bPulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, 200 South Frontage Road, LCI 106A, New Haven, CT 06510, USA
cPulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, 200 South Frontage Road, LCI 105E, New Haven, CT 06510, USA
Lung cancer; Tobacco smoking; Epidemiology; Carcinogens
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and around the world.
Almost as many Americans die of lung cancer every year than die of prostate, breast, and
colon cancer combined (Fig. 1).1 Siegel and colleagues1 reviewed recent cancer data and
estimated a total of 239,320 new cases of lung cancer and 161,250 deaths from lung cancer
in the United States in 2010.2 The statistics reflect data from 2007 and, therefore, likely
underestimate the current lung cancer burden. Lung cancer has been the most common
cancer worldwide since 1985, both in terms of incidence and mortality. Globally, lung
cancer is the largest contributor to new cancer diagnoses (1,350,000 new cases and 12.4% of
total new cancer cases) and to death from cancer (1,180,000 deaths and 17.6% of total
cancer deaths). The 5-year survival rate in the United States for lung cancer is 15.6%, and
although there has been some improvement in survival during the past few decades, the
survival advances that have been realized in other common malignancies have yet to be
achieved in lung cancer. There has been a large relative increase in the numbers of cases of
lung cancer in developing countries. Approximately half (49.9%) of the cases now occur in
developing countries whereas in 1980, 69% of cases were in developed countries. The
estimated numbers of lung cancer cases worldwide has increased by 51% since 1985 (a 44%
increase in men and a 76% increase in women). In the United States, cancer of the lung and
bronchus ranks second in both genders, with an estimated 115,060 new cases in men (14%
of all new cancers) and 106,070 in women (14% of all new cancers).1,2 The age-adjusted
incidence rate of lung cancer is 62 per 100,000 men and women per year in the United
States, with the incidence rate higher in men than in women (75.2 vs 52.3 per 100,000).3
Lung cancer in both genders tops the list on the number of estimated deaths yearly (85,600,
or 28% of all cancer deaths for men, and 71,340, or 26% of all cancer deaths for women)
Lung cancer incidence in men in the United States has been decreasing since the early
1980s. The incidence and mortality rates for lung cancer tend to mirror one another because
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*Corresponding author. .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
 
Clin Chest Med. 2011 December ; 32(4): . doi:10.1016/j.ccm.2011.09.001.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
most patients diagnosed with lung cancer eventually die of it. Siegel and colleagues,1 in
their review of cancer statistics in 2011, noted decreases in death rates from lung cancer in
men by 2.0% per year from 1994 to 2006 (Fig. 3). In women, however, lung cancer death
rates continued to increase by 0.3% per year from 1995 to 2005, but more recent data from
2003 to 2006 show a more encouraging trend with a start in decline of 0.9% per year (see
Figs. 3 and 4). The lung cancer incidence among women has declined over the past decades,
from 5.6% between 1975 and 1982, to 3.4% between 1982 and 1990, to 0.4% between 1991
and 2006, and more recently to −2.3% between 2006 and 2008 (see Fig. 4). Because of the
change in lung cancer incidence in women, recent figures show that lung cancer death rates
decreased in women for the first time, more than a decade after decreases in men.4 The lag
in the decline of lung cancer rates in women compared with men has been attributed to the
fact that cigarette smoking in women peaked two decades later than in men. Lung cancer
mortality rates thus seem to be reaching a plateau, which is an encouraging change from the
steep rise in the 1970s (see Fig. 3).
The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data from 2004 to 2008 reported
the median age at diagnosis for cancer of the lung and bronchus as 71 years (Fig. 5). No
cases were diagnosed in patients younger than 20 years (see Fig. 5).3 Approximately 0.2%
of lung cancers was diagnosed in patients between age 20 and 34 years; 1.5% between 35
and 44 years; 8.8% between 45 and 54 years; 20.9% between 55 and 64 years; 31.1%
between 65 and 74 years; 29% between 75 and 84 years; and 8.3% at 85 years and older.
Lung cancer arises from the cells of the respiratory epithelium and can be divided into two
broad categories. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly malignant tumor derived from
cells exhibiting neuroendocrine characteristics and accounts for 15% of lung cancer cases.
Non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which accounts for the remaining 85% of cases, is
further divided into 3 major pathologic subtypes: adenocarcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, and large cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma by itself accounts for 38.5% of all
lung cancer cases, with squamous cell carcinoma accounting for 20% and large cell
carcinoma accounting for 2.9%.3,5 In the past several decades, the incidence of
adenocarcinoma has increased greatly, and adenocarcinoma has replaced squamous cell
carcinoma as the most prevalent type of NSCLC. The 5-year total survival rate for lung
cancer in the United States from 2001 to 2007 was 15.6%. Patients with localized disease at
diagnosis have a 5-year survival rate of 52%; however, the more than 52% of patients with
distant metastasis at diagnosis have a dismal 5-year survival rate of 3.6%, which begs for the
need for better screening methods to detect early-stage cancers (Fig. 6). (See article
elsewhere in this issue by Mithun.)
Lung cancer was the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer
death in men in 2008 globally.2 For women, lung cancer was the fourth most commonly
diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death. Overall, lung cancer
accounted for 13% or 1.6 million of total cancer cases and 18% or 1.4 million cancer-related
deaths worldwide in 2008. Lung cancer incidence and mortality rates are highest in the
United States and the developed countries. In contrast, lung cancer rates in underdeveloped
geographic areas, including Central America and most of Africa, are lower, except the rates
are slowly increasing (Fig. 7A). More developed countries have higher incidence and
mortality rates from lung cancers in both genders than less developed countries (see Fig. 7B,
C). The World Health Organization estimates that lung cancer deaths worldwide will
continue to rise, largely as a result of an increase in global tobacco use, especially in Asia.
Tobacco use is the principal risk factor for lung cancer, and a large proportion of all
pulmonary carcinomas are attributable to the effects of cigarette smoking.6 Despite efforts to
curb tobacco smoking, there are approximately 1.1 billion smokers worldwide, and if the
current trends continue, that number would increase to 1.9 billion by 2025.7 As of 2008,
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
20.6% (46.0 million) of American adults smoke.8 Of these, 79.8% (36.7 million) smoke
every day and 20.2% (9.3 million) smoke some days. During the past decade, there has been
a 3.5% point decrease in the number of US adults who smoke .11 In 1964, the US Public Health Service published a landmark report from the
Surgeon General on smoking and its effects on health.12 That seminal report stated the
following important principal findings. (1) Cigarette smoking was associated with a 70%
increase in the age-specific death rates of men and a lesser increase in the death rates of
women. (2) Cigarette smoking was causally related to lung cancer in men. The magnitude of
the effect of cigarette smoking far outweighed all other factors leading to lung cancer. The
risk for lung cancer increased with the duration of smoking and the number of cigarettes
smoked per day. The report estimated that the average male smoker had an approximately 9fold to 10-fold risk for lung cancer, whereas heavy smokers had at least a 20-fold risk. (3)
Cigarette smoking was believed more important than occupational exposures in the
causation of lung cancer in the general population. (4) Cigarette smoking was the most
important cause of chronic bronchitis in the United States. (5) Male cigarette smokers had a
higher death rate from coronary artery disease than male nonsmokers.
The report concluded, “Cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance in the
United States to warrant appropriate remedial action.” Since the publication of the report,
yearly per capita consumption of cigarettes has declined in the United States (see Fig. 8).11
It is estimated that 20.6% of all American adults over age 18 years continue to smoke, a
figure that has only minimally decreased since approximately 1997, based on a recent
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report report by Dube and colleagues.13 Of these smokers,
80.1% (36.3 million people) smoke every day and 19.9% (9 million) smoke some days.
More men (23.5%) than women (17.9%) smoke. The decline in smoking rates is steeper for
black men and white men than for white women and black women. The prevalence of
smoking is 31.1% among persons below the federal poverty level. For adults older than 25
years, the prevalence of smoking was 28.5% among persons with less than a high school
diploma compared with 5.6% among persons with a graduate degree.13 There were also
regional differences in the United States, with the West having the lowest prevalence
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(16.4%) and higher prevalence observed in the South (21.8%) and the Midwest States
(23.1%).8 More than 80% of adult smokers begin before the age 18 years. In 2009, 1 in 5
American high school students reported smoking cigarettes in the preceding 30 days.14 The
smoking rate has declined but has slowed of late; the smoking prevalence increased from
27.5% in 1991 to 36.4% in1997, declined to 21.9% in 2003, and then declined less to 19.5%
in 2009.15
One of the first descriptions of lung cancer was in 1912 by Adler16 in an extensive review of
autopsy reports from hospitals in the United States and western Europe, which found 374
cases of primary lung cancer. This represented less than 0.5% of all cancer cases. He
concluded, “primary malignant neoplasms of the lung are among the rarest forms of
disease.” In 1920, lung cancer constituted only 1% of all malignancies in the United States.
During the next several decades, researchers in the United States and abroad noted a
significant increase in the incidence of carcinoma of the lung. In a series of 185,434 autopsy
cases collected between 1897 and 1930, Hruby and Sweany17 noted that the incidence of
lung cancer had increased disproportionately to the incidence of cancer in general.
The first scientific report that associated cigarette smoking with an increased risk of
premature death was in 1938, when Pear18 showed the degree of adverse effect on longevity
increased with the amount of smoking (Fig. 9). The finding that tar applied to the skin of
animals produced lung carcinoma raised concern that inhalation of tar products could be an
important factor in the increase in lung cancer incidence. Observations in patients and
experimental studies in animals have shown that tobacco tar liberated from the burning of
tobacco was a carcinogenic agent.19 Other uncontrolled patient series highlighted the
potential role of cigarette smoking in the increase in lung cancer incidence.20–23 In 1941,
Ochsner and DeBakey stated in their review of lung carcinoma, “it is our definite conviction
that the increase in the incidence of pulmonary carcinoma is due largely to the increase in
smoking.”21
In 1950, two large landmark epidemiologic studies established the role of tobacco smoking
as a causal factor in bronchogenic carcinoma.24,25 In a case-control study in United
Kingdom, Doll and Hill24 described an association between carcinoma of the lung and
cigarette smoking and the effect of the amount of cigarette use on the development of lung
cancer.18,24,26 In another case-control study in the United States, Wynder and Graham25
examined 605 cases of lung cancer in men compared with a general male hospital
population without cancer. The American investigators found that 96.5% of lung cancers
were in men who were moderate to heavy smokers for many years. The authors concluded,
(1) the excessive and prolonged use of tobacco was an important factor in the induction of
lung cancer; (2) lung cancer in a nonsmoker was rare (however, this is currently not the case
[discussed later in section on never smokers]); and (3) there could be a lag period of 10
years or more between cessation of smoking and the clinical onset of carcinoma.
Subsequently, the Surgeon General of the United States re-emphasized in 2004 the
conclusions of the 1964 report that “cigarette smoking is the major cause of lung cancer.”27
Cigarette smoke is a complex aerosol composed of gaseous and particulate compounds. The
smoke consists of mainstream smoke and sidestream smoke components. Mainstream smoke
is produced by inhalation of air through the cigarette and is the primary source of smoke
exposure for the smoker. Sidestream smoke is produced from smoldering of the cigarette
between puffs and is the major source of environmental tobacco smoke (ETS). The primary
determinant of tobacco addiction is nicotine, and tar is the total particulate matter of
cigarette smoke after nicotine and water have been removed. Exposure to tar seems to be a
major component of lung cancer risk. The Federal Trade Commission determines the
nicotine and tar content of cigarettes by measurements made on standardized smoking
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
machines. The composition of mainstream smoke, however, can vary greatly depending on
the intensity of inhalation by a smoker. Although the use of filter tips decreases the amount
of nicotine and tar in mainstream smoke, the effect of filter tips also varies because the
compression of the tips by lips or fingers and the depth of inhalation of the smoker. There
are more than 4000 chemical constituents of cigarette smoke: 95% of the weight of
mainstream smoke comes from 400 to 500 gaseous compounds28; the rest of the weight is
made up of more than 3500 particulate components.
Mainstream smoke contains many potential carcinogens, including polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), aromatic amines, N-nitrosamines, and other organic and inorganic
compounds, such as benzene, vinyl chloride, arsenic, and chromium. The PAHs and Nnitrosamines require metabolic activation to become carcinogenic. Metabolic detoxification
of these compounds can also occur, and the balance between activation and detoxification
likely affects individual cancer risk. Radioactive materials, such as radon and its decay
products, bismuth, and polonium, are also present in tobacco smoke.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has identified at least 50
carcinogens in tobacco smoke.29,30 The agents that seem of particular concern in lung
carcinoma are the tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines (TSNAs) formed by nitrosation of
nicotine during tobacco processing and during smoking. Eight TSNAs have been described,
including 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), which is known to induce
adenocarcinoma of the lung in experimental animals. Other TSNAs have been linked to
cancer of the esophagus, bladder, pancreas, oral cavity, and larynx. Of the TSNAs, NNK,
which seems the most important inducer of lung cancer, has carcinogenic effects with both
topical and systemic administration. TSNAs are directly delivered to the lung by inhalation
of tobacco smoke. TSNAs are also absorbed systemically, and hematogenous delivery to the
lung can occur by way of the pulmonary circulation.
The dosage of smoke constituents received depends not only on the cigarette itself but also
on the duration and intensity of inhalation, the presence and competence of a filter, and the
duration of cooling of the smoke before inhalation. The primary factor determining intensity
of cigarette use is the nicotine dependence of the smoker, and although cigarettes now
contain less nicotine and tar than in the past, smokers tend to smoke more intensively with
higher puffs per minute and deeper inhalations to satisfy their nicotine need. Therefore, the
measurements of tar and nicotine content made by smoking machines may significantly
underestimate individual exposure. Low-yield filtered cigarettes might be a contributing
factor to the increase in the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the lung.31 The nicotineaddicted smoker smokes low-yield cigarettes far more intensively than nonfiltered higheryield cigarettes, and with deeper inhalation, higher-order bronchi in the peripheral lung are
exposed to carcinogen-containing smoke as opposed to the major bronchi alone. These
peripheral bronchi lack protective epithelium and are exposed to carcinogens, including
TSNAs, which have been linked to the induction of adenocarcinoma.
Tobacco carcinogens, such as NNK, can bind to DNA and create DNA adducts, which are
pieces of DNA covalently bonded to a cancer-causing chemical, such as PAH in cigarette
smoke. Repair processes may remove these DNA adducts and restore normal DNA, or cells
with damaged DNA may undergo apoptosis. Failure of the normal DNA repair mechanisms
to remove DNA adducts, however, can lead to permanent mutations. NNKs can mediate an
array of signaling pathway activation that includes modulation of critical oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes that ultimately can result in uncontrolled cellular proliferation and
tumorigenesis.32
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NNK is associated with DNA mutations resulting in the activation of K-ras oncogenes.33,34
K-ras oncogene activation has been detected in 24% of human lung adenocarcinomas35 and
is present in adenocarcinoma of the lung in ex-smokers, suggesting that such mutations do
not revert necessarily with the cessation of tobacco smoking.36 This may in part explain the
persistent elevation in lung cancer risk in exsmokers even years after discontinuing cigarette
use. In addition, a specific chemical constituent of tobacco smoke, benzo[a]pyrene
metabolite, can damage various p53 tumor-suppressor gene loci that are known to be
abnormal in approximately 60% of primary lung cancer cases.37 Related PAHs found in
tobacco smoke are also capable of targeting other lung cancer mutational hotspots.38
One in 9 smokers eventually develops lung cancer.39 The relative risk of lung cancer in
long-term smokers has been estimated as 10-fold to 30-fold compared with lifetime
nonsmokers.40 The cumulative lung cancer risk among heavy smokers can be as high as
30% compared with a lifetime risk of less than 1% in nonsmokers. The lung cancer risk is
proportional to the quantity of cigarette consumption, because factors, such as the number of
packs per day smoked, the age of onset of smoking, the degree of inhalation, the tar and
nicotine content of cigarettes, and use of unfiltered cigarettes, become important.41,42 There
is no question that tobacco smoking remains the most important modifiable risk factor for
lung cancer. It has been estimated that up to 20% of all cancer deaths worldwide could be
prevented by the elimination of tobacco smoking.43 It is also clear that individual
susceptibility is a factor in carcinogenesis. Although more than 80% of lung cancers occur in
persons with tobacco exposure, fewer than 20% of smokers develop lung cancer. This
variability in cancer susceptibility is likely affected by other environmental factors or by
genetic predisposition.
Other Types of Smoking
Other forms of tobacco use, such as cigar smoking and pipe smoking, have been associated
with increased risk for lung cancer. The risk seems weaker, however, than with cigarette
smoking. Most cigars are composed of primarily of a single type of tobacco that is air cured
and fermented but can vary in their size and shape to contain from 1 g to 20 g of tobacco.
Smoking 5 cigars a day on average is equivalent to smoking 1 pack a day of cigarettes. A
large prospective study of more than 130,000 men over 12 years showed that cigar smokers
have a relative risk of lung cancer of 5.1 compared with non–cigar smokers.44 Another study
showed a relative risk of 2.1 for lung cancer compared with nonsmokers, with men who
smoked 5 or more cigars a day having the greatest risk.45 The increased risk for lung cancer
as a result of pipe smoking is comparable to cigar smoking.46,47 A large cohort study
showed that active pipe smoking was associated with a relative risk for lung cancer of 5.0.48
Cigar and pipe smokers have a greater risk for lung cancer than lifelong nonsmokers or
former smokers.49
The effects of inhaling smoke from recreational drugs, such as marijuana and cocaine, are
less studied than the effects of tobacco smoke. Meta-plastic histologic and molecular
changes similar to premalignant alterations have been described in the bronchial epithelium
in habitual smokers of marijuana or cocaine.50,51 A clear association has not been fully
established, however, between such inhalant drug use and lung cancer. A case-control study
showed that there is an 8% increased risk for lung cancer for each joint-year of marijuana
smoking after adjusting for tobacco cigarette smoking.52 Similarly, there is a 7% increased
risk for lung cancer for each pack-year of cigarette smoking after adjusting for marijuana
smoking. The relationship between cocaine smoking and lung cancer is not well studied.
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Never Smokers
The term, never smokers, refers to persons who have smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes in
their lifetime, including lifetime nonsmokers. Most studies that track the trend of lung
cancer rates often include both smokers and never smokers, and few studies independently
study the trends over time for never smokers because of the limited longitudinal collection
and the limited reliability of smoking information in population-based registries. From what
is available, however, the overall global statistics estimate that 15% of lung cancers in men
and up to 53% in women are not attributable to smoking, with never smokers accounting for
25% of all lung cancer cases worldwide.53 If lung cancer in never smokers were considered
separately, it would rank as the seventh most common cause of cancer death worldwide
before cervical, pancreatic, and prostate cancer (Fig. 10).54 In countries in South Asia, up to
80% of women with lung cancer are never smokers (Fig. 11).55 In the United States, one
study estimated that 19% of lung cancer in women and 9% of lung cancer in men occurs in
never smokers.56 The age-adjusted rate for lung cancer in never smokers (ages 40–79 years)
ranged from 11.2 to 13.7 per 100,000 person-years for men and from 15.2 to 20.8 per
100,000 person-years for women. The rates are 12 to 30 times higher in current smokers of
the same age group.
The incidence of lung cancer in never smokers seems to have a geographic variation. For
example, a series following 12,000 patients with lung cancer in California found a dramatic
increase in bronchoalveolar carcinoma in never smokers from 19% during 1995 to 1999 to
26% during 1999 to 2003.57 The percentage of other types of lung cancer in never smokers
also increased from 8.6% to 9.4%. Another study in the United States found a small but
statistically significant increase in the mortality rate in women with non– smokingassociated lung cancers from 12.3% in the years 1959 to 1972 to 14.7% in the years 1982 to
2000.41 A corresponding increase did not occur in men. In Japan, the percentage of never
smoker NSCLC increased from 16% to 33% over a 30-year period ending in 2004.58 A
European case-control study, however, comparing data from 1950 and 1990, showed no
significant change in the percentage of never smokers in male lung cancer patients and a
decrease in the percentage of never smokers among female lung cancer patients.59 Similarly,
an analysis of 13 American cohorts and 22 cancer registry studies found no substantial
change in the rate of lung cancer in women never smokers.60 Two major epidemiologic
trends seem to be emerging in lung cancer in never smokers: (1) women are more frequently
affected than men and (2) it is more prevalent in certain parts of the world, such as Asia.
Although all histologic types of lung cancer are associated with cigarette smoking, in
smokers the association is stronger for SCLC and for squamous cell carcinoma. In contrast,
adenocarcinoma of the lung is more common in never smokers (62% vs 18%, based on 5144
cases55) compared with smokers (19% vs 53% based on 21,853 cases61) (Fig. 12).
Adenocarcinoma, however, is becoming more common even among smokers.62,63 This
finding may be attributable to the deeper inhalation of lowered tar-containing and nicotinecontaining cigarettes, leading to a more peripheral distribution of cigarette smoke in the
lung.64 Adenocarcinoma is becoming a common lung cancer type in young patients,
however, especially never smokers.65 Other series have also shown the common prevalence
of adenocarcinoma in never smokers.56,66 Although there has been no predominant causal
factor that can fully explain lung cancer in never smokers, the risk factors considered
important for never smokers include secondhand smoke; radon exposure; environmental
exposures, such as indoor air pollution, asbestos, and arsenic; history of lung disease; and
genetic factors.67 A population-based case-control study in Canada found that occupational
exposures, history of lung disease, and family history of early-onset cancer were important
risk factors for lung cancer among never smokers.68 In this study, potential environmental
sources of increased risk included exposure to solvents, paints, or thinners; welding
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
equipment; and smoke, soot, or exhaust. This finding is particularly important because there
are few data on occupational exposures and lung cancer among never smokers. Other studies
have also shown an association between lung cancer in never smokers and a family history
of lung cancer, a finding that suggests a role for genetic factors.69–71 For example, a casecontrol study following 2400 relatives of 316 never smokers with lung cancer cases showed
a 25% excess risk for cancer in first-degree relatives of lung cancer cases.70 Specific genetic
factors in these studies have not been identified. Some studies, however, suggest the role of
the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) pathway, the human repair gene
(hMSH2), and various cytochrome P450 and glutathione-S-transferase enzymes.72–75 No
unique susceptibility gene has been identified that distinguishes lung cancers in never
smokers from smokers. Recent data have shown, however, an increased frequency of EGFR
mutations in lung adenocarcinomas of never smokers, especially in Asian cohorts (Fig.
Lung cancers among never smokers in Asia (Hong Kong, Singapore, and Japan) are
diagnosed at an earlier age than in smokers.66,80 These findings have not been reproduced in
the United States or Europe.56,81 It has been suggested that the investigation threshold in
symptomatic never smokers is higher, leading to diagnosis at later stages in never
smokers.66 Despite this potential delayed diagnosis and later presentation of lung cancer in
never smokers, the survival rate for never smokers is better than for smokers, independent of
stage of disease, treatment received, and presence of comorbidities.57,81,82 A multivariate
analyses of lung adenocarcioma found that the never smoking status was an independent
predictor of improved survival (23% 5-year survival rate for never smokers and 16% for
current smokers).81 Such findings have suggested that the cancer in never smokers may
display a distinct biologic and natural history. There are also epidemiologic,
clinicopathologic, and molecular differences between lung cancers in never smokers and
smokers, differences that have led some investigators to suggest that lung cancer in never
smokers may be a different disease. Microarray gene-profiling studies have found that lung
adenocarcinomas are heterogeneous, and the profiles of cancer in smokers and never
smokers are different.83,84 In 2010, the first genome-wide association study (GWAS)
reported genetic variations in chromosome 13q31.3 that altered the expression of glypican 5
(GPC5), a heparin sulfate proteoglycan with many known functions involving cell growth
and differentiation and tissue responses.85 Another GWAS focusing on lung
adenocarcinomas in female Han Chinese never smokers in Taiwan identified genetic
variation in the CLPTM1L-TERT locus of chromosome 5p15.33 as associated with risk for
lung cancer in this population.86 This 5p15.33 chromosome contains two well-known genes,
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) and cleft lip and palate transmembrane 1-like
(CLPTM1L), both of which have been implicated in carcinogenesis.
Genetic Factors
There is a genetic component to the pathogenesis of lung cancer, whether it relates to host
susceptibility to lung cancer, with or without exposure to cigarette smoke to the
development of certain types of lung cancer, or to an individual’s responsiveness to biologic
therapies. A lung cancer risk prediction analysis developed by Spitz and colleagues87,88
incorporated multiple variables, such as smoking history, exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke, occupational exposures to dusts and to asbestos, and family history of cancer. They
showed the influence of a family history of cancer on the risk for lung cancer in never
smokers, former smokers, and current smokers (Table 1). Cassidy and colleagues89 also
highlighted the significantly increased risk for lung cancer specifically for persons with a
family history of early-onset lung cancer (<60 years of age) (Table 2).
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Recently, Schwartz and colleagues90 reviewed the molecular epidemiology of lung cancer,
focusing on host susceptibility genetic markers to lung carcinogens. (See the article by
Larsen and Minna elsewhere in this issue.) The susceptibility genetic factors include highpenetrance, low-frequency genes; low-penetrance, high-frequency genes; and acquired
epigenetic polymorphisms. Takemiya and colleagues91 and Yamanaka and colleagues92
showed the association of lung cancer with rare mendelian cancer syndromes, such as
Bloom and Werner syndromes. Studies on familial aggregation have supported the
hypothesis that there is a hereditary component to the risk for lung cancer. These familial
association approaches have been used to discover high-penetrance, low-frequency genes. A
meta-analysis involving 32 studies showed a 2-fold increased risk for lung cancer in persons
with a family history of lung cancer with an increased risk also present in nonsmokers.93
Bailey-Wilson and colleagues,94 using family linkage approaches, reported the first
association of familial lung cancer to the region on chromosome 6q23–25 (146cM– 164cM).
The addition of smoking history to the effect of this inheritance was associated with a 3-fold
increase risk for lung cancer.
There have also been many studies on candidate susceptibility genes that are of low
penetrance and high frequency. The approach has been to target genes known to be involved
in the absorption, metabolism, and accumulation of tobacco or other carcinogens in lung
tissue. For example, genetic polymorphisms encoding enzymes involved in the activation
and conjugation of tobacco smoke compounds, such as PAHs, nitrosamines, and aromatic
amines, have been widely studied. Metabolism of these compounds occurs through either
phase I enzymes (oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis) or phase II (conjugation) enzymes.
Some of the frequently studied enzymes in this system include CYP1A1, the glutathione Stransferases (GST), microsomal epoxide hydrolase 1 (mEH/EPHX1), myeloperoxidase
(MPO), and reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate quinine
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1). Polymorphisms in CYP1A1 and their association with lung
cancer risks have been conflicting. A meta-analysis involving 16 studies by Le Marchand
and colleagues95 showed no significant risk associated with the CYP1A1 Ile462Val allele;
however, in pooled analysis, a significant 55% increased risk for squamous cell carcinoma
in whites was observed, especially in women and nonsmokers. GST gene products help
conjugate electrophilic compounds to the antioxidant glutathione. GSTM1 in its null form
occurs in 50% of the population, and studies by Benhamou and colleagues96 showed a 17%
increased lung cancer risk in persons who were GSTM1 null. A more recent and larger metaanalysis involving more than 53,000 case-controls by Ye and colleagues97 showed an 18%
increase risk for lung cancer among persons who were GSTMI null, but this significant
association was not present when the analysis was limited to larger studies only. Amos and
colleagues98 performed a GWAS scan of tagged single nucleotide polymorphisms in
histologically confirmed NSCLC in an effort to identify common low-penetrance alleles that
influence lung cancer risk. They identified a susceptibility locus for lung cancer at
chromosome 15q25.1, a region that contains the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes.
Results from the many candidate gene polymorphism studies focusing on a single
polymorphism in one gene have been mixed. This has led to studies to look at gene-gene
interactions, which require even a larger study population. For example, Zhou and
colleagues99 studied the interaction between variants in genes coding for NAT2 (which
activates arylamine cigarette smoke metabolites and deactivates aromatic amines) and mEH
(which activates PAHs and deactivates various epoxides). They found significant
interactions between NAT2 variants associated with certain acetylation pheynotype and
mEH variants associated with certain activity level with the risk of lung cancer. For
example, a 2-fold increase risk for lung cancer was observed in 120 pack-year smokers who
had the NAT2 slow-acetylation and mEH high-activity genotype. Alternatively, in
nonsmokers, a 50% decrease risk for lung cancer was observed among persons with the
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
combined NAT2 slow-acetylation and mEH high-activity genotype. Susceptibility to
carcinogenic agents may also be affected by individual differences in mutagen sensitivity.
Spitz and colleagues100 reviewed the phenotypic studies of DNA repair capacity and lung
cancer risks.
Polymorphisms in genes involved in DNA repair enzymes active in base excision repair
(XRCC1 and OGG1), nucleotide excision repair (ERCC1, XPD, and XPA), and doublestrand break repair (XRCC3), and different mismatch repair pathways have also been
studied as they relate to lung cancer risks. Chronic inflammation in response to repetitive
tobacco exposure has been theorized as involved in lung tumorigenesis. Genes encoding for
the interleukins (IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8). The cyclooxygenase enzymes (eg, COX-2) involved
in inflammation, or the metalloproteases (MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, and MMP-12)
involved in repair during inflammation have been associated with lung cancer risk. Several
cell cycle–related genes have been implicated in lung cancer susceptibility, including the
tumor suppressor genes p53 and p73, mouse double minute 2 (MDM2), and the apoptosis
genes encoding FAS and FASL.
Wu and colleagues101 showed that the presence of mutagen sensitivity is associated with an
increased risk for lung cancer. Spitz and colleagues100 noted that the combined risk for lung
cancer was greater in individuals with mutagen sensitivity who smoked than in persons with
either smoking or mutagen sensitivity characteristics alone. DNA adducts can be measured
as biomarkers to represent the degree of carcinogenesis. Several of the lung cancer
susceptibility genes (discussed previously) have been associated with increased levels of
DNA adducts. Acquired or epigenetic changes to DNA chromosome can also lead to
increased lung cancer susceptibility. These events include changes, such as DNA
methylation, histone deacetylation, and phosphorylation, all of which can affect gene
expression. Despite many genetic association studies, the specific genes responsible for the
enhanced risk for lung cancer remain poorly understood. Work is under way to pool findings
to achieve greater study sample sizes in collaborative efforts, such as the Genetic
Susceptibility to Environmental Carcinogens and the International Lung Cancer Consortium.
Lung cancer susceptibility is determined at least in part by host genetic factors. Persons with
genetic susceptibility might therefore be at higher risk if they smoke tobacco. As technology
advances, it may be possible to target subgroups identified as genetically high risk for lung
cancer for specific interventions, including intensive efforts at smoking cessation, screening,
and prevention programs.
Lung cancer surpassed breast cancer as the leading cause of cancer deaths in women in the
late 1980s, and now almost twice as many women die of lung cancer than breast cancer.1
Since 1950 there has been more than a 600% increase in the lung cancer mortality rate in
women. In the United States, the cigarette smoking rate for women increased during the
period from 1930 to 1960, and this increase was followed two decades later by an increase
in lung cancer in women starting in 1960.102,103 Cigarette smoking peaked during World
War II among men born in the 1920s. The smoking rate in women peaked approximately a
decade later among those who were born in the 1930s. Lung cancer deaths are expected to
keep falling in both genders because older men and women and their younger counterparts
smoke less. Smoking prevalence is higher among men (23.1%) than women (18.3%);
however, this difference is narrowing.9 Fortunately, the lung cancer death rate in women is
beginning to plateau, with an annual increase of 0.2% in 2005.104 Lung cancer death rates
for women fell for the first time in four decades amid continued declines in the overall
cancer death rate (see Fig. 4).4 There has been a drop of 2.5% in lung cancer deaths among
men and a 0.9% decline in lung cancer deaths in women. Even though the overall age-
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
adjusted lung cancer incidence is still higher in men than women, this difference is
decreasing due to a continued decrease in the male incidence of lung cancer. Cigarette
smoking remains the most important factor for the development of lung cancer in women
with some suggesting up to 80% of cases in women are related to smoking.105 Alternatively,
for never smokers (discussed previously), the age-adjusted incidence rate of lung cancer is
higher for women than men based on the compilation of several prospective cohort studies
(14.4–20.8 per 100,000 person-years for women compared with 4.8–13.7 per 100,000
person-years for men).56
Whether women are more or less susceptible than men to the carcinogenic effects of
cigarette smoke is controversial. The American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention Study II,
which followed 1 to 2 million subjects between 1982 and 1988, reported an overall risk for
lung cancer in women smokers of 11.94, compared with an overall risk of 22.36 in male
smokers, after taking into account the intensity of smoking.106 Recent analysis of the SEER
data from 1997 to 2006 showed that the lung cancer mortality rate is 74.08 per 100,000
man-years compared with 40.81 per 100,000 woman-years.107 Other studies have suggested,
however, that women may be actually more vulnerable to carcinogens in tobacco smoke
than men.108–111 A study using the American Health Foundation data found that the odds
ratio (OR) for the major lung cancer types has been consistently higher for women than for
men at every level of exposure to cigarette smoke.111 The dose-response ORs for lung
cancer in women were 1.2-fold to 1.7-fold higher than in men. A Canadian case-control
study of male–female differences in lung cancer covering the period 1981 to 1985 showed
that with a history of 40 pack-years of cigarette smoking relative to lifelong nonsmoking, the
OR for women developing lung cancer was 27.9 versus 9.6 in men.110 In both these studies,
the increase in lung cancer risk held for all major histologic types.
The observed gender differences in susceptibility may be related to gender-related
differences in nicotine metabolism and in metabolic activation or detoxification of lung
carcinogens. Such gender differences in clearance of plasma nicotine by cytochrome P450
enzymes have been reported. For example, several reports have commented on gender
differences in lung cancer observed at the molecular level. Ryberg and colleagues112 noted
that women with lung cancer have higher levels of DNA adducts than men. Such patients
might be anticipated more susceptible to carcinogens, which might explain why women
seem to develop lung cancer with lower-intensity cigarette exposure. Furthermore, hormonal
factors may also play a role in susceptibility. A case-control study showed that estrogen
replacement therapy was significantly associated with an increased risk for adenocarcinoma
(OR 1.7), whereas the combination of cigarette smoking and estrogen replacement increased
that risk substantially (OR 32.4).113 Conversely, early menopause (age 40 years or younger)
was associated with a decreased risk for adenocarcinoma (OR 0.3). More recent large
randomized studies suggest that the use of hormonal therapies, such as estrogen and
progestin, is associated with an increased risk for lung cancer in women.114 For example,
the Vitamins and Lifestyle study followed perimenopausal women for 6 years and found the
risk for lung cancer was increased in those who used estrogen and progestin.114 The
observed risk was proportional to the duration of hormone exposure, with approximately
50% increased risk for those who used hormone replacement therapy for 10 years or longer.
Two studies as part of the Women’s Health Initiative found a statistically nonsignificant
trend toward increased incidence of NSCLC and an increased number of deaths from lung
cancer in women taking hormone therapy compared with those taking placebo.115,116
A second issue is whether cigarette smoking may be associated with a higher risk for
nonmalignant lung disease in women than in men. Neither of two large population studies,
the British Doctors Study in the United Kingdom117,118 or the Lung Health Study in the
United States,119 found gender differences in mortality from smoking-related chronic
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Other studies, however, including a study by Chen
and colleagues,120 suggest that cigarette smoking may be more harmful to the pulmonary
function in women than in men. In this study, changes in forced expiratory volume in the
first second of expiration (FEV1) and maximal midexpiratory flow rate increased with
increasing pack-years more rapidly in women smokers than in their male counterparts.
These changes were independent of age, height, and weight. Beck and colleagues121 in a
study of 4690 white subjects found that for a given level of smoking, women had more
changes in FEV1 and maximal expiratory flow at 25% and 50% of vital capacity at a
younger age (15–24 years) than men (40–45 years). Because smokers with spirometric
evidence of airway obstruction are at higher risk for lung cancer, the suggestion that women
have increased susceptibility to smoking-induced airway disease may be important in the
consideration of their risk for lung cancer.121
Finally, it also seems that lung cancer is more common in nonsmoking women than in
nonsmoking men. In an early study of tobacco smoking, Wynder and Graham10noted that a
greater percentage of cancers in nonsmokers occurred in women than men. The number of
women in that study was relatively small, however, and few women had at that time smoked
for the duration of decades. Since then, it has become clear that women never smokers are
more likely than male never smokers to develop lung cancer. In a case-control study by
Zang and Wynder111 of 1889 lung cancer subjects and 2070 control subjects, the proportion
of never smoking lung cancer patients was more than twice as high for women than for men.
The reasons for this finding are not clear, but speculation has been raised regarding the
potential of women having greater susceptibility to nontobacco environmental carcinogens
or increased exposure to ETS or the existence of gender-linked differences in the
metabolism of nontobacco environmental carcinogens.
Race and Ethnicity
Race is a complex variable that often has a strong socioeconomic association. Racial
differences in disease states can shed light, however, on the specific issues of a particular
subpopulation. Menck122 showed that the incidence of lung cancer is substantially higher
among blacks and Native Hawaiians and other Polynesians and lower among Japanese
Americans and Hispanics than among whites in the United States. These differences initially
have been attributed to the variations in cigarette smoking pattern among the different ethnic
and racial groups. Recent smoking data show that among the different groups, Asians
(9.9%) had the lowest smoking prevalence in the United States, whereas American Indians
and Alaska Natives (32.4%) had significantly higher prevalence than the other groups.8
Smoking prevalence among whites (22%) and blacks (21.3%) were significantly higher than
among Hispanics (15.8%). The Department of Health and Human Services reported,
however, that the age-adjusted prevalence of cigarette smoking was similar among blacks
and whites (30.1% and 27.3%, respectively). In addition, only 8% of black smokers smoked
at least 25 cigarettes per day compared with 28% of white smokers. Native Hawaiians also
had higher rates of lung cancer than whites and Asians despite having similar smoking
habits. Haiman and colleagues123 reported in their Multiethnic Cohort Study that among
participants who smoked no more than 30 cigarettes per day, black Americans and Native
Hawaiians had significantly greater risk for lung cancer than did whites. The relative risk for
lung cancer among subjects smoking less than 20 cigarettes per day were 0.21 to 0.39 for
Japanese Americans and Latinos, and 0.45 to 0.57 for whites as compared with black
Americans. The differences in lung cancer risks were not significant, however, among all
racial groups who exceeded 30 cigarettes per day of smoking. Recent SEER report based on
data from 2004 to 2008 showed that black men, but not black women, in the United States
had a higher age-adjusted incidence of lung cancer than their white counterparts at all age
groups (Fig. 14).
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Smokers with a history of early-onset lung cancer in a first-degree relative have a higher risk
for lung cancer with increasing age than smokers without such a family history. Coté and
colleagues124 showed in a case-control study that first-degree relatives of black persons with
early-onset lung cancer have a greater risk for lung cancer than their white counterparts
(25.1% vs 17.1%, respectively). These cumulative differences in risk for lung cancer among
blacks and whites are further amplified by increasing cigarette smoking exposure. The
explanation for these observed racial or ethnic variations in risk for lung cancer is not
known. Black Americans also have higher mortality rates from lung cancer than white
Americans.8 This difference in mortality rates has been attributed not only to the higher
incidence rates but also to the poorer survival of black patients with lung cancer than white
patients. For example, from 1995 to 2000, the 5-year survival rate was 14.3% lower in black
Americans compared with white Americans. The reasons for these racial differences are not
known. Brooks and colleagues125 hypothesized a potential role for greater use of menthol
cigarettes among black Americans than among white Americans (69% vs 22%) or the
deeper inhalation of menthol cigarettes compared with nonmenthol cigarettes. No evidence,
however, supports this hypothesis.
The average age of most populations in developed nations is increasing, and cancer is a
disease of the elderly. Although smoking prevalence is lowest among persons aged 65 years
and older (9.3%) compared with persons aged 18 to 24 years (21.4%), 25 to 44 years
(23.7%) and 45 to 64 years (22.6%),8 (see Fig. 14), more than 65% of patients with lung
cancer are older than 65. Specifically, 31.1% of patients with lung cancer are between 65
and 74 years, 29% between 75 and 84 years, and 8.3% are 85 years old and older.3 The
mean age at the time of diagnosis is over 70. This difference between lower current smoking
prevalence and the higher cancer rate in the elderly population likely reflects heavy smoking
history in current elderly population. In the past decade, the incidence and mortality from
lung cancer have decreased among persons aged 50 years and younger but have increased
among persons aged 70 years and older.126 The 5-year survival rate for lung cancer
decreases incrementally with age for both genders (Fig. 15). “Older patients” are usually
considered those older than 70 years with the “very elderly” those 80 years or older. Patients
older than 80 years constitute 14% of all patients with lung cancer in the United States but
account for almost a quarter of all lung cancer deaths. It has been estimated that the number
of lung cancer patients aged 85 years and older will quadruple by 2050. Few studies have
examined management of the elderly population with lung cancer. Recent reviews
concluded that elderly patients, specially the functionally fit elderly, with lung cancer can
benefit from many of the treatments used for younger patients, including surgery for earlystage disease and single-agent chemotherapy for advanced disease.127,128
Diet and Obesity
It has been suggested that diet is responsible for approximately 30% of all cancers.129 Many
reports suggest that dietary factors contribute to the risk for lung cancers.130 For example,
low serum concentrations of antioxidants, such as vitamins A, C, and E, have been
associated with the development of lung cancer.131,132 Vitamin A has both an animal
(retinol) and a vegetable (carotenoid) source; the vegetable component only has been shown
to have protective effects against lung cancer. In particular, β-carotene, a prominent
carotenoid, has been shown to have the greatest protective effect against lung cancer.133
Vitamins C and E (α-tocopherol) have also been shown to have some protective
effect.134,135
One of the most widely cited reports of the effect of diet on the development of cancer was a
prospective survey of approximately 2000 men aged 40 to 55 years employed by the
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Western Electric Company where detailed dietary histories were recorded in 1957 and
followed for more than 19 years.136 In this study, β-carotene intake was inversely related to
lung cancer incidence, suggesting that vitamin A and β-carotene may have a protective
effect against lung cancer. Byers and colleagues137 evaluated 27 such studies published
before 1994 and concluded that persons in the lowest quartile of carotene intake had an
approximately 50% to 100% increase in lung cancer risk compared with persons in the
highest quartile of carotene intake. In response to these positive observations, three largescale intervention trials have been conducted to try to determine the relationship between
vitamin supplementations and lung cancer. Unfortunately, these studies showed that vitamin
supplementation did not reduce lung cancer risk and in some circumstances increased the
incidence of lung cancer. The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
Study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to determine
whether daily supplementation of α-tocopherol, β-carotene, or both could reduce the
incidence of cancers, including lung cancer.138 The study enrolled 29,133 male smokers
aged 50 to 60 years in Finland. Unexpectedly, a higher than expected mortality, primarily
due to lung cancer and heart disease, was observed in the group receiving β-carotene.
Omenn and colleagues139,140 then reported results of the Beta-Carotene and Retinol
Efficacy Trial (CARET), also a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The
study was intended to determine whether dietary supplementation with β-carotene, vitamin
A, or both would decrease the incidence of lung cancer. It enrolled 18,314 men and women
considered at increased risk for lung cancer. The CARET study was stopped 21 months
early because of “clear evidence of no benefit and substantial evidence of harm” in the
group that received β-carotene and retinol palmitate, especially women.139,141 The group
that received both vitamin A and β-carotene had a 17% increase in mortality and a 28%
increase in the number of lung cancers compared with placebo. A third randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial, the Physicians’ Health Study, evaluated the effect of βcarotene in 22,071 male physicians142; 11% of the participants were current smokers and
39% former smokers at the onset of the trial. Over 12 years of follow-up, neither benefit nor
harm in terms of malignancy or cardiovascular disease was demonstrated. The dose of βcarotene in this trial was lower than in both the ATBC trial and the CARET study.
Because of the findings of the ATBC and CARET trials, the use of supplemental β-carotene
and vitamin A is discouraged. There have also been suggestions that low dietary intake of
certain minerals, including magnesium, zinc, copper, and iron, is associated with increased
lung cancer risk; however, later prospective cohort studies observed no significant
associations between total mineral intake and lung cancer risk.143,144 The role of dietary
supplementation in cancer chemoprevention is currently unsettled. These studies should
serve as a reminder, however, that indiscreet and excessive intake of vitamins or other
chemicals can be potentially harmful.
A diet rich in fruits and vegetables has been linked to decreased cancer incidence as
suggested by a large cohort study in the Netherlands, with the protective effects stronger in
current than in former smokers.145 In this study, no specific type of vegetable or fruit was
identified as particularly responsible for the effect. Consumption of vegetables described as
cruciferous, such as broccoli and cabbage, which are rich in isothiocyanates, has some
protective effect against lung cancer.146 When study participants were stratified according to
their GSTM1 and GSTT1 gene status, which are genes important at eliminating
isothiocanates, the protective effect of the cruciferous vegetable consumption was best seen
in subjects with the null gene.146 Overall, it has been shown that low or no intake of fruits or
vegetables has been associated with up to 3-fold risk for lung cancer.147 It has been also
further suggested that consuming fruits or vegetables raw rather than cooked is associated
with a further reduction in risk for lung cancer because important carotenoids can be
destroyed with cooking.148 A large prospective study showed no relation between total intake of fruit and vegetables with lung cancer
risk.149 The study did show, however, that higher consumption of several botanic groups,
such as rosaceae (apples, peaches, and strawberries), convolvulaceas (sweet potatoes and
yams), and umbelliferae (carrots), was significantly inversely associated with lung cancer
risk in men and in former smokers.149 Flavonoid plant metabolites have properties described
as antioxidant and anti-proliferative. Flavonoids can be found in foods, such as berries,
citrus fruits, tea, dark chocolate, and red wine. A prospective study showed the risk for lung
cancer was lower in men with the highest total flavonoid intake compared with those with
the lowest intake.150
Certain dietary items, including red meat, dairy products, saturated fats, and lipids, have
been suggested as increasing the risk for lung cancer.151–154 Other foods found to have an
adverse effect on lung cancer include items that contain nitrosodimethylamines and nitrites,
such as those found in salami and salted and smoked meat products.155,156 Despite the
negative large-scale chemoprevention studies of vitamin supplementation and because of the
large body of epidemiologic literature pointing to the benefits of fruits and vegetables,
health authorities continue to recommend a balanced dietary intake of fruits and vegetables,
including those containing β-carotene.
Because of the current obesity epidemic, discussion of dietary factors cannot be complete
without mention of the role of excessive weight in lung cancer. In 2005, 23.25% of the
world’s adult population (937 million people) was overweight and 9.8% (396 million) was
obese with a body mass index (BMI) of greater than 30 kg/m2.157 These numbers are greater
in industrialized countries where more than one-fifth of the adult population is obese. In the
United States, 35.1% of adults aer classified as obese.158 Excessive body weight has been
associated with increased risk for endometrial, breast, and colorectal cancer but not for lung
cancer. A meta-analysis by Renehan and colleagues159 reported that there was an inverse
association between BMI and lung cancer risk and obesity may even have a protective role.
In the absence of cigarette smoking, however, the association between BMI and lung cancer
was not significant. It has been proposed that the observed BMI and cancer association may
be related to residual strong confounding effects of smoking itself.160 For example, smokers
tend to have lower mean BMI than age-matched and gender-matched nonsmokers.161
Smokers have a lower BMI than nonsmokers, and they gain weight when they quit smoking.
It has been suggested also that leanness was associated with increased lung cancer risk, but
the studies were small and did not clearly exclude the confounding effects of smoking or
pre-existing diseases.162 More recent studies by Kabat and colleagues,163 after adjusting for
pack-years of smoking and other relevant covariates in a female cohort, showed that there
was evidence for inverse associations of BMI and lung cancer risk in current and former
smokers; whereas in never smokers, BMI was positively associated with lung cancer. A
different study showed that waist circumference was positively associated with lung cancer
risk in the smokers.164 Recent prospective studies in Chinese men showed an inverse
relationship between BMI and lung cancer mortality after adjustment for potential obvious
confounders, such as smoking.165,166 These studies did not have information on exposure to
cooking fumes that have been reported to play a role in lung cancer in the Chinese
population.167
Other Lung Diseases and Airways Obstruction
Some nonmalignant diseases have been associated with an increased risk for lung cancer,
the strongest association being with COPD. Tobacco smoking is the primary cause of both
lung cancer and COPD. A study of women never smokers with lung cancer showed a
statistically significant association between the presence of airflow obstruction and the
development of lung cancer.168 There is other evidence that airflow obstruction is a risk for
lung cancer.169,170 This conclusion is supported by the Lung Health Study in which 5887
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
male and female smokers with spirometric evidence of mild to moderate COPD were
monitored over a 5-year period with or without smoking cessation counseling or
bronchodilator therapy.171 Lung cancer was the most common cause of death, accounting
for 38% of all deaths and lung cancer deaths exceeded deaths from cardiovascular disease
by nearly 50%. More recent studies in large cohorts have shown that COPD is significantly
associated with an increased risk for lung cancer, especially in men.172,173 Because COPD
affects an estimated 40% to 70% of patients with lung cancer, a coexisting disease of lung
cancer and COPD likely reflects a common smoking exposure. Potential confounders by
age, gender, and smoking history or the effects of lung cancer on spirometry could have
resulted in the overdiagnosis of COPD in patients with lung cancer. A recent study evaluated
602 patients with lung cancer and found that 50% of them had prebronchodilator pulmonary
function test results consistent with a diagnosis of COPD with Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease stage 2 and higher, independent of age, gender, and smoking
history, with an OR of 11.6.174 The prevalence of COPD in newly diagnosed lung cancer
was 6-fold greater than matched smokers, suggesting that COPD itself is an important
independent risk factor with potential relationship to the pathogenesis of lung cancer.
COPD is characterized by chronic inflammation that responds to corticosteroids, and
chronic inflammation itself has been suggested as associated with lung cancer. A Dutch
study found that the likelihood of developing lung cancer was increased if C-reactive
protein, a measure of generalized inflammation, was greater than 3 mg/L compared with
patients with lower levels (<1 mg/L).175 A large retrospective study of patients with COPD
patients found that the risk for lung cancer was lower among patients who took high-dose
inhaled corticosteroids compared with patients taking lower doses or none at all.176 These
results suggest that inhaled corticosteroids may have a chemoproventive role in lung cancer
among patients with COPD. A study by Yang and colleagues177 tested whether α1antitrypsin deficiency carriers have a higher risk for lung cancer, after adjusting for the
effects of tobacco smoke exposure and COPD. Using a multiple logistic regression analysis,
they found a significantly increased lung cancer risk (approximately 2-fold increased risk)
among α1-antitrypsin deficiency carriers from two parallel case-control cohorts.
Interstitial fibrosis has also been associated with an increase in lung cancer risk. Hubbard
and colleagues178 evaluated 890 patients with cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis (idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis) and 5884 control subjects and found that the incidence of lung cancer in
patients with fibrosis was markedly increased, even after adjustment for smoking. Patients
with such fibrosis had an OR for lung cancer of 8.25 compared with control subjects. Other
fibrosing diseases, including asbestosis and scleroderma-related lung disease, also seem to
have an increased association with lung cancer (asbestos-related disease is discussed later).
The association of scleroderma with lung cancer, however, is weaker. A British study
followed patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and found the incidence of lung cancer
markedly increased compared with the general population.179 Although the mechanisms by
which pulmonary interstitial disease may predispose to malignancy are not clear, various
hypotheses have been raised, including malignant transformation related to chronic
inflammation, epithelial hyperplasia, impaired clearance of carcinogens, and infections.
Infections
Infection as a causative factor in lung cancer has been evoked but remains debatable. For
example, oncogenic viruses have been proposed as a cause of lung cancer. Early studies on
sheep pulmonary adenomatosis caused by the Jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus show pathologic
similarities to human bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; however, there is not enough evidence
to link these two diseases and prove the involvement of viruses in the development of
human bronchioloalveolar carcinoma.180 More recent findings have suggested a potential
role for human papillomavirus (HPV), known to cause carcinoma in other tissues. The
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
possible involvement of HPV in bronchial squamous cell lesions was first suggested by
Syrjänen,181 who described epithelial changes in bronchial carcinomas that closely resemble
those of established HPV condylomatous lesions in the female genital tract.181 HPV DNA
within squamous cell carcinoma lung cancer tissues has been detected. There is
inconsistency, however, in the reported prevalence of infection by HPV in patients with lung
cancer in different countries with racial and geographic variations. High incidence of HPV
DNA in lung cancer has been reported in Asian cohorts, especially in nonsmokers;
alternatively, studies in Western Europe failed to show an etiologic role of HPV in lung
cancer.182–184 HPV serotypes 16 and 18 are associated with lung cancer more than any other
serotypes. E6 and E7 oncogenes from these HPV serotypes have been shown to immortalize
human tracheal epithelial cells, which themselves are highly prone to genetic damage.185
Currently, studies testing lung cancer specimens for HPV have yielded mixed results, and
such variability of the frequency of HPV-positive lung cancer may be due to genetic
susceptibility; methodologic approaches to detect HPV, such as those that involve the use of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR); in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry; and
environmental and high-risk behavior variables. It would be interesting to see if HPVdirected vaccine for cervical cancer has any impact on the incidence of lung cancer.
Epstein-Barr virus, associated with Burkitt lymphoma and nasopharygeal carcinoma, has
been strongly associated with lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma, a rare form of lung
cancer, in Asian patients, but this association has not been observed in the Western
population.186 Other viruses suggested as etiologic for lung cancer include BK virus, JC
virus, the human cytomegalovirus, simian virus 40, and measles virus; however, the results
have remained inconclusive.187–190 More recently, DNA from Torque teno virus, a new
virus, has been detected at high levels in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients with lung
cancer, and although suggestive that Torque teno virus infection might be associated with
the development of lung cancer in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, more studies are needed to
confirm these findings and determine their clinical significance.191
It has also been suggested that Chlamydia pneumonia, a common cause of acute respiratory
infection, especially in cigarette smoke –exposed individuals, might be involved in lung
cancer carcinogenesis.192 Identification of C pneumoniae as etiologically related to lung
cancer, whether independent of tobacco smoking or as a cofactor, could have profound
implications, particularly in the area of lung cancer prevention. Using serology to define
Chlamydia infection, multiple epidemiologic studies have reported higher lung cancer risk
associated with positive serology compared with those without such evidence of
infection.192 Although there were concerns about measurement differences, the results were
consistent and suggested a potentially novel association of this organism with lung cancer.
Although Chlamydia is not a known oncogenic pathogen, some investigators have
hypothesized that the inflammation resulting from the infection can lead to reactive oxygen
species that can cause DNA damage, cell injury, and repair, increasing the risk of mutations,
which can confer selective advantages that lead to cancer. Such infection can also act
synergistically with cigarette smoking to increase the risk of lung cancer. Similar to the
concerns related to the evidence for various viruses as causes of lung cancer, however,
further investigations are needed to solidify the evidence for a causal role of Chlamydia in
lung cancer.
Some studies have reported association of pulmonary tuberculosis with lung cancer.193,194
A cohort study from Taiwan showed an increased risk for lung cancer in tuberculosis
patients with hazard ratio of 3.3 after adjusting for confounding factors, such as COPD and
smoking-related cancers other than lung cancer. The effect of tuberculosis was even greater
when combined with COPD or with other smoking-related cancers.194 Other investigators
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
speculate that the tuberculosis-related inflammation and scarring contribute to lung cancer
pathogenesis.193
Lung cancer has become a new challenge in HIV-infected individuals. AIDS-related
mortality has dramatically fallen since the advent of highly active antiretroviral treatments;
however, this has been accompanied by an increase in the proportion of deaths attributable
to non–AIDS-defining tumors, especially lung cancer.195,196 The increased risk of lung
cancer relative to the general population of the same age seems due in part to the higher
prevalence of smoking among HIV-infected patients. In a study of 2840 HIV-infected
patients, HIV was associated with a hazard ratio of 3.6 for lung cancer after controlling for
smoking status.197 Although smoking is a key risk factor for lung cancer in HIV-infected
patients, several other factors may contribute to the higher incidence of lung cancer. These
include greater prevalence of co-infection with oncogenic viruses, such as human
herpesvirus 8, HPV, and Epstein-Barr virus, and the potential direct effects of the HIV virus
and the consequences of long-term immunosuppression.198 For example, the HIV tat protein
can transactivate cellular genes or proto-oncogenes, whereas other HIV genes inhibit tumor
suppressor genes.199 HIV-infected cancer patients have a worse prognosis than similarly
staged non–HIVinfected patients with the same cancer.200 They are also more likely to have
more advanced disease at diagnosis.201 Studies have reported that HIV-infected patients
were younger, were more likely to be smokers, and had significantly reduced median
survival.201,202 Taken together, evidence suggests that infection may play a role in lung
cancer; however, definite proof of a causal relationship is currently lacking.
Environmental Tobacco Smoke
Secondhand smoke, also referred to as ETS, can contribute to an increased risk for lung
cancer with a dose-dependent relationship between the degree of exposure and the relative
risk. One study showed that household exposure of 25 or more smoker-years before
adulthood doubled the risk for lung cancer; exposure of less than 25 smoker-years did not
increase risk. The investigators estimated that at least 17% of lung cancers in nonsmokers
are attributable to exposure to high levels of ETS during childhood and adolescence.203 The
Surgeon General reported in the early 1970s on the health consequences of smoking and
raised concerns about hazards relating to such environmental smoke exposure.12 Because
nonsmokers exposed to ETS have an increased rate of smoke-related problems, including
upper respiratory symptoms and eye irritation, and because there is an increased frequency
of respiratory illnesses in children, it was suggested that the acknowledged carcinogenic
effect of active tobacco smoking might also be present in those involuntarily exposed. Other
reports showed an increased risk for lung cancer in nonsmoking women married to men who
smoke.204,205 A summary analysis of a large number of epidemiologic studies on the risk for
lung cancer in nonsmokers found an excess risk for lung cancer of 24% in nonsmokers who
lived with a smoker.206 This should be interpreted from the perspective that the background
risk for lung cancer in a nonsmoker is low and contrasted with the 1000-fold increase of
lung cancer risk in lifelong active smokers. Another study in nonsmoking women found that
tobacco use by the spouse was associated with a 30% excess risk for all types of lung
cancer.207 These studies showed a dose-response relationship of the risk for lung cancer
with both the number of cigarettes smoked by the spouse and the duration of
exposure.206,207
In 1986, the National Research Council commissioned a review of the effects of ETS as a
potential causal agent of lung cancer in nonsmokers exposed to household cigarette
smoke.208 Review of all the available evidence yielded an overall OR of 1.34 in lung cancer
risk associated with ETS. In nonsmokers this translates into an approximately 30% increase
of risk for lung cancer. At the same time, the US Department of Health and Human Services
in a report on the health consequences of involuntary tobacco smoke exposure concluded
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
that involuntary smoking is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in healthy
nonsmokers.209 The US Environmental Protection Agency210 and the IARC211 both
currently classify ETS as containing lung carcinogens. Cardenas and colleagues212
examined lung cancer mortality and ETS within the context of the American Cancer Society
Cancer Prevention Study. These investigators performed a prospective comparative
evaluation of 133,835 never smokers with smoking spouses versus 154,000 never smokers
with nonsmoking spouses. They concluded that the relative risk for lung cancer in women
with smoking husbands was 1.2, which represented an increase in lung cancer incidence of
20%. The relative risk in nonsmoking men with smoking wives was somewhat less but still
elevated at 1.1. These figures are consistent with data from prior studies evaluating lung
cancer risk from ETS. Pooled data from 8 such studies in the United States from 1981 to
1991 found the relative risk for lung cancer in nonsmokers living with smokers to be
ETS consists of both mainstream (exhaled) smoke and sidestream smoke. Various
carcinogens have been identified in ETS, including benzene, benzo[a]pyrene, and NNK.
Hecht and colleagues214 reported that male nonsmokers exposed to sidestream smoke
generated by machine smoking of cigarettes had measurable carcinogenic metabolites in
their urine. In the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted
between 1988 and 1991, Pirkle and colleagues215 reported that a surprising 88% of
nontobacco users had detectable levels of serum cotinine, a metabolite of nicotine,
presumably from exposure to ETS. The presence of ETS is pervasive and harmful.
Therefore, efforts on public smoking limitations will be of great benefit in this regard. With
19.8% of the American adult population still smoking, however, ETS will continue to be a
major public health issue until cigarette smoking altogether is eliminated.216 The exact
number of cases of lung cancer due to involuntary smoking is difficult to calculate. Beckett,
however, estimates that the number of lung cancer deaths in the United States attributable to
ETS is comparable to the annual number caused by asbestos or radon.217
Biomass and Wood-smoke Exposure
In many parts of the world, wood is burned for cooking and heating purposes.
Approximately 3 billion people worldwide rely on solid fuels as their primary source of
domestic energy for cooking and heating. In China, for example, incomplete combustion of
coal in homes has been linked with lung cancer.218 A case-control study followed a group of
residents living in underground dwellings who burn coal and unprocessed biomass, such as
crop residues, wood, sticks, and twigs, for heating and cooking. They found that the OR for
lung cancer associated with such coal use compared with that for biomass in the house was
1.29, after adjusting for smoking.219 The IARC has recently classified indoor emissions
from household coal combustion as a human carcinogen and emissions from biomass fuel
primarily from wood as probable human carcinogen. A study using data from this
consortium found that compared with nonsolid fuel users, predominant coal users (OR 1.64;
in particular, coal users in Asia with OR 4.93), and predominant wood users in North
American and European countries (OR of 1.21) exhibited higher risk for lung cancer.220 A
European cohort showed similar association of solid fuel use for heating and cooking with
lung cancer risk; OR of lung cancer in lifetime users of solid fuel was 1.80; switching to
nonsolid fuels resulted in lowered risk.221 It has been suggested that the lung cancer that
arise from wood smoke may behave differently from lung cancer due to tobacco smoke.
Wood smoke exposure was found an important factor in predicting favorable response of
NSCLC to tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Environmental Air Pollution
Air pollution has become a worldwide problem given the current staggering rate of
globalization and industrialization. Wilkins222 chronicled the most impressive example of
the severe adverse effect of air pollution: the 1952 “great smog” of London, during which
thousands of persons died in a week from heavy pollution. This led to the implementation of
the Clean Air Act 4 years later. The effects of low levels of air pollution exposure over a
longer period of time are harder to measure, especially the long-term and accumulative
effects on lung cancer risks. Air pollution is worsening in developing countries; the highest
concentrations of suspected particulates, sulfur dioxide, and smoke have been recorded in
large cities of these countries. Outdoor air pollution has long been thought to increase the
risk for lung cancers. Advances in analytic methods used to detect specific pollutants have
helped investigators study the effects of such airborne particulates. Early studies by
Pershagen223 involving urban-rural comparisons have shown that an “urban factor” is
associated with a 10% to 40% increase in lung cancer deaths. A case-control study in
Sweden by Nyberg and colleagues224 showed a relative risk for lung cancer of 1.44 for
persons exposed to more than 29.3 µg/m3 of nitric oxide (as a measure of traffic air
pollutant) over 21 to 30 years compared with exposures to lower than 12.8 µg/m3 of nitric
oxide. Two large United States cohort studies by Dockery225 and Pope and colleagues226
suggest that there is an excess risk for lung cancer of approximately 19% per 10 µg/m3
increment in the long-term average exposure to fine particulates after adjustments for
multiple confounding factors. Pope and coworkers226 found as part of the Cancer Prevention
Study II that fine particulate and sulfur oxide-related pollution were associated with 8%
increased risk for lung cancer mortality for each 10 µg/m3 elevation in long-term average
ambient concentration of fine particles less than 2.5 µm in diameter. Despite these studies, it
is still difficult to pinpoint the carcinogenic role played by single constituents of air
pollution.
Various potential carcinogenic components are thought to be emitted from different sources
of fossil fuel combustion products. Cohen227 and Pope and coworkers226 suggested that
there is a range gradient of relative risk for lung cancer associated with exposure to
combustion products, from 7.0 to 22.0 in cigarette smokers, to 2.5 to 10.0 in coke oven
workers, to 1.0 to 1.6 in residents of areas with high levels of air pollution, to 1.0 to 1.5 in
nonsmokers exposed to environmental tobacco smoke. Diesel exhaust composed of a
complex mixture of gases and fine particles represents an important component of air
pollution. Some of these gaseous components, such as benzene, formaldehyde, and 1,3butadiene, are suspected of causing or known to cause cancer in humans. Studies in the late
1980s concluded that there was a weak association between diesel engine exhaust exposure
and cancer. Later work, however, that included two large independent meta-analyses by
Lipsett and Campleman228 and Bhatia and colleagues,229 provided strong support that
occupational exposures to diesel exhaust, especially in persons in the trucking industry, is
associated with an approximately 30% to 50% increase in the relative risk for lung cancer.
Data linking gasoline engine exhaust and lung cancer are less compelling.
Occupational Carcinogens
Several workplace substances have been suggested to be or have been proved carcinogens in
the lung. The IARC has identified arsenic, asbestos, beryllium, cadmium, chloromethyl
ethers, chromium, nickel, radon, silica, and vinyl chloride as carcinogens. The occupations
associated with exposure to these agents are shown in Tables 3 and 4. In 2000, it was
estimated that 10% of lung cancer deaths among men (88,000 deaths) and 5% among
women (14,300 deaths) worldwide could be attributable to exposure to 8 occupational lung
carcinogens, namely asbestos, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, nickel, silica, and
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
diesel fumes.230,231 Steeland and colleagues232,233 estimated that approximately 6800 to
17,000 lung cancers were a result of exposure to chemicals in the workplace.
Asbestos—Asbestos is the most widely known and most common occupational cause of
lung cancer. Asbestos is a class of naturally occurring fibrous minerals consisting primarily
of 2 types: (1) serpentine (chrysotile) and (2) amphibole (amosite, crocidolite, and
tremolites). Asbestos has been used commercially since the late 1800s, and its fire-retardant
qualities and strength have made it useful in construction and insulating materials. As early
as the 1940s in Germany, asbestos was noted as a lung carcinogen.234 The wide recognition
of its carcinogenicity, however, dates to reports in the United Kingdom in the 1950s,
including that by Doll.235 Asbestos exposure can also result in pleural and pulmonary
manifestations. Asbestos-related pleural disease can present as effusion, pleurisy, or both.
Chronic pleural involvement is seen as areas of pleural thickening (pleural plaques) that
usually involve the parietal pleura and that are often calcified. The presence of pleural
plaques does not herald the development of mesothelioma and has not been proved a marker
of increased risk for lung cancer. Inhalation of asbestos fibers can result in parenchymal
lung disease, specifically interstitial lung disease, known as asbestosis. All the major types
of asbestos can cause interstitial lung disease, although amphibole fibers may be more
fibrogenic than chrysotile fibers. The presentation of asbestosis is essentially identical to that
of nonspecific interstitial lung disease as well as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Asbestosis
develops above a threshold fiber dose of approximately 25 to 105 fibers per mL per year,
where the threshold dose is usually reached only in workers, including asbestos insulators,
miners, millers, and textile workers, who have heavy occupational exposure.236 The
development of interstitial fibrosis usually requires prolonged exposure over months to
years. Such fibrotic disease can follow shorter, more intense exposure, as occurs in shipyard
workers. The latency period from exposure to presentation of disease is inversely
proportional to exposure level. In the United States, the national rate of lung cancer in the
form of mesothelioma is 13.8 per million population per year, with higher rates, exceeding
20 per million per year, in Maine, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Washington, Wyoming, and
West Virginia (Fig. 16).237
The distinction between asbestos exposure and asbestosis is important because of the
controversy as to which represents the actual risk factor for lung cancer. Two reviews
discussing the extensive available epidemiologic data illustrate this controversy. Jones and
colleagues238 in their extensive literature review highlight several important points. First, it
is widely recognized that lung fibrosis of many causes, including idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis and interstitial disease associated with connective tissue disease, is associated with
an increased risk for lung cancer. Second, in animal experiments asbestos-exposed animals
that developed lung cancer only when they also developed pulmonary fibrosis. Third,
pleural plaques, a marker for asbestos exposure, have not proved a reliable marker for
increased risk for lung cancer. These investigators conclude that the issue of whether
asbestosis is a necessary precursor to asbestos-attributable lung cancer cannot be definitively
settled. Their assessment, however, was that the available data strongly support that
hypothesis. In contrast, in an extensive assessment of the medical literature Egilman and
Reinert conclude, “asbestos meets accepted criteria for causation of lung cancer in the
absence of clinical or histologic parenchymal asbestosis.”239 Their evaluation of pathologic
and epidemiologic studies resulted in the conclusion that asbestos can act as a carcinogen
independent of the presence of asbestosis.
The question of whether asbestos exposure alone or asbestosis per se represents the risk
factor for lung cancer remains an area of debate. A review of 9 epidemiologic studies by
Hessel and colleagues240 in 2005 concluded that because of the relative insensitivity of chest
radiographs and the uncertain specificity of histologic findings or CT, it is unlikely that
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
epidemiologic studies alone can determine whether asbestos-related lung cancer arises only
in the presence of pulmonary fibrosis. Recent studies have found that asbestos exposure was
associated with a relative risk for lung cancer of 3.5 after adjusting for age, smoking, and
vitamin intake.241 This risk for lung cancer associated with asbestos exposure is dosedependent but varied with the type of asbestos fiber exposure. The risk for lung cancer
seems higher for workers exposed to amphibole fibers than for those exposed to chrysotile
fibers, after adjusting for similar exposure level. The presence of interstitial fibrosis, such as
in the form of asbestosis in persons exposed to asbestos, is associated with increased
likelihood for lung cancer than patients with asbestos exposure without the associated
fibrosis.241 The study concluded that asbestosis was a better predictor of excess lung cancer
risk than measures of asbestos exposure. Another study found excess risk for lung cancer
was restricted to asbestos workers with radiographic evidence of asbestosis even though
exposures to asbestos were similar to workers without such evidence.242
From a public health perspective, however, the issue is important because of concerns about
lung cancer risk related to asbestos in the general environment. Jones and colleagues238
noted that all persons living in industrialized countries have accumulated asbestos fibers in
their lungs; in adults, the number of fibers is estimated in the millions. Asbestosis, however,
requires prolonged and intense exposure to asbestos and does not occur at the level of
everyday asbestos exposure. The risk for lung cancer from nonoccupational asbestos
exposure in the general environment is extremely low. Moreover, Hughes and Weill242 point
out that if, as postulated, asbestosis is a necessary prerequisite to the development of cancer,
the extrapolation of risk for lung cancer related to occupational asbestos exposure to the risk
from exposure to asbestos in the general environment would substantially overestimate that
risk. Another controversy in the area of asbestos and lung cancer is whether all types of
fibers are carcinogenic. Epidemiologic and experimental data suggest that amphibole fibers
are more carcinogenic than chrysotile.243 In the United States, chrysotile has been by far the
most commonly used type of asbestos. Thus, although all fibers may be carcinogenic, public
concern about low-level asbestos exposure and lung cancer should be appropriately
Tobacco smoking clearly potentiates the observed carcinogenic effect of asbestos; however,
the magnitude of the combined effect is not clear. It is also unclear whether the interaction
of these two agents results in an additive or synergistic increase in the risk for lung cancer.
When considering the addition of cigarette smoke exposure to asbestos, the risk for lung
cancer is further increased. One report found that the risk for death from lung cancer in
asbestos workers increased by 16-fold if the asbestos workers smoked more than 1 pack per
day and by 9-fold if they smoked less than 1 pack per day compared with asbestos workers
without significant smoking history.244 The relative risk for lung cancer with asbestos
exposure alone is 6-fold, with cigarette smoking alone 11-fold, but with exposure to both
asbestos and cigarette smoke, the increase may be as high as 59-fold. The nature of the
interaction in terms of relative risk, however, is again not clear. What is clear is that most
lung cancers occur in asbestos-exposed workers who smoke. Smoking cessation should,
therefore, be the most important goal of cancer prevention programs in this population, with
particular targeting of the subgroup of workers with asbestosis. It is unclear if asbestosis is a
marker for heavier exposure to asbestos or if the inflammation and fibrotic changes in the
pathogenesis of asbestosis itself is mediating the cancer process. With recognition of the
many health risks related to asbestos, its use has precipitously declined in the United States
since the 1970s (Fig. 17).237
Radon—Mining is the oldest occupation associated with lung cancer. An illness described
as a wasting pulmonary disease of miners and metal smelters has been associated with early
mortality. The cause of this illness at the time, known as miners’ phthisis, was variably
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
attributed to dust or metal exposure, tuberculosis, or even inbreeding among mining
communities. Early autopsy study performed on miners exposed to ores in the Central
European mines documented that the process was actually neoplastic. Frank245 points out
that these same mines produced the material from which Marie Curie later isolated radium.
Although the etiologic factors causing the increased lung cancer risk were originally
speculated as dust-related pneumoconioses, arsenic, or cobalt, the actual carcinogens have
been identified as radioactive materials, primarily radon and its decay products.
Radon (radon 222) is a naturally occurring decay product of radium 226, itself a decay
product of uranium 238. Uranium and radium are ubiquitous in soil and rock, although in
highly variable concentration. At usual temperatures, radon is released as a radium decay
product as an inert radioactive gas. Radon itself decays with a half-life of 3.82 days into a
series of radioisotopes, known as radon decay products (or radon daughters), that have halflives measured in seconds to minutes. These products include polonium 218 and polonium
214, which emit alpha particles. α-Radiation is highly damaging to tissues including the
respiratory epithelium. Inhalation of these radon decay products and subsequent alpha
particle emission in the lung may cause damage to cells and genetic material. Ultimately,
radon decay produces lead 210, which has a half-life of 22 years. Radon is a wellestablished carcinogen with extensive data available both as an occupational hazards as well
as exposures experienced by the general population. Evidence from epidemiologic studies of
underground miners shows a linear relationship between radon exposure and lung cancer
risk.246,247 It has been found that uranium miners in Germany exposed to radon and the
decay products have an increased risk for lung cancer, especially 15 to 24 years after
exposure and in miners younger than 55 years.248 Pooled original data from 11 cohort
studies of radon-exposed underground miners showed that almost 40% of all lung cancer
deaths may be due to radon progeny exposure, with 70% of lung cancer deaths in neversmokers and 39% in smokers. Moreover, this report concludes that 10% of all lung cancer
deaths might be due to indoor radon, with 11% of lung cancer deaths in smokers and 30% of
lung cancers in never smokers.249
There is an increased risk for lung cancer in smoking miners compared with nonsmoking
miners, with both potentially acting in an additive and potentially a synergistic and
multiplicative fashion.250,251 Smokers and nonsmoking residents of smoking households are
at increased risk for lung cancer even when radon levels are low. The combination of
exposure to the two carcinogens is worse than exposure to either alone. The numbers of lung
cancer cases reported in nonsmoking miners is small because miners have a high prevalence
of cigarette smoking. In a study of underground uranium miners from Colorado, however,
nonsmoking miners had a higher relative risk for lung cancer compared with all miners.252
Such work emphasizes the potential importance of radon as a carcinogen in the nonsmoking
population at large. Uranium mining has now ceased in the United States. Radon exposure,
however, continues to be an occupational concern in nonuranium mining and underground
work as well as in uranium and nonuranium mines around the world. In the United States,
occupational exposure to radon is legislatively controlled. Individual exposure records are
mandated for all workers in areas where the concentration of radon exceeds 0.3 work level,
with an annual cumulative exposure limit of 4 work-level month. The Biological Effects of
Ionizing Radiation IV study estimated that a 40-year exposure at this level would increase a
person’s lifetime risk for lung cancer 2-fold.253 This is at best an approximate estimate,
however. Continued longitudinal evaluation of occupationally exposed persons is needed to
improve understanding of the carcinogenic effects of radon.
In recent years, the possible risk for lung cancer in the general population associated with
radon exposure has been a concern. The National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements has identified radon and its decay products as the largest component of
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
environmental radiation to persons living in the United States. These findings in conjunction
with extrapolation of data collected in groups with high occupational radon exposure have
escalated concern about the risks of lung cancer related to domestic radon. Radon is a
ubiquitous indoor air pollutant in homes, and it has been projected that radon is the second
leading cause of lung cancer after smoking. The concentration of radon gas in an
environment varies depending on two factors: the richness of the source of radium and the
degree to which the air around that source is ventilated. Therefore, certain sites may be more
likely to have a high radon concentration, with the prototypical situation being underground
mines with poorly ventilated passageways. In a 1991 survey of homes in the United States,
Samet and colleagues254 reported a mean indoor radon level of approximately 1.25 pCi/L. In
this survey, the range of indoor radon levels was broad. Most homes had levels only slightly
higher than outdoor environmental levels, but a few had levels ranging in excess of 100 pCi/
L. The primary factor determining radon gas concentration in homes is the concentration of
radium in the soil and rock beneath those structures. Building materials, well water, and
natural gas are less common sources, usually contributing only minimally to indoor radon
concentrations. Indoor-to-outdoor air exchange may also affect radon concentration within
Broad concern for the public health implications of domestic radon exposure has been
heightened by the documented carcinogenic effect of radon in miners as described. The
potential for mutagenic and carcinogenic effects of low-level α radiation, however, has been
an area of controversy. Several studies examining lung cancer risks from domestic exposure
have been performed. In a meta-analysis of 8 such studies that included 4263 patients with
lung cancer and 6612 controls, Lubin and Boice255 concluded that greater residential
exposure levels were associated with an increased overall relative risk for lung cancer of
1.14. This conclusion is consistent with extrapolation of risk from studies performed in
miners as well as with actual calculated risks in miners with low cumulative radon exposure.
This meta-analysis did not demonstrate any greater increase in lung cancer risk than what
would be extrapolated from radon exposure in miners. Using miner-based risk models, it is
now estimated that domestic radon may account for 7000 to 36,000 lung cancer deaths in the
United States per year. There are studies that dispute this projection, however, or
demonstrate no increased risk even with high indoor domestic radon levels.256–258
Cohen227,259 concluded that use of a theoretic linear no-threshold relationship to extrapolate
known risks in miners with high radon exposure levels to risk in persons with residential
radon exposure grossly overestimates lung cancer risk. Cohen pointed out that the effects of
low-dose, low-rate radiation have never been adequately evaluated, and he contested the
assumptions inherent in extrapolation of high radon exposure in miners to domestic
situations. Hei and colleagues260 shed some insight into the effects of a single alpha particle
hit to a cell as this is most relevant to radon exposure in the general population where the
probability of multiple hits on a single cell is low given the level of environmental radon.
They found that a majority of cells transversed by a single alpha particle survive such radon
exposure. Up to 10% of cells can survive even up to 8 alpha particles traversals. Moreover,
in the cells that survive such alpha particle exposure, the frequency of gene mutation after a
single traversal was enhanced 2-fold, more with additional traversals by alpha particles.
Therefore, small numbers of bronchial epithelial cells can be at significant risk for radiationinduced mutation in the setting of environmental radon levels. Assuming that genetic
mutation may be an early step in induction of cancer, these data suggest that environmental
and indoor radon exposure does indeed constitute a significant public health problem in its
potential contribution to the development of lung cancer.
Other occupational carcinogens—Other lung carcinogens have been identified,
relating to a wide array of occupations (see Tables 3 and 4). Worldwide, there are estimated
152,000 deaths from lung cancer and approximately 1.6 million disability-adjusted life years
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
from lung cancer due to exposure to occupational exposures to carcinogens.230 Steenland
and colleagues233 from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated
that approximately 9000 to 10,000 men and 900 to 1900 women per year in the United
States develop lung cancer from exposure to occupational carcinogens. Although more than
half of these are related to asbestos, a substantial number is attributable to other exposures.
Furthermore, because these figures apply only to known carcinogens, they likely
underestimate the actual number of lung cancer cases related to occupational exposures and
represent another area in which prevention may play an important role.
PREVENTION OF LUNG CANCER
Multiple genetic, cellular, and local tissue alterations are involved in a chronic process that
leads to lung carcinogenesis. The transformation of normal cells to preneoplastic cells to
actual malignant cells involves changes that include DNA damages, genetic and epigenetic
changes and the progression to unyielded proliferation of cells and invasion outside the
boundaries of local tissues that is characterized as metastases. Exposure to various
carcinogens alters normal cells long before clinically detectable invasive malignant tumors
occur. Overwhelmingly, the major risk factor for lung cancer is cigarette smoking with a
relative risk of 20 to 25 and an attributable risk of 85% to 90%.261 The remaining risk
factors contributing to lung cancer include environmental tobacco smoke, occupational
exposure to asbestos and radon progenies, and diet. The incidence of lung cancer and
therefore its related mortality can be reduced by early detection, treatment of disease,
chemoprevention, and smoking avoidance and cessation.261 Of these, only smoking
prevention and cessation programs aimed at reducing smoking rates have been shown to
reduce lung cancer risk.
Prevention of smoking initiation prevents the sequence of events leading to cancer. Despite
intensive antismoking campaigns and widespread public awareness of the risks associated
with smoking, there seems to be a committed smoking cohort that includes a 19.8% of the
population of the United States.216 There is no question that smoking cessation can decrease
the risk for lung cancer. Peto and colleagues59 reported two large case-control studies from
approximately 1950 and from 1990 in the United Kingdom. In 1990, cessation of smoking
had nearly halved what would have been the anticipated number of lung cancer cases. Lung
cancer risk also seemed related to age at smoking cessation. For men who had stopped
smoking at ages 60, 50, 40, and 30 years, the cumulative risks of lung cancer by age 70
years were 10%, 6%, 3%, and 2%, respectively. Jemal and colleagues,262 in an evaluation of
data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics in the United States, however,
identified a slowing in the rate of decrease of the birth cohort trend in lung cancer mortality
for whites born after 1950, which they interpreted as a reflection of the impact of increasing
teenage smoking. Although there has been debate as to whether age at initiation of smoking
is an independent risk factor for lung cancer, their report supports data reported by
Wiencke263 that patients in the youngest quartile of age at smoking initiation (7–15 years of
age) have the highest levels of DNA adducts. Therefore, because a large percentage of
persons in the United States and an increasing number of persons worldwide continue to
smoke, efforts to prevent smoking initiation, particularly in children and teenagers, are of
paramount importance. Furthermore, smoking cessation as the other method of primary
prevention needs to be continually reinforced.
Smokers who quit for more than 15 years have an 80% to 90% reduction in their risk for
lung cancer compared with persons who continue to smoke. Smokers who stop smoking
even well into middle age avoid most of their subsequent risk for lung cancer, and stopping
before middle age avoids more than 90% of the risk attributable to tobacco.59 It is this
primary prevention that should be the main focus of every society to reduce the risks for
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
lung cancer. (See discussion of the prevention of lung cancer by smoking cessation by Hurt
and colleagues elsewhere in this issue.) Lung cancer risk among former smokers has been
shown to decrease with increasing duration of smoking abstinence.264 Studies have observed
a 50% or greater lung cancer risk reduction in the first decade of smoking abstinence for
former smokers compared with current smokers.265,266 In the Women’s Health Study of
women ages 55 to 69 years, there was a beneficial effect of smoking cessation among recent
and distant former smokers. There are some investigators who argue that lung cancers may
be triggered by smoking cessation.267,268 The process of lung cancer development, however,
takes place over many years. With the median interval of cessation to diagnosis of 2.7 years,
the majority of former smokers with lung cancer likely harbored cancer at the time of
smoking cessation.269 A study described spontaneous smoking cessation before lung cancer
diagnosis and challenged the widely believed notion that cessation was due to disease
symptoms26 but instead spontaneous smoking cessation represent a presenting symptom of
lung cancer itself. They speculate that lung cancers may produce factors that block or
emulate the effects of nicotine.269
The risk for lung adenocarcinoma, however, remained elevated for up to 30 years for both
former heavier and former lighter smokers, highlighting the importance of emphasis on
smoking prevention for all smokers.270 Chemoprevention has been advocated as an
approach to reduce lung cancers with the idea of treating in the early steps in lung
carcinogenesis. Chemoprevention, a termed coined initially by Sporn and colleagues271 in
1976, consists of the use of specific natural or non-natural agents, dietary or pharmacologic,
to interfere with the development of cancer cells by preventing the DNA damage that
initiates carcinogenesis or by halting the progression of premalignant cells.272 Kelley and
McCrory261 and Dragnev and colleageus273 extensively reviewed the studies related to lung
cancer chemoprevention strategies. Chemoprevention strategies can be used for primary
prevention of lung cancer in persons with known high-risk factors, for secondary prevention
in persons with disease precursors, or for tertiary prevention in persons with a prior cancer
that had been treated with curative intent. Chemoprevention has been used with some
success in breast cancer (tamoxifen), prostate cancer (finasteride), and colon cancer
(celocoxib); however, no agents have been validated as effective chemoprevention for lung
cancer.274,275 There have been various large chemoprevention of lung cancer trials testing
for various agents, such as retinol (vitamin A), β-carotene, N-acetylcysteine, and selenium;
however, none of these trials has shown evidence for efficacy.261 As discussed previously,
there is evidence to suggest that the use of β-carotene and isotretinoin for lung cancer
chemoprevention in high-risk persons may increase their risk for lung cancer, especially in
those who continue to smoke.273 Currently there are chemoprevention trials being conducted
involving agents, such as COX inhibitors, prostacyclin analogues, leukotriene modifiers,
green tea, and broccoli sprout extracts, with future trials planned using peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) agonists or mammalian target of rapamycin
inhibitors. For a successful lung cancer chemoprevention trial, incorporation of a highly
defined risk population based on known lung cancer epidemiology and reliable biomarkers
is needed. Until these chemopreventative agents are shown to be efficacious, smoking
cessation and tobacco control are the main forms of prevention.
A vast majority of lung cancer deaths are attributable to cigarette smoking, and curbing the
rates of cigarette smoking is imperative. Understanding the epidemiology and causal factors
of lung cancer can provide additional foundation for disease prevention. The role of tobacco
as an etiologic factor in lung cancer has been convincingly established. Likewise, ionizing
radiation and certain occupational exposures have been recognized as carcinogenic. At
present, the 5-year survival rate for lung cancer is only 15.6%. This is in stark contrast to the
Dela Cruz et al.
Clin Chest Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
5-year survival rates for the other leading causes of cancer death in the United States,
including cancers of the colon (66%), skin (melanoma 93%), breast (90%), and prostate
(100%).1 The absolute number of lung cancer cases continues to be alarming, with the
continued rise of lung cancer in women a particularly disturbing feature. The challenge in
the future will be to modify the impact of these identified external sources of risk while
continuing to expand knowledge of the genetic and molecular basis of carcinogenesis. Early
diagnosis of lung cancer is imperative because the 5-year survival rate for treated stage I
lung cancer is substantially better than for stages II to IV. The issue of benefit related to lung
cancer screening is being actively revisited. The American Cancer Society does not
currently recommend routine screening for lung cancer. The American College of Chest
Physicians guidelines for lung cancer screening only recommend it for persons who are part
of a clinical trial. Prior trials from the 1970s and 1980s demonstrating no reduction in cancer
mortality despite screening by chest radiograph effectively eliminated such testing. Petty276
points out that groups at high risk, specifically heavy smokers with spirometric and clinical
evidence of airflow obstruction, can be easily identified. Many clinicians think that
screening with chest radiography and sputum cytology in such groups might be justifiable.
Recent National Lung Screening Trial study shows that using low-dose CT scans to screen
for lung cancer resulted in a 20% reduction in deaths from the disease.277 As promising as
the National Lung Screening Trial results are, official guidelines on CT scan for lung cancer
screening are not available pending careful evaluation of the new data to determine who
should or should not consider undergo screen for early lung cancer detection. It is hoped that
ongoing trials evaluating chest radiography, chest CT scanning, and sputum cytology will
clarify this important controversial issue.
At present, with approximately a quarter of the American population still smoking
cigarettes, continued efforts must be directed at smoking cessation and at preventing persons
from becoming addicted to smoking. Although work in the field of lung cancer treatment
continues to be and remains important, the dismal survival rate associated with this disease
demands that the medical profession contribute to efforts aimed at limiting its primary
cause. If tobacco smoking could be eliminated, or at least severely curtailed, and if some of
the other known exposure risks of lung cancer are addressed, only then may lung cancer be
able to be returned to its designation by Adler16 at the turn of the twentieth century as
“among the rarest forms of disease.”