Searching for solutions in games and artificial
intelligence
Citation for published version (APA):
Allis, L. V. . Searching for solutions in games and artificial intelligence. [Doctoral Thesis, Maastricht
University]. Rijksuniversiteit Limburg. 
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/1994
10.26481/dis.19940923la
Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can
be important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record.
People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication,
or visit the DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above,
please follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.umlib.nl/taverne-license
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
 
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 26 Mar. 2025
Searching for Solutions in
Games and Artificial Intelligence
..ItA IJÎÏB
&rehm£; ^o.?' b<oUitk>nJ* m
Vbor Pe£ra en
i i i ^ H «Bb .;£••• . l . R .i
Searching for Solutions in
Games and Artificial Intelligence
?• T J'i'.P, ,lb .loi*"!
PROEFSCHRIFT
ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor
aan de Rijksuniversiteit Limburg te Maastricht,
op gezag van de Rector Magnificus, Prof. dr. H. Philipsen,
volgens het besluit van het College van Dekanen,
in het openbaar te verdedigen
op vrijdag 23 September 1994 om 14.00 uur
Louis Victor Allis
Promotor: Prof. dr. H.J. van den Herik
Leden van de beoordelingscommissie:
Prof. dr. P.T.W. Hudson (voorzitter)
Prof. dr. ir. J.L.G. Dietz
Prof. dr. ir. W.L. van der Poel (Technische Universiteit Delft)
Prof. dr. S.H. Tijs
Dr. E. Wattel (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
CIP-GEGEVENS KONINKLIJKE BIBLIOTHEEK, DEN HAAG
Allis, L. Victor
Searching for Solutions in Games and Artificial Intelligence /
L. Victor Allis ; [ill. by the author]. - [S.I. : s.n.]
(Wageningen : Ponsen & Looijen). - 111.
Thesis Maastricht. - With references. - With summary in Dutch
ISBN 90-9007488-0
Subject headings: artificial intelligence / games / search.
Cover design: Rob Ferwerda
i"O fi S rU IGh'KÏ 5-î
List of Tables
List of Figures
*"**3 b»a*-,tj.yanr,h.^-,
P r e f a c e
: : a , ' . « q
T ' Î - Ï ^ V •';••;:,
1 Introduction
, . . ^ - i;,,»,.
Speculations and AI
Identifying the obstacles
Uncovering hidden obstacles
The problem statement
Solving games
Thesis outline
2 Proof-Number Search
2.1 Knowledge representation and search
Pn-search: the algorithm
The AND/OR-tree model
Main assumptions of pn-search
Informal description of pn-search
The pn-search algorithm
Enhancements
Reducing memory requirements
Reducing execution time
Applying domain-specific knowledge
Transpositions
Introduction
The rules of awari
Tournament programs
The algorithms compared
Comparing the performances
Test positions
Conclusions
2.5 Related algorithms
Conspiracy-number search
3 Dependency-Based Search
3.1 Introduction
3.2 The double-letter puzzle
3.3 A formal framework for db-search
States and operators
Key classes
Traversing t/fc
Informal description of db-search
3.5 Algorithms
3.6 Test results
3.7 Applicability
4.1 Background
4.2 Rules and strategies
Threats and threat sequences
Cube types and automorphisms
4.3 Applying db-search
A single-agent search in qubic
A db-search framework for qubic
Qubic-specific enhancements to db-search
4.4 Applying pn-search
Qubic as an AND/OR tree
Enhancements
4.5 Solving qubic
-A . 5.S.Ô . . 109
Subdividing the game tree
iiârfJÛt . S.K.a . . 109
Statistics
i;:-#d3. .I.S.a . . 113
Comparison with Patashnik
Reliability
. «ficrb agsnMO 01.£.9
L'juaH i i . O
5.1 Background
5.2 Rules and strategies
5.2.1 Rules
Threats and threat trees
Human strategies
5.3 Applying db-search
A single-agent search in go-moku
A db-search framework for go-moku
Go-moku specific enhancements to db-search
Heuristically improving the efficiency of db-search . . 139
Additional requirements for standard go-moku . . . .
Applying pn-search
Go-moku as an AND/OR tree
Enhancements
5.5 Solving go-moku
Victoria's I/O
Subdividing the game tree
Statistics
Reliability
6 Which Games Will Survive?
6.2 Game properties
Perfect information
Convergence
Sudden death
Complexity
6.3 The games of the Olympic List
Connect-Four
Nine men's morris
6.3.10 Chinese chess
6.3.11 Renju
6.3.13 Scrabble
6.3.14 Backgammon
6.3.15 Bridge
6.4 Reviewing the problem statement
The research questions
The problem statement
6.5 Predictions . . . . . '
Future playing strength
The future of games
A Domain-specific solution to DLP
Samenvatting
Curriculum Vitae
Bibliography
List of Tables
2.1 Pn-search algorithm
Most-proving node selection algorithm
2.3 Proof and disproof numbers calculation algorithm
2.4 Node-development algorithm
2.5 Ancestor-updating algorithm
2.6 Pn-search algorithm (with current node)
2.7 Ancestor updating algorithm (enhanced)
2.8 Give-away chess results
2.9 Number of times an algorithm performed best of all
2.10 Comparing pairs of algorithms on easy positions
2.11 Comparing pairs of algorithms on hard positions
2.12 Test figures per algorithm
2.13 Positions per group, per grouping algorithm
2.14 Positions per group, grouped by all four algorithms
3.1 Symbols used in db-search framework
Main db-search algorithm
3.3 Dependency-stage algorithm
Dependent-children algorithm
3.5 Combination-level algorithm
3.6 Algorithm to find combinations of nodes
4.1 Number of positions in the qubic solution
4.2 Number of positions in qubic solution per depth
5.1 Nodes per tree depth in go-moku solutions
6.1 Predictions for the Olympic Games in the year 2000
List of Figures
1.1 The interdependencies of chapters
2.1 AND/OR tree with proof numbers
AND/OR tree with disproof numbers
2.3 AND/OR tree with most-proving node .ft
AND/OR DAG with practical solution
2.5 Cyclic AND/OR graph
2.6 Tree version of the graph of figure 2.5
2.7 A position with legal moves Al, C4 x 2, D19 x 7, £4 and F2 x 4. 44
2.8 1. 51 / I wins. After 1. £1? / I south must play 2. Fl
2.9 Comparison based on grouping by a-/?
2.10 Comparison based on grouping by transpositions
2.11 Comparison based on grouping by basic pn
2.12 Comparison based on grouping by stones pn
2.13 Comparison based on grouping using all four algorithms. . . . 59
3.1 Search graph after 1st dependency stage for theorem oaccadd. 86
3.2 Search graph after 1st combination stage for theorem aaccadd. 86
3.3 Search graph after 2nd dependency stage for theorem aaccadd. 87
3.4 Complete dependency-based search graph for theorem aaccodd. 87
3.5 Tree size per algorithm applied to the double-letter puzzle. . 92
4.1 Three types of groups in qubic
4.2 An 11-ply winning threat sequence
4.3 The 12 two-ply moves
4.4 Cube numbers on the qubic board
4.5 A deep winning line
5.1 Threats in go-moku
5.2 Complicated threats
LIST OF FIGURES
5.3 Winning threat variations
5.4 White defending with multiple-stone replies
5.5 White refutes a potential winning threat sequence
5.6 Global refutation of all potential winning lines
5.7 Black threatens to win by moves 1 through 7
5.8 Replies to the threat sequence of figure 5.7
5.9 Deep variations
6.1 Estimated game complexities
A.I Solution to instance aoôdcftèdcoo of DLP
The research presented in this thesis would have been impossible without the
help of many persons, whom I want to recognize here.
First of all, I would like to thank Jaap van den Herik for being my
teacher. Jaap created an environment generously providing an abundance of
learning opportunities. His efforts have been manifold, notably those aimed
at teaching me how to write up scientific research as reflected in this thesis.
Still, any mistakes remaining are my own.
Administrative complications unfortunately prevented my two auxiliary
thesis advisors, Jonathan Schaeffer and Bob Herschberg, from due mention
for their essential efforts. I would like to redress the balance. Jonathan
Schaeffer's influence on this thesis has several facets. His work on cn-search
forms the foundation on which pn-search has been built. During that process,
his constant interest in pn-search has led to an increased understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of the algorithm. Furthermore, his comments on
earlier versions of this thesis have led to major improvements, most notably in
chapter 3. Bob Herschberg has scrutinized many draft versions of this thesis.
The ensuing comments and explanations, regarding all different levels of the
art of writing, can best be compared with a chess Grand Master introducing
a young player to the many intricacies of the game. Bob's efforts have not
only greatly improved the thesis at countless points, his guidance has shown
me that much remains to be learned. For guiding me along this path, arduous
as it may have been, I owe Bob Herschberg sincere thanks.
Besides my three thesis advisors, I want to thank Maarten van der Meulen
for the research we did together. His contribution to the development of pnsearch has been indispensable. I also want to thank my room mate Dennis
Breuker for always being available to discuss new ideas and for all the games
he beat me at over lunch. I would like to thank Matty Huntjens for creating
order in the chaos of my experiments and Loek Schoenmaker for creating the
X-interface for our go-moku program. I want to thank Patrick Schoo for our
collaboration on the qubic program. Many thanks also go to Barney Pell.
Our email discussions, as well as the times we met in person have been a
source of inspiration. I would like to thank my colleagues at the Department
of Computer Science of the University of Limburg, for making me feel at
home. Furthermore, I would like to thank my colleagues from the Al-group
at the Vrije Universiteit, who enabled me to finish this thesis. Moreover, I
would like to thank the Foundation for Computer Science Research in the
Netherlands (SION) and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO) for their financial support.
Besides the efforts of my thesis advisors, the final version of this
dissertation has benefited from valuable suggestions by several people: Ingo
Althôfer, Barney Pell, Loek Schoenmaker, Mark Willems and the members
of the 6eoorde^nffscommts5ie.
Finally, I want to thank my family and friends for their stimulating
interest in my research.
Most important of all, however, has been the
continuous support and stimulation of my wife Petra and my daughter Cindy.
Victor Allis
Boukoul, July 1994
Introduction
In this thesis "intelligent" games are investigated from the perspective of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) research. In this chapter the relevance of such
investigations is discussed, leading to the formulation of a problem statement.
1.1 Speculations and AI
All through history, mankind has been fascinated by the thought of creating
machines to perform the most difficult of tasks. Men of every era have dreamt
of and speculated about achievements beyond the scope of the technology of
their time. Yet, when confronted with a machine performing tasks at an
unexplained high level, many willingly believed that science and technology
had made it possible, instead of doubting the genuineness of the machine's
results. For example:
In 1769, Wolfgang von Kempelen demonstrated his chess-playing automaton, the Tur/c, to the world . It was the first machine to create
the illusion of having mental abilities: playing chess at a high level. Among its
successes was a victory over the Prussian king Frederick the Great. For many
years, large numbers of people believed that the TurA; was a true thinking
machine, even though the technology of the 18th century did not hint at
how such a machine could have been created. For exactly that reason, many
others believed that the Turfc had to be a fraud. Nevertheless, the secret
of the small human chess-player hidden inside the Turfc was well-kept until
With the creation of modern computers, the field of Artificial Intelligence
emerged as a new focal point for speculations. Some of these speculations
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
have been made by scientists working within the field, while others have been
made by laymen, such as those working in the motion-picture industry. For
instance, movies such as 200i: .A Space Odyssey, 5tar Wars and War Games
feature computers (resp. HAL, R2-D2 and C-3PO, and WOPR) which seem
to have minds of their own. The impact of these truly artificially intelligent
entities, fictitious as they may be, on the perception of Ai research by the
public at large is considerable. Predictions presented by leading scientists in
the field reinforce the image created by movies and science-fiction authors. As
an example we refer to the Inaugural Lecture delivered by Van den Herik in
which he raised the question whether computers will be able to decide issues
of law . Irrespective of Van den Herik's estimation of
several hundreds of years necessary to create an artificial judge, the spin-off
of such speeches in terms of nation-wide coverage by newspapers, radio and
television strengthens the general public's idea that the creation of artificially
intelligent entities is within close range.
It is important to distinguish clearly between the s created the General Problem Solver, a new control
metaphor for representing and solving problems. The name of their
system led to speculations concerning the creation of a truly general
problem solver. More than three decades later AI has not produced
anything near such a goal.
2. In 1959, Samuel created his learning checkers* program which won a
game against a human master player .
From this single game, it has been wrongly concluded by many that
an artificial master checkers player had been created, while some even
believed that the game of checkers had been "solved" . Samuel's work on learning is classical within Ai but only recently
have programs begun to compete with the best human checkers players
 .
3. The medical diagnostic expert system MYCIN determines the infectious
agent in a patient's blood, and specifies a treatment for the infection
 . Despite the promise
*In this thesis we shall use the name checkers for the game played on an 8 x 8 board,
which is called checkers in the United States of America, and draughts in Great Britain.
We reserve the term draughts for the game played on a 10 x 10 board.
1.2 IDENTIFYING THE OBSTACLES
created by successes such as MYCIN, the development of expert systems
has been hindered by many problems, such as the knowledge-acquisition
bottleneck . Speculations regarding machines replacing doctors of medicine so far lack a scientific basis.
The three examples illustrate that AI research in the last decades of
the twentieth century is not directly involved in creating true intelligence.
Instead, many of the stumbling blocks on the road to such a goal are now
themselves the main subject of investigation. Only when these obstacles are
removed may we start looking for the goal implicit in the name of the field.
Identifying the obstacles
It is believed by many scientists that the main hurdle to be cleared when
creating artificial experts in practical domains is common-sense fcnoiuZedpe
 . Where humans are extraordinarily well equipped to acquire
common-sense knowledge with their five senses, computers are deficient in
this area. Despite efforts in areas such as computer vision, robotics, speech
processing etc., no computer program exists which exhibits even a basic
understanding of the real world . This lack of knowledge severely
handicaps computers in becoming experts in any real-world domain, such
as medicine, law, manufacturing etc. A direct consequence is the failure
in dealing with natural languages. In conversations between human beings
many things are left unsaid without hindering the participants. The gaps
are filled by common-sense knowledge and sentences are interpreted within
the context of our world view.
Many Ai researchers thus believe that
common-sense knowledge is a vital ingredient for natural language processing
 .
Another area where nature has been generous to humans is learning.
Humans continuously learn from their experiences, much unlike computer
programs. Whereas learning is an automatic built-in feature of infants, it is
difficult to realize in computer programs, despite the efforts spent on machine
learning .
The lack of common-sense knowledge and of learning have a large impact
on what computers can and cannot do. Besides these known obstacles,
we may wonder whether other, hidden obstacles hinder progress in AI.
For instance, some argue that intuition is a human quality which cannot
be implemented , while others believe that intuition is
simply a name for rule-based behavior where the rules are not accessible
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
to consciousness . Thus, while some consider intuition to be
unattainable for computers, others stress that to implement intuition, all we
need to do is to uncover the rules at its basis. In general, it is of interest to
know as many of the main obstacles hindering progress in AI as possible. It
remains in dispute whether intuition should be regarded as such.
Uncovering hidden obstacles
Some new obstacles for Al research may become visible only after we
have successfully dealt with the obstacles apparent today. Others may be
discovered by concentrating on a set of domains where known obstacles play
no role of importance, such as the domain of games. Many games, such as
chess, checkers, go and bridge possess the property that they create a micro
world , in which common-sense knowledge and natural
languages are not relevant. Instead, a small set of rules determines all possible
states within the micro world. And yet, in most of these games, humans are
(still) superior to their artificial counterparts. The game of go is a striking
example: today's strongest go programs have reached a mere novice level.
By investigating a game, we envision two possible outcomes.
• If we achieve a playing strength sufficient to defeat the best human
players, analysis of the means which led to this improvement may
uncover new Al techniques.
• If the playing strength keeps falling short, even after prolonged
attempts, of that of the best human players, a better understanding
of the problems inherent in playing the game at a high level may be
We remark that the possibility remains that the results do not lead to
progress (i.e., to new AI techniques or a better understanding of the inherent
problems). In the first case, the improvement may be due to entirely domainspecific techniques which cannot be generalized to Al techniques . In the second case, we may find that we have difficulty in isolating
the problems from our failed attempts. Although a lack of progress may
occur in some cases, by investigating a representative set of games in this
way the probability increases that new AI techniques are developed or insight
into problems hindering progress is obtained.
If similar problems are found in several different games, it may help us
to uncover obstacles which are likely to exist in real-world domains as well.
1.4 THE PROBLEM STATEMENT
It could also lead to an understanding of the restrictions of the techniques
applied. We list two examples of this last phenomenon.
• After the rapid increase in playing strength of computer chess programs
in the seventies and eighties, it was suggested that an increase of
the search depth by an extra ply (i.e., a move by one player), was
equivalent to an increase in playing strength of approximately 200
ELO points . Now that progress in playing strength
has slowed down, investigations in the relation between search depth
and playing strength for checkers indicate that the added strength per
ply diminishes for deeper searches . Furthermore,
positions have occurred in tournament games where a search of 60 ply
would be necessary to stand up against human knowledge . Because such searches are by far out of reach of current
technology, it has become clear that added knowledge is a vital
ingredient to world-champion level checkers and chess programs.
• In the early days of AI research, many new weak methods (i.e., using
little domain-specific knowledge) were demonstrated to succeed on
toy problems . It was believed that through deeper
search the results on toy problems could be extrapolated to real-world
problems. This has proved to be more difficult than anticipated. Using
sufficient domain knowledge, state spaces can be reduced such that
problems become solvable. However, when vital knowledge is excluded
the explosion of possibilities makes many such problems intractable.
We postulate that when investigating sufficiently complex games with the
goal of outperforming human beings, success is likely to yield new AI
techniques as their products, while failure presents a better understanding
of problems and obstacles encountered. This observation is the basis of the
problem statement presented in the next section.
1.4 The problem statement
In this thesis, we consider games which have the following five properties.
Examples of games which have these properties include chess, checkers, go
and bridge.
1. Ttuo-p/aj/er Most games are two-player games, as opposed to zeroplayer games ), one-player
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
games , Rubik's cube and peg solitaire
 ) and multi-player games ).
2. Zero-sum. These are games where one player's loss is the other player's
gain. The prisoners' dilemma when considered as a
game is not zero-sum.
3. A^on-tn'via/. A best playing strategy should not be trivially establishable through enumeration or mathematical analysis.
Examples of
trivial games are tic-tac-toe and nim.
4. We//-Jfcnou;n. These are games which have been played by large numbers
of people, resulting in the game being known in several countries. This
excludes many mathematical games, and obscure variations on wellknown games (such as give-away chess).
5. i2e<7mrin<7 sifciZ/. Some games serve mainly as a pastime, not requiring
much skill. The more experienced player has no real advantage in those
games, except maybe against novices (examples are many simple card
games played by children). The games included here should exhibit a
strong relation between skill and winning chances. Such a relation also
exists in some games which are influenced by a chance element, such
as backgammon and bridge, which are thus included.
The first two properties (two-player and zero-sum) are selected to ensure
that cooperation between players can be excluded from the investigations.
The third property (non-trivial) is necessary for us to have something to
investigate. The last two properties (well-known and requiring skill) ensure
that the results of our investigations can be checked (for instance against
strong human players) and evaluated.
To be more specific, we list the set of games played at the Computer
Olympiads which fulfill all these criteria . This list of games will henceforth
be called the O/ympic
awari, backgammon, bridge, chess, Chinese chess, checkers, connectfour, draughts, go, go-moku, nine men's morris, othello, qubic, renju,
We do not claim that the fifteen games of the Olympic List are the
only games satisfying the five properties listed above. However, as long as
1.5 SOLVING GAMES
sufficient challenges exist for the listed games, there is no need to try to be
We are now ready to present our proi/em statement, consisting of two
questions.
Through an investigation of games of the Olympic List,
1. which new Ai techniques can be developed and
2. which obstacles for AI research will emerge?
The goal of this thesis is to find an answer to these questions. To this
end, we list below three detailed research questions, distinguishing between
performance levels of systems which may be the result of investigating games
of the Olympic List.
1. Which games can be soZued (see section 1.5) and what techniques may
contribute to the solution?
2. For which games can we create programs outperforming the best human
players in the near future, and what techniques contribute to their
performance?
3. In which games will humans continue to reign in the near future (say,
at least the next decade) and what are the main obstacles to progress
for computer programs?
Our attempts to answer these three questions have guided the research efforts
described in this thesis.
Before we give an outline of the thesis in section 1.6, we must clarify the
term soiled in relation to games. As there is no consensus about this term,
we will give a definition in section 1.5.
Solving games
Stating that a game is so/ued usually indicates in common parlance that
a property with regard to the outcome of the game has been determined.
Even for two-player zero-sum games with perfect information (see section
6.2), at least three different definitions could be meant, which we name uftratueaMy so/ved, weafcty so/uerf and stronp/y so/red. The first two terms have
been suggested by Paul Colley, while the third term has been suggested by
Donald Michie.
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
ultra-weakly solved For the initial position(s), the game-theoretic value
has been determined.
weakly solved For the initial position(s), a strategy has been determined to
obtain at least the game-theoretic value of the game, for both players,
under reasonable resources.
strongly solved For all legal positions, a strategy has been determined to
obtain the game-theoretic value of the position, for both players, under
reasonable resources.
We remark that the reasonable resources mentioned may be a subject of
discussion. The size of the resources is meant only to give an approximate
indication of the time and computing equipment allowed for reproducing a
solving strategy. Without these restrictions, it could be argued that, for
instance, chess could be weakly solved. As a strategy to solve chess, an
a-/? search through the full game tree suffices. The reasonable resources
mentioned should typically allow the use of a state-of-the-art computer and
several minutes of computation time per move.
The definition of ultra-weakly solved indicates that, at the start of the
game, it is known what the outcome of the game would be with optimal play
by both sides. It is not necessarily known how either player can achieve the
optimal outcome. The game of hex, for instance, is known to be a first-player
win on all diamond-shaped boards, although no constructive strategy has
been determined. The game-theoretic value has been established by noting
that the game does not permit draws and that having an extra move cannot
be a disadvantage. Thus, since the first player does not need to lose, hex is
a first-player win. This reasoning has not (yet) led to a winning strategy for
the first player, which makes it of little use to practical play.
It is well-known that tic-tac-toe is a game-theoretic draw. A player who
has weakly solved tic-tac-toe only needs to be able to achieve a draw, in every
game she^ plays. It is not necessary for her to win against a non-optimally
playing opponent, when she is given a winning opportunity.
The definition of strongly solved demands a strategy not just from the
initial position(s), but from all legal positions. Thus, against a non-optimally
playing opponent, each mistake must be capitalized upon. Examples of
strongly-solved games are tic-tac-toe, nim and many chess
'in contexts where the gender of a non-neutral third person is irrelevant, we will always
use "she" and "her" to avoid the more cumbersome "s(he)" and "her/his".
1.6 THESIS OUTLINE
endgames .
Note, however, that for games where the program has shown the game to
be a win for the stronger side, it is not guaranteed to exhibit any skill when
playing the weaker side. The guaranteed performance level, i.e., ensuring
that no single match is lost, is in our opinion sufficient to declare a game
In this thesis, we consider a game $o/t>ed when it is at least weakly solved.
Thesis outline
In 1988, research performed for a Master's thesis led to solving
connect-four, published as . Inspired by this result,
we decided to start with the first research question, i.e., determining which
other games of the Olympic List can be solved, and identifying techniques
which contribute to their solution. In particular, of the fourteen remaining
games of the Olympic List (i.e., excluding connect-four), we have selected
four which seemed eligible for solution. These games are awari, qubic, nine
men's morris and go-moku. Awari and nine men's morris are selected for their
relatively small state-space complexity (see chapter 6), while qubic and gomoku are selected since human experience indicates that the first player
has an overwhelming advantage. As Ralph Gasser has been investigating
nine men's morris concurrently with our research , we have
concentrated on awari, qubic and go-moku.
During investigation of these games, two new search techniques have been
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
2. Proof-number
l.lfflroductioa
6 Which Games
will Survive?
3. Dependencybased Much
S. Go-Moku
Figure 1.1: The interdependencies of chapters
developed, viz. proo/-numôer searc/i (pn-search) and dependency-based searc/i
(db-search). While db-search forms the basis for solving qubic and go-moku,
pn-search is an important contributing factor. Although our investigations
showed that applying pn-search to awari leads to promising results, awari has
not (yet) been solved. The results of our investigation of the first research
question are described in chapters 2 through 5.
In chapter 6 the second and third research questions are investigated
leading to an evaluation of the problem statement.
The thesis is organized as follows. It consists of four parts, the first of
which is this introduction. The second part consists of chapters 2 (Proof-
Number Search) and 3 (Dependency-Based Search), containing descriptions
of the two search techniques developed in the course of this research.
Both techniques are presented independently of their application to games.
Chapters 2 and 3 can each be read independently of other parts of the thesis
and are of special interest to those researchers who would like to apply the
techniques to their own research domains.
The third part of the thesis consists of chapters 4 (Qubic) and 5
(Go-Moku), each describing the solution to the game under investigation.
Although it is recommended to read chapter 2 before any of the game-specific
chapters, proof-number search is not essential foreknowledge. Dependencybased search forms the basis for solving qubic and go-moku. It is, therefore,
necessary to read chapter 3 before starting on chapters 4 and 5.
1.6 THESIS OUTLINE
The fourth part of the thesis consists of chapter 6 (Which Games Will
Survive?), in which all games of the Olympic List are investigated. For each
game, we determine the value of four game properties, describe the state
of the art in game-playing programs, list the techniques applied and the
obstacles to progress. Next we evaluate our research with respect to the
problem statement. Predictions regarding the future of games conclude the
chapter. The fourth part of the thesis can be read independently of the
second and third parts, although it is recommended that the reader first
obtains some knowledge of the contents of these parts.
The interdependencies between the chapters are pictured in figure 1.1. An
arrow from chapter A to chapter 5 indicates that A is essential foreknowledge
A dashed arrow between chapters A and B indicates that it is
recommended, but not essential, to read A before 5.
ari? baa !>^qj0!3Jiii«ftÇ:v< a{ .t: if'
i V : - ; '
". , ; > ; • ' • .
iï? i=;4.i«Jj)i)iii U
Proof-Number Search
2.1 Knowledge representation and search
Problem solving is one of the corner-stones of Ai research. Within problem
solving, we distinguish two subprocesses: choosing a knowledge re-presentation and performing a search. We remark that the term knowledge
representation is meant to include analysis, conceptualization and formalisation. A well-chosen representation may considerably reduce the amount of
search needed to solve a problem, while a badly chosen representation may
render solving a problem (virtually) impossible. As an example we present
the mu-puzzle .
A production system consisting of four rewriting rules generates
theorems consisting of the letters M, I and U. In each production,
x and y denote any string of letters.
1. il —> xiu
2. MX -> MXX
3. xllly ->• xUj/
4. xUUy —> xy
The goal of the mu-puzzle is to determine whether MU is a theorem
in the above system, given that MI is the only axiom.
In a first attempt to solve the puzzle, we represent a theorem
simply by its string of letters. The rewriting rules are used to
expand nodes of the search tree, where each node represents
a theorem. We are now faced with a tree-search problem: to
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
find a path of rewriting rules leading from the initial state Ml to
the goal state MU. A suitable tree-search algorithm is selected
to perform the search, such as breadth-first search or depthfirst search. To select a search algorithm, various criteria may
be applied. For instance, breadth-first search guarantees that
the first solution found is also the shortest solution . A disadvantage of breadth-first search is that it requires
more working memory than an algorithm such as depth-first
search . Generally, each of the applicable search
algorithms has its own advantages and disadvantages. In case no
solution exists, these algorithms have the disadvantage that the
search will not terminate, as the set of theorems is infinite.
Instead of concentrating on the selection of the best possible
search algorithm, we may first try to optimize the chosen
representation.
For the mu-puzzle, a better representation
involves an extra item of knowledge per theorem. This Boolean
item, which we name ISTRIPLEI, indicates whether the theorem's
total number of is is a multiple of three. We can now verify
that each of the four rewriting rules creates new theorems with
ISTRIPLEI'S value equal to that of the theorem it is created
from. The observation that Ml (false) and MU (true) have unequal
ISTRIPLEI values is sufficient to prove that MU is not a theorem.
In the mu-puzzle example, it was possible to eliminate all search by
enhancing the representation of the puzzle. It illustrates that choosing
a representation should have the highest priority when solving problems.
Choosing a knowledge representation in problem solving is mostly domainspecific. Even though general techniques (such as abstraction, here applied
to the mu-puzzle) exist, their successful application remains the fruit of a
thorough understanding of the domain under investigation.
For problems more complex than tl. mu-puzzle, a good representation
generally does not eliminate all search; it merely reduces the size of the state
space to, hopefully, manageable proportions. It is then important to select a
search algorithm which will find a solution, if it exists, in an efficient manner.
The efficient manner is to be understood here in a broad sense, including
programming time, calculation time and the required amount of working
memory. The weighting of these resources depends on the circumstances in
which the problem has to be solved.
2.1 KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION AND SEARCH
Thus, the domain-specific task of finding a suitable knowledge representation is performed in combination with the selection of a search algorithm
well-suited for the state space. In the course of a considerable number of
years of research in Ai, many different search algorithms have been developed.
We distinguish between several categories of search problems, such as those
represented by single-agent trees, AND/OR trees and game trees . While the category that a search problem belongs to restricts our
choice of search algorithms, wi</im each category several search algorithms
exist, each with its own characteristics. These characteristics determine the
scope of problems for which the algorithm may be preferred over the other
algorithms within the same category. We remark that the division into search
categories is not strict. An example relevant to this thesis is that two-valued
game-tree searches can also be performed by search algorithms for AND/OR
For the category of game trees, many different search algorithms have
been developed. We name the best known algorithms and mention the type
of search problems for which we believe they are best suited:
• By far the best-known game-tree search algorithm is a-/3 search .
It is a directoona/ (also known as dept/i-/trs£)
algorithm, having working-memory requirements linear in the depth
of the tree investigated. Knuth and Moore have shown that
Q-/3 search achieves optimal efficiency on perfectly-ordered uniform
trees. Application of iterative deepening to a-/3 search ensures for
many application domains that strongly-ordered trees are traversed,
resulting in close-to-optimal efficiency on uniform trees .
• Sss* is a 6es£-/ïrs . It will never
investigate a node pruned by a-/3 search . Second, the reduction in the number
of nodes searched compared with iterative-deepening a-/? search does
not outweigh the cost of maintaining the search tree (or open list) in
working memory for most practical applications. However, if the cost
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
of heuristic evaluation is large compared to the cost of traversing the
tree, or if obtaining a good ordering through iterative deepening for
a-/3 search is difficult for the domain under investigation, SSS* may be
an alternative to be preferred.
• Another best-first search algorithm is B* . It depends
on the availability of reliable heuristic estimates for the upper and lower
bounds on the value of internal nodes. For chess, the algorithm has been
implemented in HITECH, but it remains unclear whether for this domain
sufficiently accurate upper and lower bounds can be estimated to result
in better move selection than by algorithms based on a-/3 search.
• Conspiracy-number search (cn-search) is a best-first search algorithm which determines the cardinality
of the smallest sets flf (terminal) nodes which must change their value
in order to change the value of the root. Once this cardinality grows
beyond a pre-specified bound, it is considered unlikely that the root
value will change, and the search is terminated. Cn-search has shown
its merits in tactical chess positions , but has failed
in a comparison with a-/3 search in a tournament chess program . Cn-search has as disadvantages the large amount
of bookkeeping necessary at each node, and the subsequent amount of
working memory required to perform the search. One of the ideas
underlying cn-search is that the distribution of the values over the
leaf nodes of the tree, and the shape of the tree, should influence the
selection of the next node to be investigated.
The last aspect of cn-search, using the shape of the tree to guide the search,
has been singled out in proo/-num6er searc/i (pn-search), which can be seen
as a successor to conspiracy-number search. In this chapter we present pnsearch, which has the exploitation of non-uniformity as its main theme. Pnsearch will be presented as an AND/OR tree search algorithm, even though
all applications discussed in this thesis concern game trees.
We introduce in section 2.2 the pn-search algorithm for AND/OR trees.
In section 2.3, several enhancements to the algorithm are presented. These
include techniques to reduce execution time and usage of working memory,
examples of the application of domain-specific knowledge, and a discussion
regarding transpositions within pn-search. Results of applying pn-search to
a practical domain, the game of awari, are presented in section 2.4, where
its performance is compared with those of sophisticated implementations of
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
a-/? search. Finally, section 2.5 contains a discussion of related algorithms,
analyzing the similarities and differences between pn-search and conspiracynumber search, SSS*, B* and A*. , a single-agent
search algorithm, has been included in this list because of its similarities
with pn-search.)
2.2 Pn-search: the algorithm
In this section we introduce pn-search for AND/OR trees. First, in section
2.2.1 we define our tree model and a precise terminology for the remainder
of the chapter. Then, the main assumptions of pn-search are described in
section 2.2.2 and the notions of proof numbers and disproof numbers are
introduced. Next, section 2.2.3 informally discusses the order in which the
nodes of a pn-search tree should be created. Finally, an algorithm in pseudocode for pn-search is presented in section 2.2.4.
The AND/OR-tree model
We define our tree model as follows. In the tree, there are two types of nodes:
AND nodes and OR nodes. We assume that each node can be eua/uated,
leading to one of three values: false, true or unknown. Please note the
difference between nodes which have not yet been evaluated (thus whose
evaluation value is not yet known) and nodes which /lave been evaluated and
obtained the value unknown.
Nodes with evaluation value unknown can be expanded. When a node
J is expanded, a non-empty set of c/izW nodes is created, each having J as
parent node. A node which has been expanded is an mterTiai node. There are
three kinds of Zea/nodes, i.e., nodes without children. First, a node evaluated
to false or true is a terTnma/ node. Second, a node which has evaluated to
unknown is called a /ranker node. Third, a node which has not yet been
evaluated is also called a /rentier node.
There are two tree-creation procedures, which we name immediate evaluation and de/ayed equation. When applying immediate evaluation each node
in the tree is immediately evaluated upon creation. The tree is initialized by
creating (and evaluating) the root. Then, as long as the tree has not been
solved, at each step a frontier node is selected (which, since it has already
been evaluated, must have value unknown), expanded and all its children are
immediately evaluated. This process of expanding a node 7 and evaluating
J's children is called deue/opino node J. In case of delayed evaluation, each
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
node is only evaluated when it is selected, instead of at creation. Thus,
the tree is initialized by creating the root (without evaluation). Then, at
each step a frontier node J is selected (which is guaranteed not to have
been evaluated) and evaluated. If the evaluation value of J is unknown, J is
expanded (without evaluating J's children). Here the process of evaluating
a node, possibly followed by its expansion, is also called deue/opinp node J.
We remark that the terms /ronger node and developing each have a double
meaning. However, once the tree-creating procedure has been specified, both
terms are unique. This approach has been chosen so that pn-search can be
explained independently of the tree-creation procedure.
The value of an expanded internal AND node .4 is determined as follows: if
i4 has at least one child with value false, ^4 also has value false; otherwise, if 4
has at least one child with value unknown, A has value unknown; otherwise 4
has value true. The value of an expanded internal OR node O is determined
as follows: if O has at least one child with value true, 0 also has value
true; otherwise, if 0 has at least one child with value unknown, 0 has value
unknown; otherwise 0 has value false. A tree is so/ved if the value of its root
has been established as either true or false. A solved tree with value true is
called proved, while a solved tree with value false is called disproved.
Throughout this chapter, we depict AND nodes by circles and OR nodes
by squares in each of the figures. Furthermore, AND nodes can be recognized
by the arcs linking their children, in accordance with standard conventions
for depicting AND/OR trees.
Main assumptions of pn-search
Best-first search algorithms select a best node (according to some criterion)
in the search tree, develop the node and then update such information as is
necessary for the algorithm to continue. The distinguishing factor of each
best-first search algorithm is the manner in which a node is characterized as
For pn-search we assume that we have no knowledge regarding a pnori
probable values of nodes, nor knowledge regarding correlations between node
values, although this knowledge could be added to the program (see section
2.3.3). Instead, only the position of a node in the tree and its possible
contribution to solving the tree is considered.
First, we formulate the assumptions of pn-search, implying the above.
Second, we present some definitions to aid in the description of pn-search.
Third, using an example, we illustrate that some nodes are better in their
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
contribution to solving the tree than others. Finally, we summarize our
Assumptions
While searching AND/OR trees, we make the following two assumptions.
1. The probability distribution of values (true, false, unknown) for a
frontier node is unknown.
2. The probability distribution of values (true, false, unknown) for a
frontier node is equal throughout the tree.
Even though these assumptions mean that we cannot distinguish between
two nodes by looking at them independently of their context, nevertheless
their position in the tree may influence their expected contribution to solving
Definitions
When searching AND/OR trees, developing a single frontier node is often
insufficient to solve the tree. In most cases, several frontier nodes must
obtain the value true to prove the tree or the value false to disprove it. This
observation is reflected in definitions 2.1 and 2.2.
Definition 2.1 For any AND/OR free T a se£ o//ron<ier nodes 5 is a proof
set i/ proving aZZ nodes wiMin 5 proves T.
Definition 2.2 For any AND/OR free T a set o//ronfier nodes 5 is a disproof
set i/ disproving aZZ nodes wiMin 5 disproves T.
Since it will turn out that we shall use the cardinality of proof and disproof
sets, these are given names in definition 2.3 and 2.4.
Definition 2.3 For any AND/OR free T, Me proof number o/ T is de/ïned
as Me cardinality o/ Me smaZZesÊ proo/ se£ o/ T.
Definition 2.4 For any AND/OR free T, Me disproof number o/ T is de/med
as Me cardinaZity o/ Me smaZZesi disproo/ se< o/ T.
CHAPTER 2. PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Figure 2.1: AND/OR tree with proof numbers.
To illustrate how the context can be used to distinguish between nodes, we
have depicted an AND/OR tree in figure 2.1.
With each node, we have associated the proo/ number of the subtree with
that node as its root, as defined in definition 2.3.
All frontier nodes (£, F, /, L, M, Wand /> in figure 2.1) have proof number
1. This follows from the fact that only the node itself needs to obtain the
value true to prove the whole subtree (consisting of only the node itself). A
terminal node with value true (node if in figure 2.1) has proof number 0, since
its value has already been proved. Terminal nodes with value false (node 0
in figure 2.1), have proof number oo, since there is no smallest finite set of
nodes which can undo the fact that the node is disproved. Internal AND nodes
obtain the value true only if all their children are proved. Thus, internal AND
nodes (5, Z), G, /f and J in figure 2.1) have proof numbers equal to the sum
of the proof numbers of their children. For internal OR nodes it suffices to
prove one of their children, in order to have the parent obtain the value true.
Thus, for internal OR nodes (;4 and C in figure 2.1) we establish the proof
number by taking the minimum of the proof numbers of their children.
Root 4 of the tree in figure 2.1 has proof number 1. This indicates that
somewhere in the tree a frontier node exists, which, by obtaining the value
true, would complete the proof of the tree. The path from the root to this
frontier node can be found by examining the proof numbers. To prove the
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
Figure 2.2: AND/OR tree with disproof numbers.
root (an OR node), it is sufficient to prove one of its children. Child C has
the smallest proof number among the three children of .4. The frontier node
we are looking for thus lies within subtree C In the same way, node G is
preferred over node //, since G's proof number is equal to 1, while /f s proof
number equals 2. To prove node G (an AND node), it is necessary to prove
all its children. Child A' has already been proved, thus only a proof of node
L is needed, which is the frontier node we have been looking for.
We could now proceed and develop node L, in an attempt to prove
the tree. Instead, we will first determine which nodes may contribute to
a potential disproof. In figure 2.2 we have depicted the same tree as in figure
2.1. With each node, we have associated the disproof number of the subtree
with that node as root, as defined in definition 2.4.
The disproof numbers behave analogously to proof numbers, interchanging the roles of AND nodes and OR nodes, and the cardinalities 0 and
oo. Thus, frontier nodes (£, F, /, L, M, iVand P in figure 2.2) have disproof
number 1. A terminal node with value false (node 0 in figure 2.2) has disproof
number 0, since it is already disproved. Terminal nodes with value true (node
A" in figure 2.2) have disproof number oo. Internal AND nodes (5, Z), G, i/and
J in figure 2.2) have disproof numbers equal to the minimum of the disproof
numbers of their children. Internal OR nodes (^4 and C in figure 2.2) have
disproof numbers equal to the sum of the disproof numbers of their children.
Root .4 of the tree in figure 2.2 has disproof number 3. This means that
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
at least 3 nodes must obtain the value false to disprove the tree. Analysis of
the tree shows that it involves one of the nodes £ and F, node L and one of
the nodes M and iV.
The previous paragraphs illustrate that proof numbers and disproof numbers
can be used to find nodes within the smallest subset of frontier nodes in the
tree which, by all obtaining the same value, solve the tree.
From the assumptions underlying pn-search it follows that the probability
that all nodes in a proof set obtain the value true increases with decreasing
cardinality of the proof set (except in the trivial cases that the probability
of evaluation to true equals either 0 or 1). As a result the total number
of node developments needed to solve a tree is (on the average) reduced by
first focusing on potential solutions involving a small number of nodes (i.e.
subtrees with small proof and/or disproof numbers), before trying to find
solutions known to require a larger number of nodes. This expectation is the
basis for the pn-search algorithm as described in the following sections.
Informal description of pn-search
Pn-search continuously tries to solve the tree by focusing on the potentially
shortest solution, i.e., consisting of the least number of nodes. At each step of
the search, a node which is part of the potentially shortest solution available
is selected and developed. After the development of a node, its proof number
and disproof number are established anew. Then, the proof and disproof
numbers of its ancestors are updated. This process of selection, development
and ancestor updating is repeated until either the tree is solved or we have
run out of resources (time or working memory).
The main issue yet to be resolved is to decide (1) to select a node in the
smallest proo/set, or (2) to select a node in the smallest disproo/ set. We will
show in the following paragraphs that, maybe surprisingly, we can always do
both at the same time. This results in the definition of a most-proving node
as in definition 2.5.
Definition 2.5 for any AND/OR tree T, a most-proving node o/ T is a
/ronher node o/ T, u//iic/i bu obtaining </ie vo/ue true reduces T's proo/ number
bj/ .?, tu/ii/e by ofttammp t/ie va/ue false reduces 7"s disproo/ number by i.
Definition 2.5 assumes that within each unsolved tree T a frontier node
exists, which is an element of the intersection of a smallest proof set and of a
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
smallest disproof set of T. A stronger claim is that eac/i pair consisting of a
smallest proof set and a smallest disproof set has a non-empty intersection.
We prove this stronger claim by induction.
For each frontier node J the singleton set containing J is both the only
proof set, and the only disproof set. The intersection of these two sets
contains node J and thus is not empty.
• /nducizon
Suppose that the assumption has been proved for all children Ji, .., ./„
of an internal AND node J. To disprove •/, only one child needs to be
disproved. Let disp( Ji) be any disproof set of J^ which has minimal
cardinality among all disproof sets of children of 7. Then disp(Jx) is also
a minimal disproof set of 7. To prove 7, all children must be proved.
Let prove(Ji) (1 < i < n) be arbitrary minimal proof sets for each
of the children J^. Then U"=i prove(Jj) is a minimal proof set of •/,
which we name prove(J). Thus disp(Ji) is a minimal disproof set of
J, and prove( Ji) is contained in a minimal proof set of J. As disp(Jx)
and prove(Ji) are minimal disproof and proof sets of Ji, they have a
non-empty intersection according to the induction assumption. Thus
disp(7) and prove(J) have a non-empty intersection.
The proof for internal OR nodes proceeds analogously.
We conclude that there is no conflict of strategies between trying to prove
or to disprove the tree: by repeatedly selecting a most-proving node, both
strategies are executed simultaneously, without one strategy delaying the
other. How to select the most-proving node using proof and disproof numbers
is illustrated with an example tree.
Below each node of the tree depicted in figure 2.3, we have depicted its
proof number and disproof number (in that order). Thus, the least number
of nodes which must be developed to prove the tree is 3. The same number
of nodes is needed to disprove the tree.
First, let us analyze the effort necessary to disprove the tree. As node A is
an OR node, it will only obtain value false if both children obtain value false.
In other words, both children must be solved (with value false) to disprove
the tree. Thus, in both subtrees frontier nodes exist which are part of the
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Figure 2.3: AND/OR tree with most-proving node
smallest disproof set of .4. Second, let us look at the least number of node
developments needed to prove the tree. For an OR node it is sufficient to
have one child with value true to prove the OR node. In other words, only
one child needs to be solved (with value true) to prove the tree. The proof
number of child 5 (3) is one less than the proof number of child C (4). Thus,
all frontier nodes of a smallest proof set lie within subtree 5. We conclude
that aH most-proving nodes lie within subtree JB.
With respect to subtree 5 an analogous analysis applies. However, since
node 5 is an AND node, the roles of proof number and disproof number are
interchanged. Thus, to prove 5, both its children must be proved. Therefore,
in both subtrees Z? and £, frontier nodes exist which are part of the smallest
proof set of 5. To disprove 5, it is sufficient to disprove one child. Node 5
has disproof number 2, one less than disproof number 3 of node Z). Thus, all
frontier nodes of a smallest disproof set lie within subtree £. We conclude
that o/i most-proving nodes lie within subtree £.
The selection within OR node £ is based on the disproof numbers, as
it was for node J4, and thus subtree N is selected. Within AND node JV no
preference exists on the basis of the disproof numbers and both Z2 and S
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
procedure ProofNumberSearch(root);
Evaluate(root);
SetProofAndDisproofNumbers(root);
while root.proof ^ 0 and root.disproof / 0 and
ResourcesAvailable() do
mostProvingNode := SelectMostProving(root);
DevelopNode(mostProvingNode) ;
UpdateAncestors(mostProvingNode)
if root.proof = 0 then root.value := true
elseif root.disproof = 0 then root.value := false
else root.value := unknown
Table 2.1: Pn-search algorithm.
are most-proving nodes according to definition 2.5. In such cases we will,
somewhat arbitrarily, always select the leftmost child. Thus, .ft is selected to
be developed.
To summarize, the selection of a most-proving node is based on proof
numbers among the children of OR nodes and on disproof numbers among
the children of AND nodes.
The pn-search algorithm
In this section the algorithmic details of pn-search are presented in pseudocode, except for three domain-specific procedures and functions. In each of
these three cases, the code for the implementation depends on the domain
of investigation.
The goai of each of these three, however, is domainindependent and has been specified below.
1. EWuaiefnode,). Assigns to node.value one of the values true, false and
2. GenerateA/JCTiiWrenfnode,).
Assigns to node.numberOfChildren the
number of children of the node, and to node.childrenfl..node.number-
OfChildren] (pointers to) the children themselves.
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
function SelectMostProving(node);
while node.expanded do
case node.type of
• ' • • • • •
while node.children[i].proof # node.proof do
while node.children[i].disproof ^ node.disproof do
node := node.children[i]
return node
Table 2.2: Most-proving node selection algorithm.
3. .ResourceSi4i>aiia&Je(9. Returns a Boolean value which indicates whether
sufficient resources are available to continue the search. This function
will typically test the availability of working memory.
The algorithm of table 2.1 encodes the main loop of pn-search. The root
of the tree is created and evaluated. Then, at each iteration, a most-proving
node is selected and developed, followed by updating the proof and disproof
numbers of the most-proving node and its ancestors.
The algorithm terminates when the tree is solved, or the program runs
out of resources. We remark that there is a choice between implementing
immediate eva/ua(ion and de/oj/ed euoiuaiton. The main difference between
these two methods is the amount of information available within trees of
the same size: with immediate evaluation, all nodes in the tree have been
evaluated, while with delayed evaluation the frontier nodes have not been
evaluated. Due to the extra information, under the same working-memory
limitations, immediate evaluation is more often able to solve a tree than
delayed evaluation. In rare circumstances, however, delayed evaluation may
be preferable. Examples of these circumstances include trees with a large
2.2 PN-SEARCH: THE ALGORITHM
SetProofAndDisproofNumbers(node);
if node.expanded then
case node.type of
node.proof := EjveChildren(node)
node.disproof := Min^children(node) N-disproof
node.proof := Min^^hildren(node) N-proof;
node.disproof := E^children(node) N.disproof
elseif node.evaluated then
case node.value of
false : node.proof := oo; node.disproof := 0
true : node.proof := 0; node.disproof := oo
unknown : node.proof := 1; node.disproof := 1
else node.proof := 1; node.disproof := 1
Table 2.3: Proof and disproof numbers calculation algorithm.
variance in the branching factor, and slow evaluation. We have chosen to
implement immediate evaluation, as it is used in all our applications of pnsearch to games. Thus, all frontier nodes in the tree have been evaluated.
The algorithm of table 2.2 encodes the selection of a most-proving node,
in accordance with the description in section 2.2.3. Thus, at OR nodes the
child with lowest proof number is selected, while at AND nodes the child with
lowest disproof number is selected. In case of a tie between children, the
leftmost child is selected. Selecting the child with minimal proof number (in
an OR node) or disproof number (in an AND node) is equivalent to selecting
a child with proof number or disproof number equal to its father's. We
remark that in most applications children will not be ordered by their proof
or disproof number, as the cost of updating the ordering may be prohibitive.
If the children are unordered, selecting the leftmost child with equal proof or
disproof number on the average reduces the selection time of the most-proving
node by at least a factor two, compared with determining the minimum over
all children. A detailed discussion of enhancements to the algorithm can be
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
procedure DevelopNode(node);
GenerateAllChildren (node) ;
for i := 1 to node.numberOfChildren do
Evaluate(node.children[i] ) ;
SetProofAndDisproofNumbers(node.children[i])
Table 2.4: Node-development algorithm.
procedure UpdateAncestors(node);
while node 7^ nil do
SetProofA'ndDisproofNumbers(node);
node := node.parent
Table 2.5: Ancestor-updating algorithm.
found in section 2.3.
The algorithm of table 2.3 encodes the calculation of proof and disproof
numbers for a given node. It is a direct translation into pseudo-code of the
case-by-case observations made in section 2.2.2. We remark that "E" in the
algorithm indicates that the sum is calculated over all children, while "Min"
indicates that the minimum over all children is calculated.
The algorithm of table 2.4 encodes the development of a node. As stated
before, we have implemented immediate evaluation.
The algorithm of table 2.5 updates the proof and disproof numbers of
the most-proving node and its ancestors. This is necessary to ensure that all
nodes in the tree correctly reflect the new situation after the development
of the most-proving node. Starting from the most-proving node, the tree
is traversed in the direction of the root, updating the proof and disproof
numbers of each ancestor. After the proof and disproof numbers of the root
have been updated, the algorithm is terminated (indicated by the fact that
the root has no parent).
This concludes our formal description of pn-search.
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
Enhancements
In the previous section we have presented the pn-search algorithm. Several
enhancements exist. Some of these should be applied in most practical
circumstances, since the added performance outweighs the additional implementation effort. The advantage associated with the other enhancements
depends on the domain of application. In section 2.3.1 we focus on enhancements reducing the amount of working memory needed to execute a
search. Section 2.3.2 deals with reducing the execution time necessary to
select the most-proving node and to update the proof and disproof numbers
of the ancestors. The role of domain-specific knowledge when enhancing the
algorithm is examined in section 2.3.3. Finally, transpositions are discussed
in section 2.3.4.
Reducing memory requirements
Pn-search has working-memory requirements linear in the size (number of
nodes) of the search tree. Depth-first search algorithms, such as a-/? search,
only require working memory linear in the depth of the search. As a result,
working memory is a possible bottleneck when applying pn-search. We
discuss two techniques to reduce memory requirements. The first technique
is concerned with the removal of solved subtrees, while the second technique
performs pn-search at two levels.
Deleting solved subtrees
A node in a pn-search tree may influence the search process in two ways:
1. it is (on the path to) the most-proving node;
2. its proof and disproof numbers influence the proof and disproof numbers
of its parent.
Below, we show that solved subtrees do not influence the search process in
either way, except that they may solve their parent immediately after they
were solved themselves.
First, we show that a solved node is never on the path to the mostproving node. As long as the search is in progress the root is not solved. We
thus start the selection of the most-proving node from an unsolved node. All
unsolved nodes have finite proof and disproof numbers unequal to zero. Since
at each step of the selection, a child is chosen with a proof or disproof number
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
equal to that of its parent, each subsequent node must also be unsolved. We
conclude that a solved node cannot be on the path to the most-proving node.
Second, we show that the proof and disproof numbers of a solved node
either solves its parent, or does not influence its parent's values. A solved
node with value true has proof number 0 and disproof number infinity. A
parent OR node is solved by this child, and immediately obtains the value
true. A parent AND node sums its children's proof numbers, to which the
0 does not contribute, while it minimizes its children's disproof numbers, to
which infinity does not contribute. Only if this child were the last unsolved
child is the AND node solved and obtains the value true. To a solved child
with value false an analogous reasoning applies, with false and true, proof
number and disproof number, and AND node and OR node interchanged.
We conclude that a solved subtree, once its parent has been updated,
no longer influences the search, and thus may be removed. An efficient
way to implement this enhancement in the Se£Proo//4nd.Dispro0//Vum6ers(7
algorithm of table 2.3 is by deleting solved children when calculating the sum
and minimum of the childrens' proof and disproof numbers.
For a discussion of the expected gain of this technique, we refer to section
Pn^-search
As a second technique to reduce memory requirements, we present a short
description of a recent, so far unpublished, development in pn-search, named
pn^-search. The algorithm has been developed in collaboration with Stef
Pn^-search consists of two levels of pn-search. The first level consists of
a pn-search (pni), which calls as evaluation of any node J a pn-search at the
second level (pri2), with a bound TV on the maximum tree size. In pn^-search
./V is chosen to be the current size of the pni search tree. The second level of
pn-search is a standard pn-search, with a normal (either standard or domainspecific) evaluation. The result of pri2 on node J is the value true or false
in case pri2 solved 7, or the proof and disproof numbers of J, if J has not
been solved. In the latter case, the proof and disproof numbers are used to
initialize J in pni. After termination of pn2, its tree is removed from memory.
We remark that several enhancements to pn^-search have been suggested to
reduce the overhead associated with recreating deleted parts of the tree. One
example of such an enhancement involves storing the M last pri2 trees in a
cache, instead of deleting them, as suggested by Schaeffer . The gain
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
achieved by such enhancements is a topic of future research. Pn^-search has
the following properties.
1. A search resulting in a pni tree of size AT has searched approximately
^ • iV^ nodes.
2. The memory requirements during the creation of a pni tree of size N
are approximately 2./V nodes.
3. Implementing pn^-search requires only minor changes to an implementation of standard pn-search
It has been established that the memory requirements of pn^-search are on the
order of the square root of the number of nodes investigated. Comparisons on
awari and draughts have shown experimentally that pn^-search investigates
on the average three times as many nodes as standard pn-search to solve the
same problem. This factor of three is independent of problem size within the
range investigated.
Given the approximate constancy of this factor, it follows that in cases
where pn-search is bounded by trees of 10^ nodes, pn^-search, with the same
resources of memory may usefully investigate 10^ nodes. This conclusion
can be extrapolated to even larger problems only when the factor of three
suggested by the experiments remains constant. Whether it does and whether
the extrapolation therefore remains valid, is a topic for future research.
Reducing execution time
The main difference in execution time between a best-first search algorithm,
such as pn-search, and a depth-first search algorithm, such as a-/3 search,
is the number of node traversais necessary to select the most-proving node.
The overhead specific to pn-search is the calculation of proof and disproof
numbers at internal nodes, being linear in the number of node traversais.
The enhancement presented in this section reduces the number of node
traversais per selection of the most-proving node. We remark that the
same enhancement can be and has been applied to conspiracy-number search
 .
At each iteration of pn-search we traverse the tree starting at the root
and ending at the most-proving node. After developing the most-proving
node, we follow the same path backwards until we are at the root. The basis
of the enhancement consists of two observations.
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
• If the proof and disproof numbers of an ancestor do not change, the
updating process can be terminated.
• If a node 7 is on the path from the root to the most-proving node,
and / s proof and disproof numbers are not changed by the updating
process, 7 also lies on the path from the root to the next most-proving
From these two observations it follows that at each iteration a node exists
where we can terminate the updating process, and start the next mostproving node selection. Such a node is called the current node, which is
defined as follows.
Definition 2.6 For any AND/OR tree T, o< any time dunnj t/ie execution
o/ pn-searc/i, t/ie current node o/ T zs de/îned as t/ie ancestor o/ t/ie previous
most-promno node J, c/osest to 7, tu/uc/i /iad no c/ianpes to its proo/ and
disproo/ numbers caused 6y t/ie development o/ J. /nztz'a%, t/ie current node
eoua/s 4/ie root.
Enhancing the pn-search algorithm to use the notion of current node
changes the algorithms for Proo/TVumterSearc/i and f/pdatolncestors. The
new algorithms are shown in the tables 2.6 and 2.7.
The current-node enhancement reduces the number of node traversais per
iteration from linear in the depth of the search tree to close to constant and
should therefore be included in most practical implementations of pn-search.
We remark that at the cost of storing a most-proving node per subtree,
the selection process can be changed into an instant most-proving node
selection. Then, the most-proving nodes of the subtrees are updated during
the updating of the proof and disproof numbers within the tree. Since the
working memory is the main bottleneck in most applications, we feel that
small gains in terms of processing speed do not warrant the extra space
requirements.
Applying domain-specific knowledge
Two assumptions underly the formulation of the pn-search algorithm. First,
the probability distribution of expected values of frontier nodes is equal
throughout the tree. Second, the distribution of probabilities over the three
evaluation values (true, false, unknown) is unknown. These two assumptions
describe a situation in which no domain-specific knowledge can be applied to
guide the search through the tree. In many practical domains, however, at
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
procedure ProofNumberSearch(root);
Evaluate(root);
SetProofAndDisproofNumbers(root);
currentNode := root;
while root.proof ^ 0 and root.disproof ^ 0 and
ResourcesAvailable() do
mostProvingNode := SelectMostProving(currentNode);
ExpandNode(mostProvingNode) ;
currentNode := Update Ancestors (mostProvingNode)
if root.proof = 0 then root.value := true
elseif root.disproof = 0 then root.value := false
else root.value := unknown
Table 2.6: Pn-search algorithm (with current node).
least some knowledge is available. In this section we show how such knowledge
can be applied to pn-search by altering the initialization of the proof and/or
disproof numbers of frontier nodes.
We can view proof and disproof numbers as lower bounds on the effort
necessary to solve a tree. So far, the effort has been measured in node
developments. We consider three methods to use alternative measures of
effort. First, we use the number of node evaiuoh'ons as a measure of effort.
Second, a domain-specific measure of effort is applied. Third, a function
of the tree depth is used to influence the shape of the tree searched. Each
method is illustrated using a particular game, being give-away chess, awari
and go-moku, respectively. Finally, we review the three methods applied.
Evaluations as a measure of effort
A node development, when using immediate evaluation, consists of expanding
the node and evaluating each of its children. Thus, the amount of effort
involved in a node development depends on the number of children. We will
use as J's proof number the least number of node evaluations necessary to
prove node J and as its disproof number the least number of node evaluations
necessary to disprove J. Let us assume that 7 will have n children when
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
function UpdateAncestors(node);
changed := true ;
while node / nil and changed do
oldProof := node.proof;
oldDisproof := node.disproof;
SetProofAndDisproofNumbers(node);
changed := (oldProof ^ node.proof) or
(oldDisproof 7^ node.disproof);
previousNode := node;
node := node.parent
return previousNode
Table 2.7: Ancestor updating algorithm (enhanced).
expanded. J's proof and disproof numbers can be initialized using that
knowledge, even before J is expanded. If J is an OR node, only one child
needs to evaluate to true to prove J, thus J's proof number equals 1. To
disprove J, all n children must evaluate to false. J's disproof number is
therefore initialized to n. For an AND node, the proof number is initialized
to n, while the disproof number becomes 1.
The advantage of using the number of evaluations as a measure of effort is
that a distinction between frontier nodes can be made which is not present in
standard pn-search. It allows pn-search to focus on frontier nodes with fewer
children before developing frontier nodes with more children. It is expected
that in this way pn-search will find solutions more quickly. Below we present
results from applying this method to give-away chess.
Give-away chess is a variant of chess where a player wins as soon as she
cannot make a legal move (i.e., she has no pieces left or her remaining pieces
are blocked). The pieces move as in chess, with two exceptions:
1. the king has no special status and can be captured like any other piece;
2. a player is forced to make a capture move if she can (like in checkers
and draughts).
Castling and en-passant capturing are extremely rare in give-away chess. To
simplify our implementation task, we have omitted these types of moves, thus
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
rendering them illegal. In collaboration with Barney Pell we created the giveaway chess program Proue-awaj/, solely based on pn-search. A node evaluates
to true, if white is to move and has no legal moves, while it evaluates to
false if black is to move and has no legal moves. All other nodes evaluate to
unknown. Pn-search was implemented in two variants, one variant using the
standard initialization, and the other one using node evaluations as measures
of effort.
To enable Prove-away to play games against opponents, it selects its
moves by performing pn-search with a predetermined bound on the number
of nodes to be created. If the tree is not solved within that limit, the 1-ply
nodes are inspected and the move leading to a node with the minimal ratio
of proof and disproof numbers is selected. If the tree is proved within the
limit, the move proving the tree is selected, ensuring a win for Prove-away.
If the tree is disproved, the 1-ply node with the largest subtree is selected,
speculating on the opponent not seeing her winning line. Although we have
no clear indication of the strength of Prove-away, it has beaten its human
opponents in all but three of its games (out of several dozen). Most games
are decided by Prove-away finding a winning line in which the opponent is
forced at each move to capture one of the program's pieces, until the program
runs out of moves and wins. The maximum depth of such lines in give-away
chess is 32 ply (16 moves by the program and 16 captures by the opponent).
We conducted an experiment to compare the two variants of pn-search
described above. During the experiment, Prove-away plays random games
against itself. At each move in the game, both variants of pn-search (standard
initialization and using evaluations as measure of effort) create a tree, with
the current game position as root. As soon as one or both variants solve the
tree, the game is terminated. If in a position neither variant solves the tree
within 25,000 nodes, Prove-away plays a random legal move to continue the
game. A total of 30 games were played, which lasted on the average 5.6 ply
(i.e., a little less than three moves by white and three moves by black). Three
games where duplicates of other games, due to the fact that the program
quickly proved that black wins after the opening moves 1. d2-d4, 1. d2-d3 or
1. e2-e4, and each of these moves was selected twice as opening move during
the 30 games. In the following we disregard the three duplicate games.
The conditions of the experiment ensure that the final position of each
random game has been proved a win for one of the players by at least one
of the pn-search variants. In some games, both variants proved the win,
while in others only the pn-search variant with the number of evaluations
as the measure of effort succeeded. In none of the games did only standard
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
developments
nodes visited
branching factor
max tree size
nodes per sec.
initàa/ùataon
imtia/izaiion 6y
no. o/ moves
improvement
Table 2.8: Give-away chess results.
pn-search solve the tree of the final position. To compare the performances
of both algorithms, We reran the standard algorithm with unlimited working
memory on the positions where that variant had not found the win within
the limit of 25,000 nodes. The results of the experiment are presented in
table 2.8.
Measured in number of node developments, the enhanced algorithm
(using evaluations as measure of effort) gains a factor of a little over 2, while
in number of nodes the improvement factor is almost 8. These numbers
indicate that the enhanced algorithm develops nodes with, on average, a 4
times smaller branching factor (2.9 vs. 10.5). This clearly indicates that the
selection of most-proving nodes is strongly influenced by the non-standard
initialization. The average amount of working memory necessary to complete
the search is specified in table 2.8 as the maximal tree in memory per search.
It is directly related to the total size of the tree created, resulting in an
improvement by a factor 8. The extra time spent on counting the number of
moves per terminal node slows the algorithm down approximately 20% per
node, compared to the standard initialization. Thus, the overall gain in CPU
time amounts to a factor of more than 6.
We conclude that using the number of node evaluations as a measure of
effort to initialize the proof and disproof numbers may yield a significant
reduction in node evaluations, node developments and CPU time.
Domain-specific measures of effort
In many domains, domain-specific properties exist which give an indication
of the amount of effort involved in solving a position (i.e., in solving the
AND/OR tree with the position as root).
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
For instance, in Othello solving a position with only a few empty squares
is easier than solving a position with more empty squares. In draughts, it is
simpler to solve a position if both players have only four men than if both
players have ten men. In these cases, we could select as domain-specific
measures of effort the number of moves to the end of the game (othello) or
the number of men of the opponent to be captured (draughts and checkers).
We illustrate the idea on the game awari. In the initial awari position,
there are 48 stones on the board. Both players move stones around, with the
goal of capturing stones. The goal of awari is to capture more stones than
your opponent. It follows that a player who has captured at least 25 out of
the total of 48 stones, wins the game (for a definition of the rules of awari,
see section 2.4.2). We use the number of stones a player needs to capture
as the measure of effort. Let us assume that we would like to determine
whether north can win, or whether south can obtain at least a draw. Let
us furthermore assume that south has so far captured 11 stones, while north
has collected 8 stones. We build the tree from the perspective of south, thus
proving the tree means showing that south can reach at least a draw. In the
given position, south must capture at least another 13 stones to reach a draw,
while north needs another 17 stones to obtain the 25 stones necessary for a
win. These values, 13 and 17, are then used as proof and disproof numbers
of the position.
In section 2.4.7 we present test results of applying pn-search to awari
for both the standard initialization and the stone-based initialization as
suggested here.
Depth-related measures of effort
By inspecting trees created by pn-search, we have found some occasions in
which the shape of the tree indicated that much effort was spent on variations
which were less likely to succeed quickly than some others. For instance, in
mating problems in chess, where the weaker side was restricted to moving
one piece between two squares, most variations had proof number one. As a
result, variations where the attacker moved a single piece aimlessly over the
board were searched very deeply. On one occasion, this resulted in a mate in
114 moves being found, while a mate in 4 moves existed. Instead of putting
a hard limit on the depth of the search, examining deep variations can be
somewhat discouraged by initializing the proof and disproof numbers of a
node using a function of the depth of the node.
By assigning higher proof and disproof numbers to nodes deeper in the
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
tree, it is expected that pn-search will create a somewhat shallower and
broader tree. Analogously, by assigning smaller proof and disproof numbers
to nodes deeper in the tree, pn-search is expected to create deeper and
narrower trees. Inspection of trees created by pn-search with such alternative
proof-and-disproof-numbers initializations shows that the average node depth
is indeed influenced in accordance with these expectations.
Experiments on go-moku (see chapter 5), with each node's proof and
disproof numbers initialized to the depth of the node measured in full moves,
show that a somewhat broader, shallower tree is created, without losing pnsearch's ability to find narrow, deep variations leading to a win. Comparisons
on go-moku showed that this initialization was an improvement over the
standard initialization. The depth-related initialization was used in the
search which led to solving go-moku.
Despite this example, we do not have much ground for the assumption
that such an initialization is an enhancement to pn-search for domains
with behavior similar to go-moku. Furthermore, the evaluation function
we developed for go-moku also influenced the success of the non-standard
initialization. Although a linear function in the depth of the node worked
well in go-moku, more complicated functions may be necessary for other
domains. The strongest conclusion we are prepared to draw is that by using
a function of the depth of the node, the shape of the tree can be somewhat
influenced (either made broader and shallower, or narrower and deeper).
Reviewing the application of domain-specific knowledge
We have presented three ways in which domain-specific knowledge can be
used to change the initialization of the proof and disproof numbers at frontier
nodes. Although each of the three methods has been successful in improving
the performance in a practical domain, some caution is in order, particularly
with the second and third methods. While the use of non-standard proof-anddisproof-numbers initializations may seem useful to guide the search process,
the underlying principles of pn-search are violated. Two examples of violated
principles are: (1) the assumption that all frontier nodes are indistinguishable
and (2) the assumption that the proof and disproof numbers are lower bounds
on the effort required to solve the tree. The positive influence of different
initializations may at the same time result in negative effects. We have
found that for some domains, such as Othello, it is necessary to perform
a large number of experiments to fine-tune the initialization process, akin
to the process of fine-tuning evaluation functions in game-playing programs
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
 . We conclude that as yet we lack a proper understanding
of the precise effects associated with knowledge-driven proof-and-disproofnumbers initializations.
Transpositions
The definition of pn-search depends on the graph searched being a tree.
When determining the proof and disproof numbers of an internal node J, the
cardinality of the smallest proof set and disproof set must be determined.
In a tree, the subtrees rooted at the children of J are disjoint, ensuring
that the cardinality of the smallest proof set and disproof set of J can be
calculated from the cardinality of the smallest proof sets and disproof sets of
the children.
In many domains, however, the same subtree may be encountered several
times during the search, at different places in the tree. The standard pnsearch algorithm will in such cases obtain an upper bound on the cardinality
of the smallest proof and disproof sets, instead of the true proof and
disproof numbers. Problems and solutions related to the problem of the
common subtree (transpositions) in combination with pn-search have been
investigated by Schijf and Schijf et a/. .
In the following, we shortly describe problems and practical solutions for
transpositions in pn-search. We distinguish between directed acyc/ic </rap/is,
abbreviated as DAGs and directed cyc/ic yrap/is, abbreviated as DCGs. We
remark that practical techniques for handling transpositions in game-playing
programs using Q-/3 search have been extensively described in the literature
 .
Transpositions in DAGs
Transpositions resulting in DAGs necessarily occur in games where each move
is a conversion, i.e. an irreversible alteration of the state of the game. In
chess, captures and pawn moves are examples of conversions, while noncapture moves by a piece (except for castling, and castling-forbidding moves)
are non-conversions. In connect-four, qubic and go-moku, each move is a
conversion, as in all three games the number of stones on the board strictly
increases.
As stated above, in a DAG, addition of proof numbers or disproof numbers
possibly overestimates the cardinality of the minimal set of nodes needed
to solve the tree. Theoretically correct algorithms exist to establish the
correct proof and disproof numbers at each node, but these are slow or use
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Figure 2.4: AND/OR DAG with practical solution.
an inordinate amount of working memory, or both, thus barring practical
application .
A practical solution to this problem is to treat the DAG as if it were a tree,
thus calculating (incorrect) proof and disproof numbers of a node directly
from its children. The main difference in the algorithm is that while updating
ancestors, all parents of a node must be updated recursively. In figure 2.4,
a DAG is depicted where proof and disproof numbers are calculated directly
from their children. It can easily be shown that if node G is solved, root
J4 obtains the same value as G. Thus, the proof and disproof numbers of /I
should equal 1. Furthermore, G should be the most-proving node. Thus, both
numbers in the root are too high, and the selection mechanism incorrectly
selects node D as the most-proving node. This example clearly indicates that
the practical solution is no longer in accordance with the definitions of section
2.2.2. Still, our experience with connect-four, qubic and go-moku shows that
this practical pn-search algorithm for DAGS has advantages similar to those
of standard pn-search.
Transpositions in DCGs
Transpositions resulting in DCGs appear in games where a series of nonconversion moves leads to a position which has occurred before. Special
rules govern the continuation of games after repetitions, leading by complex
regulations to game-specific outcomes. There is fascination in the diversity
2.3 ENHANCEMENTS
Figure 2.5: Cyclic AND/OR graph.
of these rules: in Chinese chess, some repetitions are illegal by the operation
of complex rules; in go, any repetition is outlawed by the fco rule; in chess,
finally, a repeated position can give rise to a claim of a draw from its third
occurrence onwards.
Figure 2.5 depicts a DCG; in figure 2.6 we have converted that graph into
a tree. Each path in the tree terminates at a frontier node of the graph, or
at a repetition of positions in the path. In this example we assume that a
repetition evaluates to false. The tree contains three duplicates of node Z).
Among these three, two have the value false, while one has proof number
2 and disproof number 1. The fact that the same node may have different
proof and disproof numbers depending on the path it lies on forms the basis
of the complexity of performing pn-search on DCGs. Node C has properties
similar to node U. Moreover, we note that /Ts proof number (2) is less than
the sum of the proof numbers of its children, as subtrees 5 and C have node
£ in common. The proof number at the root indicates that to prove the tree,
both £ and F must be proved. The disproof number 1 of -A indicates that
disproving either £ or F disproves the tree.
The dependence of the proof and disproof numbers of a node on the
path to that node forms the basis of the difficulties of cyclic transpositions.
In Schijf , a theoretically correct algorithm for pn-search on DCGs is
described. Unfortunately, its time and working-memory requirements are too
costly to warrant practical application.
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
false CD,0
Figure 2.6: Tree version of the graph of figure 2.5.
Practical methods to apply pn-search to DCGs also exist. First, the
practical algorithm for DAGs may be applied with one modification: only
positions created after a conversion move are eligible to have more than one
parent. As a result, some transpositions are investigated only once, while for
others duplicates are created in the graph. Second, for each set of equivalent
positions, at most two nodes are created: one for all paths in which the
node occurs for the first time, and the second node when the node is its
own ancestor. The second node is initialized to the value associated with a
repetition of positions in the game under investigation. In this case, if a node
is its own ancestor through at least one path, the repetition of positions is
used to update the ancestors on all paths leading to the node, including those
in which the node is not a repetition. Therefore, the search may incorrectly
deduce that a node must have the value of a repetition of positions. Thus,
if the value of the root is proved to equal the value assigned to repetitions
of positions, the proof is not fully reliable. If the opposite value is proved,
however, the proof is bound to be correct. For a detailed description of these
two practical algorithms for pn-search in DCGs, we refer to Schijf .
We believe that pn-search on directed cyclic graphs requires further investigation.
2.4 RESULTS
2.4 Results
Introduction
In this section we compare pn-search's performance with that of a sophisticated implementation of a-/3 search, by far the most commonly applied gametree search algorithm in tournament programs for strategic games. As a test
domain, we have selected the game of awari, one of the games on the Olympic
List. We have chosen awari for two main reasons. First, awari search trees
contain non-uniformity, which make them suitable for the application of pnsearch. Second, all strong tournament programs competing in the Computer
Olympiads selected their moves using sophisticated implementations of a-/3
search, establishing that awari search trees are suitable for application of a-/3
It will be shown that, for the purpose of proving the game-theoretic value
of a position in awari, pn-search outperforms Q-/3 search by a wide margin. It
proves that a category of search trees exists for which pn-search outperforms
a-/?. Further indications of pn-search's strengths can be found in chapters
4 and 5, where pn-search's contribution to solving qubic and go-moku is
described.
This section is organized as follows. First, we present the rules of awari.
Second, we give a description of the strongest existing awari programs, which
presents evidence that our implementation of Q-/3 search is competitive with
a-/3 search implementations of other authors. Third, we describe in detail
the implementations of pn-search and Q-/3 search and their performances are
compared. Fourth, it is explained how the nodes visited by both algorithms
are counted, which is important due to the different nature of the algorithms.
Fifth, we describe the set of awari positions to which the algorithms were
applied. Finally, we present and analyze the empirical data.
The rules of awari
Awari is a two-player (south and north) zero-sum game with perfect information. It is one instance of a large family of games named mancala, of which
some 1200 variants are known. The mancala games originate from Africa.
Awari is mainly played in its western regions, such as Nigeria. For the game
described here, the names wari or awele are also used (Deledicq and Popova,
Awari is played on a wooden board containing two rows of six pits. Each
player controls the row on her side of the board. South's pits (from left to
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
South (to move)
Figure 2.7: A position with legal moves Al, C4 x 2, £>19 x 7, £4 and F2 x 4.
right, as seen by south) are named 4 through F, while north's pits (from left
to right, as seen by north) are named a through /. At the right-hand side
of each row, an auxiliary pit is used to contain a player's captured stones.
At the start of the game each pit (except the auxiliary pits) contains four
stones, for a total of 48 stones on the board.
At each move, a player selects a non-empty pit X from her row. Starting
with Ts neighbor, she then sows all stones from A', one at the time, counterclockwise over the board (omitting the two auxiliary pits). If X contains
sufficient stones to go around the board (12 stones or more), pit X is skipped
and sowing continues. Thus, after the move, X will always be empty. Finally,
captured stones, if any, are removed and stored in the auxiliary pit. Stones
are captured if the last stone sown lands in an enemy pit which after landing
contains 2 or 3 stones. If such a capture is made, and the preceding pit
contains 2 or 3 stones and the pit is an enemy pit, those stones are also
captured. This procedure is successively repeated for the pits preceding and
ends as soon as a pit is encountered containing a number of stones other than
2 or 3, or the end of the opposing row is reached.
A move is described by the name of the pit, followed by the number
of stones sown (the name of the pit by itself defines the move, but such a
notation is prone to error). The number of stones captured, if any, is indicated
by the amount preceded by a " x". In figure 2.7 an example position is shown
with south to move. Legal moves for south are: Al, C4 x 2, D19 x 7, £4
and F2 x 4.
The goal of awari is to capture more stones than the opponent. The game
ends as soon as one of the players has collected 25 or more stones. Two
other conditions exist which terminate the game. First, if a player is unable
2.4 RESULTS
South (to move)
Figure 2.8: 1. 51 / I wins. After 1. £1? /I south must play 2. Fl.
to move (i.e., all her pits are empty), the remaining stones are captured by
her opponent. Second, if the same position is encountered for the third time,
with the same player to move, the remaining stones on the board are evenly
divided among the players. In all cases, after the end of the game, the winner
is the player who captured the most stones. If both players capture 24 stones,
the game is drawn.
A last rule exists to prevent players from running out of moves early
in the game.
Whenever possible, a player is forced to choose a move
such that her opponent is able to make a reply move. It is, however, not
compulsory to look several moves ahead to ensure that the opponent will
continue to be able to reply. For instance, figure 2.8 shows a position in
which south by playing i. 5i can deliberately create a position in which
she is unable to offer north any stones on her next move. By doing so,
south captures all three stones remaining on the board and wins the game.
However, would she have played 1. £1, then after 1. ... /I she is forced
to play 2. FI, leaving the game for the moment undecided (although after
2. ... al 3. 51 61 4. Cl cl 5. Dl dl 6. Al el we are back at the initial
position, giving south a second chance to play the winning move).
Tournament programs
In 1990 Maarten van der Meulen and the author constructed an awari-p'lying
tournament program, named Lit/iidion (Greek for 'little stone'). Lit/izdion at
the time consisted of an a-/? search algorithm, and an endgame database
containing the game-theoretic value of each awari position with 13 stones or
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
fewer left on the board .
In 1991 Li£/iidion was enhanced with pn-search and a larger database (all
positions with 17 stones or fewer). In 1992 Lzt/irdion was further enhanced
with an opening book. In describing Z/it/iidion, we will concentrate on this
last version of Lit/udzon.
The basis for Zii/iidzon is its a-/? search algorithm. Any position not in the
opening book or the endgame database is searched with iterative-deepening
Q-/3 search. The evaluation function for leaf nodes is trivial: at each leaf
node it is assumed that the players divide the remaining stones evenly. If,
in the search tree, a position is encountered having 17 stones or fewer on
the board, its exact value is retrieved from the endgame database. Thus,
the value of the a-/? search is based on a combination of crude guesses for
some leaf nodes, and exact values for others . We remark that in
awari the difference in the number of stones by which one wins is irrelevant.
Therefore, the value retrieved from the endgame database is converted into
—oo for losses, 0 for draws, and oo for wins. Once the game has progressed
to a position contained in the endgame database, no search is needed, and
at each turn the best move is played instantly.
After a move has been selected by Q-/3 search (typically based on an 18to-20 ply search), pn-search is called to check the move. If a proof can be
found that the selected move loses, the move is rejected, a-/? is asked to select
a new move, and the procedure is repeated. If all moves are proved losses, the
first move selected is played, hoping for an error by the opponent. While the
opponent is pondering on the position, L^/iidion performs pn-searches on her
potential moves looking for wins. In case the opponent selects a losing move,
Z/i</iidion uses the proof by pn-search to select its winning move. The pnsearch algorithm regards positions within the endgame database as terminal
nodes, just as it treats positions where a player has no legal moves. All
other positions are internal nodes. In summary: pn-search is only used to
prevent Li</itdion from playing losing moves and to detect winning lines after
erroneous moves by the opponent. All other moves are based on a-/? search.
has played in three tournaments: the awari tournaments of the
2nd, 3rd and 4th Computer Olympiads . Lit/iidion won the gold medal each time. The tournaments
of the 2nd and 3rd Olympiads have been described in Levy and Beal 
and Van den Herik and Allis .
2.4 RESULTS
In 1990, Lzt/iidion's only opponent, Marco, written by Remi Nierat,
winner of the gold medal at the awari tournament of the 1st computer
Olympiad, lost all its games. Marco is based on human-expert knowledge
of awari, shallow a-/3 searches (averaging fewer than 10 ply) and no endgame
databases. In most games, both Marco and Lit/iidion had prospects of
winning, until Lit/iidion's endgame database was reached. At that point
Marco made one or more erroneous moves, leaving Lif/iidion with an easy
win. In 1990, the main deciding factor was the endgame database (at that
time, all positions of 13 stones or fewer).
In 1991, a new opponent appeared: Mj/Pro^ram written by Eric van
Riet Paap. Mj/.Pro<?ram had been created using the published description
of Lii/iidion . It contained a large endgame database
(all positions of 16 stones or fewer), a fast implementation of Q-/3 search
including the singular-extension enhancement 
and the same evaluation function as Ltt/u'dion (see above). Zif/iidion defeated
Mj/Propram by the smallest possible margin, with three wins, two losses and
one draw. In at least one of the games, pn-search played a decisive role,
finding a deep winning line in a position unclear to Q-/3 search. Given the
small differences between the programs (a 17-stone database versus a 16-stone
database, pn-search versus singular extensions, and Mj/Propram searching
twice as many nodes per second), it is unclear what the exact impact of
pn-search on the match has been.
In 1992, two new opponents appeared: Marvin and Juju. Juju turned
out to be no competition for its two strong opponents and lost all its games.
Marvin was created by Ralph Gasser with Lit/iidion as its example. The
a-/3 search algorithms of Marvin and Lit/iidion performed almost equally
well. Marvin's endgame database (20 stones), however, was much larger than
Lii/iidion's (17 stones). A disadvantage to Marvin was that its database did
not fit in RAM memory. Each entry retrieved from the hard disc slowed down
the a-/3 search. Two further disadvantages to Marvin were its lack of a pnsearch implementation and of an opening book. As a later test indicated, the
opening book was the decisive factor in this match, which Lii/iidion won by a
score of 4-2. The test consisted of replaying the first game from the position
where Lii/iidion had exited its opening book, with Marvin and Lii/iidion
changing places. Marvin easily won the game, similarly to the way Lii/iidion
had won the game during the tournament. Clearly, the opening book had
provided Lit/iidion with a winning advantage.
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Comparing the performances
When selecting a search algorithm for an application, the elapsed CPU time
is an important selection criterion. However, experimental results on tree
searches when measured in CPU time are difficult to generalize, due to
implementation details. Instead, it is customary to compare the number
of nodes visited.
In this case, a careful analysis is needed to determine the fairest way to
compare the number of nodes visited by a-/? search and pn-search.
Let us consider the number of nodes visited by a-/3 iterative-deepening
search. On the one hand, we could sum the number of nodes visited in
each iteration. However, this would be unfair to a-/? search, since a smaller
number of iterations (e.g., by searching to even ply depths only) may result
in almost the same ordering and thus reducing the number of nodes visited.
On the other hand, we could just take the number of nodes visited in the
last iteration. That would be unfair towards pn-search, as the last iteration
does use the move ordering of previous iterations, and these searches should
be included in the total node count somehow. Moreover, a-/3 search with
transposition tables obtains many early cut-offs during the last iteration due
to the solved subtrees stored in the transposition table.
Instead, we have chosen to count at iteration i only the nodes at depth
i. Then the extra iterations are an asset to a-/? search, without costing
anything in terms of the number of nodes visited. Re-ordering of the moves
may result in terminal nodes in a new iteration, which are not at the deepest
level. These nodes are not counted at all. This slight bias in favor of a-/3
iterative-deepening search does not significantly influence the results.
For pn-search, we simply count the total number of nodes created during
the search.
Test positions
As mentioned in section 2.4.3, Ltt/udion has taken part in three awari
tournaments of Computer Olympiads. In total, she played 23 games (5
against Marco and 6 each against Mj/Propram, Jtyu and Marvin), of which
two games were identical, which can be explained as follows. Each of the five
programs described in section 2.4.3 plays deterministically. Therefore, before
the next game against the same opponent, a change should be made in the
opening choice of the program to avoid losing in exactly the same way. Jtyu
forgot to do so once, and lost two games in identical fashion.
2.4 RESULTS
In the 22 different games a total of 1707 positions have occurred (from the
initial position to the position after the last move had been played). Of these
there were 1599 unique positions, which have been selected as the ini£ta/test
positions.
For each of the initial test positions, a search with all four algorithms was
performed. Since an awari game has three possible outcomes: win, draw and
loss, and pn-search is a two-valued search algorithm, the three outcomes must
be divided into two sets. We arbitrarily chose to treat a draw as equivalent to
a loss for the player to move. Each of the searches has one of three possible
• The player to move has a proved win.
• The opponent has at least a draw.
• The search ran out of resources.
Not all test positions can be used to compare the performance of the four
algorithms. First, positions with 17 stones or fewer are solved immediately by
all four algorithms through a single database lookup. Second, positions too
early in the game are likely to be unsolvable by all four algorithms. Therefore,
we have selected the relevant positions from the 1599 initial positions as
follows. Each position has been investigated by all four algorithms with a
resource limit of 500,000 nodes per position. If after 500,000 nodes the search
had not succeeded, it was terminated. Using the outcome of the searches,
the following selection was made. First, the 2 positions in which the game
had just ended were discarded since all four algorithms solved the positions
visiting only a single node. The reason why only 2 such positions were found
out of 22 different games is that most games ended by resignation. Second,
all positions with 17 stones or fewer (496 in total) were excluded. Third,
all positions which were not solved by any of the algorithms (764 in total)
were labeled unsolvable. The remaining 337 positions are named the /ma/
test positions.
We remark that in this way positions which are well suited for a-/3 search
will be selected for the final test positions, as well as those positions well
suited for pn-search. Thus, in our selection method of test positions there is
no bias towards either of the algorithms.
Each of the algorithms which failed to solve one of the final test positions
within the 500,000 nodes limit, was given virtually unlimited resources to try
again. In practice this meant a limit of a quarter billion nodes per position for
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
a-/? search, while for pn-search no final test position took more than about
one and a half million nodes to solve.
In this section we present the results of the comparison of the four algorithms
described in section 2.4.4 on the 337 final test positions of section 2.4.6.
Each of the 337 final test positions was solved by basic pn and
stones pn. Two positions were not solved by a-/3 within a quarter billion
nodes, while there were two more positions not solved by both Q-/3 and
transposition. In this section we have set the solution size of unsolved
positions at a quarter billion, which is a lower bound on the number of nodes
necessary to solve them. Although this results in a bias in favor of a-/3 search,
it does not influence our conclusions and it allows us to include the positions
in the test results. Removing the positions from the final test set would be
particularly unfair towards pn-search, as it would ignore its finest results.
First, we present figures indicating how often one algorithm outperformed another, without paying attention to the exact difference in node counts.
Second, we tabulate the total number of nodes visited by each of the four
algorithms, and calculate averages. Third, we group test positions by size of
solution, and graphically depict the average difference in performance of the
search algorithms per group.
Outperforming the other algorithms
In this section, we are interested in whether one algorithm performed better
on a specific test position than another algorithm, but ignore the size of the
difference. In our results we have divided the set of positions into two halves:
the easy and the /mrd positions. To this end, we have sorted the positions
according to the minimum number of nodes in which a position was solved.
As a result, the 169 positions which were solved by at least one algorithm
in fewer than 3200 nodes, were classified as easy positions, while the 168
positions with smallest solution larger than 3200 nodes were named the hard
positions.
In table 2.9 we have listed for each algorithm how often it outperformed
all other algorithms, separated for easy and hard positions. If two algorithms
shared first place on a position, they were each awarded half a point.
As can be seen from table 2.9, at the easy positions there is hardly any
difference between the a-/? search algorithms (84 times best algorithm) and
the pn-search algorithms (85 times best algorithm). For the hard positions
2.4 RESULTS
transposition
Table 2.9: Number of times an algorithm performed best of all.
transposition
transposition
Table 2.10: Comparing pairs of algorithms on easy positions.
the picture is entirely different: the pn-search variants are 146 times best,
against just 22 times for the a-/? search variants.
Table 2.10 shows per pair of algorithms, how often one algorithm outperformed the other, on the easy positions. Each entry at row .ft and column C
in the table indicates how often the algorithm heading row i2 found a solution
more quickly than the algorithm heading column C. The same information
for the hard positions is displayed in table 2.11.
Table 2.10 indicates that transposition wins against the other three
variants, albeit with a small margin compared with the two pn-search variants
(89 against 80 and 100 against 69).
Table 2.11 clearly indicates that a-/? has the worst performance of all
four algorithms. It loses in all cases against transposition, and only 6
times outperforms the pn-search variants. Transposition occasionally does
better than the pn-search variants, but is outperformed in more than 85% of
all hard positions. Between the pn-search variants, the initialization based
on the stones to be captured seems to pay off, given the 126 against 42 win
compared with the standard initialization.
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
transposition
transposition
Table 2.11: Comparing pairs of algorithms on hard positions.
transposition
total nodes
2,437,035,522
1,285,839,816
28,214,875
18,918,032
average nodes
Table 2.12: Test figures per algorithm.
Nodes visited
In this section we concentrate on the number of nodes visited by each
algorithm.
In table 2.12 the first column of results lists the total number of nodes
visited on the 337 test positions, per algorithm, while the second column
contains the average per position. In the third column, the factor difference
between each algorithm's average and the best average is presented. For both
pn-search variants we have also determined the maximum number of nodes
present in memory during each search. The average of these maxima have
been listed in the last column of the table.
From table 2.12 a pattern similar to that seen in tables 2.10 and 2.11
becomes apparent: the pn-search variants perform best, with stones pn
doing somewhat better than basic pn. With factors 68.0 and 128.8, both
a-/3 and transposition are clearly outperformed.
The average maximum tree size in memory during the pn-searches,
compared to the average solution size, indicates that removing solved subtrees
during the search results in somewhat smaller memory requirements. Here
approximately a factor 2 is gained. We remark that these figures only relate
2.4 RESULTS
transposition
Table 2.13: Positions per group, per grouping algorithm.
to so/ved positions. In searches which are not successful, the number of solved
subtrees is smaller, rendering the technique less effective.
Performance by size
Table 2.12 shows that pn-search is capable of outperforming Q-/3 search by a
large factor. The table does not indicate, however, to what extend the gain
factor is related to the size of the search problems. Furthermore, we must
realize that in the table the hard problems dominate the results.
Measuring the size of the search problems is not a straightforward task,
since a position which is difficult to solve with Q-/3 search may be rather
simple for pn-search or vice versa. Therefore, we have grouped the test
positions in four different ways, each time according to one of the algorithms
applied in our experiments. We describe the grouping process based on a-/3.
We have created groups for each power of 10. Thus, group i consists of
all positions which were solved by a-/3 in more than 10*~* nodes, and less
than or equal to 10* nodes. Within each group, the average number of nodes
necessary to solve all positions in the group is calculated, for each of the
four algorithms. These averages are then compared to see which algorithm
performs best on positions of the size represented by the group.
In table 2.13 we have listed for each algorithm the number of positions
per group, depending on the algorithm used as grouping criterion. These
numbers indicate the size of each of the groups on which figures 2.9, 2.10,
2.11 and 2.12 are based.
Figures 2.9, 2.10, 2.11 and 2.12 contain the results per group, where
the groups are created according to the solutions of o>/3, transposition,
basic pn and stones pn, respectively. For each figure, the numbers on the
horizontal axis indicate the /opio of the size of the groups. The numbers
on the vertical axis indicate the Jo<?2 of the factor difference between the
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
logarithmic 3
logarithmic
problem size
Figure 2.9: Comparison based on grouping by a-/?
logarithmic
transposition
logarithmic
problem size
Figure 2.10: Comparison based on grouping by transpositions
2.4 RESULTS
logarithmic
transposition
logarithmic
• problem size
Figure 2.11: Comparison based on grouping by basic pn
logarithmic
logarithmic
problem size
Figure 2.12: Comparison based on grouping by stones pn
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Table 2.14: Positions per group, grouped by all four algorithms.
algorithms.
In figures 2.9 and 2.10 we see that on small problems a-/3 search does
somewhat better, while with increasing problem size, pn-search does better
and better. For the largest problems, the gain factor is around 500.
In figures 2.11 and 2.12, again pn-search does worse on the smallest
problems and quickly starts doing better on increasing problem size. It
is remarkable that the gain factor reduces when the problem size further
increases. The cause of this phenomenon is described below.
In each figure the algorithm used as grouping criterion plays an important
role. In the first few groups we find positions which were suitable for that type
of algorithm, while in the last few groups the positions found were difficult
to solve for the algorithm. It is thus to be expected that in the graphs the
other algorithms will do somewhat worse in the first groups, while they do
somewhat better on the last groups.
This is exactly what can be seen in all four graphs.
In figures 2.9
and 2.10 pn-search outperform a-/3 search starting from group 4, while in
figures 2.11 and 2.12 pn-search is the better algorithm from group 2 onwards.
Furthermore, in the first two graphs pn-search's gain factor towards the last
few groups grows remarkably fast, while in the second two graphs, with pnsearch as the grouping criterion, pn-search's advantage reduces in the last
two groups.
Thus, when looking at the groups for the hard problems, figures 2.9 and
2.10 are too flattering towards pn-search while figures 2.11 and 2.12 do not
give pn-search full credit.
As a solution to this problem, we present one final graph. This time we
have determined the size of a problem in a more elaborate way. For each
solution by an algorithm, we determine the /o<?io of the number of nodes
visited. For the four algorithms we then determine the average of these
exponents and use it as group number. The number of positions per group
has been tabulated in table 2.14. We average the logs since node counts tend
to grow exponentially instead of linearly.
2.4 RESULTS
logarithmic
^_ logarithmic
problem size
Figure 2.13: Comparison based on grouping using all four algorithms.
The singleton last group has been deleted, and its position has been
added to the second last group, making a total of 36 entries in that group.
The graph produced by this grouping criterion is pictured in figure 2.13. The
numbers on the axes have the same meaning as in figures 2.9, 2.10, 2.11 and
2.12. In it, the bias towards a single algorithm no longer exists. The figure
confirms the suggestion from the previous four figures, that pn-search's gain
factor, compared with a-/? search, grows with increasing problem size.
Conclusions
In this section we have compared the behavior of two pn-search variants with
two variants of Q-/3 search. The comparisons lead to clear conclusions: pnsearch significantly outperforms both variants of a-/3 search (cf. table 2.12)
in proving game-theoretic values in awari. The gain factor difference between
pn-search and the a-/3 variants tends to increase with increasing problem size
(cf. figure 2.13).
We further conclude from table 2.12 that a domain-dependent initialization can be beneficial on awari, with the enhancement yielding a profit of
about a factor 2. Moreover, the removal of solved subtrees in pn-search
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
decreases the working memory requirements by a factor of about 2, in
problems which are ultimately solved.
We believe that the success of pn-search on awari is due to the nonuniformity of the tree. Allis et oi. have attempted to measure the
degree of non-uniformity necessary for pn-search to outperform alternative
algorithms. The results of this section show that awari's non-uniformity
warrants the selection of pn-search for proving game-theoretic values instead
of a-/? search variants.
We tentatively conclude from these results that pn-search has contributed
significantly to proving the game-theoretic values of other non-uniform trees,
such as those of connect-four, qubic (see chapter 4) and go-moku , connect-four , give-away chess, go-moku
(see chapter 5), othello and qubic (see chapter 4). In our
discussion of related algorithms we will therefore focus mainly on gametree search algorithms. In this section, we discuss the relationships with
conspiracy-number search, SSS*, B* and A*, the latter being the only singleagent search algorithm in the list.
Conspiracy-number search
Conspiracy-number search (cn-search) is pn-search's direct ancestor. Cnsearch was developed in the middle of the 1980s by McAllester, and has
received attention of many researchers since then .
While pn-search focuses on the minimum number of nodes which must
conspire to prove the value of a position, cn-search determines the minimum
number of nodes which must conspire to c/ianpe the value of a position. This
main difference is more apparent when looking at the search tree: pn-search
does not use a heuristic evaluation function to evaluate non-terminal nodes,
while cn-search does.
2.5 RELATED ALGORITHMS
Subtle differences between cn-search and pn-search can be identified by
creating an instantiation of cn-search which resembles pn-search as much as
possible. To do so, we define a three-valued evaluation function for cn-search,
which returns -1 for a disproved node, 0 for a node with value unknown, and
1 for a proved node. In such a tree, the conspiracy numbers for -1 and 1 of
a node correspond to the proof and disproof numbers of that node. These
algorithms only differ in the manner in which the next node to be developed
is selected, for which unpublished experiments on connect-four have shown
that the selection mechanism of pn-search performs better than the selection
mechanism of cn-search.
In cn-search, for any potential value t> of the evaluation function it is
determined for each subtree how many nodes, say 7V«, within the subtree must
change their evaluation value to u, to change the value of the subtree to î>. If
TV,, for the root exceeds a certain limit, for all i> unequal to the current root
value, cn-search assumes that the current root value is reliable and terminates
the search. Schaeffer's implementation showed that cn-search could achieve
good results in tactical chess positions . Unfortunately,
experiments with tournament chess programs have
not been successful.
We remark that, despite pn-search's success in analyzing awari positions,
we do not claim that pn-search is better suited than cn-search to perform well
in a tournament chess program. Instead, we claim that the ideas behind cnsearch, such as applied in pn-search, are better suited for proving values, than
for determining the reliability of heuristic root values. Pn-search capitalizes
on this suitability, concentrating on proving only. We do envision applications
in tournament programs, as we have in our awari program. For instance,
Breuker ei o/. have shown that pn-search may be an asset to chess
programs, to prove quickly whether a mating sequence exists in a given chess
We conclude that cn-search and pn-search are closely related, with pnsearch focusing on a different goal and being successful at it.
With the availability of large internal memories, algorithms which store
the search in working memory have become of practical interest. One of
the earliest game-tree search algorithms which uses a stored tree is SSS*
 .
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
SSS* and pn-search are both best-first search algorithms. At each step
in the algorithm a node is selected according to a certain criterion and
then developed. This process is repeated until the tree has been solved, or
resources have run out. An important similarity between SSS* and pn-search
is that neither algorithm uses a heuristic evaluation function for internal
nodes. Only leaf nodes are assigned a value, either by a heuristic evaluation
function or by reliable game knowledge.
The main difference between the algorithms is the criterion which determines the selection of the next node. Sss* selects a node purely based on
the upper bound still achievable. At any point during the search the node
which has the highest possible upper bound is selected, while among equals
the leftmost node in the tree is preferred. Pn-search does not use a range
of terminal-node values. Instead, the set of possible terminal-node values is
split into two. Solving the tree means determining in which of the two sets
the true value lies. If the exact value from a larger range must be determined,
pn-search should be called repeatedly, for instance by having pn-search be
the discriminating function in a binary search. While pn-search does not use
a range of values, it bases its selection on the proof and disproof numbers
implying that a node is tried which may be part of a solution with minimal
A predecessor of pn-search, viz. a/3-cn search , can be
seen as a hybrid form of pn-search and SSS*. It uses both a range of values
ond proof and disproof numbers (although these were named differently)
to determine the next node to be developed. The main criterion is the
range of possible values, like in SSS*, while in case of a tie the proof and
disproof numbers are used. It can be shown, however, that trees exist with
solutions of only a few nodes, in which a/3-cn search could spend a long
time in irrelevant subtrees . The solution to this problem
consisted of reducing the impact of the range of values, while enlarging the
role of the proof and disproof numbers. The result of this change has been
the development of pn-search.
For a comparison of SSS* and a/3-cn search on random trees, see Allis et ai.
B* is a best-first game-tree search algorithm introduced by Berliner .
It assumes that at each frontier node a special evaluation function returns
a reliable lower and upper bound on the true value of the node. After a
2.5 RELATED ALGORITHMS
node is expanded, the lower and upper bounds of a node are calculated by
maximizing (or minimizing, depending on the node type) the lower and upper
bounds of its children. Let us assume that the root of the tree is a max node.
Let us further assume that the root has two children ,4 and 5, with values in
the intervals and . B*'s main goal is to determine the best move,
without necessarily knowing the exact vafue of such a move. In our example,
5 is the most-promising child of the root. Before we can terminate the search,
however, we should either prove that the upper bound (2) on J4'S interval can
be reduced to a value below the lower bound of 5, which currently equals 1,
or we should prove that the lower bound of 5 can be raised to at least the
value of ;4's upper bound. These two different strategies are called prove and
Focusing both on proving and disproving is a similarity with pn-search.
However, a difference with pn-search is that there is no way to simultaneously
work on both strategies. Thus, in B*, at each step first a choice must be made
for one of the strategies, followed by the selection of a node. Of course, after
each node expansion, a change of strategies may take place. Since B* does not
assume that some nodes may change their bounds more easily than others,
we suggest that the concept of proof and disproof numbers could be a useful
addition to B*.
An important prerequisite of B* is the re/taft/e evaluation function which
determines the lower and upper bound per node. Such an evaluation function
heavily depends on domain-specific knowledge, and may be a serious obstacle
in many domains. If, however, the knowledge to create such a function is
readily available, B* provides a sound mechanism to incorporate it to guide
the search process. An alternative way to obtain these bounds through a
small search has been described by . For pn-search such a clear
mechanism has not yet been formulated. In this respect B* has advantages
above pn-search.
A*, a single-agent search algorithm, has links with pn-search. A* is a bestfirst search algorithm, which uses an admissible evaluation function at each
frontier node. Such a function calculates a lower bound on the total costs
of the path from the root to a solution through that node. At each step
a node with minimal lower bound on the solution costs is developed. A*
thus guarantees finding an optimal solution .
CHAPTER 2.
PROOF-NUMBER SEARCH
Where A* concentrates on the cheapest ouera/Z solution, including the
effort already spent (i.e., the cost of the path from root to frontier node), pnsearch selects a node on the basis of the cheapest remaining solution, thus
ignoring the contribution of already solved nodes and the path length from
the root to the most-proving node. As a result, pn-search is not guaranteed
to find the solution tree of minimal size.
Surprisingly, a small change to pn-search is sufficient to let it find the
minimal solution tree. If, at each internal node, we add one to the proof
number and disproof number as calculated from its children's proof and
disproof numbers, then the proof number and disproof number at each node
are a lower bound on the size of a solution tree for the node. We remark that
proof and disproof numbers now can only increase, making some changes to
the algorithm necessary. This algorithm, originating from discussions with
Ingo Althôfer, has been named MST*, short for Minimal Solution-Tree search.
MST*, as variant of pn-search, will be subject of future research.
Dependency-Based Search
Introduction
In section 2.1, we argued that choosing a representation and performing
a search are two interacting subprocesses of problem solving.
representations of a problem may result in smaller state spaces, and
better search algorithms may traverse a given state space more efficiently.
While the game-tree search algorithm pn-search (chapter 2) focuses on the
latter, the single-agent search algorithm dependency-based search (db-search)
introduced in this chapter, focuses on the former.
Atomic vs. structured states
Search problems are often modeled by treating states as atomic entities. This
means that two states are considered as either equal or different, without the
option of a measure of similarity between states.
As an alternative to atomic state representations, states can be structured,
such as in STRIPS . In STRIPS, each state is denned
as a set of attributes. Each operator / is specified by a precondition set, a
de/ete set and an add set. In any state A containing the attributes of the
precondition set of /, / can be applied, yielding a state 5. 5 consists of the
attributes of A with the attributes of the delete set of / removed and with
the attributes of the add set of / added.
To see how a structured state representation may help in reducing the size
of a state space consider a production system P consisting of 10 rewriting
rules ro,ri,...,rg.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
' i- v ; ; ;^f'UJ
u ; , , ; -
Furthermore, we consider'production system P', which contains the 10 rules
of P as well as the rule rioaltogether - ^
Rule rio states that the string a^oge</ier may be replaced by the string goa/.
For both P and P', we start with the initial string 0123456789. The goal of
both P and P' is to create the string 500/. Clearly, in P there is no solution,
while any order of applying rules ro to rg, followed by the application of rio
leads to the goal in P'.
First, let us represent P using atomic states. The state space will consist
of 2*° = 1024 states, each representing a mixture of digits and lower-case
letters. The state space of P' consists of the same 1024 states as P, with
one additional state consisting of the string 300/. Without the application of
domain-specific knowledge, searching P consists of traversing the full state
space of 1024 states. The number of states visited in P' depends on the
search algorithm applied. Depth-first search visits the goal as 11th state,
while breadth-first search visits the goal state as number 1025.
Second, let us represent P and P' using structured states. A possible
structure consists of attributes of the form a(i, 2), where z € {0,..., 9}, and
2 € {0,... ,9, a, e,g, /i, Z,o, r, t}. An attribute a(t,z) indicates that letter or
digit 2 occupies position i in the string represented by the set of attributes.
In P' we have an additional attribute <? representing the string pod. The
rule ro can now be represented by its precondition set {a(0,0)}, its delete
set {a(0,0)} and its add set {a(0, a)}. Similarly, rule rs is represented by its
3.1 INTRODUCTION
precondition set {a(5,5)}, its delete set {a(5,5)} and its add set {a(5,e)}.
The rule rio is represented by its precondition set
{o(0, a), o(l, 0, o(2, t), o(3, o), o(4, p), a(5, e), o(6, t), a(7, /i), o(8, e), a(9, r)},
its delete set
{a(0, a), o(l, 0, a(2, t), o(3, o), a(4, p), a(5, e), a(6, i), o(7, /i), o(8, e), a(9, r)},
and its add set
{a(0,p),a(l,o),a(2,a),a(3,/)}.
The number of states in the state space, as well as the number of states visited
by depth-first search and breadth-first search algorithms are equivalent to the
numbers found for atomic states.
The difference between the atomic and the structured state representations is that the structure of states provides us with a framework for reasoning
about relations between states and operators (e.g., rewriting rules), wtà/iout
having to rely on domain-specific knowledge. As an example of such a relation
between operators we state that any two rules r* and rj, for 0 < i < ji < 9
are independent, meaning that in any state where both rules can be applied,
changing the order of application does not influence the outcome.
Clearly, all relations which can be found by using structured state representations can also be found through a domain-specific analysis of the
problem at hand. The advantage of a general framework using structured
states as introduced in this chapter is that the analysis is performed once
and for all for a category of problems.
In this chapter we define a framework, based on structured states and
STRiPS-like operators. Within the framework, a set of conditions has been
identified which are sufficient to prove that a reduction of the state space can
be performed without the loss of solutions in the state space.
Conventional search algorithms cannot traverse the reduced state space;
but the db-search algorithm can. It is proved that db-search, introduced for
the purpose, traverses exactly the reduced state space.
To give an indication of the amount of state-space reduction achieved by
our framework, we once again look at the state space defined for production
systems P and P'. For P the reduced state space consists of 11 elements
(an initial state and 10 states representing the changes by rules ro,... ,rg).
For P' the reduced state space consists of 12 elements (one additional state
representing 30a/). These numbers should be compared with the 1024 and
1025 found for the atomic-state representation.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
Overview of the chapter
In section 3.2 we describe the double-letter puzzle (DLP), which is used as
an example throughout the chapter. In section 3.3 we formally define a
framework for a category of single-agent searches based on structured-state
representations. Each definition in this section is illustrated by its application
to DLP. In section 3.4 db-search is described informally using the framework
introduced in the previous section, by applying it to an instance of DLP. In
section 3.5 we present algorithms in pseudo-code for db-search. In section
3.6 we compare the performances on DLP of db-search and depth-first search.
Finally, in section 3.7 the scope of applicability of db-search is discussed. For
practical results of db-search we refer to chapters 4 and 5.
The double-letter puzzle
The double-letter puzzle (DLP) is a production system consisting of an oxiom
and a set of 10 rewriting rufes. The axiom is an element of {a, 6, c, d, e}+.
The rewriting rules are listed below.
aa —» e | 6
66 —> a | c
cc —> 6 | d
dd —> c | e
ee —> d | a
The rewriting rules can be informally described as allowing any double
occurrence of a letter to be replaced by a single instance of its alphabetical
predecessor or successor in a circular alphabet.
We define the set of theorems of DLP as follows:
1. The axiom is a theorem
2. If i is a theorem and there exists a rewriting rule r such that x -^-* y,
then y is a theorem.
3. There are no theorems except as defined by 1. and 2.
Each theorem of length 1 (i.e., a theorem consisting of a single letter) is called
a solution to DLP.
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
Two solutions to instance aa6dc66dcaa of DLP are presented below.
aa6dc66dcaa °-^+ 66dc66dcaa -^? adc66dcaa - ^ adccdcaa ^ *
— • adddcaa — • aaccaa — > addaa — > aeaa — > aee — >
aa—»6|e , .
aa6dc66dcaa °-^> 66dc66dcaa -^> cdc66dcaa —> cdccdcaa —>
—• cdadcaa —• ccdcaa —>• dacaa —> ccaa —> oaa —•
oa—**> I L W—»o|c
—>• 66 —> a | c
From the examples we see that a, 6, c and e can be deduced. For a proof
that d cannot be deduced from aa6dc66dcaa, we refer to appendix A.
3.3 A formal framework for db-search
In this section we define a formal framework for db-search. The framework
is described in four steps. In section 3.3.1 we define states and operators. In
section 3.3.2 we define paths through the state space and classes of equivalent
paths. It is shown that conventional search algorithms traverse exactly the
set of all paths. In section 3.3.3 key classes are defined. These form a subset
of the classes of paths defined previously. It is shown that, under accurately
defined circumstances, the set of all key classes is complete, meaning that each
solution path is represented by a key class. In section 3.3.4 we define a metaoperator for traversing the state space defined by the set of all key classes.
It is shown that the meta-operator is sound and complete, meaning that
through application of the meta-operator exactly all key classes are visited.
Finally, in section 3.3.5, we summarize the properties of our framework.
The description of the framework for db-search requires a large number
of definitions. For reference purposes, we have listed the symbols used in this
section and a short description of their meaning in table 3.1. Each definition
in this section is illustrated by its application to the instance of DLP with
axiom aacc.
States and operators
In this section we first define the set of attributes C/ and the state space £/,.
Then we define operators (consisting of a precondition set, a delete set and
an add set) which map states onto other states, followed by the set of all
CHAPTER 3. DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
•'(j'i9i'-,«l,*2)
description
the set of all attributes
the state space
the set of all initial states
the set of all goal states
the set of all operators
the set of all paths applicable to initial states
the set of all key classes
an operator
the precondition set of operator /
the delete set of operator /
the add set of operator /
the state reached when applying operator / to 5
/i supports /2, /2 depends on /i
/i precedes /2
an operator in DLP
the concatenation of paths P and Q
paths P and Q are equivalent
P and Q are transpositions
the state resulting from applying path P to state 5
the equivalence class of path P
the set of equivalence classes of t/p
the key operator (last operator) of path P
the merge of paths P and Q
the set of parents of operator / in path P
the set of ancestors of operator / in path P
the axiom state of DLP
Table 3.1: Symbols used in db-search framework
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
operators C/. Finally, we define the set f/i of all initial states, and the set C/j
of all goal states.
., ->-.-a «•*•''•* ^J^
Definition 3.1 Let [/ 6e a set 0/ attributes. JTien t/ie state space t/, w
as 2^, t/ie power set o/£/\
We index the letters of the axiom in DLP from 0 to n - 1, where n is
the length of the axiom (i.e., 4 for DLP with axiom aacc). In the axiom, the
first a has index 0, the second a has index 1, the first c has index 2 and the
second c has index 3. Each letter in a theorem originates from a substring
of the axiom. We represent a letter 2 in a theorem by three values: the first
and last index of the substring of the axiom 2 originates from, and 2 itself.
If aa6 is produced from aacc, the letter 6 originates from the substring cc in
the axiom, which has first index 2 and last index 3. Therefore, the 6 in aaft
is represented by ,4(2,3,6).
The set of all attributes f/ is specified as follows.
£/ = {A(i,j,2) | 0 < i < j < 3 A 2 G {a,6,c,d,e}}
As the axiom will play a special role in many of the definitions of this section,
we denote the state representing the axiom aacc by Ac. In accordance with
definition 3.1, ,4x G £/j is represented as follows.
Ax = {A(0,0, a), ,4(1, 1, a), ,4(2,2, c), ,4(3,3, c)}
Definition 3.2 We de/ine an operator / as a 3-tupfe </^",/*',/•"">, toitfc
/ " " , / * ' , / « « Ç [/ and / * ' Ç /P".
77ie elements in tàe 5-tuple are
named t/ie precondition set, t/ie delete set and t/ie add set 0//, respec£it;e/y.
Operator / is a partia/ /unction / : [/„ —> [/«, de/ïned as /(S) = ( 5 \ /*') U
/"**, /or o / I S D / ^ .
Definition 3.2 states that an operator / is applicable to each state
containing all attributes in the precondition set of /. Applying operator
/ to state 5 yields a state T, by deleting the attributes of the delete set of /
from 5 and adding to the result the attributes of the add set of /. In DLP,
two equal adjacent letters 21 are replaced by 22, which is either the successor
or predecessor of 21. The two 21S originate from two adjacent substrings in
the axiom. Let the first 21 originate from the substring with start index p
and end index 0, and let the second 21 originate from the substring with start
index q + 1 and end index r. Then, the indices p, q, and r, and the letters 21
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
and 22 are sufficient information to define an operator. In the following, we
denote with /(p,<j,r,zi,*2) the operator
({A(p, g, zi), A(o + 1, r, zi)}, {A(p, g, zi), A(o + 1, r, zi)}, {A(p, r, 22)}).
An example operator in DLP is
/(o,o,i,a,6) = <M(0,0, a), A(l, 1, a)}, { A(0,0, a), A(l, 1, a)}, { A(0,1,6)})
Applying /(o,o,i,a,b) to axiom state Ax yields {A(0,1,6), A(2,2, c), A(3,3, c)}.
Definition 3.3 77ie set 0/ operators denned unt/im 0 domain is denoted 6t/
Using definition 3.3 we define for our instance of DLP the set of operators
{/(p,9,r,*i,22) I 0 < p < g < r < 3 A zi 6 {a, 6, c, d, e} A 22 G succpred(2i)}
Here succpred(z) denotes a set containing the circular alphabetical successor
and predecessor of 2.
Definition 3.4 We denote t/ie set 0/initial states 6y f/j, unt/i t/j Ç [/«. We
denote t/ie set o/goal states oy C/g, tuit/i L^ Ç [/„.
For our instance of DLP,
{{A(0,3,a)},{A(0,3,6)},{yl(0,3,c)},{A(0,3,d)},{A(0,3,e)}}.
In this section we first define paths, which are just sequences of operators.
We define the application of a path to a state 5, as one by one applying the
operators, starting from state 5. Then solutions for a state 5 are defined as
the paths which, if applied to 5 yield a superset of a goal state. We then
define the extension of a path P, which is a path consisting of all operators of
P, in the same order, plus one additional operator. An equivalence relation
for paths is defined, which states that two paths are equivalent if one is
a permutation of the other. Then, a notation for equivalence classes of
paths is introduced. Finally, we describe the behavior of conventional search
algorithms in terms of paths.
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
Definition 3.5 ^Inj/ e/ement P o/ £//* ts a path. Let P = (/i,..., /„) 6e a
pat/i. Let concatenation o/ two pat/is P ana" Q 6e denoted 6y P ~ Q- TTien,
P is applicable to 5 i/ (ij P = e, or f2j P = (/) ~ Q and /(S) is de/ined
and Q is appZicaè/e to /(5). / / P is appZica&Ze to 5, t/ien
For path P = (/(o,o,i,a,6),/(2,2,3,c,b),/(o,i,3,fc,c)), applicable to the axiom
state J4:E, it follows from definition 3.5 that
/(0,l,3,6,c)(/(2,2,3,c,6)({^(0, 1, 6), A(2, 2, c), yl(3, 3, C)})) =
Definition 3.6 T/ie set o/pat/is t/p, is de/îned as
[/p = {P | 5 G f/i A P is applicable to 5}
It can be checked that for our instance of DLP with initial state Ax, f/p
(definition 3.6) consists of 17 paths.
^P = fc> (/(0,0,l,a,6))> (/(0,0,l,a,e))> (/(2,2,3,c,6))i (/(2,2,3,c,(i))i
(/(0,0,l,o,«>)' /(2,2,3,c,b))> (/(2,2,3,c,h). /(0,0,l>a,6))> (/(0,0,l,a,t)i /(2,2,3,c,d))i
(/(2,2,3,c,d)> /(0,0,l,a,6))> (/(0,0,l,a,e)i /(2,2,3,c,6))i (/(2,2,3,c,6)i /(0,0,l,a,e)).
(/(0,0,l,a,e). /(2,2,3,c,d))) (/(2,2,3,c,d)) /(0,0,l,a,e))i
(/(0,0,l,a,b)t /(2,2,3,c,6)i /(0,l,3,6,a))i (/(2,2,3,c,6)> /(0,0,l,a,6)i /(0,l,3,6,o))i
(/(0,0,l,a,b), /(2,2,3,c,b). /(0,l,3,b,c))i (/(2,2,3,c,b)i /(0,0,l,a,b), /(O,l,3,b,c))}
Definition 3.7 Let P = ( / i , - - - , / n ) ^e a pat/i app/icatZe to 5 . VKe de/ine
t/ie /o/Zou/in^ terroino/o^j/ tyit/i respect to P .
i. P is a solution /or 5, i/3x G f/g x Ç P(5).
â. A pat/i Q is an extension o/P, i/Q = P ~ (/), /or some operator / .
We give examples for definition 3.7 using path
(/(0,0,l,a,b))/(2,2,3,c,b)./(0,l,3,b,c))-
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
» 1. P is a solution for axiom state Ac, because P(Ac) = {A(0,3, c)} and
{A(0,3, c)} e C/j.
2. P is an extension of path (/(o,o,i,a,6). /(2,2,3,c,6))-
Definition 3.8 let P and Q 6e paf/is. P and Q are equivalent, denoted
P = Q, i/P is a peJ7nu<a<ion o/Q.
An example of definition 3.8 from the set of paths in DLP applicable to
(/(0,0,l,o,6). /(2,2,3,c,6). /(0,l,3,b,c)) = (/(2,2,3,c,6). /(0,0,l,o,b). /(0,l,3,6,c))
Definition 3.9 Let P € f/p 6e a pat/i. We denote t/ie set o/ a/Z pat/is Q G C/p
suc/i t/iat P = Q 63/ [P]= ft/ie eamva/ence c/ass o/P modu/o =j. T/ie set 0/
a// eçuiva/ence c/asses 0/ C/p modu/o = is denoted 6y f^p/= •
From definition 3.9 and the example after definition 3.6 it follows that for
•P = (/(0,0,l,a,6)./(2,2,3,c,fc)>/(0,l,3,6,c))i
0,0,l,a,6)./(2,2,3,c,6)i/(0,l,3Ac)), (/(2,2,3,c,6). /(0,0,l,a,6)> /(0,l,3,b,c)))-
We mention that in our instance of DLP f/p/= consists of 11 equivalence
Traversing C/p
In this section we describe how a conventional tree search algorithm traverses
C/p, as defined within our framework.
As an example tree search algorithm, we discuss dept/1-./ïrst searc/i (DFS).
Starting from initial state Ac, DFS traverses a tree such that each node TV
represents a path P applicable to initial state Az. At node TV, an operator
/ of £// can be applied, if / is applicable to P(Ar). In other words, / can
be applied at node iV, if P ~ (/) is applicable to Ar, i.e., P ~ (/) G £/p.
Clearly, DFS will traverse a finite C/p fully, unless terminated early.
A reduction of state space C/p is applied in many practical domains. We
say that P = Q if P(Ar) = Q(Az). Thus, if P = Q, then P(Ar) and Q(Ac)
are transpositions. From the definition of a path, it is clear that in such a
case P and Q can be extended in exactly the same way. Thus, even though
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
several paths may lead to the same state, the continuations from that state
need to be investigated only once. Instead of traversing f/p, we may therefore
restrict ourselves to traversing £/p/^. To do so, transposition ia6/es are used
to store the results of investigating the continuations starting at each node.
Before investigating a node, it is checked whether the node has already been
investigated (indicating that the node is a transposition) (Greenblatt et o/.,
We conclude that conventional tree search algorithms traverse the state
space £/p, which may be reduced by investigating each transposition only
Key classes
In this section we define the key operator of a path (which is just the last
operator of the path), key classes (which are equivalence classes of paths
where all paths have the same key operator), and the set of all key classes. We
define monotonicity, which indicates that in the course of executing operators,
an attribute can never be recreated after it has been deleted. We define
singularity, which means that each goal state consists of a single attribute.
Furthermore, we define redundant paths, which are extensions of solutions.
Finally, we show that the set of all key classes is complete under the condition
of monotonicity, singularity and the absence of redundancy. Completeness
means that each solution in C/p is an element of a key class.
Definition 3.10 Lei P = (/i,...,/n) ^ a pa£/i apphca&Ze to 5. 77ie /ast
operator o/ a non-empiy pat/i P fi.e., /„,), is ca//ed i/ie key operator o/ t/ie
pat/i. A^oiafion: fcey(P) = /„.
For path P = (/(o,o,i,a,6),/(2,2,3,c,6),/(o,i,3,6,c)) we obtain from definition
3.10 that fcey(P) = /(o,i,3,6,c)-
Definition 3.11 Lei C G C/p/= &e o c/ass. C is a key class, i//or a/f Pj, P, G
C, fcey(Pj) = fcey(Pj). TTie set o/ a// fcey c/asses o/ f/p/= is denoted iy £/*.
TTie key o/ a fcey dass C is denned to eçua/ t/ie fcey o/ i/ie pat/is in C and is
denoted 6y fcey(C).
From definition 3.11 and the example after definition 3.9, it follows
that for P = (/(o,o,i,a,6)./(2,2,3,c,6)./(o,i.3,fc,c)). [^1= is a key class.
Q = (/(o,o,i.a,6)./(2,2,3,c,6))i [Q]= is not a key class, since Q has key /(2,2,3,c,6),
while (/(2,2,3,c,6)»/(o,o,i,a,b)) has key /(o,o,i,a,b)- We note that £/* for our
instance of DLP consists of 7 key classes.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
Definition 3.12 4 pa</i P = (/i,..., /„) app/icaft/e to S w monotonous for
v ^ /?** n /f" = 0 A Vi s n /f** = 0.
[/p M monotonous i/ a// pat/is in C/p ore monotonous /or aH S € £/t-
In our instance of DLP, there are 17 paths. Investigation shows that each
path P is monotonous for 4z. From definition 3.12 it follows that f/p is
monotonous.
Definition 3.13 We say Mat £/g w singular i/ eac/i 5 € f/g consists o/ a
sinpfe attribute, i.e., |5| = 1.
The C/g defined for DLP,
^ = {{4(0,3, a)}, {4(0,3,6)}, {4(0,3, c)}, {4(0,3, d)}, {4(0,3, e)}}
is singular, according to definition 3.13.
Definition 3.14 4 pat/i Q is redundant, i/Q is an extension o/P, and P
is a so/ution /or an initia/ state, or P is redundant. £/p is non-redundant, i/
no pat/i in f/p is redundant.
In DLP, there are no operators applicable to goal states. Therefore, there
are no redundant paths in DLP, as defined in definition 3.14.
Completeness of C/jt
In section 3.3.2 we have shown that conventional search algorithms traverse
C/p. Through the equivalence relation =, we have defined classes of paths,
£/p/=. Of these classes, the subset f/^ of key classes has been singled out.
In this section we will show that to find all solutions in C/p, it is sufficient
to consider only paths which are elements of key classes, thereby restricting
the size of the state space. Our proof is based on the assumption that t/p is
monotonous and non-redundant, and that f/g is singular.
Our proof consists of three steps. First, in lemma 3.1 we show that
either all paths in a class are a solution, or none are. It follows that instead
of focusing on paths, we need only to focus on classes of paths, thereby
restricting our state space to £/p/=. Second, in lemma 3.2 we show that each
equivalence class containing a solution must be a key class. Third, in theorem
3.1 we combine these two results to show that it is sufficient to examine the
set of all key classes [/*.
Lemma 3.1 Let P and Q, pat/is app/ica&/e to 5, 6e e/ements o/[P]=, /or P
and Q monotonous /or 5. 77ien P(S) =
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
:>^''i'*ï-'
'•-&•'•> **>'W "!'"''b'!O_.iiilJV:>-ï
-iiiîjif.T .
We assume without lack of generality that P = (/i,..., /„) for some natural
n. Let a G P(S) be an attribute. Then, because of monotonicity, a is an
element of exactly one of the following sets: 5, /f", /£<",..., /£*". Now let
us suppose that a € /,**"', for some i. Then from definition 3.2 it follows
that a € /f', restricting a to membership of exactly one of the following
sets: S,/f",/a™"> •••>/?-*?• But then, since a g /<(... (/i(5))), also a £
P(S). This contradicts our assumption that a G P(S). Thus, there is no
i G {1,... ,n} such that a G /,^'. Since Q is a permutation of P, a G Q(5)
and P(S) Ç Q(S). Analogously, Q(5) Ç P(5).
Lemma 3.2 Let f/g 6e singular and Jet C/p 6e monotonous and non-redundant. / / P is a so/ution app/icaft/e (o 5 t/ien [P]= is a A;ej/ c/ass.
Let Q G [P]=- We assume without lack of generality that Q = (/i,..., /n)
for some natural n. Let x be an attribute in an element of f/g. If x G /p"^,
for some p G {1,..., n}, then (/i,..., /p) is a solution, since C/g is singular.
Since £/p is non-redundant, Q is non-redundant. Thus, /p must be the last
operator (i.e., the key operator) of Q. As /p occurs in all paths in [P]=, it
must be the key operator in each of these paths. Thus, [P]= is a key class •
Theorem 3.1 Le< f/p 6e monotonous and non-redundant and Jet f/g fte
sinpu/ar. 77ien f/^ is comp/ete ('i.e., eac/i so/ution pat/i in [7p is e/ement
o/ a c/ass in £4, and eac/i cZass in t/jt either consists o/ on/y so/utions, or no
so/utionsj.
From lemma 3.1 it follows that either all paths in the equivalence classes
of t/p/= are solutions, or none are. From lemma 3.2 it follows that the
equivalence class modulo = for any solution path is a key class. Thus, for any
solution path, its equivalence class is a key class, of which each representative
is a solution. Thus t/* is complete.
Traversing £/*
In this section we define two relations, to support and to precede, between
operators.
These relations create a partial order between operators in
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
monotonous paths.
Using the partial order we can define the parents
(operators which directly support or precede an operator) and ancestors
(operators which directly or indirectly support or precede an operator). Last,
we define the merge of a set of classes, which itself is a class. The merge of a
set of classes consists of paths containing exactly the operators in the paths of
the classes merged. Stated more simply, if we merge a class containing path
P with a class containing path Q, the merge contains all paths consisting of
exactly the operators in P and Q. Operators in both P and Q occur only
once in the paths of the merge.
The purpose of these definitions is to create a meta-operator which is
capable of traversing exactly C/fc. We have shown in section 3.3.3 that C/^
is complete. Together with a proof that we have a meta-operator which
traverses exactly £4, we have shown that a restricted state space can be
traversed, without reduced efficacy.
The definition of the meta-operator
and the proof of its soundness (each application leads to a key class) and
completeness (all key classes will be created by application of the metaoperator) follow the definitions in this section.
Definition 3.15 Let /n/2 € {//. We de/ine t/ie tu/o re/ations -< (supports)
and «C (precedes) on £// x [// as /o//ou;s.
We remark that we will use both the phrases /1 supports /2 and /2 depends
on /1 to describe /1 -< /2- We provide examples in our instance of DLP, for
the two relations of definition 3.15.
2- /(0,0,l,a,6) « /(0,0,l,«,e), ^ /(7o,l,a,6) ^ /(O,Ô,l,«,e) = M(0, 0,a),
We remark that also /(o,o,i,a,e) *^ /(o,o,i,a,6)-
Which shows that
/(o,o,i,a,e) and /(o,o,i,a,6) cannot occur in the same monotonous path.
Definition 3.16 Let P k a non-empty pat/i apph'ca&fe to 5, and /et / 6e an
operator in pat/i P. 77ie set 0/ parents 0/ / m P is de/ïned as
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
Between /(o,o,i,a,6). /(2,2,3,c,6) and /(o,i,3,6,c) the following two relations
hold: /(o,o,i,o,6) -< /(o,i,3,6,c) and /(2,2,3,c,6) -< /(o,i,3,6,c)- Thus, for path P =
(/(o,o,i,a,6)./(2,2,3,c,6),/(o,i,3,6,c)). definition 3.16 states that P a r / ^ j ^ , ( P ) =
{/(0,0,l,a,6)i/(2,2,3,c,6)}-
. . . , • [ , !
Definition 3.17 Let P 6e a non-emptj/ paf/i appZica&Ze to 5, and /ef / fte an
operator in P. TTie set o/ancestors o// in P is denned as
Furt/iermore, a parent /j o// is named a relevant parent i//or aZi parents /,•
In our example instance of DLP, ^4nc/(P) = {/} U Par/(P), for all paths
P and all operators /. In more complex instances of DLP, however, not all
ancestors of / as defined in definition 3.17 will be parents of / (or / itself).
In each instance of DLP, each parent is a relevant parent.
Definition 3.18 Let Pi,...,Pn 6e pat/is apphcafi/e to 5. 7Vien t/ie merge
o/ Pi,..., P,i, denoted 6j/ Pi || ... || P,,, is de/med as t/ie set o/ a// pat/is Q
app/icaftie to 5, suc/i t/iai Q is a permutation o/ t/ie set o/ a// operators in
t/ie P^ 77ie merpe o/ a set o/ c/asses [Pi]= is de/îned as ^/ie mer^e o/ a set o/
representatives o/ t/ie cZasses. T/ius,
We present three examples of merges of paths, as defined in definition
(/(0,0,l,a,6)) II (/(2,2,3,c,6))
{(/(0,0,l,a,6)i/(2,2,3,c,6))i (/(2,2,3,c,6)./(0,0,l,o,6))}
(/(0,0,l,a,6)) II (/(0,0,l,a,e))
(/(0,0,l,o,6)) II (/(2,2,3,c,b))
{(/(0,0,l,a,6))} II {(/(2,2,3,c,6))}}
A meta-operator
So far, we have defined [/* and proved its completeness, under the assumptions of singularity, non-redundancy and monotonicity. For the remainder
of this section we assume that these three conditions hold, unless stated
otherwise.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
Traversing C/fc is not as straightforward as traversing £/p. For instance,
{(/(o,o,i,a,6))} is a key class in the unsolvable instance aacaa of DLP, whose
axiom is represented by
{4(0,0, a), 4(1, 1, a), 4(2,2, c), 4(3,3, a), 4(4,4, a)}.
We can extend the only path in the key class to the paths (/(o,o,i,a,6). /(3,3,4,a,6))
and (/(o,o,i,a,6)>/(3,3,4,a,e))- However, in both cases the equivalence classes of
these paths are not key classes. Thus, extending elements of key classes
may lead to paths which are not element of a key class. We conclude that
traversing f/fc involves more than just extending paths.
In this section we introduce the meta-operator i^(A^, /) which is capable of
traversing [/*. First, we define F(7V, /). Then we prove that each application
of F(./v*, /) in a graph where each node represents a key class, creates only
nodes representing key classes. Finally, we prove through induction that each
key class is created through'application of F(./V, /).
Definition of the meta-operator
We define meta-operator F(Af,/) in definition 3.19.
Definition 3.19 Let AT Ç [/*, tzntfi TV = {Ci,... ,Cn}, a// Cj # 0, and
n > 1. Let Ci || ... || C,, = C, witfi C ^ 0. Let operator / € £//, suc/i
t/iat Vi<j<n (fcey(Ci) -< / V fcej/(Cj) <C /), and Jet / 6e an extension to a
pat/i P E C .
We t/ien say t/iat / w valid in TV. F(TV,/) is applicable i/
and onty i/ / is va/id m N and t/iere z« no proper suftset M o/ AT, suc/i
t/iat / 15 va/id in M. 7/F(iV,/) is appficaè/e, t/ien F(JV, /) = [P ~ (/)]=.
Furt/iermore, F(0, /) is app/icatie i/ and on/y i/ /(Ax) is de/îned. 7n t/iose
cases, F(0,/) = {(/)}.
An informal interpretation of F(A^, /) is as follows. Operator / can only
be applied to states containing all elements of /*""'. Each element Ci of the
set of key classes N contributes one or more attributes of /*""% implying that
/ depends on or is preceded by the key operators of each CV If all operators
in the Ci can be combined without conflicts (i.e., the merge of all Ci is not
empty) and paths in the merge extended with / are applicable, then F(AT, /)
is applicable.
We give two examples. First, we look at instance aacc of DLP. Both Ci =
{(/(o,o,i.a,6))} and C2 = {(/(2,2,3,c,6))} are key classes. Operator / = /(o,i,3,6,o).
with / P " = {4(0,1,6), 4(2,3,6)} depends on the keys of the paths of Ci and
C2. Furthermore, Ci || C2 = {(/(0,0,l,a,6),/(2,2,3,c,6)), (/(2,2,3,c,6)./(0,0,l,a,6))}-
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
For both paths Qi and Q2 in the merge, Qi ~ (/) and Q2 ~ (/) are
applicable to Ax. Finally, F({Ci},/) and F({C2},/) are not valid. Thus,
F({Ci,C2>,/) is applicable.
Second, we look at the production system P' of section 3.1. In P', each
of the applications of ro,..., r9 results in a key class of one element, which
we name Co through C9. Rule rio depends on each of the applications of
ro to rg to have been executed. Thus, F({Co,..., C9}, rio) is applicable and
yields the solution of P'.
,,;,;;:>::
Soundness of the meta-operator
In theorem 3.2 we prove that each application of meta-operator F(./V, /)
creates a key class. Before we give the proof of theorem 3.2, we prove lemmas
3.3 and 3.4.
Lemma 3.3 Let P = (/1,..., /„) 6e a pat/i opp/ica6ie £0 5. Let /* ^ /j+i A
/i 5^ /i+i • 7%en (/1,..., /j_i, /i+i, /i, /i+2, • • •, /n) w ako a pa^ app/tca6/e
Let /i_i(...(/i(5))...) = T. Then /j(T) is denned, and /f" Ç T. Since
/, / /i+i we know that /f" n / ^ = 0. Thus, / ^ Ç T and /i+i(T) is
denned. Furthermore, /j ^ /j+i implies that /^'j n /f" = 0. Therefore
/i(/i+i(T)) is defined. Since /i(/i+i(T)) = /i+i(/i(T)) according to lemma
3.1, (/i,...,/i-i,/i+i,/i,/i+2,...,/n) is a path.
Lemma 3.4 Let C 6e 0 fcey c/oss u;ii/i fcey /„. Let P = (/1,..., /„) 6e o pat/i
in C. T/ien t/ie /oi/owinj two statements are true.
1. Vi<i<«_i 3j->i (A -< /,• V /i < /,•)
2- Vi<i<«_i
(/nT^/.A/n^/,)
1. Suppose that there exists an /p, with 1 < p < n— 1, such that Vj>p(/p ^
/j A/p ^ /,). Then, by repeated application of lemma 3.3, we can move
/p to the end of P. However, this contradicts the assumption that C is
a key class. Thus, Vi<j<n-i3j>i(/i -< /j V /i < /,-)•
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
2. Suppose that there exists an /p, with 1 < p < n— 1, such that /„ -< /p.
Then /£<" n /*""• # 0 . Let x € /"** n /£". Then, by monotonicity,
x £ 5 and x 0 /f**, for all i < n. Thus, /p is only applicable if p > n,
which is a contradiction. Thus, /n ^ /p. Suppose that there exists an
/p, with 1 < p < n - 1, such that /„ < /p. Then /£" n /**' # 0. Let
x € / £ " D /*'. Then, by definition 3.2 x € /£", and either x € 5, or
x € /•"" for exactly one i < p, but not both. And thus, x g /?** for all
j > p. Thus, /„ is only applicable, if n < p, which is a contradiction.
Thus, /„ }£ /p. Therefore, Vi<<<n_i (/„ ^ /* A /„ < /<).
Theorem 3.2 // F(iV, /) is appJicaft/e, t/ien F(iV, /) is a fcey c/ass.
Consider arbitrary P € -F(.N, /) and suppose that Aej/(P) 7^ /. Then either
fcey(P) = A;ey(Pi) for some Pj in a class in AT or fcey(P) is a non-key operator
/j in a path in some class in iV. The first case leads to a contradiction, since
fcey(Pi) -< / according to definition 3.19, which contradicts lemma 3.4. The
second case also leads to a contradiction, since [Pj]= is a key class, and from
lemma 3.4 it follows that /, precedes or supports at least one operator /*
in Pj and thus cannot be the key in Pj. We conclude that the assumption
A;ej/(P) ^ / is invalid, thus P(n, /) is a key class with key /.
Completeness of the meta-operator
In this section we prove by induction that each key class can be created
through applications of F(./V, /), as formulated in theorem 3.3. Before we
present the proof of theorem 3.3, we prove lemmas 3.5 and 3.6.
Lemma 3.5 Lei P Je a patfi apphcaèfe to 5, and / € P. 77ien i/iere is 0
opp/ico6/e to 5, suc/i
/. Q consists 0/ exact/y i/ie operators in j4nc/(P).
2. [Q]= is a fcey c/ass, tuit/i fcey /.
We name [Q]= t/ie key class induced by / in P.
3.3 A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR DB-SEARCH
1. Let P = (/i,... /n) and Q be the path consisting of the operators in
.4nc/(P) in the same order as they appear in P. Now let us suppose
that Q is not applicable to 5, i.e., there is an operator /i in Q, such
that /j is not applicable. Then, there is an attribute x G //""', such
that x G //**, while /_,• g j4nc/(P). However, then /*•" n / f " ^ 0,
and thus /,• -< /j, and thus /,• G i4nc/(P) if /< G >lnc/(P). Thus, Q is
applicable to 5.
2. By definition of j4nc/(P), for each operator /< G Anc/(P) with /j ^ /,
there is an operator /,-, such that /j -< /,• V /{ < /,-. And thus, /j must
occur before /,• in any path containing both. Thus, only / may be the
last operator in a path containing all operators in ylnc/(P). Therefore,
[Q]= is a key class, with key /.
Lemma 3.6 Let C Je a A;ey class wit/i fcey /„ and /et P G C 6e o pat/i, tuit/i
P = (/i,..., /n)- Let AT 6e t/ie set o/ relevant parents o/ /„ in P. 77ien t/ie
merge M o/ t/ie fcey c/osses induced 6y t/ie e/ements o/A^ is non-empty, and
/or eocA po«A Q G M, Q ~ (/„) G [P]=.
Let /i G P (1 < i < n — 1) be the operator with highest index such that
/i is not in any path of the key classes induced by the relevant parents of
/n- Since P is a path in a key class, it follows from lemma 3.4 that there
exists an /,• such that /j -< /j V /j < /,. If /, = /„, then /* is a parent of
/n and by definition a relevant parent. If /,• 7^ /„, then /j is in a path in the
same key class as /j induced by a relevant parent of /„. Thus, in both cases,
/i is in a path in a key class induced by a relevant parent of /„. From this
contradiction, it follows that all / , 6 ? are in a path in a key class induced by
a relevant parent of /„. Thus, the merge of all these key classes contains at
least the path Q such that Q ~ (/„) = P. From this it follows immediately
that for each path Q G M, Q ~ (/„) G [P]=.
Theorem 3.3 For eac/i non-empty fcey c/ass C G t/fe, tàere is a set AT o/ifcey
classes and an operator /, suc/i t/iat P(A^,/) = C.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
Let C = {(/i)}. Then by definition F(0,/i) = C.
We assume that each class C consisting of paths with length less than
n is the result of an application of -F(JV, /). Let P = (/i,..., /„) and
let C = [P]= be a key class, with key /„. Let .ft be the set of relevant
parents of /n in P. Furthermore, let iV be the set of key classes induced
by the elements of .ft (cf. lemma 3.5). Then, from lemma 3.6 it follows
that the merge M of all paths in TV is non-empty, and that for each
path g € M, [Q ~ (/„)]= = C. Thus, F(7V, /„) = C.
In this section we have created a framework for db-search. We have shown
that conventional search algorithms traverse the set of all paths £/p. The
object of determining the state space traversed by conventional search
algorithms was to create a standard for comparison with db-search.
Next we have defined the set of key classes £/*, which is a subset of the
equivalence classes of £/p modulo =. We have proved that f/jt is complete,
which means that all solutions in f/p are elements of classes in {/* under
the conditions of monotonicity, non-redundancy and singularity. Thus, even
though the cardinality of £/* is not larger than that of f/p, and often (much)
smaller, all solutions are present in the smaller state space.
Finally, we determined a meta-operator which can be used to traverse
the smaller state space 17*. The meta-operator F(iV,/) was defined, and we
have shown that it is both sound and complete. The former indicates that
each operation of the meta-operator yields an element of the reduced state
space, while the latter indicates that each element of the reduced state space
can be reached by application of the meta-operator.
Summarizing, we have succeeded in creating a framework which allows
us to search a smaller state space, while being assured that the smaller
state space contains all solutions of the original state space, and that the
smaller state space is fully traversed. What remains to be done, is to describe
practical algorithms for applying the meta-operator in an efficient manner.
This is the topic of the next section.
3.4 INFORMAL DESCRIPTION OF DB-SEARCH
3.4 Informal description of db-search
In section 3.3.4 we have defined meta-operator F(iV, /). F(7V,/) can be
applied to a set of nodes JV (each node representing a key class) and an
operator /, under the three conditions that (1) the merge M of all key
classes in iV is non-empty; (2) the concatenation of a path P in M with
/ is applicable to the initial state; (3) for each of the key operators /i of the
classes in N, /i -< / or /j >C /.
Clearly, trying all subsets JV of nodes of a tree T as parameter for F(7V, /),
has a search complexity exponential in the number of nodes of T. In such a
case, searching C/fc may be more expensive than searching the larger set C/p
using a conventional search algorithm. The way in which db-search traverses
the search graph is designed to limit the cost of applying F(iV, /) as much
as possible. We present a short informal description of db-search, followed
by an explanation of the application of db-search to an instance of DLP
Db-search repeatedly executes Zeve/s, where each level consists of two
s£a<?es. In the first stage, named the dependency stage, only sets of nodes
with cardinality 1 are selected for application of F(7V, /). If new eligible sets
of nodes with cardinality 1 are created during a stage, F(7V, /) is applied to
these sets as well. The dependency stage ends when F(./V, /) has been applied
to all such sets. In the second stage, called the combination stage, sets of
nodes with larger cardinality are considered. A node A created during the
combination stage may not be element of a set iV to which F(./V, /) is applied
during the same stage. This ensures that the computationally expensive
combination stage does not continue any longer than is strictly necessary.
We remark that during each combination stage of db-search, we only
perform preparatory work for application of F(iV, /). We create a combination node A for each set of nodes TV, such that at least one / exists allowing
the execution of F(./V, /). During the dependency stage of the next level,
/ will be executed from A. Thus, nodes created during the combination
stage do not themselves represent elements of f/jt, but are aids to a clear
implementation. They correspond to the merge of the classes represented by
the nodes in iV.
In the following, we describe the application of db-search to instance
aaccadd of DLP.
Figure 3.1 shows the search graph after executing the first dependency
stage for axiom aaccadd. In each child node we have capitalized the letter
which has been created through the last applied operator. In each of the
1-ply nodes of the tree four operators are applicable. However, none of these
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
Figure 3.1: Search graph after 1st dependency stage for theorem aaccadd.
Figure 3.2: Search graph after 1st combination stage for theorem aaccadd.
correspond to an application of meta-operator F(iV, /), since the operator /
does not depend on the operator leading to the 1-ply node. To clarify this,
we look at the node representing theorem bccadd. The rules cc —> 6|d and
dd —> c|e are applicable and correspond to the operators /(2,2,3,c,6)> /(2,2,3,c,d)>
/(5,5,6,d,c) and /(5,5,6,d,e)' Neither of these operators depends on the operator
/(o,o,i,o,e) which has led to the creation of this node. Therefore, the metaoperator is not applicable in node Eccadd.
Having finished the first dependency stage, we proceed with the first
combination stage. In DLP, each precondition set of an operator consists of
two attributes. As a result, during the combination stage only combinations
of exactly two nodes need to be considered. Figure 3.2 shows the search
graph for our instance of DLP after finishing the first level of db-search.
It was created by examining all 15 combinations of two 1-ply nodes, to
see if the combination of two nodes would lead to a valid application of
the meta-operator. In one case it did, resulting in the creation of node
5Sadd. The operators which led to the creation of the parents 55add are
/(o,o,i,a,b) and /(2,2,3,c,6)- Depending on both these operators are /(o,i,3,6,a) and
/(o,i,3,6,c)- Thus, two operators are applicable in 5Bodd, for which reason
the combination node representing theorem B.Badd was created.
Next, we execute the dependency stage of the second level of db-search.
For this stage, we apply F(JV, /) to the combination node created in the
first level. The application of /(o,i,3,b,a) and /(o,i,3,6,c) from the combination
lead to the creation of Aadd and Cadd. From yladd we can apply two more
3.4 INFORMAL DESCRIPTION OF DB-SEARCH
••• :<J:::oObbA
!• ••";! ---: b v s i
Figure 3.3: Search graph after 2nd dependency stage for theorem aaccadd.
Figure 3.4: Complete dependency-based search graph for theorem aaccadd.
operators which depend on the operator leading to Aadd. Thus, a total of
four nodes is added in the second dependency stage. Figure 3.3 shows the
search graph after the second dependency stage.
For the second level of combination nodes, not all combinations of nodes
in the tree need to be checked. Only combinations involving at least one
node created during the second dependency stage need to be investigated. In
our example this leads to a combination between second-level node .Edd and
first-level node aaccai?. Using the new combination node, the third level of
nodes is created, again consisting of a dependency stage and a combination
The complete dependency-based search graph for theorem aaccadd is
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
procedure DbSearch()
CreateRoot(root);
level := 1;
while ResourcesAvailable() and TreeSizeIncreased() do
AddDependencyStage(root);
AddCombinationStage(root);
level := level + 1
Table 3.2: Main db-search algorithm.
procedure AddDependencyStage(node)
if node ^ nil then
if level = node.level+1 and
node.type in [Root, Combination] then
AddDependentChildren(node)
AddDependencyStage(node.child);
AddDependencyStage(node.sibling)
Table 3.3: Dependency-stage algorithm.
shown in figure 3.4.
The graph consists of three dependency levels, and two combination
levels. The third combination level is empty, which terminates the search.
From figure 3.4 we see that the instance of DLP with axiom aaccadd has two
solutions: single-letter theorems a and d can be created.
Algorithms
In this section we present the db-search algorithms in pseudo-code. We
remark that many implementation details have been omitted in the algorithms.
Table 3.2 shows the main loop of db-search. Repeatedly, a level is created,
3.5 ALGORITHMS
procedure AddDependentChildren(node)
for operator in LegalOperators(node) do
if Applicable(operator, node) then
LinkNewChildToGraph(node, operator);
AddDependentChildren(node.newChild)
Table 3.4: Dependent-children algorithm.
procedure AddCombinationStage(node);
if node ^ nil then
if node.type = Dependency and node.level = level then
FindAllCombinationNodes(node, root);
AddCombinationStage(node. child);
AddCombinationStage(node.sibling)
Table 3.5: Combination-level algorithm.
consisting of a dependency stage and a combination stage, as described in
section 3.4.
Table 3.3 shows the algorithm for creating the dependency stage. It is
assumed that each node has a child pointer and a sibling pointer. The child
pointer points to the first child of the node, while the child's sibling pointer
points to the next child, etc. This assumption explains the recursive calls in
v4d</Z)ependencyS£a<7e(9. In the graph, we distinguish between three types of
nodes: Z2oo£, Combination and Dependency. A dependency stage is started
only from combination nodes, and, for the first level, from the root.
The algorithm of table 3.4 determines all operators dependent on a node
and creates children for each eligible operator. The function ,4pp/zcafc/e(9 tests
to see if the selected operator and node form a pair of parameters which is
eligible for application of the meta-operator F(./V, /).
The second stage of each level of db-search consists of creating the
combinations of independent paths. In our example algorithm (see table
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
procedure FindAllCombinationNodes(partner, node);
if node ^ nil then
if NotInConflict(partner, node) then
if node.type = Dependency then
combination := Combine(partner, node);
operators := DependingOn(combination);
if operators ^ nil then
AddCombinationNode(node, combination)
FindAllCombinationNodes(partner, node.child)
FindAllCombinationNodes(partner, node.sibling)
Table 3.6: Algorithm to find combinations of nodes.
3.5) we have assumed that each combination consists of exactly two nodes.
In the double-letter puzzle and qubic, this is indeed the case. In go-moku,
combinations of up to four nodes exist. Extending the algorithm to include
combinations of three or more nodes is not difficult. A disadvantage is,
however, that searching for combinations of c nodes in a graph of size iV
has a time complexity in the order of JV\ Domain-specific reductions of
the complexity may often be possible. We have therefore refrained from
presenting a general algorithm for combinations of other than two nodes.
The algorithm of table 3.6 finds a node in the graph for a selected
partner. It is checked that the nodes are not in conflict, that its type is
a dependency node, and that the combination of the two nodes allows at
least one application of the meta-operator. This last condition is important
to prevent the creation of a large number of useless combination nodes.
Test results
Earlier, we stated that conventional search algorithms traverse f/p, while dbsearch traverses [/*. In this section we investigate through experiments on
DLP the difference in cardinality between C/p and £/*•
First, we describe the four algorithms used in the experiments. Second,
3.6 TEST RESULTS
we describe the set of test problems used for the experiments, as well as the
conditions in which the experiments took place. Third, we present the results
of the experiments.
Selected algorithms
As a conventional tree-search algorithm for our experiments, we have selected
DFS of which we have implemented two variants: (1) without transposition
tables (DFS-), and (2) with transposition tables (DFS+). Since we intend
to run the algorithms in our experiments until the complete state space has
been traversed, the performance of alternatives like breadth-first search are
equivalent to the performance of DFS.
The other two implemented algorithms are the domain-specific algorithm
TRIANGLE, presented in appendix A, and, of course, db-search. An advantage
of db-search over TRIANGLE is that in cases where only few theorems can be
deduced, db-search may search less nodes than the fixed number of entries
needed for TRIANGLE. A disadvantage of our implementation of db-search
is that we did not implement a transposition table. However, transpositions
resulting from the order in which operators are executed are non-existent in
C/fc, as they are all part of the same key class. As a result, transpositions
have only a minor influence on the performance of db-search on DLP.
Test problems
We have generated random instances of DLP. For each string length of 1
to 20, 100 strings were generated, for a total of 2000 axioms. For each of
these 2000 axioms, all four algorithms were to run to completion. However,
in order not to have extremely large state spaces dominate the results and to
keep the required resources within practical limits, we have set limits for the
state spaces examined by DFS-|- and DFS-. We terminated DFS+ as soon as
the tree size exceeded 100,000 nodes, while DFS- was terminated as soon as
the tree size exceeded 1,000,000 nodes. Both TRIANGLE and db-search were
run to completion on all selected test problems.
The tree-size limit set for DFS+ terminated the search 26 times out of the
2000 runs. Only once did the early termination result in missing a solution.
For DFS- a million nodes was insufficient to complete the search in 129 of the
2000 runs. In 24 of these, at least one of the solutions was missed.
CHAPTER 3.
DEPENDENCY-BASED SEARCH
DFS witnout transpositions
• F S with transportions
» axion length
Figure 3.5: Tree size per^algorithm applied to the double-letter puzzle.
Db-search's most difficult problem was d6dea66aacccddaeecda, for which
it needed 3934 nodes to determine that it has no solutions. Both variations
of depth-first search did not complete the search on this axiom within their
respective tree-size limits.
The average number of nodes visited by each algorithm is illustrated in
figure 3.5. The horizontal axis is the axiom length, while the vertical axis is
the fo<?2 of the number of nodes created.
Up to strings of length 18, db-search outperforms TRIANGLE.
those strings, transpositions do not outweigh the gain db-search makes in
terminating the search early if possible. Still, the time complexity of dbsearch, in particular in the combination stage of each level, is higher than
for the domain-specific algorithm. Therefore, we do not claim that db-search
outperforms TRIANGLE.
The trees traversed by both variants of DFS suffer from a combinatorial
explosion. At theorem length 20 the average cardinality of t/p (the size of
the trees searched by DFS-) is more than 1200 times the average cardinality
of t/fc (the size of the graphs searched by db-search). As can be seen from
the size of the graph traversed by DFS+, transpositions are responsible for
a factor 20. The more than 60 times smaller graph traversed by db-search
compared to DFS+ indicates that db-search is far more efficient on DLP than
conventional search algorithms.
In chapters 4 and 5 db-search has been applied to qubic and go-moku,
3.7 APPLICABILITY
resulting in significantly reduced state spaces, while no domain-specific algorithm has yet been developed which does the same.
Applicability
Db-search is a single-agent search algorithm. The main source of applications
therefore lies within that area. In some games, such as qubic and gomoku, a restricted search concentrates on sequences of threatening moves
only. If the opponent is constantly restricted to only a single reply, the
state space is conceptually transformed into a single-agent state space. In
those circumstances db-search may be applied to games. For details of such
transformations on qubic and go-moku see chapters 4 and 5.
In section 3.3.3 we have proved that {/* is complete if three conditions
are met. While these conditions all hold for DLP, they do not hold fully
in domains such as qubic and go-moku (i.e., after the transformation to a
single-agent state space). As a result, {/* may neither be sound nor complete.
Searching a non-complete C/fe may still be favorable to searching £/p, if the
size of £/p prohibits full investigation. However, further research is necessary
to understand the implications of applying db-search to such domains in
' J • ! O i j K
•'•><•: U > Î O m
In chapters 2 and 3 two new search techniques, pn-search and db-search, were
introduced. Pn-search attempts to use non-uniformity in AND/OR trees to
traverse the state space more efficiently than the various conventional search
algorithms. Db-search traverses a smaller graph than conventional search
algorithms. Still, for a special class of problems it has been shown that the
smaller graph is sound and complete. This means that each solution found
by a conventional search algorithm will also be found by db-search.
Pn-search and db-search were developed during the investigation of
several games: connect-four , awari , qubic
 and go-moku . The application of
pn-search and db-search to qubic and go-moku are discussed in this and the
next chapter. The purpose of these chapters is twofold:
1. to explain in detail how pn-search and db-search were applied to two
combinatorially complex problems, and
2. to show that qubic and go-moku can be solved, thereby positively
answering our first research question (cf. section 1.4) for two specific
At this point it is important to mention that qubic was solved more than
a decade before we started our research. Oren Patashnik solved qubic in 1977
and his solution was confirmed by Ken Thompson .
Our interest in qubic sprang from its potential as a test bed for go-moku,
due to the similarity between these two games. While i/ireai sequences (see
section 4.2.2) play an important role in both games, threat sequences in gomoku are more complex than threat sequences in qubic.
CHAPTER 4.
Being ignorant of Patashnik's work, there was the added challenge of
solving the game. After we were informed of Patashnik's work by Ingo
Althofer and Ralph Gasser, we nevertheless decided to finish our work on
the game. The experience gained has helped to solve go-moku, while it also
provided the means for a comparison of db-search and pn-search with the
search techniques applied by Patashnik.
The chapter is organized as follows.
In section 4.1 we provide a
background to the investigations in qubic. The rules of qubic and common
strategies are presented in section 4.2. The application of db-search to qubic
is described in section 4.3. The role of pn-search in the solution of qubic
transpires from section 4.4. The results of our investigations, as well as
comparisons with the results of Patashnik, are presented in section 4.5.
Background
Among the games of the Olympic List, qubic is one of the lesser-known
games. Despite its simple rules, qubic has a severe handicap: it is played
on a three-dimensional board. Therefore, visualizing sequences of moves is a
difficult task for human players, while most games end in a long sequence of
threatening moves requiring careful analysis.
Nevertheless, at least some strong human players exist, as is apparent
from Patashnik , who describes how qubic is solved using a combination
of human expert knowledge and a standard search algorithm.
Patashnik assumed that qubic would be a first-player win. Therefore, to
prove a win in a position with white (the first player) to move, only one
winning move had to be selected. To prove a win in a position with black
(the second player) to move, all moves had to lead to wins for white. Using a
standard a — /? search, Patashnik created a tactical module which determined
in a given position whether the player to move had a forced win. For each
position in the search tree, it was determined whether the player to move
had to make a forced move. Otherwise, if black was to move, for each legal
black move a child position was created. If white was to move, a so-called
strategic moue had to be made. These moves were selected by hand by
Patashnik. Using some 1500 hours of CPU time, and 2929 strategic moves,
qubic was solved. The database with the solution tree has been checked by
Ken Thompson, who confirmed Patashnik's results.
Our research in 1991 consisted of creating a tactical module based on
db-search. Furthermore, instead of selecting strategic moves by hand, pnsearch guided the search process. After the program was created we were
4.2 RULES AND STRATEGIES
informed that qubic had already been solved. Nevertheless, as qubic was
not yet removed from the Computer Olympiad, we finished our solution in
collaboration with Patrick Schoo. Since then our understanding of db-search
has improved, resulting in a new implementation of our qubic program. In
this chapter we describe the 1993 implementation and its results, which differ
somewhat from Allis and Schoo .
In earlier publications we used
the term t/ireat-space searc/i for the application of db-search to qubic and gomoku. In this text we only use the term db-search. We gladly acknowledge
that both names were suggested by Barney Pell.
4.2 Rules and strategies
Qubic is a three-dimensional instance of a category of games of which wellknown two-dimensional analogs are tic-tac-toe, go-moku and renju. First,
we present the rules in section 4.2.1. Second, in section 4.2.2 we discuss
the role of threats and threat sequences in qubic. Finally, we analyze the
automorphisms (i.e., mappings of the playing board onto itself, such that all
relevant properties of the board are preserved) of the qubic board and its two
different types of cubes in 4.2.3.
Qubic is played on a 4 x 4 x 4 cube, thus consisting of 64 small cubes. Players
move alternately by occupying any empty cube. The game ends as soon as
one of the players has occupied four consecutive cubes in a straight line (either
in one, two or three dimensions). Such a set of four cubes in a straight line
is called a proup. There are 3 x 16 = 48 one-dimensional groups, 3 x 8 = 24
two-dimensional groups and 4 three-dimensional groups, for a total of 76
In figure 4.1 the three different types of groups are shown. Group a is onedimensional, group 6 is two-dimensional, while group c is three-dimensional.
Threats and threat sequences
If a player has occupied three cubes in a group, with the fourth cube empty,
she threatens to win at her next move. In such a position, the opponent is
forced to refute the threat (unless she can win at her next move). The game
CHAPTER 4.
Figure 4.1: Three types of groups in qubic.
is usually decided by a player creating a threat sequence ending in a double
threat, which cannot be stopped by the opponent.
In figure 4.2 an example winning threat sequence in a single plane is
shown. White has occupied three cubes in the plane (in the corners), while
black has played her moves elsewhere (i.e., in other planes). White now has
an 11-ply winning threat sequence starting with moves 1 through 9 in figure
4.2. After move 9, white threatens to win at a and 6, which cannot both be
countered by black's next move.
In general, a threat sequence may end in one of three possible ways. First,
a double threat may be created, resulting in a win for the attacker. Second,
the attacker may run out of threats. Third, the forced moves of the defender
may result in her accidentally creating a threat of her own, and changing her
role from defender to attacker.
If a threat sequence ends without success for the attacking player, she
has normally exhausted most of her threat potential, reducing her winning
chances. Therefore, early in the game, both players try to occupy cubes which
increase their potential for creating threats, without actually executing those
4.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
Figure 4.2: An 11-ply winning threat sequence.
4.2.3 Cube types and automorphisms
The 64 cubes fall into two categories. The 8 corner cubes and 8 center cubes
are named 7-cubes, as each is part of 7 groups (3 one-dimensional groups, 3
two-dimensional groups and 1 three-dimensional group). The other 48 cubes
are called 4-cubes as they are part of four groups only (3 one-dimensional
groups and 1 two-dimensional group).
The number of automorphisms in qubic is surprisingly high: 192. This
can be explained as follows. By rotation, each of the six sides of the cube
can be brought on top in four different ways, resulting in a total of 24
automorphisms by rotation. There are three more operations, each doubling
the number of automorphisms. First, re/ïeciion in a plane through the center
of the cube. Second, (urTiinp </ie cute inside ou£, i.e., exchanging (in all three
dimensions) the inner planes with the outer planes. Third, m^erTia/ exc/ionge,
i.e., exchanging the inner planes in all three dimensions, while leaving the
outer planes untouched.
Due to the automorphisms, there are only two distinct opening moves in
qubic, one at any 7-cube, and one at any 4-cube. After White's first move
at a 7-cube, black has 12 distinct answers, as presented in figure 4.3. Each
of the empty 51 cubes in the figure can be mapped to at least one of the 12
black cubes, through at least one of the automorphisms of qubic.
Applying db-search
As mentioned before, threat sequences play a dominant role in qubic. Obviously, to play qubic well, it would be advantageous to have a module which
determines whether a winning threat sequence exists. Our application of
db-search to qubic is restricted to searching for winning threat sequences.
This section consists of three parts. First, in section 4.3.1 we describe
how the adversary-agent state space, when restricted to threat sequences,
can be transformed into a single-agent state space. Second, in section 4.3.2
CHAPTER 4.
Figure 4.3: The 12 two-ply moves.
we illustrate how the single-agent state space thus created for qubic fits in
the framework for db-search presented in chapter 3. Third, in section 4.3.3
we discuss three properties of the single-agent state space for qubic which
have not been included in the framework of section 4.3.2. For each of these
properties there is an explanation of how our implementation of db-search
handles them.
A single-agent search in qubic
Our description of the single-agent state space of threat sequences in qubic
consists of a set of definitions, an interpretation of the definitions, and the
transformation of the adversary-agent state space to a single-agent state
Definitions
In the previous sections we informally introduced the concept of threats,
threat sequences and winning threat sequences in qubic. These notions are
defined in definitions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
4.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
Definition 4.1/1 threat m qubic is a move 6y t/ie ottocfcer feadtng to a
position suc/i
1. 77ie de/ender cannot win at Aer next more, and
2. TTie de/ender /ias at most one move stopping t/ie attacker /rom winning
at /ier next move.
If a threat leaves the defender without any moves to stop the attacker
from winning at her next move, it is called a double t/ireat, otherwise the
threat is called a sino/e t/ireat.
Definition 4.2 J4 threat sequence (ai,di, 0,2,0^2, • • • , a,i,dn), wit/i n > 1, w
any sequence 0/ moves suc/i t/iat eac/i aj, 1 < i < n il a sino/e threat, and
eac/i dj t/ie sinp/e response to aj w/iich does not /ose immediate/y,
Definition 4.3 A winning threat sequence in qubic is a sequence 0/mores
(ai,di,... ,an,dn,ûn+i,dn+i), suc/i t/iat (ai, di,...,an, dn) is a t/ireat sequence, a,j+i is a dou6/e t/ireat and d^+i is anj/ /ega/ move.
Interpretation
Here we elaborate on the definitions presented above, interpreting them in
the context of groups.
To win in qubic, a player must occupy all four cubes in a group. Thus,
a player who occupies three cubes in a group, while the last cube is empty,
threatens to win. According to definition 4.1, such a move is only a threat
if the opponent has not obtained three cubes in a group herself. In other
words, a threat consists of a JocaJ property for the attacker (i.e., the state of
one specific group) and the 5/060/ lack of a similar property for the defender
(i.e., no group on the board having the property).
In a threat sequence, each attacker move occupies the third attacker cube
in a group, while the fourth cube is empty. Each defender move occupies
the fourth cube in that group. In each case, the defender has no alternative
move which wins immediately and, although the rules of qubic allow playing
anywhere else, alternative moves are 6/unders as they would result in losing
at the next move. In other words, a threat sequence consists of a sequence of
moves where each attacker move is followed by its only non-blundering reply.
A winning threat sequence is a threat sequence followed by a double
threat and any legal move. Since there are at least two places where the
attacker threatens to win at the next move, and the defender cannot win
CHAPTER 4.
herself immediately, all moves are equally bad. Therefore, any legal move
may be selected.
Adversary-agent vs. single-agent
As we have seen, in threat sequences and winning threat sequences each move
by the defender is implied by the previous attacker move. Therefore, we may
conceptually merge these two moves into a single meta-move.
If we examine the state space created by these meta-moves, it is no longer
an adversary-agent state space, but instead a single-agent state space. For
each meta-move, the attacker selects any of the possible threats in a position.
If the threat is a single threat, the move by the opponent is implied by the
previous move. If the threat is a double threat, all moves by the opponent
are equally bad, and a random move may be selected to represent all possible
moves. In both cases the defender has no real choice, effectively transforming
the state space into a single-agent state space. In the remainder of this
section, we will only regard meta-moves, and assume that the attacker move
and defender move in a meta-move are made at the same time.
A db-search framework for qubic
In this section, we describe a db-search framework for the single-agent state
space of qubic. We mention that the framework only involves /oca/ properties,
i.e., occupation of single groups, while ignoring #/o6a/ properties, i.e., possible
counter threats of the defender.
Global properties of a position will be
handled in section 4.3.3. The terminology introduced in chapter 3 is used
throughout this section.
Attributes
The set {/ of all attributes is denned as follows. £/ = {C(i,x)|0 < 2 <
SIZE - 1 A x G {o,«, •}}. Attribute C(i,z) represents the fact that cube i is
occupied by the attacker (o), occupied by the defender (•) or empty (•). The
constant SIZE equals the number of cubes on the playing board (i.e., 4^ = 64).
It can easily be checked that 17 has 192 elements.
The operator /ci,c2,c3,c4 is denned as follows.
/cT,c,,C3,c« -
{C(C1,O),C(C2,O),C(C3,-),C(C4,-)}
4.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
(C(C3,-),C(C4,-)}
The set of all operators £// is defined as follows.
^/ = {/ci,c2,c3,c4l{ci,C2,C3,C4} is a group}
We remark here that a group is a set of four squares which, if all occupied
by one player, result in that player winning the game. In qubic there are 76
groups. For each group, the 4 elements can be ordered in 4! = 24 possible
ways. Thus, there are 24- 76 = 1824 operators in £//. Since ci and C2 can be
exchanged without changing the operator, there are effectively 912 operators
Initial state and goal states
The initial state consists of exactly 64 attributes, one per cube indicating
the contents of the cube. Each qubic position which is to be checked for the
existence of a winning threat sequence can serve as an initial state. The set
t/g of goal states is independent of the initial state, and is defined as follows.
^s = {{C(ci,o),C(c2,o),C(c3,o),C(c4,-)} | {ci,C2,C3,C4> is agroup}
In other words, any state in which a group exists of which three cubes
have been occupied by the attacker and the fourth cube is empty, is a goal
state. We remark that each meta-move starts with a move by the attacker.
Therefore, a state as described here in the single-agent search, ensures that
in the adversary-agent search the attacker can win at her next move, C/^ has
304 elements and is not singular.
Properties of the qubic framework
The framework we have described above is monotonous. Furthermore, we
can easily restrict ourselves to non-redundant paths. If C/g were singular, our
f/jt would be complete.
We can create a singular {/^ = { {G} }, by defining a special goal
attribute G and operators which transform any element of £/g into (7, which
would result in a complete C/fc. A discussion of the completeness of [/*. would
be premature, however, since we have ignored the global properties of qubic
CHAPTER 4.
Qubic-specific enhancements to db-search
The db-search framework for qubic presented in the previous section focuses
only on the local properties of threats. In this section we discuss the three
global properties which need to be incorporated in db-search. Each property
is described followed by the method of inclusion in db-search.
Defender four
In each winning threat sequence, both the attacker and defender occupy
cubes. Even though the defender has no choices of which cubes to occupy,
the attacker may, accidentally, force her to occupy all four cubes in a group.
Such a group is named a de/ender /our. If this happens, the threat sequence
by the attacker has failed.
During the dependency stage of each level of db-search, it is easy to check
after each meta-move (a, d), consisting of attacker move a and defender move
d, whether d has created a defender four. It is sufficient to investigate the
4 or 7 groups in which d lies. During the combination stage of each level
of db-search, a defender four could be created by the merge of two or more
paths. To detect such a defender four, all 76 groups must be investigated
when creating a combination.
We remark that the qubic-specific enhancements mentioned below render
the dependency-stage test for defender fours superfluous and it has therefore
been omitted in our implementation.
Closed defender three
Each meta-move results in a group containing three attacker cubes and one
defender cube. Such a group is named a dosed aMacfcer i/iree. Similarly,
a dosed de/ender i/iree is a group containing three defender cubes and one
attacker cube. A group where one player has occupied three cubes, while the
fourth cube is empty are named open a«acA;er </iree or open de/ender </iree.
Even though closed defender threes cannot be converted into a winning
group, they may represent a subtle problem. If two paths in db-search are
merged they may create one or more closed defender threes on the board.
Let us assume that the three defender cubes are occupied during meta-moves
mi, 77i2 and 7713, while the attacker cube is occupied during meta-move m.
Furthermore, let us assume that a path P in the merge exists, consisting
of the following sequence of moves: (7711,7712,7713,7714,771), where 7714 is any
meta-move. Then, after move 7713, an open defender three exists. Clearly,
4.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
the only way for the attacker to stop the open defender three is to immediately
play move m. In P move 7714 is played first, which means that meta-move m,4
erroneously ignores the option for the defender to win. We remark that (some
of) the cubes in a closed defender three need not be part of a meta-move,
but could be part of the initial state.
Summarizing, closed defender threes present a problem when the metamove occupying the attacker cube is played later than immediately after the
third defender cube has been occupied. In other words, an ordering exists
between the set of meta-operators occupying the defender cubes in the closed
defender three, and the operator occupying the attacker cube.
During the dependency stage of db-search, to create a closed defender
three, first an open defender three must be created, otherwise the closed
defender three does not pose a problem. As these are monitored separately,
we can safely ignore closed defender threes during the dependency stage.
During the combination stage, a merge may create one or more closed
defender threes. Only paths in which the attacker cube for each closed
defender three is occupied in time (i.e., not later than immediately after
the third defender cube has been occupied) should be included in the merge.
Determining whether a merge is non-empty may be time-consuming when
fully incorporating the closed defender tests. Instead, we have implemented a
simple and surprisingly effective heuristic. Previously, for each combination
node (i.e., for each merge), a path representing the merge was selected
randomly. The heuristic consists of investigating whether the selected path
honors the ordering criteria imposed by the closed defender threes. If so, the
merge is not empty. If not, the merge is assumed to be empty. Clearly, in this
way valid merges may be rejected, but invalid merges are never wrongfully
To investigate the amount of error created through the use of this
heuristic, we ran the program twice on a set of test positions. The first variant
of the program contained the heuristic test, while the second variant did not
test for closed defender threes at all. In less than 1% of the test positions did
the second variant suggest a winning line, while the first variant failed to find
any winning line, although several times the first variant suggested a different
winning line. We remark that in the extra 1%, the suggested winning line
may have been incorrect, due to defender threes, or may have been valid
and have been accidentally rejected by the above heuristic. A non-heuristic
implementation for investigating closed defender threes is expected to yield
only a small gain in efficacy while causing a significant decrease in efficiency.
Such an implementation has therefore been omitted.
CHAPTER 4.
Open defender three •
When a threat sequence contains an open defender three, the attacker must
respond to that defender three immediately or lose at the next move.
During the dependency stage of db-search, only meta-moves are considered which depend on, or are preceded, by the node from which the metamove is made. Therefore, during the dependency stage it is often not possible
to counter a defender three. Instead, we solve the problem of open defender
threes during the combination stage.
In standard db-search, to apply meta-operator F(iV, /), set TV must be a
minimal set of key classes, such that / depends on, or is preceded by, the key
operator in each of those classes. We extend the application of meta-operator
F(iV, /) as follows.
Let F(JV, /) be applicable and let P be an element in the merge of classes
of TV. Furthermore, we assume that (xi,...,Zn) is the priority queue of
empty cubes in open defender threes in P(J4), where A is the initial state.
Then, we define F(iV', /), with W = iV U Pi, to be applicable, if (1) the key
operator /i of Pi occupies with its attacker move ii, and (2) the merge of
all elements in TV' is non-empty.
Using the extended meta-operator, we can create combinations of paths
to counter open defender threes. Clearly, a combination should only be
created if F(iV, /) is applicable and its priority queue of empty cubes in
open defender threes is empty. In our db-search implementation for qubic we
have implemented the extended meta-operator.
Summary of db-search enhancements
In this section we have introduced three qubic-specific enhancements to dbsearch. The main question yet to be answered is whether the state space
searched by db-search with these qubic-specific enhancements is complete.
Of course, the heuristic applied to counter closed defender threes renders the
state space incomplete, but as has been argued, only a marginal number of
solutions are incorrectly rejected. Without proof we state that, except for
the aforementioned heuristic, our implementation of db-search is complete.
In other words, in each position where a winning threat sequence exists,
db-search finds a winning threat sequence, unless the meta-moves within each
winning threat sequence can be reordered such that a closed defender three
is countered too late by the attacker.
4.4 APPLYING PN-SEARCH
Applying pn-search
To apply pn-search to qubic, we need to convert the qubic game tree into
an AND/OR tree. This is described in section 4.4.1. The enhancements to
basic pn-search adopted for our qubic implementation are described in section
Qubic as an AND/OR tree
Proof-number search (as described in chapter 2) is an AND/OR-tree algorithm.
To apply it to qubic, we represent positions where white is to move as OR
nodes, and positions where black is to move as AND nodes. A win for white is
represented by the value true, while a draw and a win for black are represented
by the value false. Thus, proving the pn-search tree means that white can
win in the root position, while disproving the pn-search tree means that black
can achieve at least a draw.
At each OR node, white is to move. At such nodes, db-search with white
as attacker is used as evaluation function. If db-search finds a winning threat
sequence, the node is proved, otherwise it obtains the value unknown. In AND
nodes, black is to move. In such nodes, db-search with black as attacker is
used as evaluation function. If a winning threat sequence is found, the node is
disproved, otherwise the value of the node is unknown. A node representing a
position with all 64 cubes occupied, while neither player has created a winning
configuration, is a draw and therefore has value false, without applying the
evaluation function.
Enhancements
The above description explains how standard pn-search is applied to qubic.
However, four enhancements have been added to speed up the search. The
enhancements are discussed in this section.
Transpositions
A DAG is created instead of a tree, using the algorithm described in section
2.3.3. This ensures that if a position has already occurred in the DAG, or if
a position is equivalent through automorphisms to another position in the
DAG, the position is not investigated again.
CHAPTER 4.
Threatening moves by white
Pn-search favors subtrees in which the mobility (i.e., the number of choices
available to a player) of one player is restricted, while the mobility of the
other is enlarged. In qubic, this means that threatening moves are favored
above all other moves, as they leave the opponent with just a single response.
After a threatening move, and the forced response by the opponent, again
threatening moves are favored above all other moves, and so on. Thus, pnsearch automatically focuses on the space of threatening moves. This is
undesirable for pn-search in qubic, since the evaluation function (db-search)
will already have investigated whether a winning threat sequence exists. If
such a sequence does not exist, the potential for threats should be increased,
instead of decreased by executing them. Therefore, in our pn-search tree, we
have restricted white to non-threatening moves, simply by omitting moves
which create a threat in the move-generation module. For black, of course,
all moves are investigated.
Heuristic (dis)proof number initialization
In chapter 2 we have suggested several methods to include some domainspecific knowledge in the initialization of proof and disproof numbers. Here
we describe our qubic-specific initializations.
After expansion of an AND node (black to move), usually many nodes
are proved immediately by db-search. Nodes in which black has just created
a threat, however, are not proved immediately, because white is forced to
counter the threat. A good estimate of the number of nodes which must
still be proved at an AND node is the number of threatening moves black
can make. Therefore, the proof number of an AND node is initialized to the
number of threatening moves for black (with a minimum of 1), while the
disproof number is initialized to 1.
After expansion of an OR node (white to move), usually several nodes are
disproved immediately by db-search. Moves which create potential threats
(named positaona/ moves), however, are usually not disproved immediately.
We determine the number of posiiiono/ moves using the following heuristic.
For a move M we consider the set of groups G which contain M, while
not containing any black cubes. M is named positional if G consists of at
least three groups, each containing zero or one white cubes (besides M), or
at least two groups, each containing at least one white cube (besides M).
At OR nodes, the disproof number is initialized to the number of positional
moves for white (with minimum 1), while the proof number is set to 1.
4.5 SOLVING QUBIC
Removing solved terminal nodes
In section 2.3.1 it was described how solved subtrees in a pn-search tree may
be removed. Such a technique has disadvantages when applied to a DAG
instead of a tree.
Assume that a node J has been solved and is subsequently removed from
the DAG. If in another subtree a new instance of node J is created, the work
to solve J will be duplicated. The decision of which solved nodes to remove
may depend on the size of the working memory and the probability that this
scenario will occur. Generally, nodes which have been solved with little effort
may be removed with less cost than nodes which have been solved only after
a large search.
We have decided to remove nodes from the DAG only if they were solved
through evaluation. As evaluations of nodes require only a small amount of
time, the reduced memory requirements were judged to outweigh the cost
of re-evaluation for the terminal nodes which occur more than once in the
search. In our experiments the memory requirements were thus reduced by
approximately 70%.
Solving qubic
In this section we describe how we solved qubic. First, in section 4.5.1
we describe how we subdivided the game tree into 195 subtrees. Second,
in section 4.5.2 we present statistics on solving each of the 195 subtrees.
Third, we compare our results with those of Patashnik in section
4.5.3. Finally, in section 4.5.4 we discuss the reliability of our results.
Subdividing the game tree
In this section we explain why and how we subdivided the qubic game tree
in 195 subtrees. First, we explain why this was necessary. Second, we show
how we subdivided the game tree into four-ply subtrees. Third, we explain
how each of the four-ply subtrees was investigated.
Necessity of subdividing the game tree
Before white can create a threat, she must have occupied two cubes in the
same group. After the threat is executed by white and countered by black,
white has three cubes in one group together with a black cube. To create a
new threat she must have occupied at least one other cube. Thus, winning
CHAPTER 4.
threat sequences can only be found in positions with at least six cubes (three
white and three black) on the board. As we have seen in figure 4.2, in some
positions with exactly three white cubes, winning threat sequences exists.
From the above, it follows that any evaluation by db-search of positions
with 0 to 5 cubes occupied will return the value unknown. Furthermore, the
number of children per qubic position at level d equals siZE-d. Therefore,
the first 5 ply of the qubic game tree, using evaluation function db-search,
has a uniform branching factor per level of the tree. Executing pn-search
for the full game tree (with the root representing the empty board) will be
ineffective, as pn-search relies on non-uniformity. For this reason, we decided
to split the game tree into subtrees.
Selecting a minimal set of subtrees
The subtrees each represent positions 4-ply into the game. A depth of four
was selected since it was deep enough to overcome the uniformity problem for
pn-search mentioned above, while it required the selection of only 13 strategic
moves by hand (i.e., one move for the initial position, and 12 moves in the
twelve 2-ply positions of figure 4.3) thus leaving as much work to pn-search
as possible.
Starting from the empty board, we suggested a move for white. Since
there are only two distinct moves, one at a 4-cube, and one at a 7-cube, we
selected the 7-cube move as white's best chance for winning.
As shown in figure 4.3, black has 12 different first moves. Thus, at ply two
we have 12 positions to solve. In each of these positions we suggested a move
for white. In Patashnik , moves at 7-cubes were selected, such that the
number of different resultant positions (after applying automorphisms) was
as small as possible. There, 7 three-ply positions are presented. To obtain
the 7 three-ply positions, in each of the 12 two-ply positions, white played
in a one-dimensional group containing white's first move. Since white's first
move at a 7-cube is an element of 3 one-dimensional groups, it is possible to
select such a move with the extra constraint that black's first move is not an
element of the same group.
Using this approach, it turns out that there are eight different ways in
which the 12 two-ply positions are reduced to 7 three-ply positions. We
represent a three-ply position by a three-tuple < iui, 102,&i >, with u;i and
W2 the cube number of the white stones, and 61 the cube number of the
black stone. The cube numbers for each of the 64 cubes of the qubic board
are shown in figure 4.4. The eight ways to create 7 three-ply positions is as
4.5 SOLVING QUBIC
Figure 4.4: Cube numbers on the qubic board.
< 0,3,12 >,< 0,3,21 >,< 0,3,60>,
((< 0,3,5 >, < 0,3,29 >) V (< 0,3,20 >, < 0,3,24 >)),
((< 0,12,1 >,(<0,3,28> V < 0,3,61 >))V
(< 0,3,28 >, (< 0,3,1 > V < 0,12,1 >)))
For each of these eight groups of 7 three-ply positions, we have created
the set of all four-ply positions. Since there are 61 legal moves per position,
initially 427 four-ply positions were created. After applying automorphisms,
however, 195, 195, 217, 217, 226, 226, 241 or 241 positions remain, depending
on the group of three-ply positions. The 3-ply position < 0,3,1 > looks bad
for white, since black has blocked the potential white threats. Therefore, the
group expanding to 195 four-ply positions of which < 0,3,1 > is an element
is ignored. The remaining group of 7 three-ply positions expanding to 195
four-ply positions is listed below.
< 0,3,12 >, < 0,3, 20 >, < 0,3,21 >, < 0,3,24 >,
CHAPTER 4.
< 0,3,60 >, < 0,3,61 >, < 0,12,1 >
The same group of three-ply positions was selected by .
Since each 7-cube move is also an element of three two-dimensional
groups, we could instead try moves at 7-cubes in the same two-dimensional
group as the first white move. Again, the 12 two-ply positions can be reduced
to 7 three-ply positions, this time in seven different ways, all of which have
been listed below.
< 0,15,51 >, < 0,15,21 >, < 0,60,3 >, < 0,51,6 >, < 0,51,5 >,
((< 0,15,1 >, (< 0,60,1 > V < 0,60, 7 >)) V
(< 0,60,7 >, (< 0,15,1 > V < 0,60,1 >))V
(< 0,60,1 >, (< 0,60,7 > V < 0,51,7 > V < 0,15,1 >)))
The number of four-ply positions grown from each of these groups is 219,
229, 229, 229, 229, 240 and 240.
We have selected the same set of three-ply positions as Patashnik ,
since it yields the smallest set of four-ply positions. This choice also allows
us to compare his results with ours.
Investigating the subtrees
Pn-search has been applied to all but two of the 195 four-ply positions. The
two remaining positions have the property that the two black stones lie within
a group Gi which intersects the group G2 containing the two white stones.
By playing at the intersection c of Gi and G2, either player can create a
threat and counter a potential threat by the opponent at the same time.
Therefore, move c is regarded as a strong move for white. However, in pnsearch we explicitly forbid white to create threats. In these two positions,
this heuristic deprives white of her best move, and allows black to gain
counterplay. Therefore, in these two positions we played white's third move
at c and countered the threat with black's third move before applying pnsearch.
Tests on these two four-ply positions showed that one position was quickly
solved through an alternative third move for white, while the pn-search for
the other position was terminated after a DAG of a million nodes had been
created. In the latter case, these tests suggest that playing at intersection c
may be white's only path to a win.
4.5 SOLVING QUBIC
Statistics
In this section we present the statistics of running pn-search on the 195
positions described in the previous section. We distinguish between execution
time, pn-search DAG size, db-search evaluations and solution size. We also
present an example winning line.
Execution time
All experiments were run on a SPARCstation 2 at the Vrije Universiteit in
Amsterdam. The machine has 128 Megabytes of internal memory, allowing
pn-search trees of up to 1 million nodes to fit in internal memory, without
slowing down the search by swapping to disk.
The SPARCstation 2 is
estimated to have an execution speed of 28 MIPS.
The CPU time needed for the 195 positions (193 four-ply positions and 2
six-ply positions) was 55,700 seconds, or roughly 15.5 hours.
Pn-search DAG size
The pn-search tree size is the number of nodes created during the search.
Since no nodes are removed from the DAG once created, this equals the size
at termination. We remark that terminal nodes solved by db-search are not
included in the DAG, as described in section 4.4.2.
The smallest pn-search DAG consisted of 884 nodes, while the largest
consisted of 310,000 nodes, with the median at 4,000 nodes and the average
at 10,000 nodes. Only one other DAG was larger than 60,000 nodes, at
118,000. These two difficult positions are < 0,3,1,7 > (118,845 nodes)
and < 0,3,21,22 > (310,424 nodes). . Patashnik defines a siroiegic moue as a non-obvious
move for white, thus excluding moves suggested by the tactical search, and
excluding forced moves for white when countering threats made by black. To
compare our results with Patashnik's we must exclude all forced moves for
white from the 6,654 moves in our solution to qubic. The number of strategic
moves per depth, for both Patashnik and our solution, are shown in table
From table 4.2 it follows that Patashnik made 10% fewer strategic moves
than pn-search. For Patashnik, making the strategic moves was a bottleneck
in solving qubic, as each strategic move was made by hand. Consequently,
minimizing the number of strategic moves was a major concern in his
Therefore, we feel that pn-search, while not explicitly trying
to minimize the number of strategic moves in our solution to qubic, has
performed well.
4.5 SOLVING QUBIC
Table 4.2: Number of positions in qubic solution per depth.
Db-search vs. forced-sequence search
Before we can compare the total amount of CPU time spent by Patashnik with
our results, we must allow for the different types of machines used. Although
it is difficult to compare such vastly different machines, an expert indicated
that if the performance had to be expressed in MIPS, his best estimate for the
DEC-10 would be between 2 and 3 MIPS . Compared with the
approximately 28 MIPS of the SPARCstation 2, we assume that our machine
was between 10 and 20 times faster than the hardware used by Patashnik. In
our comparison we disregard the fact that today's computers are equipped
with much larger memories than 15 years ago.
Our first comparison is based on the total solution time. Patashnik's
solution took approximately 1500 hours, not counting time wasted on backtracking due to bad strategic moves, and computer failure. We compare
this figure with our 15.5 hours of CPU time. Factoring out the difference in
machine speed, our solution is between 5 and 10 times faster than the solution
found by Patashnik. As almost all CPU time is spent on searching forced
sequences, for both Patashnik's solution and ours, this is a first indication
that db-search may be 5 to 10 times more efficient than a conventional forcedsequence search as implemented by Patashnik.
Comparing the execution time of individual instances of Patashnik's
forced-sequence search and our db-search is slightly more difficult. Patashnik
CHAPTER 4.
remarks that typically his forced-sequence search took about two seconds,
but occasionally as long as half an hour. He also remarks that if his strategic
moves had been slightly worse, an uncontrollable combinatorial explosion
would have occurred in some positions.
For a second comparison, we will assume an average of two seconds per
forced-sequence search for Patashnik. To simplify matters for db-search,
we assume that all 55,700 seconds of CPU time were spent on db-search
evaluations (disregarding the time necessary to perform pn-search, to check
for automorphisms, and to find transpositions in the pn-search DAG). During
this time over 4.4 million evaluations were performed, for an average of almost
80 evaluations per second. Given the difference in machine speed, we find that
db-search is between 8 and 16 times faster than Patashnik's forced-sequence
As a third comparison, we look at the slowest evaluation of db-search
(less than 5 seconds) and'the slowest forced-sequence search of Patashnik
(approximately 30 minutes). This difference implies a gain factor for dbsearch of 20 to 40 on the difficult positions.
Summarizing comparison with Patashnik
We conclude that applying expert knowledge (Patashnik) to solve qubic,
results in a marginally smaller solution compared to applying the knowledgefree search technique pn-search. On qubic, db-search performs between 5 and
40 times better than a conventional search algorithm. In our opinion, the
qubic results illustrate the strengths of both pn-search and db-search.
Reliability
There are many sayings concerning the number of errors made by programmers, among which one of the most famous is: TTiere is ahuaj/s one more ftup.
These bugs may vary from uninitialized variables to serious programminglogic errors. For a program the size of our qubic implementation (over 6,000
lines of C code), there may thus be some doubts about the reliability of
our results. In this section we present some measures taken to ensure their
correctness.
The most complicated part of the program consists of the db-search
implementation. During the implementation errors were made, and corrected
but, of course, ensuring that this code is error free is a difficult task.
Therefore, the products of db-search, viz. winning threat sequences, were
independently examined for their correctness. Once a potential winning
4.5 SOLVING QUBIC
threat sequence was found, the program started from the initial search
position and played the sequence move by move. After each move by the
attacker it is investigated whether (1) the defender has a threat, and (2) the
attacker has a threat at the cube suggested as next move for the defender.
After the last move by the attacker, it is investigated if indeed a group of
four cubes has been occupied by the attacker. If any of these investigations
show that db-search made an error, this is reported. No errors have been
discovered in db-search during the process of solving qubic. We conclude that
the product of the most complicated part of the program is independently
The second most complicated part of the program consists of the pnsearch implementation. Fortunately, pn-search has been implemented for
several different games, ensuring that the chances of implementation errors
are much lower than for new code. Still, the search process is too complicated
to monitor fully, and thus errors may go unnoticed. To examine our results, a
successful pn-search produces a small database consisting of the positions in
the solution tree. After we solved all 195 four-ply positions, we merged these
databases. Next, we created a database-checking module. For each position
in the database with white to move a successor should be contained in the
database. For each position in the database with black to move, all successors
are generated. A successor should either be contained in the database, or
white should have a winning threat sequence as found by db-search. We
have thus checked the database and found it complete.
Third, our solution is consistent with the results of Patashnik , but
arrived at independently. In conclusion, we believe that our implementation
may be regarded as reliable.
• ! . " • •
' • • ' " : ' . i '
In this chapter we discuss the application of pn-search and db-search to gomoku. In the previous chapter we stated two goals for chapters 4 and 5,
which we repeat here. The first goal is to explain in detail how pn-search
and db-search have been applied to two combinatorially complex problems.
The second goal is to show that qubic and go-moku can be solved, thereby
positively answering our first research question (cf. section 1.4) for two
specific games.
In several ways, qubic and go-moku are related games, with go-moku
being the more complex one. The relationship between qubic and go-moku
is expressed in the organization of this chapter: almost every section has
a corresponding section in chapter 4. We mention this relationship for
readers who are particularly interested in the application of db-search or
pn-search. Comparing corresponding sections on qubic and go-moku may
provide additional insight in these algorithms.
The chapter is organized as follows.
In section 5.1 we provide a
background to investigations in go-moku. The rules of go-moku and common
strategies are presented in section 5.2. The application of db-search to gomoku is described in section 5.3. The role of pn-search in the solution of
go-moku is explained in section 5.4. The results of our investigations are
presented in section 5.5.
Background
Among the games of the Olympic List, go-moku has the simplest rules: two
players (black and white) alternate placing stones on a 15 x 15 square lattice
CHAPTER 5.
with the goal of obtaining a line of exactly five consecutive stones of the
player's color. While its roots lie in China and Japan, it is also popular in
several countries of Europe and the former Soviet-Union. Part of go-moku's
popularity must be ascribed to the fact that it can be played with pencil and
paper, allowing it to be played virtually everywhere (including classrooms)
by virtually everyone (including bored students).
In Japan professional renju players (renju being a complicated variant of
go-moku) have studied go-moku in detail and have stated that the player
to move first (black) has an assured win . These
statements are sometimes accompanied by a list of main variations, such
as the 32-page analysis in Sakata and Ikawa . Close examination of
these analyses reveals that in each position only a small number of white
moves are analyzed. For example, after black's first move at the center of a
15 x 15 board, white has 35 distinct moves, of which 2 are adjacent to black's
first move, ignoring symmetrically equivalent moves. In Sakata and Ikawa
 only the variations after the 2 moves adjacent to black's first move
are discussed. As far as we know, prior to this work no complete proof of
black's win in go-moku has been published.
Until this study, all go-moku programs have been defeated at least once
or been in a lost position when playing black. As an example of the latter
we mention the game between the go-moku 1991 world-champion program
Vertex (black) and the program Po/j/pon (white). Vertex maneuvered itself
into a position provably lost for black . As an aside we
note that Poty^on played its first move non-adjacent to the first black stone,
indicating that finding a win in such a variation may not be entirely obvious.
Summarizing, go-moku is assumed to be a first-player win but, as far as
we know, no complete proof has been published nor has any go-moku program
ever been shown to be unbeatable when playing black.
At this point we reiterate our remark of section 4.1. In earlier publications
we have used the term £/irea£-space searc/i for the application of db-search to
qubic and go-moku. In this text we only use the term db-search.
Rules and strategies
Go-moku is a two-player game, related to the well-known trivial game of tictac-toe. While in tic-tac-toe players must create a line of three consecutive
markers of their color on a restricted 3 x 3 board, in go-moku players must
create a line of five on a practically unrestricted lattice. Through the years,
several variants of go-moku have been developed, which are described in detail
5.2 RULES AND STRATEGIES
in section 5.2.1. Next, threats and threat trees are discussed in section 5.2.2.
Finally, in section 5.2.3 some insight is given into the way human go-moku
experts think.
:.:.•: ,:;:..-.
: : . , r .
•• / .-,..• ' ;,:,,:,..,,.-.•
. . , . : j
In go-moku, simple rules lead to a highly complex game, played on the 225
intersections of 15 horizontal and 15 vertical lines. Going from left to right
the vertical lines are lettered from a to o; going from the bottom to the top
the horizontal lines are numbered from 1 to 15. Two players, black and white,
move in turn by placing a stone of their own color on an empty intersection,
henceforth called a «çware. Black starts the game. The player who first
makes a line of five consecutive stones of her color (horizontally, vertically or
diagonally) wins the game. The stones once placed on the board during the
game never move again nor can they be captured. If the board is completely
filled, and no one has five-in-a-row, the game is drawn.
Go-moku variants
Many variants of go-moku exist; they all restrict the players in some sense,
mainly reducing the advantage of black's first move. We mention four
Non-standard boards In the early days the game was played on a 19 x 19
board, since go boards have that size. Some people prefer to think of
go-moku as being played on an infinite board. However, a larger board
increases black's advantage , which resulted
in the standard board size of 15 x 15.
Free-style go-moku An overline is a line of six or more consecutive stones
of the same color. In this variant, an overline is regarded as a win.
Standard go-moku In the variant of go-moku played most often today, an
overline does not win (this restriction applies to both players). Only a
line of exactly five stones is considered as a winning pattern.
Renju A professional variant of go-moku is renju. White is not restricted in
any way, e.g., an overline wins the game for white. However, black is not
allowed to make an overline, nor a so-called dou6/e i/iree or doutfe /our
 ). If black makes any of these patterns,
she is declared to be the loser. Renju is not a symmetric game: to play
CHAPTER 5.
it well requires different strategies for black and for white. Even though
black's advantage is severely reduced, she still seems to have the upper
We have investigated both free-style go-moku and standard go-moku. We
remark that in this chapter we discuss free-style go-moku unless it is explicitly
stated otherwise.
Opening restrictions
In an attempt to make the game less unbalanced, opening restrictions have
been imposed on black. We mention two such restrictions.
Professional go-moku In professional go-moku, black is forced to make her
first move in the center of the board. White must play her first move at
one of the eight squares adjacent to black's first move. Black's second
move must be outside the set of 5 x 5 squares centered by black's first
Professional renju In professional renju, the game starts with two players
which are named temporary ftiacA; and temporary to/ute. Temporary
black plays her first move at the center of the board, while temporary
white plays her first move adjacent to the black stone on the board.
Due to symmetry, there are only two distinct first moves for temporary
white. For each of these two, there are 12 selected squares where
temporary black is allowed to play her second move. Thus, there are
24 possible 3-ply sequences in this variant. Next, temporary white
may choose between playing black or white for the remainder of the
game. Temporary black automatically plays the other color. Then,
white plays her second move. Finally, black selects two squares for her
third move and gives white the choice between these two. From there,
the game continues according to the rules of standard renju.
In our research we have investigated variants of go-moku without any
opening restrictions.
Threats and threat trees
We describe the four types of threats in go-moku, followed by a discussion of
threat trees and winning threat trees.
5.2 RULES AND STRATEGIES
Figure 5.1: Threats in go-moku.
In go-moku a threat is an important notion; the main types have descriptive
names: the /our (figure 5.1a) is defined as a line of five squares, of which the
attacker has occupied any four, with the fifth square empty; the 5tn»£/it /our
(figure 5.1b) is a line of six squares, of which the attacker has occupied the
four center squares, while the two outer squares are empty; the t/iree (figure
5.1c and 5.Id) is either a line of seven squares of which the three center
squares are occupied by the attacker and the remaining four squares are
empty, or a line of six squares with three consecutive squares of the four center
squares occupied by the attacker and the remaining three squares empty; the
6rofcen t/iree (figure 5. le) is a line of six squares of which the attacker has
occupied three non-consecutive squares of the four center squares, while the
other three squares are empty. A winning pattern, i.e., a line of five squares,
all occupied by one player, is named a /we.
If a player constructs a four, she threatens to win on the next move.
Therefore, the threat must be countered immediately at the empty square of
the four. If a straight four is constructed, the defender is too late, since there
are two squares where the attacker can create a five at her next move (unless,
of course, the defender has the opportunity to win at her next move). With
a three, the attacker threatens to create a straight four at her next move.
Thus, even though the threat has a depth of two moves, it must be countered
immediately. If an extension at both sides is possible (figure 5.1c), then there
CHAPTER 5.
Figure 5,2: Complicated threats.
are two defensive moves: both directly adjacent to the attacking stones. If
only one extension is possible then three defensive moves are available (figure
5.Id). Moreover, against a broken three, three defensive moves exist a program based
on a large set of threat patterns is described.
5.2 RULES AND STRATEGIES
(a) Fours only.
(b) Threes only.
Figure 5.3: Winning threat variations
Threat trees
To win the game against any opposition a player needs to create a
i/ireat (either two threes, two fours, or a three and a four). In most cases,
several threats are executed before a double threat occurs. A tree in which
each attacker move is a threat is called a £/irea£ iree. A threat tree leading to
a (winning) double threat in each variation is called a u;mmn<7 tftreat tree. A
variation in a winning threat tree is called a tummnp </ireot uanaÉion. Each
threat in the tree forces the defender to play a move countering the threat.
Hence, the defender's possibilities are limited.
In figure 5.3a a position is shown in which black can win through a winning
threat variation consisting of fours only. Since a four must be countered
immediately, the whole sequence of moves is forced for white.
In figure 5.3b a position is shown in which black wins through a winning
threat variation consisting of threes, twice interrupted by a white four. As
mentioned earlier, white has at each turn a limited choice. During the play,
she can create fours as is shown in figure 5.3b. Still, her loss is inevitable.
CHAPTER 5.
Human strategies
During the second and third Computer Olympiad , we observed two human expert go-moku players
(A. Nosovsky, 5th dan and N. Alexandrov, 5th dan). These Russian players
are involved in two of the world's strongest go-moku playing programs ( Vertex
and Stone System). While observing the experts, it became clear that they
are able to find quickly sections on the board where a winning threat tree can
be created, regardless of the number of threes which are part of the winning
threat tree. The depth of these winning threat trees are typically in the range
of 5 to 20 ply.
The way a human expert finds winning threat trees so quickly can be
broken down into the following four steps.
1. A section of the board is chosen where the configuration of stones seems
favorable for the attacking player. It is then decided whether enough
attacking stones can collaborate making it useful to search for a winning
threat tree. This decision is based on a "feeling", which comes from a
long experience in judging patterns of stones ).
2. Threats are considered, and in particular the threats related to other
attacking stones already on the board.
Defensive moves by the
opponent are mostly disregarded.
3. As soon as a variation is found in which the attacker can combine her
stones to form a double threat, it is investigated how the defender can
refute the potential winning threat variation. Whenever the opponent
has more than one defensive move, an examination is made to see
whether the same threats work in all variations of the threat tree.
Moreover, it is investigated whether the opponent can insert one or
more fours, effectively neutralizing the attack.
4. If only a few variations of the tree do not lead to a win via the same
threat variation, an examination is made to see whether the remaining
positions can be won via other winning threat trees.
In practical play, a winning threat tree often consists of a single set of
attacking moves applicable to each variation of the tree, independent of the
defensive moves.
We remark that the size of the state space is considerably reduced by
first searching for one side (the attacker). Only if a potential winning
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
threat tree is found is the impact of defensive moves investigated. This
approach is supported by the analyses given in .
When presenting a winning threat tree, they only provide the moves for the
attacker, thus indicating that the set of attacking moves works irrespective
of the defensive moves. Possible fours which the defender can create without
refuting the threat tree can be neglected altogether
In positions without winning threat trees, the moves to be played
preferably increase the potential for creating threats or, whenever defensive
moves are called for, the moves chosen will reduce the opponents potential for
creating threats. The human evaluation of the potential of a configuration is
based on two aspects: (1) direct calculations of the possibilities, (e.g., if the
opponent does not answer in that section of the board) and (2) a so-called
good shape (i.e., configurations of which it is known that stones collaborate
In section 5.3 we model the above thinking process in our application of
db-search to go-moku.
5.3 Applying db-search
As mentioned before, threat trees play a dominant role in go-moku. To play
go-moku well, it would be advantageous to have a module which determines
whether a winning threat tree exists. Our application of db-search to go-moku
is restricted to searching for winning threat trees.
This section consists of four parts. First, in section 5.3.1 we describe
how the adversary-agent state space, if restricted to a subset of all possible
threat trees, can be transformed into a single-agent state space. Second, in
section 5.3.2 we illustrate how the single-agent state space thus created for
go-moku fits in the framework for db-search as presented in chapter 3. Third,
in section 5.3.3 we discuss properties of the single-agent state space for gomoku which have not been included in the framework of section 5.3.2. For
each of these properties it is explained how our implementation of db-search
handles them. Fourth, in section 5.3.4 heuristics are described which lead to
a significantly improved efficiency, at the cost of a slightly reduced efficacy.
Fourth, in section 5.3.5 we describe the additional requirements necessary to
apply db-search to standard go-moku instead of free-style go-moku.
CHAPTER 5.
A single-agent search in go-moku
Our description of the single-agent state space in go-moku consists of a set
of definitions, an interpretation of the definitions, and the transformation of
the adversary-agent state space to a single-agent state space.
Definitions
In the previous sections we have introduced the concept of threats, threat
trees and winning threat trees. For our application of db-search to go-moku,
we formally define the notions t/ireat (definition 5.1), rep/j/ (definition 5.2),
t/ireat sequence (definition 5.3), potential winning £/irea£ sequence (definition
5.4) and luinmn^ </ireoi sequence (definition 5.5).
Definition 5.1 4 threat in go-moku is a move 6y i/ie aitacA;er creating a
/ïue, a s<raiff/it /our, a /our, a t/iree or a èrofcen t/iree. i4 /ire and a straig/it
/our are caZ/ed double threats, w/iiZe a /our, t/iree and 6rofcen </iree are ca^ed
single threats. 77ie squares related to a threat are i/ie 5 (7u»e and /ourj,
5 ('straip/ii /our, t/iree, ftrofcen t/ireej or 7 ('t/ireej sçuares m t/ie fine o/ t/ie
t/irea< fc/. section 5.2.2,).
Definition 5.2 A reply to a </ireat T in go-moku is t/ie set o/de/ender moves
iî, suc/i t/iat eac/i e/ement o/i2 counters T. /loainst a/îue and a straip/it /our,
jR is empty, against a /our, .R consists o/ one moue, aoainst a tftree i2 consists
o/ tiuo or t/iree mores, and apainst a ftrofcen t/iree, i2 consists o/ t/iree moues.
Definition 5.3 .4 threat sequence in go-moku is any sequence o/ mores
(ai,di,a2,d2,... ,an,dn), u;it/i n > 1, suc/i t/iat eac/i a^, 1 < i < n is a
sino/e t/ireat, and eac/i d^ is t/ie repZy to aj.
Definition 5.4 A potential winning threat sequence in go-moku is any
sequence (ai.di,... ,On,dn,Qn+i,dn+i), suc/i t/iat (ai,di,... ,a,,,dn) is a
t/ireat sequence, On+i is a dou6/e t/ireat and dn+i is t/ie rep/y to On+i-
Definition 5.5 4 winning threat sequence in go-moku is a potential winning
t/ireat seouence (oi,di,... ,a,,,dn,an+i,o!n+i), /or u;/iic/i it /ias 6een c/iecA;ed
t/iat t/ie de/ender cannot counter i/ie t/ireat seguence 6y:
1. interj'ectino a seguence o/ t/ireats i/ie attacker must respond to, Zeading
to a win /or tne de/ender
2. interjecting a seguence o/ t/ireats t/ie attacher must respond to, heading
to occupation o/ a sguare related to a t/ireat Qi, 6e/ore t/ie de/ender
pZayed £/»e rep/y to dj.
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
Interpretation
Here we elaborate on the definitions presented above. Definition 5.1 defines
threats in accordance with the definitions of section 5.2.2. The only difference
is our inclusion of the five as a threat, and naming the straight four and the
five double threats. The reason for doing so is explained below.
When a double three is created, it is assumed that the defender counters
one of them, allowing the attacker to convert the remaining three into a
straight four at the next move. When a double four is created, it is assumed
that the defender counters one of them, allowing the attacker to convert the
remaining four into a five at the next move. When a four-three is created,
depending on the threat countered by the defender, the attacker can create
either a five or a straight four. Thus, we may recognize double threats one
move after they appear in the form of straight fours or fives.
The definition of a reply forms a crucial step in our conversion of
the adversary-agent state space of go-moku into a single-agent state space.
Human strategies imply that often threat trees are found such that in each
variation the same attacking moves are played. In other words, the choice
between defensive moves in such threat trees is irrelevant. We convert these
threat trees to threat sequences by allowing the defender to play a// defensive
moves as a single reply. In figure 5.4, we have depicted such a winning threat
sequence, consisting of four threats. After black 1, white has the three-move
reply 2. After black 3, white has the two-move reply 4. After black 5, white
has the three-move reply 6. Black 7 creates a straight four, to which the
reply set is empty.
Clearly, in free-style go-moku, having extra stones on the board is never a
disadvantage. Thus, if a variation wins for the attacker when the defender is
allowed to play replies consisting of multiple stones, then the variation wins
also if the defender is forced to select one stone from each multiple-stone
Positions exist in which the multiple-stone reply leads to counter play for
the defender, while the attacker would win in all variations through the same
attacking moves if the defender were restricted to playing one stone per reply,
but these are rare.
A potential winning threat sequence as defined in definition 5.4 has investigated only /oco/ defensive moves, i.e., after each threat, it is a^umed
that the defender must immediately counter the threat. A winning threat
sequence has also been checked for p/ofta/ defensive moves, i.e, that the squares
not related to the threat sequence have been investigated for their influence
CHAPTER 5.
Figure 5.4: Whit.e defending with multiple-stone replies
on the success of the threat sequence.
Adversary-agent vs. single-agent
As we have seen, in (winning) threat sequences, each reply by the defender
is implied by the previous attacker move. Therefore, we may conceptually
merge these two moves into a single meta-move.
The state space created by these meta-moves is no longer an adversaryagent state space, but instead a single-agent state space. In the remainder of
this section, when discussing meta-moves, we assume that the attacker move
and defender move in a meta-move are made simultaneously.
A db-search framework for go-moku
In this section we define a db-search framework for the single-agent state
space of go-moku, defined in the previous section. We mention that the
framework only involves /oco/ defensive moves, while ignoring p/o&aJ defensive
moves. Global defensive moves of a position will be discussed in section 5.3.3.
The terminology introduced in chapter 3 is used throughout this chapter.
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
N o t a t i o n
" •*•;: '-*• •••
. • • • ; • :
Lines of five, six and seven squares play an important role in go-moku. For
notational purposes, we define the following sets.
{{ai, 52, ••• ,«5} I «1,-.., «5 form a line of five squares}
{{si,S2i ••• >S6} I si,... ,S6 form a line of six squares}
{{si, S2,... ,37} I si,... ,57 form a line of seven squares}
We mention that on a 15 x 15 board, G5 has 572 elements, G6 has 500
elements and G7 has 432 elements.
Furthermore, we define a linear order on the squares of the go-moku board,
such that al < a2 < ... < al5 < 61 < ... < ol5. Clearly, the outer squares
of a line are always minimal and maximal within the line, with respect to
this ordering.
Attributes
The set Î7 of all attributes is defined as follows. £/ = {5(i, x) | al < i <
ol5 A x 6 {o,«, •}}. Attribute S(z,x) represents the fact that square i is
occupied by the attacker (o), occupied by the defender (•), or empty (•). It
can easily be checked that [/ has 675 elements.
The operator /F/.gs (five), for #5 = {si,...,«s} and 35 G G5, is defined as
The operator /sF.ge (straight four), for 56 = { « l , - - - , ^ } and
and si < S2, S3, «4, S5 < «61 is defined as follows.
CHAPTER 5.
The operator /FO,SS (four), for 55 = {si,..., 35} and 55 G G5, is defined
as follows.
{ 5 ( 5 I , O ) , 5 ( « 2 , O ) , S ( 5 3 , O ) , 5 ( « 4 , - ) , 5 ( « B , - ) }
••••••••''
The operator /BT.ga (broken three), for #6 = {*i)---i*6} and 56
and si < 82,33,34,85 < «6 and S4 neither minimum nor maximum in
{32,33,34,35}, is defined as follows.
The operator /x2,g7 (three with 2 reply moves), for 37 = {si,..., S7} and
€ G7, and Sj < «2 < «3, S4, «5 < »6 < «7i is defined as follows.
, 0. 5(53, o), 5(«4, o), 5(«s, 0, 5 K , 0, 5(37, 0}
',* = {5(32,-). 5(35,-), 5(36,-)}
= {5(32,.), 5(35, O), 5(36,.)}
The operator /r3,g6 (three with 3 reply moves), for (?6 = {«i> • • • » «0} and
56 € GO, and si < 32,33,34,35 < 36 and S2 either minimum or maximum in
{32,33,34,35}, is defined as follows.
{5(3l,-),5(32,-),5(33,o),5(34,o),5(35,-),5(36,-)}
= {5(31,0, 5(32,-), 5(35,-), 5(36,")}
= {5(3i,.), 5(32,.), 5(35,0), 5(36,.)}
The set of all operators f// is defined as follows.
{/F/,95 I 55 € G5} U {/sF,sa I 56 € Gg} U {/^o.gs I 55 G G5} U
{/BT.96 I 56 € Gg} U {/T2,j7 I 57 6 G7} U {/T3.96 | 56 6
We mention that on a 15 x 15 board, £// contains 3076 operators, of which
each can be applied in more than one way, resulting in a total number of
23596 possible applications of operators.
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
Initial state and goal states
The initial state consists of exactly 225 attributes, one per square indicating
the contents of the square. Each possible configuration of bbxk, white and
empty squares in which neither player has occupied a line of five can serve
as initial state. The set £/y of goal states is independent of the initial state,
and is defined as follows.
{si,S2, S3, 34,85} G Gs}U
{ {5(31, •), 5(«2, °), 5(33, O), 5(34, o), 5(«5, O), 5(36, •)} I
{si,32,S3,S4,S5,S6} € G6 A Si < S2,S3,S4,S5 < Se}
In other words, each state containing a five or straight four is a goal state,
t/g is not singular.
Properties of the go-moku framework
The framework we have described above is monotonous. Furthermore, we
can easily restrict ourselves to non-redundant paths. If f/g were singular, our
t/jt would be complete.
We can create a singular l/g», by defining a special goal attribute G and
operators which transform any element of £/g into G, which would result in
a complete t/fc. A discussion of the completeness of £/* would be premature,
however, since so far we have ignored global defensive moves.
Go-moku specific enhancements to db-search
The db-search framework for go-moku presented in the previous section
focuses only on the local defensive moves. For those moves we defined replies
such that each defender move was forced, allowing us to transform the search
into a single-agent search.
A search for global defensive strategies is only necessary to investigate
whether a potential winning threat sequence is correct. Thus, given such
a threat sequence, it should be investigated whether the defender has
alternatives to the local reply to refute the threat sequence. To investigate
the global defensive strategies, we perform single-agent searches, this time
fixing the attacher choices. After each attacker move specified in the threat
sequence, the resultant position is investigated for a global defensive strategy
by the defender. We describe the investigations in four steps.
CHAPTER 5.
First, we define the £/irea£ categories, which play an important role
in determining for each position the types of global defensive moves
available. Second, we describe two ways in which global defensive moves may
successfully counter a potential threat sequence. Third, we describe a set of
parameters for db-search. Fourth, we describe how the module searching for
winning threat sequences is composed of a series of db-searches. . ...
Threat categories
The operators defined in section 5.3.2 can be divided in three categories.
Category 0 consists of the five, category 1 of the straight four and four, and
category 2 consists of the three and the broken three. Using these categories
we can state exactly what kind of global defensive moves may be interjected
by the defender while countering a threat sequence. Against a threat from
category i, only threats from categories j can be used as global defensive
moves, with j < i. Thus, against a five no global defensive moves exist,
against a (straight) four only a five can serve as global defensive move, while
against a three or broken three, both fives, straight fours and fours may serve
as global defensive moves.
The above relation between global defensive moves and threat categories
can easily be verified by noting that each threat in category i threatens to
win in exactly i moves.
Global defensive strategies
In section 5.3.1 we have listed two ways in which the defender may successfully
counter a threat by interjecting global defensive moves. First, she may create
a sequence of threats leading to a win. Second, she may create a sequence of
threats leading to the occupation of a square in the threat sequence.
Here we describe how db-search can be used to determine whether such a
global defensive strategy exists. Our application of db-search for this purpose
is such that we may erroneously decide that a defensive strategy exists, thus
rejecting a winning threat sequence for the attacker, but that we will never
overlook the existence of a defensive strategy.
To prevent confusion arising from the terms attacker and defender in this
context, we assume here that player >1 has found a potential winning threat
sequence, and we investigate whether player 5 has a global defensive strategy
after move a* by A Three remarks concerning the application of db-search
to search for global defensive strategies for player £? are in order.
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
1. The goal set C/j for player B should be extended with singleton goals
for occupying any square in threat aj or reply dj, with j > z.
2. If S finds a potential winning threat sequence (i.e., a global defensive
strategy against the potential winning threat sequence of A), this threat
sequence is not investigated for counter play of player A. Instead,
in such a case we always assume that A's potential winning threat
sequence has been refuted.
3. In the application of db-search for player 5, only threats of categories
less than the category of the threat played by A may be applied. Thus,
in a db-search for player 5, only threats having replies consisting of a
single move are applied.
If we examine the description of db-search for 5, we may find that the
search is monotonous and contains no redundant paths. As argued before, t/j
can be easily transformed into a singular C/g/, without a conceptual difference
in the resulting [/&. Since any sequence found for player 5 is accepted as
refutation of the potential winning threat sequence of A, we claim that if
application of db-search does not find a global defensive strategy, such a
strategy does not exist for player 5.
We stress this point as it is a vital element in the process of solving gomoku: we must ensure that in no position we accept a threat sequence as
winning, if the threat sequence could be refuted.
Parameters to db-search
Above, we have seen that db-search is used to find potential winning threat
sequences as well as to investigate whether the defender has a global defensive
strategy refuting a potential winning threat sequence. These searches are all
performed by the same module, whose parameters are listed below.
1. The positon to which db-search is to be applied.
2. The otfocfcer, i.e., the player for whom a db-search is applied.
3. The 50a/ squares, i.e., the set of squares, which, if one is occupied by
the attacker, terminates the search.
4. The de/ensiue c/iecA; option. This is a Boolean value indicating whether
a potential winning threat sequence should be investigated for counter
CHAPTER 5.
Figure 5.5: White refutes a potential winning threat sequence.
5. The maximum caiepory, i.e., only threats of this category and lower
categories may be applied.
The winning threat sequence module
Here we present a step by step description of the winning threat sequence
module, with the aid of the position in figure 5.5.
To find the winning threat sequence for black in the position before black
1 of figure 5.5, db-search may be called with (1) that position; (2) attacker
black; (3) the empty set of goal squares; (4) the defensive check option at
value true; (5) maximum category 2. If the potential winning threat sequence
shown in figure 5.5 is found, db-search will be called five more times, after
black 1, black 3, black 5, black 7 and black 9. The parameters to db-search
after, for instance, black 1 are: (1) the position after black 1; (2) attacker
white; (3) the set consisting of the 28 squares related to the threats black
1 (7 squares), black 3 (5 squares), black 5 (5 squares), black 7 (5 squares)
and black 9 (6 squares); (4) the defensive check option at value false; (5)
maximum category 1.
After black 5, which is of category 1, black can only use a defensive
strategy involving threats of category 0, i.e., fives only. However, to create
a five after black 5, white should have created several fours after black 1 (of
category 2), followed by the local defensive reply white 2. Therefore, we need
to try threats of category 0 after black 5, for all positions which could arise
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
after sequences of fours by white, in earlier global defensive strategy searches.
Indeed, if white, instead of playing 2 immediately after 1, interjects move
a (followed by black's forced reply 6) and move c (followed by black's forced
d), then after white 2, black 3, white 4 and black 5, white can create a five
Summarizing, to find the global defensive strategies, after each attacker
move of category 2, a search for category 1 for the defender should be
performed, while after each attacker move of category 1, a search for category
0 for the defender should be performed, from every position which could be
reached by interjecting defender fours after previous threats of category 2 by
the attacker.
Heuristically improving the efficiency of db-search
As we have argued before, the module which searches for winning threat
sequences will only return a winning threat sequence if the winning threat
sequence is guaranteed to lead to a win for the attacker. The opposite is not
true: not all winning threat sequences will be found. This is caused by our
acceptance of a global defensive strategy, without investigating whether the
defensive strategy itself can be countered.
In the context of winning threat irees our search is far from complete,
as we only find winning threat sequences, i.e., threat trees in which each
variation leads to a win through the same attacking moves, in the same
In this section we present three heuristics which significantly increase
the efficiency of our winning threat sequence module, at the cost of another
(small) reduction in efficacy. Each of the heuristics, if at all applicable, is
not applied during searches for global defensive strategies, in order to ensure
that all existing refutations of potential winning threat sequences are found.
Global refutation
Our first heuristic for increasing the efficiency of db-search is based on the
existence of gZoba/ re/u<aiion5 in some positions. A global refutation is a
configuration on the board which refutes all winning threat sequences of the
attacker. An artificial example is depicted in figure 5.6.
Black to move has a large number of distinct potential winning lines at
her disposal, each starting with a three. For instance, black 1 creates a double
three immediately. White 2, however, creates a double four, thus successfully
countering the three created by black 1. Alternative lines for black, such as
CHAPTER 5.
.'•?'/.'••.
Figure 5.6: Global refutation of all potential winning lines.
black a, black 6 and black c, again creating a double three, are all also refuted
by white 2.
Thus, while db-search, focusing on local defenses, finds many potential
winning threat sequences, each of these is refuted by the search for global
defensive strategies. Finding a// several hundreds or thousands of potential
winning threat sequences in such a position is clearly a waste of time.
As heuristic to recognize those positions, we check at the end of each dbsearch level the number of potential winning threat sequences investigated
so far. If this number exceeds a preset threshold T, the search is terminated.
Experiments showed that T = 10 leads to a largely increased efficiency, at a
small cost in efficacy.
We remark that while searching for global defender strategies, the first
potential winning threat sequence found is accepted as refutation. The search
is therefore not influenced by this heuristic.
Category reduction
The category reduction heuristic is designed for a special type of global
refutations. Let us suppose that the defender has a threat 7^ of category
ci. If the attacker creates a threat 7^ of category C2, then either (1) C2 < ci,
or (2) T<vj should counter 7^,, or (3) 7^ is a refutation of 7^. As the search
for potential winning lines does only consider local replies, countering 7^ by
Tea will only occur by accident.
5.3 APPLYING DB-SEARCH
Ignoring the option that this may happen, we obtain the category
reduction heuristic: if in a node TV of the db-search DAG, the defender has a
threat of category ci, for each descendent of AT the attacker is restricted to
threats of categories less than ci.
We remark that this heuristic is switched off while searching for global
defender strategies.
Restricted threes
The definitions of operator /T3,ge (three with 3 reply moves) and operator
/T2,g7 (three with 2 reply moves) imply that if the latter is applicable, the
former is too. While in most positions where both are applicable they are
interchangeable, operator /T2,9T is superior in that its reply consists only of 2
moves, thus diminishing the chances for counterplay. Only in rare occasions
are both applicable, while only /r3,se leads to a winning threat sequence.
To prevent the creation of threat sequences with as only difference the
occurrence of /T3,S6 instead of /r2,g7> we restrict application of /T3,ge to lines
where /T2,S7 is not applicable.
We remark that while searching for global defender strategies, only threats
of categories 0 and 1 are applicable. The search is therefore not influenced
by this heuristic.
Additional requirements for standard go-moku
Standard go-moku differs from free-style go-moku in the value of overlines: an
overline is a win in free-style go-moku, while it is not in standard go-moku.
To apply our winning threat sequences module, as described in the
previous sections, to standard go-moku, a few additional requirements are
necessary. We discuss these requirements briefly.
First, we introduce the concept of a line extension. Second, we describe
how a line extension influences a db-search for potential winning threat
sequences. Third, we describe the influence of line extensions to the search
for global defensive strategies.
Extensions
For each line g 6 G5, a square c is an extension of 5, if <?U{c} G Ge- Similarly,
for each line g G G6, a square c is an extension of <?, if p U {c} G G7. We
mention that the extension of a line p G G7 is defined analogously, after the
set G8 has been defined. The extension set of a line <?, i.e., the set of all
CHAPTER 5.
extensions of 5 consists of 0, 1 or 2 elements, depending on the position of 5
on the board, with respect to the board edge.
Line extensions and winning threat sequences
A winning threat sequence in standard go-moku must meet all the requirements for a winning threat sequence in free-style go-moku. An added
requirement is that at the moment of execution of threat ai, the squares
in the extension set of ai must not be occupied by an attacker stone.
An attacker stone may be placed at the extension of a threat in three
distinct ways.
1. The stone was present in the initial position.
2. The stone is played while executing an earlier threat in the threat
3. The stone is played as forced response to a defender threat.
The first and second way of placing an attacker stone at a threat extension
is checked during the db-search for potential winning threat sequences: an
operator can only be applied if the extension squares are empty or occupied
by the defender. During the combination stage of db-search, we ignore the
occupation of extensions. Instead, after a potential winning threat sequence
has been found, the extensions of all threats in the threat sequence are
Line extensions and global defensive strategies
The third way of placing an attacker stone in a threat extension provides the
defender with an extra global defensive strategy. This strategy fits as follows
within the parameters provided to db-search. In addition to the set of goal
squares provided for free-style go-moku, the set of extensions to the threats
which have not yet been executed by the attacker is passed to db-search. A
refutation of the potential winning threat sequence has been found, if one
of the extensions has been occupied by the attacker (i.e., the player whose
potential winning threat sequence is being examined).
Special attention must be paid to the multiple-stone replies. While having
extra stones on the board does not harm a player in free-style go-moku, it
may harm a player in standard go-moku. To ensure that each global defensive
strategy is found, we perform the db-search for global defensive strategies
5.4 APPLYING PN-SEARCH
as a free-style go-moku search. Thus, a potential winning threat sequence
in standard go-moku may be refuted through a sequence of defender threats
containing overlines.
Applying pn-search
To apply pn-search to go-moku, we need to convert the go-moku game tree
into an AND/OR tree. This is described in section 5.4.1. Furthermore,
we describe the enhancements to basic pn-search adopted for our go-moku
implementation in section 5.4.2.
Go-moku as an AND/OR tree
Pn-search (as described in chapter 2) is an AND/OR-tree algorithm. To apply
it to go-moku, we represent positions where black is to move as OR nodes, and
positions where white is to move as AND nodes. A win for black is represented
by the value true, while a draw and a win for white are represented by the
value false. Thus, proving the pn-search tree means that black can win in
the root positions, while disproving the pn-search tree means that white can
achieve at least a draw.
In each OR node, black is to move. As evaluation function at such a node,
we apply db-search with black as attacker. If db-search finds a winning threat
sequence, the node evaluates to true, otherwise to the value unknown. In each
AND node, white is to move. The same procedure as in OR nodes is applied,
this time with white as attacker. If a winning threat sequence is found, the
node evaluates to false, otherwise to the value unknown. A node representing
a position with all 225 squares occupied and neither player having a winning
configuration, is a draw, and therefore obtains value false, without applying
db-search.
Enhancements
The above description explains how standard pn-search is applied to go-moku.
However, five enhancements have been added to speed up the search. The
enhancements are discussed in this section.
Transpositions
A DAG is created instead of a tree, using the algorithm described in section
2.3.3. This ensures that if a position has already occurred in the DAG, or
CHAPTER 5.
if a position is equivalent through automorphisms to another position in
the DAG, the position is not investigated again. We test for the 8 standard
automorphisms of a square board.
Restricting black's moves
In go-moku, the average branching factor is more than 200. Most of these
moves are unrelated to the battle at the center of the board and should be
ignored. However, since we want to prove the value of the root position, we
cannot simply ignore moves using heuristic selection functions.
A large reduction of the branching factor at the OR nodes can be made,
however. Since we want to prove a win for black in the root position, it is
sufficient to prove for each internal OR node that (at least) one child leads to
a win for black. For each internal AND node oi/ children must be proved.
Using these properties, we may at each OR node restrict black to, say,
the TV most-promising children, using a heuristic ordering function. If in the
restricted game tree a proof of black's win is found, the same proof is valid
in the full game tree. In our investigations presented in section 5.5 we have
restricted black in each OR node to the 10 most-promising children. Before
the ordering function is applied, we first restrict the set of all legal moves to
the set of moves which counter the threats of the opponent, as described in
the next section.
The heuristic ordering function used is rather simple: each square is
assigned 4 points for each three with a two-stone reply, 3 points for each three
with a three-stone reply, 2 points for each broken three, 2 points for each open
too, which is defined as two black stones in the center of an otherwise empty
line of 6 and 1 point for each broken two, which is defined as two black stones
with a one-square gap in the center three squares of an otherwise empty line
of 7. Among all children, the 10 children with the highest score are selected.
No points are given for the creation of a four. Creating a four is often
only a strong move if it stops a threat of the opponent, or if it creates a
winning threat sequence. Since a node is only expanded if no winning threat
sequence exists and it is ensured that we select the 10 best moves among the
moves which counter the existing threats of the opponent, there was no need
to assign any points for creating fours.
Clearly, a thorough analysis of the strategic knowledge of experts would
have led to a more refined move-ordering function. As we show in section
5.5, the function described here was sufficient for our purposes.
5.4 APPLYING PN-SEARCH
Figure 5.7: Black threatens to win by moves 1 through 7.
Related squares
As stated before, most of the approximately 200 legal moves per position
are unrelated to the battle at the center of the board and should be ignored.
Although we cannot ignore moves by white using heuristic selection functions,
we may try to apply a winning threat sequence found as reply to one move to
a large number of other moves. In this section we describe how this is done
in a reliable way.
For each winning threat sequence of the attacker, we define the set of
related squares as follows. An empty square c is related to a winning threat
sequence in a given board position, if the threat sequence no longer wins, if
c would have been occupied by the defender.
Before we use the notion of related squares, we introduce the term tmp/ici<
t/ireo<, for any position where a player threatens to win through a winning
threat sequence. In figure 5.7 black threatens to win through the threat
sequence consisting of black 1 through 7. Therefore, the position is an implicit
threat for black.
Now let us suppose that we have algorithms to determine whether a
position is an implicit threat, and that we can determine for each winning
threat sequence the set of related squares. Given a position with white to
move, which is an implicit threat for black, we determine the set of squares
related to the winning threat sequence. Then, it follows directly from the
definition of related squares that we may restrict white to these related
CHAPTER 5.
(a) Superset of related squares
(b) Related squares
Figure 5.8: Replies to the threat sequence of figure 5.7
Clearly, by determining implicit threats and sets of related squares in an
efficient way, we could speed up our search. To determine an implicit threat,
it suffices to make a null-move for the opponent (white in figure 5.7) and to
apply db-search to find a winning threat sequence for black. Determining the
exact set /2 of squares related to a winning threat sequence is computationally
expensive. Instead, we determine a superset 5 of the set of related squares.
The set consists of all squares meeting one of the following two conditions.
1. The square is in one of the lines of the threats in the winning threat
2. The square may be used in any counter threat by the opponent, in any
of the global defensive strategy searches performed to investigate the
winning threat sequence.
Using db-search 5 can be determined efficiently. Without proof we state that
.ft Ç S. For empirical evidence of this claim we refer to section 5.5.4.
In figure 5.8a, we have shown the set 5 for the threat sequence of figure
5.7. The squares labeled a are part of the lines of the threats. The squares
5.4 APPLYING PN-SEARCH
labeled 6 may, together with white stones on the board or the defensive moves
in the threat sequence, form new defensive threats for white.
Iterated related squares
The related-squares concept can be used to even further reduce the set of
white moves to be examined. After having determined the superset S of
the set of related squares, an element s of 5 is selected. A white stone is
placed at s, and the position is investigated with db-search. If no winning
threat sequence is found, a child is added to the tree for s. Otherwise, the
superset Si of squares related to the newly found winning threat sequence
is determined. Only squares in S n Si need further be investigated, since all
moves at other squares lead to a win through one of the two winning threat
sequences found so far. This procedure is repeated until all moves have been
In figure 5.8b we have marked the set of squares for which child nodes
are grown. Of the 35 related squares of figure 5.8a (set S), only 19 squares
(set i2) remain in 5.8b.
The null-move heuristic and the related-squares heuristic are applied for
both players in the pn-search DAG. For the attacker in the search (the player
for which we select only 10 moves per node) we first determine the set of
counter moves using the heuristics of this section, and then order the moves
according to the move-ordering function of the previous section. Of course,
if less than 10 counter moves exist, these are all selected.
The implicit-threat heuristic
The branching factor of go-moku is such that the search tree may become
quickly intractable.
To force black to select moves where white has a
restricted number of moves, we evaluate a position which is not an implicit
threat for black to false. Only early in the game tree (i.e., when there are
less than 9 stones on the board), if no black move leads to an implicit threat,
is the above restriction lifted.
We have found that no later than move 11 in the game, black can ensure
that each move is an implicit threat. By enforcing this restriction, the size
of the search tree is significantly reduced.
CHAPTER 5.
Heuristic (dis)proof number initialization
During our initial experiments, we have used the standard proof and disproof
numbers initialization of 1 each. While studying the trees grown, it became
apparent that pn-search tended to pursue some deep lines longer than
desirable. This is mainly caused by continuously executing threats, without
creating a potential for a winning threat sequence.
In qubic, as described in chapter 4, we chose to remove all threatening
moves for the attacker from the search tree. We could safely do so, since our
db-search implementation for qubic searched the full space of threatening
sequences. The incompleteness of db-search in go-moku with respect to the
space of all threat trees blocks a similar approach in go-moku. Instead, we
have opted to attach a small penalty to all deep lines. At each frontier
node the proof and disproof numbers are initialized to the number of full
moves made from the root position. Thus, at depth d, the proof and disproof
numbers are initialized to 1 + [<V2J •
This heuristic initialization ensures that forcing lines are not searched
too deeply (before sufficient alternatives have been tried), without interfering
with the essence of pn-search.
Solving go-moku
The program Kicioho consists of the pn-search algorithm described in the
previous section, using db-search as evaluation function. In this section we
describe how Victoha solved both free-style go-moku and standard go-moku.
First, we describe the i/o of Victoria. Second, it is explained how the game
tree was split in several hundreds of subtrees. Third, we present statistics
regarding the search process. Finally, we discuss the reliability of our results.
Victoria's I/O
The input to Victoria consists of (1) A go-moku position; (2) The game
variant (free-style go-moku or standard go-moku); (3) The player to move;
and (4) The maximum tree size for pn-search.
The output of Victoria consists of (1) the value upon termination of
pn-search (true, false, unknown) (2) a database containing a record for
each position in the solution tree. The database returned by Victoria is
empty unless the value true was returned. For each record in the database
representing a position with black to move, at least one child position will also
5.5 SOLVING GO-MOKU
be represented in the database. For each record in the database representing
a position with white to move, only child positions are represented in the
database in which black does not have a winning threat sequence.
The database created by Victoria served two purposes. First, the merged
database of all subtrees investigated should provide us with a solution tree
for the full go-moku game tree. Second, the databases created by solved
subtrees were used as transposition table for pn-searches. We have seen
several occasions where a search of several hundreds of thousands of nodes
without transposition tables was reduced to a mere few thousands nodes, by
hitting the database early during the search.
Subdividing the game tree
We have divided the go-moku game tree into several hundreds of smaller
problems. The main reason for doing this is that the size of the go-moku
game tree is such that we could not solve it through a single pn-search, due
to the limits imposed on pn-search by the size of our computer's working
We remark that by splitting the game tree into subtrees, part of the
solution process has been performed by hand. Most of these moves have been
made with the aid of Sakata and Ikawa , while others where suggested
by the proof and disproof numbers of failed pn-searches. The number of black
moves selected by hand (several hundreds) is less than one percent of the total
number of black moves in the solution tree (many tens of thousands).
Statistics
In this section we present the statistics of running pn-search on go-moku. As
mentioned before, we have subdivided the problem in several hundreds of
subtrees, each of which was individually solved. Since each completed search
extended the database of solved positions, the number of positions searched
partly depend on the order in which the subproblems were solved.
Execution time
Our calculations were performed in parallel on 11 SUN SPARCstations of the
Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam. Each machine was equipped with 64 or
128 megabytes internal memory, ensuring that pn-search trees of up to 1
million nodes would fit in internal memory, without slowing down the search
by swapping to disk. The processor speed of the machines ranged from 16
CHAPTER 5.
to 28 MIPS. Our processes could only run outside office hours. As a result,
sometimes processes which had not finished at 8am were killed, and had
to be restarted at 6pm. Still, over 150 CPU hours per day were available
for solving go-moku. In the figures below, we have not included CPU time
spend on processes which were killed in the morning and restarted in the
evening, nor have we included the CPU time spent on test runs during which
we discovered bugs in our software (see also section 5.5.4). Thus, the time
mentioned indicates the amount of time necessary to solve go-moku without
interruptions, using the final version of Victoria.
Free-style go-moku was solved using 11.9 days of CPU time, while standard
go-moku (thus banning wins through overlines) was solved with 15.1 days of
Pn-search tree size
The summed size of all pn-search trees built during the calculations (again
excluding terminated processes and runs of initial versions of the program)
for free-style go-moku is 5.3 million. For standard go-moku, 6.3 million nodes
were grown.
Comparing these figures with the execution time necessary for the
solutions, we see that both variations ran at the speed of approximately 5
nodes per second. The rejection of potential winning lines involving overlines,
resulted in the creation of a 20% larger search tree.
Db-search evaluations
For each internal node of the pn-search tree, 10-20 independent db-searches
(excluding global defensive strategy searches) were performed on the average,
resulting in, between 50 and 100 db-searches per CPU second. Multiplied by
the total calculation time, the number of independent db-searches executed
to solve go-moku lies between 50 million and 130 million.
Solution size
The solution tree found by Victoria for free-style go-moku is slightly smaller
than the solution tree found for standard go-moku: 138,790 versus 153,284
database records. Comparing these numbers with the total size of the pnsearch trees, we find that 1 out of every 40 nodes created participates in the
solution. The deepest variation in both solution trees is 35 ply.
5.5 SOLVING GO-MOKU
free-style
free-style
Table 5.1: Nodes per tree depth in go-moku solutions.
In table 5.1 we have listed the number of nodes per depth for both solution
trees. We remark that for each position with black to move, only one child
position needs to be included. Due to transpositions, the number of nodes
at each odd ply should therefore be less or equal to the number of nodes at
the preceding even ply. The only exception in the table, ply 5 for standard
go-moku, is caused by the fact that we have included several options for black
for some opening positions in our set of positions to be checked by pn-search.
Deep winning lines
The combination of db-search and pn-search makes it difficult to determine
the moiirain of go-moku (i.e., the length of the game after optimal play
of both players). Both db-search and pn-search do not aim at finding the
shortest winning paths, while the longest path found by the combination of
the algorithms may well be different from the game leading to the single
CHAPTER 5.
(a) Free-style go-moku
(b) Standard go-moku
Figure 5.9: Deep variations
position at level 35 of the solution tree. Even though the games leading to
positions at level 35 of the solution trees do not necessarily show optimal
play of either side, we have depicted two of these games in figure 5.9.
Reliability
In section 4.5.4, we have explained the hazards of solving games through large
computer programs. The same hazards mentioned there exist in go-moku in
even greater form.
Our go-moku implementation consists of almost 20,000 lines of C-code.
Approximately half is dedicated to the X-interface created by Loek Schoenmaker, while the other half consists of db-search, pn-search, database look-up
and database creation, automorphism management, etc. Errors in programs
this size are virtually unavoidable. Many errors have been created and
corrected during implementation and testing of the program, but there is
no guarantee that all bugs have been found.
A further source of error is the complexity of the calculation process.
We used 11 SPARCstations in parallel to solve each of the several hundreds of
subtrees. These 11 SPARCstations created their own databases when solving a
position, while they all used one large database as transposition table. After
5.5 SOLVING GO-MOKU
solving a position, the transposition table should be extended with the newly
created small databases. A locking mechanism was created to ensure that
no databases would be corrupted. Still, computers going down at critical
moments introduced the possibility that data would get lost. This, in fact,
has happened during our calculations.
To ensure the completeness of the solution found, we have created a
module which examines the final database created. For each position with
black to move a successor position must be present in the database. For
each position with white to move, for each legal move either a winning
threat sequence must exist, or the successor position must be present in
the database. The only common element with the solving process is dbsearch. Thus, an error in db-search may go unnoticed, while all other parts,
including pn-search and the related-squares generator, are eliminated from
the checking process. Using the database checking module, we have both
located missing database parts, due to computers failing at critical moments
and human error, and have found an error in our related-squares generator.
The final investigations, however, for both the free-style go-moku and standard
go-moku variants were successful.
The correctness of our db-search implementation is based on meticulously
testing all possible types of counterplay, including intricate ways in which the
opponent forces the attacker, after a sequence of fours, to occupy an extension
square of a threat in the threat sequence. After the final database creation,
which was checked and accepted by the database-checking module, no errors
have been found in this part of the program. Therefore, go-moku should be
considered a solved game.
Which Games Will Survive?
In chapters 2 and 3, we presented two new search techniques which have been
applied to qubic and go-moku in chapters 4 and 5, thereby partly answering
our first research question (see section 1.4). In this chapter, we broaden our
scope to all three research questions and the problem statement. The chapter
consists of four parts.
First, in section 6.2, we define four properties of games. These are per/ect
m/ormataon, convergence, sudden deat/i, and comp/exity.
Second, in section 6.3, we discuss four aspects of each of the games of the
Olympic List.
1. The relation between the game and the four game properties introduced
in section 6.2.
2. The state of the art in game-playing programs.
3. Techniques currently applied.
4. Obstacles to progress.
Third, in section 6.4 we review our three research questions on the basis
of the discussion of individual games presented in section 6.3, leading to a
review of the problem statement.
Finally, in section 6.5, we speculate about the future playing strength of
computer game playing programs, as well as of the future of thinking games
in our society.
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
For the rules of the games discussed in this chapter, we refer to Levy and
Beal , Levy and Beal and Van den Herik and Allis .
Game properties
In this section we define four properties of games, viz. per/ect in/ormaiion
(section 6.2.1), convergence (section 6.2.2), sudden dea£/i (section 6.2.3) and
comp/ezity (section 6.2.4).
Perfect information
The perfect-information property divides the set of games into two disjoint
subsets: the set of per/ec£-m/orma£zon pomes and the set of imper/ec£m/ormata'on pames. In a perfect-information game, all players, at any time
during the game, have access to all information defining the game state and
its possible continuations.'Any game which is not a perfect-information game
is defined to be an imperfect-information game.
For example, chess is a perfect-information game. Relevant information
denning the game state in chess includes: (1) the configuration of chess pieces
on the board; (2) the number of moves made since a pawn was moved, or
a piece has been captured; (3) the en-passant capturing opportunities in
the current game state; (4) the castling options left to both players; and
(5) previous configurations with their en-passant capturing opportunities
and castling options. The information described here allows each player to
determine the game state and its possible continuations, including en-passant
capturing moves, castling moves, repetition of positions, and the status with
respect to iV-move rules. In practice, a player needs only three pieces of
information: (1) the configuration of chess pieces; (2) the game score, i.e.,
all moves played since the start of the game; and (3) the official rules of
chess. The combination of these three pieces of information allows a player
to deduce all necessary information during a game.
Bridge is an example of an imperfect-information game. During the
bidding phase of bridge, each player sees only her own cards, leaving her
unaware of the distribution of the remaining 39 cards over her partner and
her opponents. During the playing phase, each player sees her cards, those
of the dummy and the cards already played, still leaving her unaware of the
distribution of the remaining cards over the undisclosed hands.
Optimal play in a perfect-information game always consists of a pure
stro£e<?2/, while in imperfect-information games optimal play may require a
6.2 GAME PROPERTIES
mixed s£ra£e<7j/. In a pure strategy, for each game state a single move can
be determined, which leads to the game-theoretic value of the position.
In a mixed strategy, optimal play requires a player to play a move i with
probability pi, while at least two such p* are non-zero. For a discussion of
pure and mixed strategies, we refer to von Neumann and Morgenstern .
Convergence
The convergence property labels games as either conuerpinp, direrpinp or
unc/ianpea6/e. Before we can define these classifications, we introduce conversions in definition 6.1.
Definition 6.1 A move M /rom state A to state B is a conversion, i/ no
con/ïpuration o/ pieces w/iic/i cou/d /iat>e occurred in any pame heading to t/ie
conjuration o/pieces in A, can occur in a pame continuing ./rom state B.
Examples of conversions in chess are moving a pawn, or capturing a piece. In
checkers, any move except for a non-capture move by a king is a conversion.
For most games, the main conversions involve the addition (e.g., connectfour, go-moku, qubic and Othello) or removal (e.g., chess, checkers, bridge) of
pieces from play. We may divide the state space of all legal positions of a
game into disjoint classes, where each class contains all positions with the
same number of pieces on the board. Let us define a directed graph G in
which each class is a node, and an arc exists between class A and class i? if
and only if a position P exists in A such that a move exists from P which
leads to a position Q in B. We can now define convergence using this notion
of classes of positions. A game conuerpes if for the majority of edges from A
to B in G, the cardinality of A is larger than the cardinality of 5. A game
diuerpes if for the majority of edges from A to .6 in G, the cardinality of 5
is larger than the cardinality of A. A game is unc/ianpeaft/e if the game does
not have conversions, or if it neither converges nor diverges.
An example of a converging game is checkers. The initial position in
checkers consists of 24 men, while during the game the number of men
decreases. After the first few captures, the number of legal checkers positions
decreases as the number of pieces on the board decreases.
An example of a diverging game is Othello. Each move in Othello adds a
piece to the board. Except for the endgame, the number of legal positions
increases as the number of stones on the board increases.
An example of an unchangeable game is shogi. Although shogi contains
captures, there are no conversions in shogi. Captured pieces may be brought
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
into play again by the player who captured the piece. As a result, the total
number of pieces participating in a shogi game does not increase or decrease.
Thus, shogi is an unchangeable game.
;;• The relevance of the convergence property is that for converging games
endgame databases can be created, while this is generally
unfeasible for diverging or unchangeable games.
Sudden death
The sudden-death property labels games as either 5udden-dea£/i or /ïzed-termination. A sudden-death game may end abruptly by the creation of one of
a prespecified set of patterns. A fixed-termination game lacks sudden-death
An example of a sudden-death game is go-moku: the game is terminated
if one of the players has created a line of five stones in her color. Suddendeath games need not always terminate through the creation of a suddendeath pattern: go-moku is declared a draw when all 225 squares have been
occupied without either player creating a winning pattern.
An example of a fixed-termination game is Othello. Othello lasts until
both players run out of moves or one of the players has no discs left on the
board. In practice, games last between 55 and 60 moves. Even though a
game might be decided within 15 moves by one player capturing all the discs
of the opponent, such an anomaly is only of marginal relevance.
The sudden-death property often is an important property in restricting
the search tree of a game. For games of high complexity (see section 6.2.4)
the sudden-death element in combination with a clear advantage for one of
the players may be the main property that allows the game to be solved.
Examples are qubic and go-moku (both sudden-death games) described in
chapters 4 and 5.
Complexity
The property comp/eiity in relation to games is used to denote two different
measures, which we name the s<ate-space complexity and the pame-iree
comp/exzij/.
State-space complexity
The 5<a<e-spoce comp/eiz<y of a game is defined as the number of /e<?a/ game
positions reachable from the initial position of the game. While calculating
6.2 GAME PROPERTIES
the exact state-space complexity of games such as chess is hardly feasible, we
present a method for calculating an approximation, using tic-tac-toe as an
example. , .
A crude approximation to tic-tac-toe's state-space complexity is obtained
through the notion that each of the nine squares can be occupied by cross,
nought, or be empty. Thus, an upper bound to the state-space complexity is
3^ = 19,683. A sharper upper bound is obtained by noting that the number of
crosses should equal the number of noughts, or exceed it by one. This results
in an upper bound of 6,046. The exact state-space complexity, however, is
obtained by observing that a position is illegal if a move has been added o/f er
a player has created three-in-row. Thus, positions containing a line of three
noughts with nought to move, or a line of three crosses with cross to move
must be excluded. The resulting 5,478 legal positions determine the statespace complexity of tic-tac-toe. The definition of the state-space complexity
could be refined so that symmetrically equivalent positions are counted only
once. We refrain from such a refinement.
Let us assume that we have established a superset of all legal positions
of the game and the cardinality of that superset. Let us also assume that
for each individual position of the superset we have an evaluation function
which determines whether the position is legal. Using the combination of
these two and a Monte-Carlo simulation, we may obtain an estimate of the
true state-space complexity. We performed 10 Monte-Carlo simulations,
with a thousand samples per simulation, chosen from the superset of 3^
configurations mentioned above. For each simulation we determined the
fraction of the positions which were legal. Multiplication of this fraction
by the size of the superset, 3^, gave an estimated state-space complexity in
our 10 simulations ranging from 4,920 to 5,983 with an average of 5,479,
surprisingly close to the true state-space complexity.
The main application of the state-space complexity of a game is that it
provides a bound to the complexity of games which can be solved through
complete enumeration. With today's technology, where computer
networks have access to Gigabytes of disk storage, the boundary of solvability
by exhaustive enumeration lies at a state-space complexity of approximately
Game-tree complexity
Before we are able to define the ^ame-tree comp/eii(y of a game, two auxiliary
definitions are needed.
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
Definition 6.2 77ie solution depth o/ a node J is i/ie minima/ dept/i fin
o/ a /u/Z-tuidt/i searc/i 5Uj0?cieni io deiervnine t/ie oame-t/ieoretic ua/ue o/J.
According to definition 6.2, the solution depth of a mate-in-n position in
chess, n > 1, is 2n — 1 ply.
Definition 6.3 77ie solution search tree o/ o node J is t/ie /u//-u;idt/i searc/i
free witA a depin eçua/ to t/ie so/ution dept/i o/J.
As an example we consider a chess position J with white to move. White has
30 legal moves. For simplicity's sake, we assume that after each legal white
move, black has 20 legal moves of which at least one mates white. Then,
the solution search tree of J consists of J, the 30 children of J, and the 600
grandchildren of J.
Definition 6.4 77ie game-tree complexity o/ a <?ame is i/ie number o/
nodes in t/ie so/ution searc/i tree o/ t/ie initia/ positionfsj o/ t/ie pame.
If J were the initial position of a game, its game-tree complexity would be
While calculation of the exact game-tree complexity of games such as
chess is hardly feasible, we can calculate a crude approximation as follows.
Using tournament games, we can observe the average game length. Also, we
may determine the average branching factor, either as a constant, or as a
function of the depth in the game tree. The game-tree complexity can be
approximated by the number of leaf nodes of the search tree with as depth the
average game length (in ply), and as branching factor the average branching
factor (per depth).
For instance, in tic-tac-toe, the average game length is close to nine ply,
since most games end in a draw, which always takes exactly nine half-moves.
The branching factor at level i in the game tree equals 9 — i. Thus, the
minimax search tree with depth 9 and branching factor 9 — i at level i
consists of 9! = 362880 terminal nodes, which is an estimate of the game-tree
complexity of tic-tac-toe. Note that the game-tree complexity of a game may
be larger than the state-space complexity, as the same position may occur at
several different places in the game tree.
The game-tree complexity is an estimate of the size of a minimax search
tree which must be built to solve the game. Thus, using optimally-ordered
Q-/3 search, we may expect to search a number of positions in the order of
the square root of the game-tree complexity .
As a guide to the perplexed, anticipating results duely credited in the
following section, we present a graphical overview of the two complexities we
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
complexity
game-tree complexity
state-space complexity
Figure 6.1: Estimated game complexities.
distinguish in figure 6.1. For credits and sources see the discussions of the
individual games.
6.3 The games of the Olympic List
In this section we discuss each of the games of the Olympic List individually.
For each game, we describe (1) its properties, as introduced in section 6.2;
(2) the currently strongest computer programs; (3) the techniques applied in
these programs; and (4) the obstacles to progress in the game.
We have ordered the games of the Olympic List as follows. First, we
discuss four solved games (qubic, connect-four, go-moku and nine men's morris)
in the order in which they were solved. Second, we discuss the eight unsolved
perfect-information games, in an order depending on the strengths of the
currently strongest game-playing program: (1) stronger than the current
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
world champion (awari and othello) (2) Grand Master strength or stronger
(checkers, draughts and chess) (3) below Grand Master strength (Chinese
chess, renju and go). Third, we discuss the three imperfect-information games
of the Olympic List (scrabble, backgammon and bridge).
Game properties
Qubic is a diverging, perfect-information game with sudden death. An upper
bound to the state-space complexity of qubic is 3^* « 10^°. To estimate the
game-tree complexity, we assume an average game length of 20 ply. With
64 — i legal moves in a position at ply i, the game-tree complexity of qubic is
approximately ||j » 10^*.
The state of the art
Qubic was the first game of the Olympic List to be solved. It was proved
that the game is a win for the player to move first . The
main game property responsible for qubic being solvable is sudden-death. For
details on the solution of qubic, we refer to chapter 4.
Techniques currently applied
Qubic was solved by Patashnik using a standard a-/? search for determining
the existence of winning threat sequences. All non-forced moves leading to
the solution were made by hand, using expert knowledge. Qubic has been
solved again using db-search for determining the existence of winning threat
sequences, and pn-search for making the non-forced moves, as described in
chapter 4.
Obstacles to progress
It could be argued that qubic provides additional challenges beyond solving
the game. For instance, one might want to determine the game-theoretic
value of every legal position, or determine the shortest winning threat
sequence from each position. However, we believe that with respect to human
performance on qubic, all interesting problems within qubic have been solved.
During the solution processes, no obstacles to progress have been discovered.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
Connect-Four
Game properties
Connect-four is a diverging, perfect-information game with sudden death.
Although at first sight the sudden death in connect-four may seem as
important as in qubic, most games in connect-four are decided between moves
37 and 42, i.e., while filling the last column of the board.
The state-space complexity of connect-four has been estimated at 10**
 . With an estimated average game length of 36 ply, and an
average branching factor of 4, the game-tree complexity of connect-four is
approximately 4^ w 10*1.
The state of the art
In September 1988, James Allen determined the game-theoretic value through
a brute-force search : a win for the player to move first.
A few weeks later, in October 1988, connect-four was solved through a
knowledge-based approach, resulting in the tournament program VICTOR
 . Recently
John Tromp has calculated the game-theoretic value for all 8-ply connectfour positions .
Techniques currently applied
Both Allen and Tromp used a sophisticated implementation of a-/? search.
While Allen spent 300 hours of CPU time to determine the game-theoretic
value of the position after 1. dl, Tromp's calculations took some 40,000 hours
CPU time for his (vastly) more complex task. Our knowledge-based solution
initially took 350 hours of CPU time. However, adding a knowledge rule in
combination with changing the search algorithm to pn-search has resulted
in a program which solves connect-four in less than 25 CPU hours. All these
experiments were performed on comparable hardware.
Obstacles to progress
The current version of VICTOR, in combination with the 8-ply database
created by Tromp, can be used to determine the game-theoretic value of
almost any connect-four position within minutes. Furthermore, VICTOR'S
knowledge-based component is able to provide us with an explanation
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
a position is won. Therefore, we believe that no challenges remain within
connect-four and no obstacles to progress have been discovered.
Game properties
Go-moku is a diverging, perfect-information game with sudden death. An
upper bound to the state-space complexity is 3 ^ « 10^. To estimate the
game-tree complexity, we assume an average game length of 30 ply. With
225 — i legal moves in a position at ply i, the game-tree complexity of gomoku is approximately 10™. For the professional variant of go-moku, with
opening restrictions for black, the average game length will be somewhat
larger, resulting in a higher game-tree complexity.
The state of-the-art
As described in chapter 5, two variants of go-moku without opening
restrictions have been solved in August 1992, proving that the game-theoretic
value is a win for the player to move first.
The current computer gomoku world champion (according to the rules of professional go-moku) is the
program Feriez written by Shaposhnikov . It is unclear
at what performance level Feriez plays in relation to the strongest human
Techniques currently applied
As described in chapter 5, the two variants of go-moku without opening
restrictions were solved using a combination of db-search and pn-search.
world champion Vertex is based on standard game-tree search techniques:
a fixed-depth (16-ply) a-/3 search for the most-promising 14 moves in
each position.
Feriez has been provided with expert pattern knowledge
and opening knowledge of two-fold world correspondence Renju champion
Nosovsky .
Obstacles to progress
During the solution process of go-moku, it became apparent that through its
tactical knowledge Vzciorio was able to suggest strong positional moves in
many positions. In other words, many positionally strong moves could be
explained through tactical calculations. We believe that a combination of
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
db-search and pn-search, without the multi-move reply and other efficiency
measures, can be implemented to outperform all human players in the search
for deep winning threat trees. With similar positional benefits as encountered
during the solution process of the free-style and standard go-moku, we
conjecture that the best human players can be defeated at any variant of
go-moku. It is also possible that standard techniques as applied in Vertez
would prove sufficient for the task. Therefore, we conclude that no obstacles
have been discovered in go-moku.
Nine men's morris
Game properties
Nine men's morris is a converging, perfect-information game. The game has a
sudden-death element: if a player is unable to make a move, she loses. Even
though this plays a role in practice, its influence on the game is much less
than that of the main feature: closing mills and thereby capturing men of the
opponent. Therefore, it seems more appropriate to classify nine men's morris
as a fixed-termination game than as a sudded-death game.
The state-space complexity of nine men's morris, calculated by Gasser
 , is the smallest of all games of the Olympic List: 10™. Nine men's
morris' game-tree complexity is much larger. During the opening phase of
the game, the branching factor is 16 on the average In the middle game
and end game, the branching factor ranges from 1 to over 50, resulting in
our conservative estimate of the average branching factor of 10. Setting the
average game length at 50 ply (again a conservative estimate), the game-tree
complexity of nine men's morris is calculated to be at least 10^°.
The state of the art
Nine men's morris has been solved in October 1993 by Ralph Gasser, proving
that the game-theoretic value is a draw. In the years preceding the solution of
the game, the program 5us/iy, also by Gasser, has shown itself to be stronger
than the best human players, as illustrated by defeating the British champion
by 5 to 1 in an exhibition match during the 2nd Computer Olympiad .
Techniques currently applied
Nine men's morris has been solved through the creation of databases by
retrograde analysis for all positions which may occur during the middle game
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
or endgame . For the opening phase, which takes exactly 18
ply, a forward search using a-/3 search was applied.
Obstacles to progress
During the solution of nine men's morris through the application of standard
search techniques, no obstacles to progress on the game have been discovered.
Game properties
Awari is a converging, perfect-information game, with fixed termination. Only
in rare circumstances may a player run out of moves early in the game,
terminating it. The chances of this happening, however, are quite remote,
which is why awari is not a sudden-death game.
The state-space complexity of awari is calculated by Allis e£ Û/. (1991C) to
be 10^. The game-tree complexity of awari, based on an average branching
factor of 3.5 and an average game length of 60 ply, is estimated at 10^.
The state of the art
Although lack of official human awari champions makes it difficult to prove,
empirical evidence suggests that today's strongest awari program, Lzi/izdion
 , outperforms the strongest human players. Lithidion
has lost games against human opponents, but in each of these cases the
game revealed a serious bug in the program. All other games against human
opponents were won, most by large margins.
We believe that awari will be the next game to be solved. Its state-space
complexity is such that, using 2 terabyte of disk space, awari can be solved.
It is only because solving awari is not a high-priority project, that it will
take several years and advances in technology before the hardware becomes
available to solve the game through full enumeration.
A similar approach as applied to nine men's morris, i.e. endgame-database
construction in combination with a forward search, may reduce the memory
requirements for solving awari.
Techniques currently applied
For a detailed description of the techniques applied to today's strongest awari
programs, we refer to section 2.4.3.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
Obstacles to progress
Given the current strength of awari programs, and the impending solution of
the game, no obstacles have been found on awari.
. - , - • .
• • ' î . i
Game properties
Othello is a diverging, perfect-information game with fixed termination. The
state-space complexity of Othello has an upper bound of 3^ « 10^°. Several
legality tests, such as that the four center squares should not be empty and
that the occupied squares must form a connected set, reduced the upper
bound in a Monte-Carlo analysis to approximately 10^®.
To calculate the game-tree complexity of Othello, we assume an average
game length of 58 ply. With a conservative estimate of the average number
of moves per position set at 10, we obtain a game-tree complexity of 10^®.
The state of the art
Othello programs have played at the level of the human world champion since
1980. In that year the program 77ie Moor won a game against the reigning
world champion. Since then, programs have continued to improve. Currently,
rating lists for Othello players show that several programs clearly exceed the
strongest human players in playing strength. Today's strongest program is
Z/OfjisieMo by Michael Buro, which, among other tournaments, has won the
1st Paderborn Othello tournament.
Techniques currently applied
All strong othello programs are based on standard game-playing techniques:
(1) a deep a-/3 search; (2) a large opening database; (3) an endgame search
determining the outcome of a game after approximately 36 ply; and (4) a
finely-tuned evaluation function.
The chances that othello will be solved in the near future are extremely
remote. The state-space complexity rules out the option of full enumeration,
while the game-tree complexity renders a full-depth forward search impossible. The diverging nature of othello makes creation of endgame databases
unfeasible. Finally, the property of fixed termination of othello renders solving
the game in similar fashion to the solution of qubic and go-moku impossible.
Only if a so far unidentified structure in the game is discovered, resulting in
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
knowledge rules which prove the value of nodes early in the game tree, may
othello be solved in the coming decades.
Obstacles to progress
The strongest othello programs have already surpassed their human opponents. Even though solving the game is out of reach, human players do
not possess knowledge or skill not shown by their artificial opponents. We
conclude that no obstacles have been found in the research on othello.
Game properties
Checkers is a converging, perfect-information game with fixed termination.
In checkers a game is lost by a player who runs out of moves. Although
in exceptional cases this may happen while both players still have most of
their pieces, in practice to win a game, (almost) all of the opponent's pieces
must be captured. The state-space complexity of checkers is estimated at
10^ . The average branching factor is surprisingly
low: 2.8, which is mostly due to the forced-capture rule .
With an estimated average game length of 70 ply, we obtain a game-tree
complexity of 10^.
The state of the art
As stated in section 1.1, Samuel's learning checkers program has, at least
by some, been wrongfully credited with solving the game, which has
clouded the history of the performance of checkers programs.
efforts by Schaeffer et a/. have led to the development of a true
world-championship level checkers program, named CTiznooA;. CTiinooA; has
challenged the human world champion, Marion Tinsley, for his title. In
a rather close match, 4 wins, 2 losses and 33 draws, Tinsley successfully
defended his title.
A rematch is scheduled for August 1994 in Boston. With the extra efforts
spent on C/iinoofc (see below), it is not unlikely that 1994 will see a computer
program become the strongest checkers entity in the world.
Techniques currently applied
C/iinooA; consists of (1) a deep a-/3 searcher (averaging approximately 20
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
ply); (2) a fine-tuned evaluation function; (3) a large, man-made, computer
checked opening book; and (3) endgame databases comprising all endgame
positions of 7 pieces or less, and all endgame positions of 4 pieces against 4.
The influence of the endgame databases in checkers should not be underestimated. Due to forced captures in checkers, removing 16 men off the board
may happen rather quickly.
With regard to solving checkers, we mention that full enumeration of the
game is ruled out by the size of the state-space complexity. A complete
forward search, even if the game-tree is perfectly ordered, is also out of reach
of current technology. However, convergence in checkers has allowed the
creation of large endgame databases, which decrease the size of the game-tree
significantly. Therefore, we do not rule out that the combination of forward
search (either pn-search or a-/3 search) and endgame databases may prove
sufficient to solve (some of the openings of) checkers, as stated by Schaeffer
Obstacles to progress
While C/imoo&'s strength is its deep tactical searches, combined with perfectendgame knowledge, its main weakness is that the value of each pattern
not available in the evaluation function must be compensated for by search.
In contrast, Tinsley's pattern knowledge is such, that he knows of many
positions for which a search of 50 or more plies is necessary to reveal the
value of the position. Each of such patterns corresponds to a weakness of the
program with respect to human players.
Although C/iinooA's tactical and endgame ability make up for most of
the lack of pattern knowledge, it reveals traces of an obstacle to progress in
checkers: the inability to gain experience from previous plays. The suitability
of checkers to alternative approaches, such as the brute-force approach
applied by CTiinooA; shows that this experience obstacle has not prevented
checkers programs from successfully challenging the strongest human players.
Game properties
Draughts is a converging, perfect-information game with fixed termination,
in many ways similar to checkers. The state-space complexity of draughts is
significantly larger than that of checkers, and we have calculated an upper
bound of 10^°. The game-tree complexity of draughts is also larger than that
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
of checkers. Conservatively estimating the average branching factor at 4,
and the average game length at 90 ply, we obtain an estimated game-tree
complexity of 4^° «
The state of the art
The strongest draughts program is 7Vuus written by Stef Keetman . Truus' current level of play at tournament speed is ranked around the
40th position in the world. In speed draughts, TVuus has beaten reigning
world champion Alexei Tsjizjow once, and reached the 9th position in a
tournament entered by almost all strong human players.
Currently, Keetman works towards the goal of creating a tournament
program able to defeat the human world champion. These efforts may
improve 7Vuua' level of play in the near future.
Techniques currently applied
IVuus consists of (1) a deep a-/? searcher (averaging a nominal depth of
approximately 10 ply); (2) a fine-tuned evaluation function; (3) a large, manmade, computer-checked opening book; and (4) a set of about 1,000 tactical
patterns, which 7Vuus learned through automatic generalization.
According to its author, TVuus' undefeated record amongst draughts
programs since 1990, is mostly due to its learning of tactical patterns
 .
In the near future, 7Vuus' learning abilities will be
extended to positional patterns, which have so far been hand-coded by the
The large state-space complexity, in combination with the large game-tree
complexity, make draughts unsolvable in the foreseeable future.
Obstacles to progress
7Vuus' strength is mostly based on its knowledge of tactical patterns and
deep tactical searches. Although it has been argued by Keetman that
tactical knowledge in draughts enhances positional play, positional knowledge
is 7Vuus' main weakness in comparison with human experts. Like in checkers,
each pattern not available in the evaluation function must be compensated
for by search revealing similar traces of an obstacle to progress as in checkers:
the inability to gain eipenence while playing the game.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
Game properties
Chess is a converging, perfect-information game with sudden-death. While
convergence and sudden-death are major contributors to high-level play in
games like qubic, go-moku and checkers, there is only a slight influence on
tournament play in chess. Convergence in chess is slow, and a large majority
of all chess games are decided long before endgame databases come into
play. In chess practice the subgoal of obtaining material superiority often
dominates the sudden-death goal of checkmate. Thus, both convergence and
sudden-death are less pronounced in chess, than in games like checkers and
draughts, or qubic and go-moku, respectively.
In our calculation of the state-space complexity of chess, we have included
all states obtained through various minor promotions.
Using rules to
determine the number of possible promotions, given the number of pieces
and pawns captured by either side, an upper bound of 5 • 10^ was calculated.
Not all of these positions will be legal, due to the king of the player who just
moved being in check, or due to the position being unreachable through a
series of legal moves. Therefore, we assume the true state-space complexity
to be close to 10^°. A state-space complexity of 10^, as mentioned by various
authors , is in our opinion too low an estimate.
The game-tree complexity of chess, 1 0 ^ is based on an average branching
factor of 35 and an average game length of 80 ply.
The state of the art
Today's strongest chess program is Deep T/iou^M . Its estimated
ELO rating of 2550 ranks it between positions 100 and 150 on the world rating
list. Current efforts to create Deep 5/ue, a parallel program consisting of 1000
Deep 77iou<?/i£s, aim at surpassing the human world champion.
Possibly as early as 1994 a new match with today's strongest computer
chess player and one of the reigning world champions, Garry Kasparov, will
be held. So far, all previous games between Kasparov and Deep Thought
have been won by the human Grand Master to purely brute-force .
.Deep T/iou(//ii consists of (1) a deep a-/? searcher (averaging approximately 10 ply); (2) a fine-tuned evaluation function; (3) a move-generator
embedded in hardware; and (4) a large, man-made, computer-checked
opening book.
Even though deep searches have had a large impact on the strength of
today's chess programs, we should not ignore the contribution of the improved
evaluation functions developed alongside the deeper searches. A strong
example is Ed Schroder's 1992 world champion program, which compensates
for one or more plies of search through a highly sophisticated evaluation
function, manually fine-tuned through years of development and testing.
Obstacles to progress
In chess, just as in checkers, many strategic concepts known to human Grand
Masters are based on gains achieved after a large number of moves. For many
of these patterns, programs cannot compensate for their lack of knowledge
by simply searching a few ply deeper.
Again, but more clearly than in checkers and draughts, the contours of
lack of experience as obstacle to progress in chess becomes visible.
The extent to which this obstacle prevents programs from attaining
dominance over their human counterparts through brute-force alone is
unclear. While some believe that it will still take decades before computers
will defeat the human world champion, others have stated that this event
will occur before the year 2000 .
Chinese chess
Chinese chess is similar to (Western) chess in many ways: (1) it is a
converging, perfect-information game with sudden-death; (2) its state-space
complexity, at 10*®, is similar to that of chess (at 10^). (3) the approaches
to creating computer programs for playing Chinese chess have been similar
to that of chess. Its game-tree complexity, estimated at 38^ « 10^°
 , is somewhat larger than the game-tree complexity of
chess, at 10^3.
In our opinion, the main reason why Chinese chess programs fall somewhat
behind in their challenge of the stronger human players is the lesser amount
of effort invested in Chinese-chess research.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
Game properties
Renju (see also section 5.2.1) is a variant of go-moku, played by professional
players. It is a diverging, perfect-information game with sudden death. Its
state-space complexity and game-tree complexity are similar to that of gomoku.
The state of the art
In its purest form, without special opening rules restricting black (see section
5.2.1), we believe renju can be proved a first-player win, in the same way
as go-moku has been solved. The main extension needed consists of the
definition of special types of threats white can create, using squares forbidden
to black (squares where black would create a double three, a double four or an
overline). Using these extra threat types, white may be able to counter threat
sequences which cannot be countered otherwise. Furthermore, potential
winning threat sequences by black must be checked for the occupation by
black of forbidden squares. Despite the extra complications in the program,
and the somewhat enlarged solution complexity, we believe that renju should
be solvable in at most ten times the effort required for the go-moku solution.
Professional renju, as described in section 5.2.1, is a game with virtually
equal chances for both players. As go-moku could only be solved through
black's opening advantage, we believe that professional renju will be unsolvable in the foreseeable future. Today's strongest renju programs, such as
Feriez by Shaposhnikov, are estimated to play at a level of 2 or 3 kyu , which is the level of intermediate to strong club players.
Techniques currently applied
World champion Veriei is based on standard game-tree search techniques:
a fixed-depth (16 ply) a-/? search for the most-promising 14 moves in
each position.
Verier has been provided with expert pattern knowledge
and opening knowledge by two-fold world correspondence Renju champion
Obstacles to progress
In go-moku we have seen that the availability of a strong tactical module
allows a program to determine positionally strong moves: through refutation
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
of positionally weak moves by tactically forced sequences, the positionally
strong moves automatically emerge as the only options. In renju, a strong
tactical module can be created using the same principles as applied to gomoku, albeit somewhat more complex. So far, it has not been shown that it is
necessary to master deep positional knowledge as applied by human master
players. In other words, so far no obstacles to progress in renju have been
discovered.
Game properties
Go is a diverging, perfect-information game with fixed termination, We
remark that, in theory, go should be regarded as an unc/ianpea^e game,
instead of a diverging game, as any legal state can be reached from any other
legal state, if both players cooperate to this end. However, in practice, the
board is slowly filled with stones until the board is divided into territories
for both players. For practical purposes, therefore, go is a diverging game..
Go's state-space complexity, bounded by 3 ^ ' « 10^, is far larger than
that of any of the other perfect-information games of the Olympic List. Its
game-tree complexity, with an average branching factor of 250, and average
game length of 150 ply, is approximately 10"^°.
The state of the art
The strongest programs, such as Go/za</i by Mark Boon and Go-/n£eMec<
by Ken Chen, have achieved ratings roughly between 8 and 10 kyu , a level equivalent to weak club players. The low playing
strength in comparison to human players cannot be attributed to the lack of
interest by strong players or by financiers: both Mark Boon and Ken Chen
have a go-rating of 5 dan, while large sums of money can be won by the
strongest go programs.
The explanation for the low playing strength of current go programs
is found in the nature of the game. While the potential branching factor
averages 250, human players only consider a small number of these, through
extensive knowledge of patterns relevant to go. Similarly, while evaluating
a position, humans determine the strengths and weaknesses of groups on
the board with pattern knowledge. Thus, either programs must obtain
pattern knowledge similar to human experts, or compensate for a lack of
such knowledge through search or other means.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
Techniques currently applied
We restrict our description to two-fold computer world champion Go/taM,
written by Mark Boon. Goftat/i's main strength is its evaluation function.
As part of the evaluation function, heuristics determine the value of groups
under attack, as well as the result of many forcing sequences, without
having to analyze these sequences in detail. The evaluation function is used
in a selective search, where moves are generated using pattern knowledge
indicating candidate moves.
A future version of Go/zat/i, aimed at achieving a playing level of 5 kyu,
is currently being developed.
Obstacles to progress
The main progress made by human go novices can be attributed to learning
important patterns, in go terminology called <7ood s/mpe and 6ad $/iape.
Furthermore, after each life-and-death attack, their pattern knowledge regarding the liveliness of each group on the go board is enhanced. After
playing a few hundred games, a novice go player will have acquired sufficient
pattern knowledge to defeat today's strongest go programs.
While lack of pattern knowledge is not unique to go (cf. checkers, draughts
and chess), the main reason why it stands out in go is that deep search fails
to mask the lack of pattern knowledge. As a result, in go, the experience
obstacle is clearly visible.
Game properties
Scrabble is a diverging imperfect-information game with fixed termination.
The imperfect information in scrabble consists of not knowing the contents
of the rack of the opponent and of the chance element in drawing tiles from
The state of the art
During our investigations we have not been able to determine the current
level of the strongest scrabble programs. While some people stated that
scrabble programs such as TSP by Jim Homan and 7y/er by Alan Frank (the
two competitors at the third Computer Olympiad) are stronger
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
than the best human players, others believe that human players still have the
Techniques currently applied
Scrabble as a family game may be best known for its potential of family
disputes: while one player maintains that a word is valid, another may dispute
it. At official scrabble tournaments, the set of legal words is strictly defined.
Either the British O^îcioi 5cra66Ze Words or the American O^ïcia/ ScraôôZe
P/oyers Dictionary determine the legal words. For words of nine or more
letters, We6s<er's 7Vin£/i Co/Zepmte is decisive. All strong scrabble programs
have these dictionaries in memory.
Generally, a set of legal moves is selected, of which each move is evaluated
according to (1) the number of points scored; (2) the remaining board position
(i.e., the average score the oppbnent may obtain after the move); and (3) the
potential of the letters remaining on the rack, in combination with the letters
likely to be drawn from the heap.
The endgame of scrabble (i.e., once all letters from the heap have been
drawn) is a perfect-information game. A standard forward search can be
applied to such positions to determine optimal play for both sides.
Obstacles to progress
Scrabble programs have shown to be capable of high-level play, even though
relatively little research has been performed in this area.
We believe
that using existing techniques, scrabble programs will surpass their human
opponents, if this is not already the case. Summarizing, no obstacles to
progress in scrabble have been encountered.
Backgammon
Game properties
Backgammon is a converging, imperfect-information game of fixed termination. Although both players have access to all information determining the
current state, dice determine the legal continuations. Not until a player is
bearing her stones off or until the game has converted into a running game,
are conversion moves made.
6.3 THE GAMES OF THE OLYMPIC LIST
The state of the art
In 1980, the human world champion in backgammon, Luigi Villa, was beaten
in a short match by the backgammon program BKG . However,
both the length of the match, and the fact that Villa seems not to have taken
the match as seriously as he should have done, suggest that BKG may not
have been truly stronger than the top human players of that time.
Recently, Gerald Tesauro created the program 77)-<7ammon, which narrowly lost a match against former world champion Bill Robertie: 40-39.
Tesauro's investigations suggest that TZ)-<?ammon is significantly stronger
than BKG (approximately 0.35 points per game), while being close to current
human world-champion level .
Techniques currently applied
While BKG has been created through expert knowledge, 7Z>-<7ammon is a
three-layer neural network, which is trained through the unsupervised TD(A)
learning algorithm. The input to TD-pammon consists of the board position
in combination with some fairly basic backgammon knowledge. From the
input and a random initialized network, TD-^ammon has trained itself on
1.5 million games of self play, resulting in world-class level play (Tesauro,
Using the neural network as the evaluation function, TD-jommon
performs a 3-ply search. Doubling is handled by a separate algorithm, as
well as part of bearing off, for which an endgame database is used.
Obstacles to progress
Tesauro's work on rZ)-<?ammon indicates that a neural network is capable of
capturing pattern knowledge in backgammon as well as the strongest human
players. Therefore, we do not see obstacles which have become apparent
through research on backgammon.
Game properties
By declaring bridge to be a two-player game, it was possible to include it
in the Olympic List. Arguments can be adduced for bridge being a twoplayer, three-player or four-player game. During the bidding phase, four
players participate in the bidding. During the playing phase, three players
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
participate, while the fourth player becomes the dummy. On the score card,
two partnerships are recognized as the players in bridge. Like Blair et a/.
 , we have chosen to regard bridge as a two-player game.
We remark that double-dummy bridge problems are two-player perfectinformation games, while bridge problems assuming optimal counterplay can
be regarded as two-player imperfect-information games. Finally, we mention
that Blair et a/. call the three and four player phases in bridge, twoplayer games without per/ect recaZZ.
Restricting ourselves to the playing phase of bridge, it is a converging,
imperfect-information game with fixed termination.
The state of the art
Instead of trying to master the whole game at once, several researchers have
concentrated on single aspects, such as Lindelof , who developed a
special bidding system for computer programs and Berlekamp , who
created a double-dummy analyzer. Recently, Schoo has created a
program which determines optimal play in single suits.
Despite progress on parts of bridge, the strength of today's best bridge
programs may at best be called amateur level. An example of leading bridge
programs is 5hdpe 5aron by Tom Throop and Tony Guilfoyle, winner of the
bridge tournament at the second and third Computer Olympiads.
Techniques currently applied
5aron consists of knowledge rules which determine what to bid and
the information each bid contains.
A major problem not yet solved is
interpreting the bids of the opponents when they are using vastly different
bidding systems.
Knowledge rules containing standard playing patterns form the basis for
the playing phase, in combination with search. The heuristic nature of the
patterns is the source of errors, as shown in a deciding hand in the final of
the third Computer Olympiad .
Except for double-dummy problems and single-suit problems, exhaustive
search has so far not been successful, predictions by Levy notwithstanding that a world-champion level program based on brute-force search
could be created with today's technology.
6.4 REVIEWING THE PROBLEM STATEMENT
Obstacles to progress
The main reason for the slow progress on bridge seems the inability of
programs to truly understand the vague information they are processing.
Instead, programs are taught a bidding system by specifying for each bid the
hands for which the bid may be applicable, and the information transferred
by the bid. The creation of a bidding program in this way suffers from
the knowledge-acquisition bottleneck .
Furthermore,
extracting information from the bidding phase for use during the playing
phase has proved to be rather difficult. Novice human players learning to
play bridge experience similar problems. However, through experience, they
learn to interpret bids, judge hands, and transfer information gained during
bidding to the playing phase. We believe that the experience obstacle blocks
progress in bridge.
6.4 Reviewing the problem statement
In section 1.4, we have formulated the problem statement consisting of two
questions. To find an answer to the questions in the problem statement,
we formulated three research questions. In this section we summarize the
answers found to the three research questions (section 6.4.1) and review the
problem statement (section 6.4.2).
The research questions
In this section, we summarize the answers found to the three research
questions of section 1.4. We discuss each of the questions separately.
Solvable games
The first research question reads: 'Which games can be solved and what
techniques may contribute to the solution. With respect to the first part of
the question, solvable games, we have found the following answer.
1. Four games (qubic, connect-four, go-moku and nine men's morris) have
been solved.
2. Awari and renju without opening restrictions will be solved in the near
3. Checkers is a likely candidate for solution in the future.
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
With respect to the second part of the question, contributing techniques, we
have found the following answer.
1. For qubic, go-moku and renju, db-search has been, or will be, a
contributor to finding winning threat sequences.
2. For qubic, connect-four, go-moku, renju and checkers, pn-search has
been, or may be, a contributor to performing a forward search to solve
3. For nine men's morris, awari and checkers, retrograde analysis has been,
or will be, a contributor to create endgame databases which reduce the
size of the search tree necessary to solve the game.
4. In connect-four applying knowledge rules to determine the gametheoretic value of game positions has proved to be successful.
5. Variants of a-/? search have proved effective as contributors to the
solution of qubic, connect-four and nine men's morris, while they may
aid in solving checkers.
Outperforming the best human players
The second research question reads: 'For which games can we create
programs outperforming the best human players in the near future, and what
techniques contribute to their performance.' With respect to the first part
of the question, outperforming the best human players, we have found the
following answers (we ignore the games listed in the answers to the first
research question.)
1. Today's othello programs are stronger than the best human players.
2. Today's draughts, backgammon and scrabble programs are close to world
champion level. Expected progress in the near future, possibly just by
technological advances, seem sufficient to outperform the best human
3. For chess, Chinese chess and (professional) renju, current techniques may
prove sufficient to obtain world-champion level, although it is rather
difficult to predict when the last human hurdle will be taken.
With respect to the second part of the question, contributing techniques, we
have found the following answer.
6.4 REVIEWING THE PROBLEM STATEMENT
1. The most important techniques for obtaining high-level tournament
programs have been sophisticated variants of a-/3 search, with finetuned static evaluation function. It is a contributing factor in Othello,
draughts, chess, Chinese chess and professional renju.
2. Db-search in combination with pn-search may prove a contributing
factor for professional renju.
3. Neural networks are the basis for the high performance level in
backgammon.
Human superiority
The third research question reads: 'In which games will humans continue to
reign in the near future (say, at least the next decade) and what are the main
obstacles to progress for computer programs?' With respect to the first part
of the question, human superiority, we have found the following answer.
1. For chess, Chinese chess and (professional) renju it is unclear whether
the, seemingly inevitable, defeat of the strongest human players will
take place within the coming decade.
2. For bridge and go the current performance level as well as the obstacles
to progress suggest that humans will remain superior for at least the
coming decade, if not for much longer.
With respect to the second part of the question, we have found that the main
obstacle to progress apparent in several games, but most clearly in bridge and
go, is the lacking ability to gain experience.
The problem statement
Through the answers to the three research questions, as presented in section
6.4.1, we are now able to discuss the questions raised in the problem
statement.
As an answer to the first question, concerning new AI techniques
applicable to other domains, we have found in the course of our research
two new search techniques, pn-search and db-search. Pn-search is applicable
to AND/OR trees (see chapter 2), and can thus be applied outside the area of
games. Db-search is a single-agent search (see chapter 3), for which we have
presented examples including production systems. The applicability of dbsearch to problems outside the domains discussed in this thesis needs to be
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
Predicted program strengths in the year 2000
connect-four
nine men's morris
Over Champion
backgammon
World Champion
Grand Master
Chinese chess
Table 6.1: Predictions for the Olympic Games in the year 2000
investigated in the future. Clearly, as challenges remain within the domain
of games, with as specific examples bridge and go, new Ai techniques may be
developed through further investigation of these games.
As answer to the second question, concerning obstacles emerging through
investigation of games, we have found a single obstacle, apparent in several
games, but most pronounced in bridge and go: the lack of an ability to gain
eiperience. The ability to gain experience is based on Zeornm^ and /ïexz&î/ity.
Flexibility is necessary to generalize while learning, and to recognize the
applicability of patterns learned. While these concepts are not at all new
revelations, we believe that their importance in relation to our research
consists of showing that even without other interfering obstacles, such as
common-sense knowledge, gaining experience is an obstacle in itself. We
believe that to overcome such an obstacle, a recommended approach is to
research it in separation from other known obstacles. Stated differently, we
believe that bridge and go are suitable test beds for investigating the nature
of the experience obstacle.
In conclusion, we state that our research has contributed two new search
techniques which may be applied in Ai, as well as some additional insight in
the importance of one obstacle to game research.
Predictions
Future playing strength
In 1990 we have predicted the strength of computer programs in the year
2000 for each of the games of the Olympic List . These
predictions have been reproduced in table 6.1. In 1990, we were only aware of
the solution to connect-four even though qubic had been solved over a decade
before. Currently, four of the five games listed as predicted to be solved in
6.5 PREDICTIONS
2000 are solved. In the Over C/iampion category (i.e., significantly stronger
than the human world champion), renju is listed. If we were to recreate
table 6.1 today, we would put renju without opening restrictions in the So/ved
category, while we would put professional renju at the Grand Master category.
The Over CTiampzon entry should thus be regarded as a compromise between
these two. Of the five games in the Over CTiampzon category, currently
only othello is known to have achieved true Over Champion level. To be at
world champion level means having a rating close to that of the human world
champion. For both games mentioned (chess and draughts), an official rating
system exists, which makes it possible to check such a claim. Equivalent to
such a rating would be a close match over a large number of games. Thus,
CTiinooA: is considered by us to be of world-champion level in checkers. The
main reason for listing Chinese chess at Grand Master level, instead of at
world-champion level, is the little effort invested in comparison with chess.
Therefore, we believe that progress in Chinese chess will keep trailing several
years behind that of chess.
The bridge entry at Grand Master level in retrospect seems somewhat
optimistic.
Had we introduced a Master level, this is where we would
categorize it with our 1994 knowledge. However, having to choose between
amateur level and Grand Master level, we opted for the latter.
Finally, the go entry speaks for itself. In go terminology, the term
amateur may be ambiguous. To be clear, any dan rating in the year 2000 for
computer programs (even amateur dan ratings) would be above our current
expectations.
The future of games
Even where computers have failed to achieve perfection, which we see as
solving the game, they may succeed at the simpler task of outwitting human
beings. In table 6.1, we predict that for the majority of the games of the
Olympic List computers will have the advantage over their human opponents
before the turn of the century.
This being so, we nevertheless argue that all games will continue to be
played at all levels, from youngsters enjoying tic-tac-toe to Grand Masters
competing in chess tournaments for titles and money. Neither known gametheoretic values nor the availability of silicon opponents of superior strength
will extinguish man's urge to compete.
It has also been argued that, once a program of over-champion strength
exists, programs will cease to improve. Not so: while human beings construct
CHAPTER 6.
WHICH GAMES WILL SURVIVE?
programs, competition among programmers will see to it that programs will
continue to rise in strength. We therefore conclude: a// games will survive at
o// levels.
Appendix A
Domain-specific solution to
In this appendix we describe the algorithm TRIANGLE to determine the
solution to an instance of the double-letter puzzle. TRIANGLE has storage
complexity in the order of n^ and time complexity in the order of n^.
To simplify the description of TRIANGLE, we index the letters in the axiom
of DLP from 0 to n — 1, where n is the length of the axiom. We define a
su&strm<7 of the axiom as any range of letters from a start index i to an end
index j , with 0 < z < j < n — 1.
TRIANGLE uses a triangular array of ^n(n + 1) entries, where each entry
can store any subset of {a, fe, c, d, e}. Rows in the array represent start indices,
and columns represent end indices, i.e., each row i consists of column entries
i to n — 1. In the triangular array, TRIANGLE stores for each su&strin^ of
the axiom, the single letters to which that substring can be reduced. After
finishing this task for all substrings, the solution to DLP is found in the entry
representing the substring with start index 0 and end index n — 1, which
represents the whole axiom. The triangular array is filled in n steps.
First, the n entries with the start index equal to the end index (entries
[i, i], for 0 < i < n — 1) are initialized to the singleton set containing the letter
at position i in the axiom. The other ^n(n — 1) entries are not initialized.
Second, we concentrate on entries representing substrings of two letters
(i.e., entries [i,i + 1], for 0 < i < n — 2). In general, the value of [i, i + 1]
can be determined by looking at the sets at table entries [t,z] and [i + l,i +
1]. The intersection 5 of these sets indicates pairs of equal letters which
can be replaced by the predecessor or successor of the letters in 5. These
APPENDIX A.
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC SOLUTION TO
Figure A.l: Solution to instance aaôdcbWcaa of DLP.
predecessors and successors are then stored at the entry [i,i + 1].
Third, we determine the value of the entries representing substrings of
three letters (i.e., entries [i,i + 2], for 0 < i < n — 3). To determine the
value of [z, i + 2] we must look at the intersection Si of the sets at entry [i, z]
and [i + 1, t + 2], and at the intersection 52 of the sets at entry [z, i + 1] and
[t + 2, t + 2]. The union of Si and S2 determines the letters from which the
predecessors and successors are included in entry [i,i + 2].
In general, entry [p, 9] is the set of predecessors and successors of the
letters in Ug([p,j]n[i +1,9]).
Figure A.I depicts the array of entries created to solve the instance
oo6dc66dcao of DLP (the example of section 3.2). The set of letters stored in
entry [0, n — 1] yields the solution. As mentioned in section 3.2, only d is not
a solution.
: • - . ' ,
• • • • : •
• . . • • ; • . • • ;
- . » • : • ' • « »
In this thesis "intelligent" games are investigated from the perspective of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) research. Games were selected in which, at least
partially, human expert players outperformed their artificial opponents. By
investigating a game, we envision at least two possible outcomes.
• If we achieve a playing strength sufficient to defeat the best human
players, analysis of the means which led to this improvement may
uncover new Ai techniques.
• If the playing strength keeps falling short, even after prolonged
attempts, of that of the best human players a better understanding
of the problems inherent in playing the game at a high level may be
We remark that there is a possibility that the results do not lead to
progress (i.e., no new AI techniques and no better understanding of the
inherent problems). In the first case, the improvement may be due to entirely
domain-specific techniques which cannot be generalized to AI techniques. In
the second case, we may find that we have difficulty in isolating the problems
from our failed attempts. By investigating a representative set of games,
the probability increases that new AI techniques are developed or insight
into problems hindering progress is obtained. For our investigations, we
have selected a set of games called the Ofr/mpic Lzsi, consisting of: awari,
backgammon, bridge, chess, Chinese chess, checkers, connect-four, draughts,
go, go-moku, nine men's morris, Othello, qubic, renju and scrabble.
The research is in two parts. First, we have investigated three games
which we believed could be so/ued: awari, qubic and go-moku. Games can
be solved if it is possible to determine strategies leading to the best possible
result for both players. For qubic and go-moku we have been able to find
strategies which guarantee a win for the first player. For awari this has
not yet been achieved, but we did create a program that outperforms the
strongest human players. Analysis and generalization of the methods used
in solving qubic and go-moku resulted in two new Ai techniques: the search
techniques proo/-num6er searc/i (pn-search) and dependency-eased searc/i (dbsearch). Awari is close to its solution, indeed so close that we believe that
extant techniques suffice to solve it.
Second, for each game of the Olympic List we have investigated whether
the difference in playing skill of human beings and computer programs gives
us reason to believe that there is an intrinsic obstacle to progress. We have
found that, based on insufficient flexibility and learning ability, an eipenence
obstacle exists. This obstacle is particularly conspicuous in bridge and go.
We conjecture that, while such obstacles exist in the games domain, these
same obstacles will stand in the way of progress in other domains.
This thesis consists of six chapters.
In chapter 1, the relevance of
investigating games is discussed, leading to the formulation of a problem
statement and three research questions. In chapter 2, pn-search is defined.
It is shown that pn-search traverses a set of state spaces much more efficiently
than alternative search algorithms; awari serves to provide an example. In
chapter 3, db-search is defined, a search algorithm that traverses a state
space significantly reduced when compared to traditional search algorithms.
It is shown that under clearly defined conditions the reduced state space is
complete, which means that it contains all solutions present in the original
state space. The potential of db-search is demonstrated on an example
domain. In chapter 4, it is demonstrated how pn-search and db-search solved
qubic. Similarly, in chapter 5 it is demonstrated how pn-search and db-search
combined solved go-moku. In chapter 6 all games of the Olympic List are
investigated, resulting in, among others, a prediction of the playing strengths
of the strongest computer programs in the year 2000 and a discussion of the
future of games in our society.
Samenvatting
Dit proefschrift beschrijft onderzoek naar denkspelen in het kader van de
Kunstmatige Intelligence. Uitgegaan is van denkspelen waarin de sterkste
menselijke spelers hun kunstmatige opponenten, in elk geval op onderdelen,
nog de baas waren. Dergelijke onderzoekingen kunnen leiden tot tenminste
twee nuttige uitkomsten.
• Wanneer de achterstand op de menselijke topspelers geheel wordt
ingelopen, dan leidt analyse van de wijze waarop dit bereikt wordt
mogelijk tot het vinden van nieuwe Al-technieken.
• Wanneer ook na langdurige pogingen het niveau van de mens onhaalbaar blijkt, kan analyse van de gevonden problemen leiden tot het
ontdekken van algemene obstakels voor vooruitgang in de Kunstmatige Intelligence.
Het is natuurlijk ook mogelijk dat de achterstand op de mens in een
bepaald denkspel wordt ingehaald, maar dat reeds bestaande technieken
gebruikt kunnen worden, of dat de gebruikte technieken geheel specifiek
zijn voor dat spel en geen algemenere toepassing zullen vinden. Ook zou
het zich kunnen voordoen dat langdurige pogingen tot analyse van de
gevonden problemen tot niets leiden. Door een representatieve verzameling
denkspelen te onderzoeken, achten wij de kans groot dat onderzoek bij een
aantal daarvan tot nieuwe inzichten zal leiden. Deze verzameling, die der
O/j/mpi5c/ie Z>enfcspe/en, bestaat uit: awari, backgammon, bridge, Chinees
schaken, checkers, dammen, go, go-moku, molenspel, othello, qubic, renju,
schaken, scrabble en vier-op-een-rij.
In het onderzoek hebben we ons allereerst geconcentreerd op drie
denkspelen die mogelijk opgelost konden worden: awari, qubic, en go-moku.
Dit zijn denkspelen waarvoor het mogelijk lijkt uitspraken te bewijzen over
strategieën die tot het best bereikbare resultaat leiden voor beide spelers.
SAMENVATTING
Voor qubic en go-moku hebben we een stratégie kunnen vaststellen die de
eerste speler winst garandeert. Voor awari zijn we nog niet zover; wel is een
programma gecreëerd dat sterker speelt dan menselijke topspelers. Analyse
en generalisatie van de methoden die tot de oplossing van qubic en gomoku leidden, hebben twee nieuwe AI technieken opgeleverd, namelijk de
zoektechnieken proo/-rmm&er searc/i (pn-search) en dependencj/-6ased searcft
(db-search). Awari staat op het punt opgelost te worden. We geloven dan
ook dat bestaande technieken hiervoor afdoende zullen blijken te zijn.
Vervolgens is voor elk van de Olympische Denkspelen nagegaan in
hoeverre de afwijking tussen de speelniveau's van mensen en computers
aanleiding geeft te veronderstellen dat een belangrijk obstakel de vooruitgang
in de weg staat.
Wij hebben gevonden dat met name het feit dat
computerprogramma's onvoldoende in staat zijn relevante enmn'ng op te
doen, door gebrek aan flexibiliteit en lerend vermogen, dit bij sommige spelen
leidt tot een wezenlijke achterstand ten opzichte van menselijke spelers. Het
duidelijkst wordt dit gebrek bij bridge en go. We vermoeden dat zolang
bij begrensde onderzoeksgebieden, zoals denkspelen, dergelijke obstakels
vooruitgang in de weg staan, diezelfde obstakels een hindernis vormen bij
vooruitgang in andere onderzoeksgebieden.
Het proefschrift bestaat uit zes hoofdstukken. In hoofdstuk 1 worden
de mogelijke produkten van onderzoek naar denkspelen beschreven.
wordt een probleemstelling geformuleerd, evenals drie onderzoeksvragen. In
hoofdstuk 2 wordt pn-search gedefinieerd. Aan de hand van experimenten
op awari wordt aangetoond dat pn-search een bepaald type zoekruimte
aanzienlijk efficienter onderzoekt dan alternatieve zoekalgoritmen. In hoofdstuk 3 wordt db-search gedefinieerd, een zoekalgoritme dat de zoekruimte
die door traditionele zoektechnieken wordt onderzocht aanzienlijk verkleint.
Er wordt aangetoond dat onder nauwkeurig gedefinieerde omstandigheden
de door db-search verkleinde zoekruimte uo/Jedip is, wat wil zeggen dat zij
aile oplossingen van de oorspronkelijke ruimte bevat. Aan de hand van een
voorbeeld wordt de potentie van db-search geïllustreerd. In hoofdstuk 4
wordt gedemonstreerd hoe pn-search en db-search qubic hebben opgelost,
terwijl in hoofdstuk 5 het oplossen van go-moku met pn-search en db-search
wordt beschreven. In hoofdstuk 6 worden allé Olympische Denkspelen onder
de loep genomen, resulterend in, onder andere, een voorspelling van de
speelsterkte van de beste computerprogramma's in het jaar 2000 en van de
toekomst van denkspelen in onze samenleving.
Curriculum Vitae
L. Victor Allis
Date of birth:
May 19, 1965
Place of birth:
Gemert, The Netherlands
Nationality:
Married to:
Petra Allis-Meinsma
 
Sept '77-Aug '83 Hermann Wesselink College, Amstelveen.
Sept '83-Oct '88
Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Master degree
(with honors)
Jan '90 -Aug '93 University of Limburg, Maastricht. Ph.D. student
in Artificial Intelligence. Supervisor: H.J. van den
Work Experience
Sept '85 -June '87 Teaching assistant at the Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam.
April '88-Sept '88
Free-lance Computer Science Teacher,
Jan '89 -Nov '89
Programmer, Analist, Project Leader at Advanced
Management Systems, Takapuna, New Zealand.
Jan '90 -Aug '93
Free-lance Computer Science Teacher, NOVI.
Sept '93 -
Assistant professor of Artificial Intelligence at the
Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam.
Bibliography
 Allen J. D. . A Note on the Computer Solution of Connect-
Four. Heuristic Programming in Artificiai Znteiiigence I: the first
computer olympiad (eds. D.N.L. Levy and D.F. Beal), pp. 134-135.
Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England. (163)
 Allis L.V. and Schoo P.N.A. . Qubic Solved Again. Heuristic
Programming in Artificiai Inteiiigence 3: the third computer
oiympiad (eds. H.J. Van den Herik and L.V. Allis), pp. 192-204. Ellis
Horwood, Chichester, England. (95, 97)
 Allis L.V. . A Knowiedge-Based Approach of Connect-Four.
The Game is Soived:
White wins.
M.Sc. Thesis, Faculty of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam.
(9, 60, 95, 163)
 Allis L.V., Van den Herik H.J., and Herschberg I.S. . Which
Games Will Survive? Heuristic Programming in Artificiai /nteih'gence
2: the second computer oiympiad (eds. D.N.L. Levy and D.F. Beal),
pp. 232-243. Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England. (182)
 Allis L.V., Van der Meulen M., and Van den Herik H.J. . a/3
Conspiracy-Number Search. Advances in Computer Chess 6 (ed. D.F.
Beal), pp. 73-95. Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England. (60, 62)
 Allis L.V., Van der Meulen M., and Van den Herik H.J. .
Databases in Awari. Heuristic Programming in Artificiai Inteiiigence
2: the second computer oiympiad (eds. D.N.L. Levy and D.F. Beal),
pp. 73-86. Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England. (46, 47, 166)
 Allis L.V., Van den Herik H.J., and Huntjens M.P.H. . Go-
Moku Solved by New Search Techniques. Proceedings of the J993
BIBLIOGRAPHY
AAA7 Faii Symposium on Games: Pianning and Learning. AAAI
Press Technical Report FS93-02, Menlo Park, CA. (95, 97)
 Allis L.V., Van der Meulen M., and Van den Herik H.J. . Proof-
Number Search. Artificial Inteiiigence, Vol. 66, No. 1, pp. 91-124.
 Anantharaman T.S., Campbell M.S., and Hsu F.-h. . Singular
Extensions: Adding Selectivity to Brute-Force Searching. Artificial
Inteiiigence, Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 99-109. (47)
 Beal D.F. . Mixing Heuristic and Perfect Evaluations: Nested
Minimax. ICCA Journai, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 10-15. (46)
 Beasley J.D. .
The Ins & Outs of Peg Soiitaire.
University Press, Oxford.
 Berlekamp Elwyn R. . Programs for Double-Dummy Bridge
Problems - A New Strategy for Mechanical Game Playing. Journai
of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 357-
364. (178)
 Berlekamp E.R., Conway J.H., and Guy R.K. . Winning Ways
for your mathematical piays II Academic Press, London. (5)
 Berliner H.J. . The B* Tree Search Algorithm: A Best-First
Proof Procedure. Artificiai Jnteiiigence, Vol. 12, pp. 23-40. (16, 62)
 Berliner H.J. . Backgammon Computer Program Beats World
Champion. Artificiai Inteiiigence, Vol. 14, pp. 205-220. (177)
 Blair J.R.S., Mutchler D., and Liu C. . Games with Imperfect
Information.
Proceedings of the J993 AAAI Faii Symposium on
Games: Pianning and Learning, pp. 59-67. AAAI Press Technical
Report FS93-02, Menlo Park, CA. (178)
 Boon M. .
Overzicht van de ontwikkeling van een go
spelend programma. M.Se. Thesis, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (174)
 Breuker D.M., Allis L.V., and Herik H.J. van den . How to
Mate: Applying Proof-Number Search. Advances in Computer Chess
7, pp. 251-272. (60, 61)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Buchanan B.C. and Shortliffe E.H. . ftuie-Based Expert
the MYCIIV Experiments of the Stanford Heuristic
Programming Project. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. (2)
 Campbell M.S. and Marsland T.A. . A Comparison of Minimax
Tree Search Algorithms. Artificial Inteiiigence, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp.
347-367. (15, 61)
 Carroll CM. .
The Great Chess Automaton.
Publications, Inc., New York. (1)
 Charniak E. . On the Use of Framed Knowledge in Language
Comprehension. Artificial inteiiigence, Vol. 11, pp. 225-265. (3)
 Chen K. . Attack and Defense. Heuristic Programming in
Artificiai Inteiiigence 3: the third computer olympiad (eds. H.J. Van
den Herik and L.V. Allis), pp. 146-156. Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester.
 De Groot A.D. . Thought and Choice in Chess. Mouton
Publishers, The Hague-Paris-New York. Translation, with additions,
of a Dutch Ph.D. thesis from 1946. Second edition 1978. (3, 128)
 Deledicq A. and Popova A. . Wari et Soio: ie jeu de caicui
African. CEDIC, Paris. (43)
 Dreyfus H.L. . Why Computers Can't Be Intelligent. Creative
Computing, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 72-78. (4)
 Feigenbaum E.A. . Themes and Case Studies of Knowledge
Engineering.
Expert Systems in the Micro-Eiectronic Age (ed.
D. Michie), pp. 3-25. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh,
Scotland. (3, 179)
 Fikes R.E. and Nilsson N.J. . STRIPS: A new approach to
the application of theorem proving to artificial intelligence. Artificiai
Inteiiigence, Vol. 1, No. 2. (65)
 Gasser R. . Heuristic Search and Retrograde Analysis: their
application to Nine Men's Morris. Diploma thesis, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Zurich. (165)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Gasser R. . Endgame Database Compression for Humans and
Machines. Heuristic Programming in Artificiai Inteiligence 3: the
third computer oiympiad (eds. H.J. Van den Herik and L.V. Allis),
pp. 180-191. Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England. (9)
 Gasser R. . Personal Communication. (166)
 Gnodde J. . Aida, New Search Techniques Applied to Othello.
M.Sc. Thesis, University of Leiden, The Netherlands. (39, 60)
 Greenblatt R.D., Eastlake III D.E., and Crocker S.D. . The
Greenblatt Chess Program. Proceedings of the Faii Joint Computing
Conference, pp. 801-810. San Francisco. (39,75)
 Hall M.R. and Loeb D.E. . Thoughts on Programming a
Diplomat. Heuristic Programming in Artificia/ Intelligence 3: the
third computer oiympiad (eds. H.J. Van den Herik and L.V. Allis),
pp. 123-145. Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester. (6)
 Hart P.E., Nilsson N.J., and Raphael B. . A Formal Basis for the
Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths. IEEE Transactions
on SSC, Vol. 4. (17, 63)
 Hart P.E., Nilsson N.J., and Raphael B. .
Correction to
'A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost
Paths'. SIGART JVewsietter, Vol. 37. (63)
 Hofstadter D.R. . Godei, Escher, Bach: an Eternai Goiden
Braid. Basic Books, New York. (13)
 Hofstadter D.R. .
Metamagicai Themas.
Bantam Books,
Toronto. (6)
 Hsu F.H. . Large Scale Parallelization of Alpha-Beta Search: An
Algorithmic Architectural Study with Computer Chess. PhD thesis,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. (171, 172)
 Keetman S. . Personal Communication. (170)
 Klingbeil N. and Schaeffer J. . Search Strategies for Conspiracy
Numbers. Canadian Artificiai Intelligence Conference, pp. 133-139.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Klingbeil N. . Search Strategies for Conspiracy Numbers. M.Sc.
Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (31, 60)
 Knuth D.E. and Moore R.W. . An Analysis of Alpha-Beta
Pruning. Artificiai Intelligence, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 293-326. (15, 160)
 Knuth D.E. . The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
edition). (8)
 Korf R.E. .
Depth-First Iterative-Deepening: an Optimal
Admissable Tree Search. Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 27, pp. 97-109.
 Levy D.N.L. and Beal D.F. (eds.) . Heuristic Programming in
Artificial Intelligence: the first computer olympiad. Ellis Horwood,
Chichester, England. (6, 156)
 Levy D.N.L. and Beal D.F. (eds.) . Heuristic Programming
in Artificial Intelligence 2: the second computer olympiad. Ellis
Horwood, Chichester, England. (6, 46, 128, 156, 165)
 Levy D.N.L. .
The Million Pound Bridge Program.
Heuristic Programming in Artificial Intelligence: the first computer
olympiad (eds. D.N.L. Levy and D.F. Beal), pp. 95-103. Ellis
Horwood, Chichester, England. (178)
 Lindelof E.T. . COBRA - The Computer Designed Bidding
System. London, Gollancz. (178)
 Lister L. and Schaeffer J. . An Analysis of the Conspiracy
Numbers Algorithm. Computers and Mathematics with Applications,
Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 41-64. (60)
 Marr D. . Artificial Intelligence - A Personal View. Artificial
Intelligence, Vol. 9, pp. 37-48. (3)
 McAllester D.A. . Conspiracy Numbers for Min-Max Search.
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35, pp. 287-310. (16, 60)
 Michalski R.S., Carbonell J.G., and Mitchell T.M. . Machine
Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach, Vol. 1. Tioga, Palo
Alto, CA. (3)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
,3 Michalski R.S., Carbonell J.G., and Mitchell T.M. . Machine
Learning: An Artificial Jnteiiigence Approach, Vol. 2.
Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA. (3)
 Michie D. . Information and Complexity in Chess. Advances
in Computer Chess 3 (ed. M.R.B. Clarke), pp. 139-143. Pergamon
Press, Oxford.
 Newell A., Shaw J.C., and Simon H.A. .
Preliminary
Description of General Problem Solving Program-I (GPS-I). Report
CIP Working Paper 7. (2)
 Nilsson N.J. .
Problem Soiving Methods in Artificial
Intelligence. McGraw-Hill, New York. (15)
 Nilsson N.J. . Principles of Artificiai InteJJigence. Tioga, Palo
Alto, CA. (14, 63)
 Ohta T. . Personal communication. (173)
 Palay A.J. . The B* tree search algorithm - new results.
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 19, pp. 145-163. (63)
 Patashnik O. .
Qubic: 4x4x4 Tic-Tac-Toe.
Mathematics
Magazine, Vol. 53, pp. 202-216. .
A Minimax Algorithm Faster than Alpha-
Beta. Advances in Computer Chess 7 (eds. H.J. Van den Herik,
I.S. Herschberg, and J.W.H.M. Uiterwijk), pp. 237-250. University
of Limburg, Maastricht. (15)
 Reznitsky A. and Chudakoff M. . Pioneer: A Chess Program
Modelling a Chess Master's Mind. International Computer Chess
Association Journal, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 175-195. (171)
 Sakata G. and Ikawa W. . Five-In-A-Row. itenju. The Ishi
Press, Inc., Tokyo. (122, 123, 129, 149)
 Samuel A.L. . Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the
Game of Checkers. IBM Journal of Research and Development, Vol. 3,
No. 3. (2)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Samuel A.L. . Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the
Game of Checkers II. Recent Progress. IBM Journai of Research and
Development, Vol. 11, No. 6. (2)
 Schaeffer J. . Conspiracy Numbers. Artificial Inteiiigence,
Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 67-84. (16, 60, 61)
 Schaeffer J., Culberson J., Treloar N., Knight B., Lu P., and Szafron
D. . Reviving the Game of Checkers. Heuristic Programming in
Artificiai Intelligence 2: the second computer oiympiad (eds. D.N.L.
Levy and D.F. Beal), pp. 119-136. Ellis Horwood Ltd., Chichester,
England. (2, 168, 171)
 Schaeffer J., Culberson J., Treloar N., Knight B., Lu P., and Szafron
D. .
A World Championship Caliber Checkers Program.
Artificial Inteiiigence, Vol. 53, pp. 273-289. (2, 168)
 Schaeffer J. . Personal Communication. (168, 169)
 Schaeffer J. .
A Re-Examination of Brute-Force Search.
Proceedings of AAAI Faii Symposium on Games: PJanning and
Learning, pp. 51-58. AAAI Press Technical Report FS93-02, Menlo
Park, CA. (5)
 Schaeffer J. . Personal Communication. (30)
 Schijf M. . Proof-Number Search and Transpositions. M.Sc.
Thesis, University of Leiden, The Netherlands. (39, 40, 41, 42)
 Schijf M., Allis L.V., and Uiterwijk J.W.H.M. . Proof-Number
Search and Transpositions. /CCA Journai, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 63-74.
 Schoo P.N.A. . Optimal Play in a Single Bridge Suit. Personal
Communication. (178)
 Shortliffe
MYCIN: Computer-based
Consultations. Based on a PhD thesis, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, 1974. (2)
 Stiller L. . Parallel Analysis of Certain Endgames. 7CCA
Journai, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 55-64. (9)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
r Stockman G. . A Minimax Algorithm Better than Alpha-beta?
Artificial Inteiiigence, Vol. 12, pp. 179-196. (15, 61)
 Tesauro G. . TD-Gammon, A Self-Teaching Backgammon
Program, Achieves Master-Level Play. AAAJ Technical report FS93-
02 Games: PJanning and Learning, pp. 19-23. AAAI Press Technical
Report FS93-02, Menlo Park, CA. (177)
 Thompson K. .
Computer Chess Strength.
Advances in
Computer Chess 3 (ed. M.R.B. Clarke), pp. 55-56. Pergamon Press.
 Thompson K. . Retrograde Analysis of Certain Endgames.
ZCCA Journal, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 131-139. (9, 158)
 Throop T. and Guilfoyle T. . A Thrilling Hand. Heuristic
Programming in Artificial Inteiiigence 3:
the third computer
olympiad (eds. H.J. Van den Herik and L.V. Allis), pp. 27-28. Ellis
Horwood Ltd, Chichester. (178)
 Tromp J.T. . Aspects of Algorithms and Complexity. University
of Amsterdam. Ph.D. Thesis. (163)
 Tsao Kuo-Ming, Li Horng, and Hsu Shun-Chin . Design and
Implementation of a Chinese Chess Program. Heuristic Programming
in Artificial Inteiiigence 2: the second computer olympiad (eds. D.N.L.
Levy and D.F. Beal), pp. 108-118. Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester.
 Uiterwijk J.W.H.M., Van den Herik H.J., and Allis L.V. .
A Knowledge-Based Approach to Connect-Four. The Game is Over:
White to Move Wins!
Heuristic Programming in Artificiai
Inteiiigence: the first computer olympiad (eds. D.N.L. Levy and D.F.
Beal), pp. 113-133. Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester.
 Uiterwijk J.W.H.M., Van den Herik H.J., and Allis L.V. .
A Knowledge-Based Approach to Connect-Four. The Game is Over:
White to Move Wins! Report CS 89-04, Department of Computer
Science, Faculty of General Sciences, University of Limburg. (163)
 Uiterwijk J.W.H.M. . Go-Moku still far from Optimality.
Heuristic Programming in Artificiai Inteiiigence 3: the third computer