Early Results of Experiments with Responsive Open
Learning Environments
Martin Friedrich, Martin Wolpers
(Fraunhofer FIT, Sankt Augustin, Germany,
{martin.friedrich, martin.wolpers}@fit.fraunhofer.de)
Ruimin Shen, Carsten Ullrich
(Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{rmshen, ullrich_c}@sjtu.edu.cn)
Ralf Klamma, Dominik Renzel
(RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany,
{klamma, renzel}@dbis.rwth-aachen.de)
Anja Richert, Bodo von der Heiden
(RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany,
{richert, vonderheiden}@zlw-ima.rwth-aachen.de)
Abstract: Responsive open learning environments (ROLEs) are the next generation of personal
learning environments (PLEs). While PLEs rely on the simple aggregation of existing content
and services mainly using Web 2.0 technologies, ROLEs are transforming lifelong learning by
introducing a new infrastructure on a global scale while dealing with existing learning
management systems, institutions, and technologies. The requirements engineering process in
highly populated test-beds is as important as the technology development. In this paper, we will
describe first experiences deploying ROLEs at two higher learning institutions in very different
cultural settings. The Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China and at the “Center for Learning
and Knowledge Management and Department of Information Management in Mechanical
Engineering” (ZLW/IMA) at RWTH Aachen University have exposed ROLEs to theirs
students in already established courses. The results demonstrated to readiness of the technology
for large-scale trials and the benefits for the students leading to new insights in the design of
ROLEs also for more informal learning situations.
Keywords: Personalized learning environment, Responsive open learning environment,
language learning, inter-widget communication
Categories: M.5, L.2, L.3, D.2
Introduction
Responsive open learning environments (ROLEs) are characterized through their
openness for new configurations, contents and users, and through their responsiveness
to learners' activities in respect to learning goals. Openness specifically encompasses
the ability to include new learning material and services. These can be combined
either in a static fashion or dynamically, therefore allowing learners to create their
own learning environments. Consequently, throughout the lifetime of a ROLE, new
Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 17, no. 3 , 451-471
submitted: 30/10/10, accepted: 28/1/11, appeared: 1/2/11 © J.UCS
configurations will be created by a learner, usually adapted to her needs, requirements
and ideas. In addition, ROLEs respond to the actions the learners carry out within
them. Such actions can be as simple as downloading a suggested reading and as
complex as participating and interacting with other learners in a complete course
about a certain topic. Responsiveness then requires the system to respond to these
activities, for example by incorporating previously downloaded documents into the
suggestions for new readings (as kind of a recommender system) or by offering new
services that better suits the needs of learners. For example, a learner might be
suggested to use a simulation and conceptual mapping tool to understand a certain
problem instead of reading theoretical literature as was provided before.
In the context of the research project ROLE (Responsive Open Learning
Environments), a technological-pedagogical infrastructure is developed to enable the
creation of individual open responsive learning environments. The ROLE project
aims to enable learners to assemble and re-assemble their own learning environments
which become advanced Personal Learning Environments (PLE) in due course. To
get a most comprehensive analysis of requirements for ROLEs, the project is
especially targeting highly populated test-beds in different typical lifelong learning
settings. Of particular relevance are the critical transition phases of lifelong learning,
e.g. from university to company, or from one company to another, when
inhomogeneous groups of learners are treated in a one-size-fits-all manner, since there
is no way to respond to their individual strengths and weaknesses. Even worse, in
such transition phases learners are typically required to become accustomed to
working with entirely new learning environments. The main challenge in the current
phase is to learn from the many different attempts to let learners create their own
learning environments in different learning situations. Typically, higher education
institutions are early adopters of new learning technologies, even they are not
concentrating on mass individualization of learning as ROLE does. While taking into
account the limitations of the presented scenarios we were able to demonstrate two
main findings in this paper. The techno-pedagogical infrastructure is ready to serve
highly populated learning test-beds with psycho-pedagogical meaningful learning
widget bundles. This is a basic requirement to distinguish ROLE approaches from
simple Web 2.0 content aggregation environments calling themselves PLEs. The
second finding demonstrated the usefulness of the psycho-pedagogical infrastructure
in different cultural settings. The ROLE project offers the unique opportunity to try
out sets of learning bundles in similar learning scenario, but with a different
population of learners. Some early experiences about German and Chinese student
learners are presented as well. Although, the main focus of the paper is the
technological evaluation.
This paper provides an overview about the general technical concepts used in
ROLE in Section 2. A description of the test-beds including the applied scenario, the
technical realization and outcomes is done in Section 3, while Section 4 describes first
experiences using ROLE in specific test-beds. The results and insights gained from
the application of the prototypes in the test-beds are summarized in Section 5.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
General Technical Concepts
To visualize the potential of ROLE and to gather experience in using the technologies
required within the project we are continuously developing and refining a
comprehensive technical infrastructure that in its final state will enable the assembly
of arbitrary responsive open PLE. In that sense we will not deliver the one and only
ROLE PLE, but rather facilitate the emergence of a plethora of PLE assembled by
different learners according to their preferences. In this section we present some of
the general technical foundations of our infrastructure and its services, before we
show their particular application in two different test-bed scenarios and corresponding
PLE in Section 3.
One of our most critical overall requirements is to employ open standard Web
technologies, in particular an approach based on emergent Web widget technologies
such as [OpenSocial, 10; Cáceres, 10]. With an already existing huge amount of such
widgets available on the Web, learners can use any widget-enabled public container
(e.g. iGoogle, netvibes, social networking platforms such as Facebook, etc.) to
assemble their own personal learning environments as combinations of widgets
suitable for their individual learning tasks. Such an approach fosters heavy reuse of
existing widgets and makes the development of new learning widgets independent
from specific learning platforms, thus providing an easy way to extend these
platforms with new features by simply adding new widgets from multiple sources. For
development purposes we resorted to an early version of Apache Shindig
( the reference implementation of an OpenSocial container.
For the widgets and PLE we implemented in the context of the PLE presented in this
paper, we employed an early version of the OpenSocial specification. In Section 4 we
will discuss some challenges with respect to this fast moving technology.
One shortcoming of current widget-based PLE is the lack of interoperability
between different widgets in terms of communication between them. The transfer of
data from one widget to another in the same PLE instance or even across remote PLE
instances widens PLE to not just be plain collections of independent widgets. They
can rather interact with each other and become combinable to integrated Web
applications while following the well-known principles of low coupling accompanied
with high cohesion [Stevens, 74]. In our work we employ the concept of Inter-widget
Communication (IWC) for these purposes. In order to realize an approach with a
minimal burden of PLE configuration complexity for learners, it has to be cleanly
designed and implemented by developers. As a conceptual approach to IWC the
publish/subscribe (pubsub) pattern [Birman, 87] is well-suited. For the development
of the PLE presented in Section 3 we employed a Gadget pubsub channel
[OpenSocial, 10] as a message channel enabling widgets to publish or subscribe
information payloads about inter-widget communication events encoded in a unified
and extensible JSON message format [Isaksson, 10]. An example of such a payload is
provided in Listing 1 for the selection of a certain learning object as occurring in the
PLE supporting a programming course as presented in 3.2.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
{type: “namespaced-properties”,
event: “select”,
userid: “4711”,
message: {“ = “UML Diagram”,
“ = “object”,
“ = 
Listing 1: Example of an Inter-widget Communication Event Payload
Each time a user action is performed inside a widget a respective event is published
by broadcasting a message containing information about the user action. In our
approach any such message is received by all other widgets subscribed to the same
channel. The subscribing widgets then decide whether and how they react to the event
depending on message type, content, etc. Naturally, the respective data to be
published as well as the behavior on receiving IWC events has to be defined by the
respective widget developer. At the current stage, IWC is limited to widgets in the
same local browser instance. However, current development efforts lead in the
direction of realizing arbitrary forms of real-time communication between learners,
remote inter-widget communication, interoperable data exchange, event broadcasting,
etc., by employing the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) [Saint-
Andre, 04a, Saint-Andre, 04b, Saint-Andre, 09]. The combination of Web widget and
XMPP technologies is feasible, but still challenging, as we will discuss in more detail
in Section 4.
For further responsiveness of the learning environment we aim to provide selfevaluation and recommendation mechanisms. Therefore we developed a widget to
monitor learner behavior within PLE. Each user interaction inside a widget triggering
a publish event is intercepted and recorded by this monitoring widget to observe the
learners behavior over time. For this purpose, each received message is transformed
into Contextualized Attention Metadata (CAM) [Wolpers, 07] and stored in a central
database. Such information recorded for multiple learners enables the generation of
recommendations based on collaborative filtering algorithms [Linden, 03] and the
provision of self evaluation mechanisms. For recommendations e.g. the current usage
history of the learner can be taken into account and compared with the usage histories
of other learners and recommend documents of users having a similar usage history as
the learner. To provide self evaluation functionality, CAM can be used to visualize
and summarize learner activity statistics over time and compare own activities with
those of other learners. Furthermore, CAM information can be enriched with manual
annotations such as an evaluation of learning success which makes it possible to track
the learning progress similar to [Wolpers, 09].
In the following Section we will now demonstrate how the ROLE technical
infrastructure and the features described above have been used to support different
learner communities and their needs in two of our ROLE test-beds.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
Two Culturally Different Test-beds
ROLE is based on the vision that responsive open learning environments will
accompany learners throughout their learning career, from formal education to
learning at the workplace. Several test-beds enable the ROLE project to collect
requirements in various settings. In the following sections, we present two culturally
different test-beds and the application of ROLE technologies to support their learning
tasks including first evaluation results. The first test-bed we describe is operated in
the School of Continuing Education (SOCE) at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China,
while the second test-bed is operated at RWTH Aachen University, Germany.
The Shanghai Jiao Tong University Test-bed
SOCE is the online branch of SJTU. Online colleges/universities such as SOCE play a
particular role in the Chinese education system. Foreseeing the enormous demand for
higher education, the Chinese government decided in 1998 to establish a number of
online institutions that were open to those students who did not pass the university
entrance exams 
[People's Daily Online, 2007]. The ROLE SOCE test-bed enables us to learn about
PLE from the viewpoints of “average” users, that is learners who are not highly
technically literate or who have limited time due to jobs and families.
Test-bed Description
The students on the SOCE (the situation is similar at the other online institutions) are
mostly adult learners who have a job. They study two to three years for associate or
bachelor degree courses. The courses are similar to regular university courses with the
difference that teaching takes place in the evenings and weekends. Each class lasts for
three hours. Our blended classrooms are based on the Standard Natural Classroom
model [Shen, 08], in which students can either attend the classes in person or attend
via the live Web broadcast. Lectures can also be downloaded for asynchronous
watching. During the lectures, online students can communicate with the teacher via
short messages. The SOCE software system records, encodes and broadcasts each
lecture in real-time. Target devices/destinations include desktop/laptop PC via ADSL
broadband connections, IPTV devices via the Shanghai Educational IPTV channel,
universities in western China via two satellite connections and mobile devices via
GPRS. SOCE produces about 6GB of content every day. The current SOCE learning
management system supports student-student communication via forums. Teachers
can create exercises/homework to be completed by the students.
Some of the gaps in the current learning processes are representative for most
Chinese educational settings. Students are degree/certificate oriented: the primary
goal is to receive a formal acknowledgment rather than the mastery of the subject
itself. Group work is hard to perform as it is seldom performed at school. In
consequence, the practical application of learned knowledge is difficult for Chinese
students. For instance, in language learning, the students have extreme difficulties
communicating with native speakers. They are insecure, shy, and make frequent
mistakes. Furthermore, in our lectures we over and over make the experience that the
students do not know, have difficulties or simply do not use existing tools such as
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
online dictionaries, pronunciation tools or micro-blogging sites. Reasons given
include lack of time, interest and motivation. In ROLE, we experiment with different
scenarios to address these problems.
We experimented with an Open Learning Environment and a variety of tools
(video conferencing, micro-blogging, translation services, text-to-speech, etc.) over
two semesters in the courses English Listening and Speaking, German I/II, French I/II
and Introduction to Computer Science. About 50-100 students attended the language
learning courses, and about 1.200 students took part in the Computer Science class.
From our experience we knew that the students at SOCE have limited knowledge
about Web tools (RSS is virtually unknown), only limited time at their disposal and
limited technical expertise. Furthermore, in the Confucian culture of China learning is
still very teacher-centered [Zhang, 07], and students are not used to actively
contribute within a class. We therefore decided to build PLE according to the
suggestions of the teachers and make these pre-built PLE accessible to the students.
The teachers presented the PLE in class and showed example usages. In order to
encourage usage, the students were assigned homework that required using those
PLE. We then observed the students' usage of the PLE and collected feedback from
the teachers and students by interviews and questionnaires.
For testing the ROLE technologies within the SJTU test-bed we defined the following
scenario. The French teacher assembled the PLE shown in Figure 1. The widgets on
the left hand site consist of tools helpful in a language learning context, namely a
translator widget, a spell checker, a text-to-speech engine and a recording widget. In a
first experiment, the PLE was introduced to the students during class and their usage
was illustrated by examples. Then, the students received the homework to author and
record a self-introduction using the specified tools. The intention was that the
students, which were beginners in French with almost none French knowledge, would
use the translation tool to translate English or Chinese source content into French, fine
tune the translation with the help of the spell checker, listen to the pronunciation of
the text using the text-to-speech widget, and finally record their own pronunciation
using the recording widget an compare it with the given pronunciation of the text-tospeech widget. The outcome of this scenario which was used in a class is reported in
Specific Technical Realization
For the experiments at the SJTU test-bed, we applied a version which is based on the
portal Liferay. While we did not offer advanced features such as inter-widget
communication, the basic functionality was the same and enabled us to collect
information about the usage of an OLE in a higher education context.
Liferay is an open-source portal system that enables the creation of groups,
group-specific pages, and the population of pages with widgets. In the SJTU setting
we created groups for each class (French I, II, computer science) as well as user
accounts for each student in class and for each teacher. The teachers then added a
number of pages for each of their lectures. For instance for French I, the pages
“Tools” (a number of tools helpful for translation and speaking practice tasks) and
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
“Grammar” (a grammar book that was collaboratively created during class) were
created and extended with a large number of exercise pages that contained multiplechoice exercises for testing several aspects of the French language. Figure 1 shows an
early version of this system.
Figure 1: Screenshot of the SJTU prototype
The included widgets were embedded in two different ways: either according to
the Java Portlet Specification (JSR-168) or they were embedded using a Liferay
widget which allowed the inclusion of arbitrary HTML code. Widgets which are
included using the JSR-168 specification are the RSS widget and the multiple-choice
exercise tool. Most of the language related widgets are included using the HTML
method, namely the spell-check widget, the text-to-speech widget, the recording
widget and the etherpad widget which is used to simulate a joint grammar book. The
current version of Liferay supports OpenSocial which enables a more general
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
inclusion of widgets. This functionality was not completely available during the
reported period; using a prototypical version we included a translation widget.
Evaluation
Here, we will briefly report on our experiences with using the PLE in the SJTU testbed for language learning support, namely the classes French I and French II over the
three semesters Spring 09 , Summer 09 , and Spring 10 . The classes were
taught in French and English. Numbers about students inscribed for the French
lectures are difficult to give. The school administration has figures about the total
numbers of students in each tier, but no information about the selected second
language as this can be freely chosen (students have the choice between German,
French and Japanese). The S1 tier (in which French I was taught) counted 128
students, S2 474 students (347 French I tier, 130 French II tier) and S3 369 students
(178 French I, 191 French II). The students progress from French I to French II. This
means that the S2 French II students are mostly identical to the S1 French I students,
etc. Similarly, concrete numbers about attendance are not available: students do not
attend regularly due to their busy schedule. They can come to class in person, watch
via their browser live or later download the video of each class. In average, about 20–
30 students attended the French I lectures in the classroom and about 10–15 students
the French II lectures. An indication of participation is given by the numbers of
students who took the final exams: 33 for S1 (French I), 106 (French I: 72, French II:
34) for S2, 95 (French I: 37, French II: 56) for S3. This is about 23% of the total
numbers in each tier. These numbers are typical for the second language (which is
deemed as rather unimportant by the students). The lecturer was popular among the
students and received good grates in students’ evaluations.
We employed several approaches to capture qualitative and quantitative data. The
research team observed teacher-student interactions during the lectures to learn about
the general interactions. Additional information was obtained by collecting feedback
from the teacher. A questionnaire and a video-taped Q&A session served to collect
information about the impressions of the students. Furthermore, we analyzed the logfiles of the PLE server in order to gain quantitative data about students’ usage of the
PLE. While the PLE was introduced and used in class, the students were expected and
encouraged to use it outside of the class. The student accounts were automatically
created using the list of students inscribed in each tier. An analysis of the PLE logging
data showed that for S1 and S2, 49 students logged in at least once which is about half
of the 106 students who took the exam in S2 (recall that this number includes the S1
students). For S3, 38 students logged in at least once. These numbers are comparable
to the amount of students who handed in homework.
We believe that this rather low uptake rate of the PLE was mainly due to how the
PLE was introduced in class. For the students it is not sufficient to present a single
example of how to use the OLE in class. In itself, this will not enable and motivate
students sufficiently to work with the provided tools. We hope to improve these
figures by increasing the incentive to use the PLE. Measures will include extra points
for the final grade but also better communication of the value of a PLE. In particular,
students need to understand how the tasks and services work which can help them to
achieve their goals. Each OLE usage needs to be broken down into individual steps.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
For instance the task of doing a spoken self-introduction can involve the steps of
writing the introduction in the native tongue, translating it, polishing it, using a textto-speech tool to listen to it, a recording to practice one’s own pronunciation and
finally recording and publishing it. Demonstrating this whole sequence only once or
twice overtaxes the student. Each single step needs to be shown and done by the
students several times. The single steps as well as the combination of services should
be assigned as homework giving the students an initiative for practicing. Breaking
down the usage of an OLE helps students to understand how to use it. Even more
important is that the students understand why they should use a PLE. Students need to
see the value of performing additional tasks which are not directly related to language
One particular feature frequently mentioned in favour of PLE is that users
(students and teachers) can configure and assemble them depending on their needs
and with tools they are already using. We investigated whether our students actually
have a need for these features and what kind of tools they are using. The data was
collected using a Question and Answer session which was videotaped and by a
questionnaire. 65 students completed the questionnaire which was completely
voluntary. According to the data, our students are only using few of the available
tools. 20% use blogs, 6% forums, 15% social networks, 6% RSS, and 85% chats.
None of the students uses Wikipedia (which is not blocked in China) and only 3% use
translation tools. 63% do not access the Internet with their mobile phone.
For western students the access to the internet is almost as common as watching
TV. Applying a web based PLE to other countries requires taking into account
country-specific restrictions. For example as SJTU is located in China the access to
quite a large number of Web sites including social networks such as Twitter,
Facebook and Friendfeed as well as many Web services is blocked. Furthermore,
many institutions such as schools or companies restrict the access of sites deemed to
be inappropriate for their scholars.
Furthermore, we experienced new directions for technical research which should
be taken into account for the development of the next ROLE prototypes. This includes
the necessity to create accounts for some services which require a login or the
necessity to have a single sign on feature since logging in several times leads to
frustration of the students. Finally, even though logging data was collected in the
SJTU test-bed, students did not raise privacy concerns. On the contrary, repeatedly,
students uttered concerns that their contributions in the employed tools might not be
noticed by the teacher.
The RWTH Aachen Test-bed
Another test-bed is provided by the “Center for Learning and Knowledge
Management and Department of Information Management in Mechanical
Engineering” (ZLW/IMA) at RWTH Aachen University, Germany. The ZLW/IMA is
responsible for the lecture “Informatics in Mechanical Engineering” with more than
1000 students each time. The usage of e-learning tools supports the teaching. One of
these e-learning tools is the Web 2.0 Knowledge Map (WKM), the RWTH Aachen
test-bed. The WKM is a semantic-net based tool which is similar to a Wiki and its
supports a non-linear learning approach.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
Test-bed Description
Our course “Informatics in Mechanical Engineering” is held in the second term of the
study path for the Bachelor in mechanical engineering and in the fourth term in study
path of industrial engineering. It is composed out of three different course formats:
The theoretical foundations are taught in a lecture. In the project task, the second one,
students train practical foundations. In a third part two weeks before the final exam,
the students are prepared for the exam in small sized group-courses. During the
project “WeKnow” , the project task was chosen as the optimal
course format to implement the WKM. In the project task, the students use a selfdirected learning approach [Sattari, 06]. The students work in groups of five to six
persons and have to implement a tool to simulate a work process at a terminal station
[Henning, 03]. The project task takes place in a computer pool with 220 workstations.
Within this project it is intended to get an overview over the usage of the WKM for a
longer period and over several generations of students.
The WKM provides selected contents of the course to the students. Subjectspecific content is linked and offered by means of various elements such as images,
audio and video files, animations or podcasts. The WKM helps the students to solve
individual subtasks they should solve during the project task. The goal of the WKM
tool is to guide and to support the self-learning process of the students. The tasks of
the teachers focus on motivation, introduction and provision of high quality basic
knowledge.
An analysis of the number of users of the WKM during the WeKnow-Project
indicates that the students mostly use the WKM during the term. However, two weeks
before the exam (in parallel to the small sized group-courses) the WKM usage
increases enormously as the tool is used to support the students in their exam
preparation.
The original WKM was integrated into a prototype described in the next section,
which was developed before the summer term 2010. During the summer term, the
usage of the WKM was tracked with the CAM-widget which was developed in
context of the ROLE project. In the last week of the term, a survey was carried out.
First results of an evaluation are presented in 3.2.4.
In the RWTH Aachen University test-bed scenario we assume on the one hand that a
learner wants to improve his knowledge about informatics in mechanical engineering
and on the other hand a teacher (for the lecture “Computer Science in Mechanical
Engineering”, a 2nd term lecture) wants to provide a learning environment for his
students as an additional support during the learning process. This tool should be used
in parallel with traditional teaching methods such as lectures and exercises.
In the second part of the scenario a teacher chooses widgets from a widget store
and arranges them to an integrative learning environment regarding to the content of
the lecture “Computer Science in Mechanical Engineering”. In our case, for students
which prefer a non-linear learning approach this tool is a good choice because it
provides many advantages. Particularly for students - we call them digital natives,
which are familiar with remote controls, PCs and cell phones - the learning
environment is intuitively comprehensible. Their specific knowledge and skills such
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
as scanning skills, multi-tasking skills and the ability to process discontinued
information have to be addressed [Sattari, 06]. Thus, the Knowledge Map-Widget is
chosen as the main part of the learning environment. Furthermore a chat widget
would support the collaboration and a history widget for the last five visited items
helps the students to maintain the overview in a non-structured environment. As a
result the widgets are arranged as shown in Figure 2. The link to the learning
environment, labeled WKM, is named in the lecture and on the homepage of the
institute. The teacher will test this combination of widgets and will update the setup
before each term, if she recognises (by evaluation) that the students want to use
another setting.
Figure 2: Set of the Web 2.0 knowledge map in summer term 2010
In another scenario, a 2nd term mechanical engineering student receives the link to
the WKM in the lecture. In the tutorial “project task”, which takes place parallel to the
lecture, the student gets different practical tasks to solve, e.g. the creation of a “UML
class diagram”. The student remembers the tool, searches and finds the word “class
diagram”. Now the student can only use the original WKM-widget. In this case she
only needs to read the description of the selected item and receives hints for more
relevant items at the left and right side of the description. By using the history-widget,
the student can track back the last five selected items. Additionally, the student can
discuss the task and the class diagrams via the chat function. Whenever the student
has to solve a task or does not know a new item in the lecture she can use the
knowledge map as a reference book and as a tool for collaboration.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
Specific Technical Realization
In this section we briefly discuss the key points of the technical realization of the
RWTH test-bed. In particular, we discuss how we integrated the original WKM
[Hees, 06] into the ROLE infrastructure including Inter-widget Communication and
Monitoring. In particular, we created a widget-mashup with enhanced WKM features
such as the learning history and multi-user chat widgets described in the previous
The technical foundation for the ROLE-enhanced version of the WKM is Apache
Shindig ( the Open Source reference implementation of an
OpenSocial [OpenSocial, 10] container. Here, we mainly used the container
functionality to setup the WKM as widget-based PLE. For the WKM, there was no
requirement of letting students choose from a catalogue of widgets, so the container
itself consisted of a simple HTML file including a static layout for three different
widgets, which we will describe in the following. Although all of these widgets were
compliant with the OpenSocial specifications, their purposes, used technology and
development processes were completely different, demonstrating the importance of an
infrastructure that allows the integration of highly heterogenous technologies at the
time of PLE usage. Given the Inter-widget Communication infrastructure, see Section
2, the integration of all three widgets into the test-bed PLE could be achieved with a
comparably low effort. Central element of the resulting PLE is the WKM Widget, a
“widgetized” version of the original WKM. Using the OpenSocial Gadget
specification, such a widget could theoretically be constructed easily by just providing
the URL of the original WKM in order to wrap it into a widget. However, any
modifications to the original within the widget code are not possible anymore with the
regular OpenSocial Gadget API. Thus, we decided to utilize the PMRPC framework
( to communicate between the original WKM-URL
and an iFrame in the Widget.
In order to foster direct communication among the test-bed students in their
course and to push forward the envisioned ROLE real-time communication and
collaboration infrastructure, the multi-user chat widget was developed using a
combination of open standard OpenSocial/AJAX and XMPP technologies [Saint-
Andre, 04a; Saint-Andre, 04b; Saint-Andre, 09; Saint-Andre, 10]. The main purpose
of this widget was to provide students with a communication medium for discussions
on the topic of software development in the context of the project task in general or
on a specific topic offered by the WKM. Therefore, the widget supports multiple tabs,
each representing a specific chat room. The additional support for handling real-time
information on presence and status additionally offers students a certain level of
community awareness. In our case we used this concept to indicate on which topics
students were currently active in order to bring them together based on their current
interests.
The main purpose of the history widget is to record Contextualized Attention
Metadata [Wolpers, 07] by intercepting all events exchanged via the local Interwidget Communication mechanism we employed in this test-bed. However, since this
functionality by itself will not bring any direct benefits for the students, we decided to
not only record, but also to show the last recorded events in the form of a history list
of the last visited WKM topics as a tool for students to track their recent learning
activities. Technically, the CAM widget intercepts all Inter-widget Communication
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
events and then interacts with a Web service responsible for persisting and retrieving
As previously indicated, all three widgets do not only provide their functionality
in a stand-alone fashion, but also interact with each other, thereby realizing the WKM
as a complete integrated Web application, but with the usual benefits of decoupling
during the development process. In that sense, the majority of widget functionality
could be developed independently, and the integration worked seamlessly by simply
exposing the respective Inter-widget Communication events and their data
representations as interface definitions. The following three examples of such events
demonstrate some of the interactions we implemented:
Entering a Topic-based Chat Room on Topic Selection: when a user selects a
topic from the WKM, a corresponding chat room is entered in the chat
widget. At the same time his online status is changed to the new topic in realtime and visible to and clickable for other students.
Following a User’s Activity: when a student clicks the online status of
another student, he navigates to the corresponding topic in the WKM, in turn
triggering an event to enter the corresponding topic-specific chat room.
Recording Inter-widget Communication Events: all events published by any
of the other widgets are intercepted and processed by the CAM widget.
CAM data is stored, and the history list is updated by the underlying Web
service. A click on any list item triggers selection of the corresponding
WKM topic, the corresponding chat room is entered and the online status
changed accordingly.
The above examples demonstrate that it is even possible to build complete chains of
events. Although such chains might be a powerful concept of creating complex
applications, there is a certain risk of building event cycles, in turn resulting in infinite
loops and an annoying user experience due to the feeling of having lost control over
the interface.
Evaluation
In this section we provide a brief report on our experience with and evaluation of the
first version of the “widgetized” version of the WKM, introduced in the lecture
“Informatics in Mechanical Engineering” at RWTH Aachen University in summer
term 2010 . The teaching period took place from Mid-
April until end of July. The lecture is taught in German. The lecture is an obligatory
lecture in the 2nd semester for students in the field of mechanical engineering and in
the 4th semester for students of the field engineering economics. The real number of
users is difficult to determine. The potential number of users is about 1400 students,
because this is the number of students who attend this lecture in their field of study. In
this summer term 1194 students have written the final exam, which indicates that not
all students have attended the lecture. The completion of the project task, a weekly
2.5h practice course, is voluntary. The knowledge map is mainly introduced in the
project task as one e-learning tool, students can use as an addition to other tools e.g.
the lecture-script and a wiki called eClara. Students may also use the knowledge map
outside the course.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
We used several approaches to capture user data. We used the history-widget
(CAM), which collects each interaction with knowledge map and the chat by the
students, see 3.2.2. As a second tool we implemented a survey dealing with the
opinion of the students about the knowledge map. We also collected feedback from
users while they used the knowledge map (there was an integrated feedback form
included into the knowledge map).
While the knowledge map (including the Chat- and the History-Widget) was
introduced in the lecture and in the project task, the students were encouraged to use it
also outside the course. The students get logins to use the workstation in a designated
computer pool. They can also use these logins to use the knowledge map. Thus,
students have to remember only one login for the workstation, the knowledge map
and also for lecture relevant downloads such as slides, old exams, etc..
As shown in Figure 2 here is a minimization-button (arrow symbol) at the top
right corner of the chat widget. In April this button was not introduced yet. A first
feedback from the students (by using the feedback form) showed that they think that
the chat occupies too much space. They wanted to personalize the version of the
knowledge map but nevertheless think that the chat is useful, but that it should be
closed and indicate a new message by flashing or alternative clues. As a first quick
reaction we included the minimize/maximize button.
Figure 3: Visitors per week (generated by analysis of CAM-data)
The analysis of the CAM-Data illustrated that about 180 students have tested the
knowledge map during the first week of the project task, see figure 3, 26-April – 2-
Mai-2010. The next two weeks of the project task include a self-introduction to the
programming language C++ by using the tool eClara. Having completed this task the
content of the knowledge map is more relevant. The week 24-Mai – 30-Mai-2010 was
the so called “excursion-week”, a week without any lectures and exercises. In the last
three weeks students implemented a tool for a “goods station”. In this period the
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
actual content of the knowledge map is not really relevant. The final exam was
written on 25-September 2010. The small peak before this date illustrates that some
students used the knowledge map outside their courses for the preparation of the
exam. Not surprisingly, it is shown that the top selected items and the top search
keywords correspond to the content of the lecture and the project task.
Our survey about the usage of the knowledge map showed that many students
(about 80%) do not know that there is a tool called knowledge map which can be
helpful for an exam preparation. Those who know the knowledge map and used it
think that the knowledge map can help them to promote their skills in “Subjectspecific content”, “dealing with e-learning tools” and “Networking”. They also like to
work with a knowledge map in other courses. The students also “consider the
knowledge map a good idea”. A comparison with the survey-results of 2008 indicates
that the students in 2010 have less used the knowledge map.
The new integrated chat-function was hardly used by the students. So it is not
surprising that the students evaluated the function negatively. The knowledge map
was used mostly within the project task. There were also direct contact persons which
were used instead of the chat. Furthermore a chat-function is more useful if many
users are online at the same time; this was not the case outside the project task.
The data shows that in 2008 and 2010, only few students have used the WKM.
Among the students using the WKM the acceptance is high. This suggests that the
reason why most students do not use the WKM could be a lack of recognition of the
additional value the knowledge map can provide. Hence, the intrinsic motivation to
use the WKM is not high enough. For these reasons we consider various solutions for
this problem. One solution depicts a better integration of the WKM into the concept
of the lecture. By this means the students have to use the WKM initially and thereby
identify the benefits more easily. Another possibility is to add more helpful content to
the WKM. Such additional content could be different links to You-Tube-videos
(played in a You-Tube-Widget developed by ROLE-partners) or animations of
pictures to visualise specific processes. Concerning this, it is an advantage that the
contents of the course will develop towards "robotics" in the next summer, because a
huge variety of films is available in this research area. We believe that these measures
will increase the acceptance of the WKM.
Discussion of Development Experiences
After a discussion of the usage of the developed PLE by learners, we use this section
to also provide a discussion of experiences from the perspective of developers. As we
indicated in the previous sections, the ROLE project is targeting to create an
infrastructure for learners to create their own PLE from tools already existing.
However, since our infrastructure introduces opportunities for interesting new classes
of widgets and combinations thereof, we aim to attract Open Source as well as
commercial developer communities on a large scale as a long-term goal in order to
create a critical mass of learning tools and people that care for self-sustenance even
before the project ends. Practically, this also meant for us that we would have to
design our infrastructure suitable for distributed widget development processes only
by exposing interfaces for communication with other tools, services and widgets. In
this section we will discuss some of the experiences we made during the development
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
processes for the aforementioned test-bed PLE from the developer perspective,
thereby demonstrating that distributed independent development and subsequent
integration with the ROLE infrastructure is already possible, but yet challenging.
As we aimed to build widget-based PLE, we first scouted for a development
environment suitable for hosting and rendering the sets of widgets and services
contributed by the distributed development partners. The goal was to organize our
process according to the following policy in order to emulate the scenario of
distributed widget development and subsequent integration into the ROLE
infrastructure by different independent parties:
Every developing partner maintains a local development environment.
One partner maintains an additional integration environment, from where all
distributed results of the partners should be usable.
All local development environments and the integration environment are
fully compliant with each other.
The second policy intended to emulate the future situation of combining multiple
widgets from different sources into own PLE hosted at arbitrary ROLE-compliant
containers. Here, we put a strong focus on staying compliant with already established
public containers such as iGoogle, netvibes, Liferay, as well as manifold social
networking sites such as Facebook that already include widget support for small
stand-alone applications such as mini-games.
Especially the mutual compliance required in the last policy rule was not
fulfilled for reasons discussed in the following. Although there exist multiple Open
Source solutions for widget containers already, the biggest challenge was (and still is)
their instability as a result of the fast moving OpenSocial specification process,
especially regarding IWC, one of the main requirements for our PLE.
We tested three different development environments, mainly consisting of
OpenSocial containers and their surrounding infrastructure, i.e. Web servers,
application servers, and other tools supporting the development process.
1. SocialSite (based on Shindig within Glassfish) [SocialSite, 10]
2. Apache Shindig [Shindig, 10]
3. OSDE (Eclipse Plugin with integrated Shindig) [OSDE, 10]
With all of the above systems we encountered at least one of the following problems:
Lack of Forward Incompatibility
Client Browser Dependence
Server Platform Dependence
Inaccessible Bugs in Generated Code
Lack of Developer Support
Incompatibility with External Libraries
Instability of Draft Standard Specifications
Missing/Changing Libraries for inter-widget Communication
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
The first problem was related to container installation, in particular with SocialSite.
First, the current SocialSite distribution was restricted to specific, already outdated
versions of Glassfish and Shindig, and thus is not forward compatible - an essential
property, when working with experimental systems likely to evolve in future. Given
the diversity of devices and platforms used by the different developing partners, we
quickly had to find out that platform and browser independence was not given at all.
Although both Shindig and Glassfish are Java-based, and all partners were using the
same installer version, some partner installations worked as expected, while others
exhibited unexplainable container side errors. Another issue was browser
incompatibility. Even with a fully working container, some browsers did not render
widgets correctly. This problem is highly likely to be related to different
implementations of JavaScript engines implemented in current browsers. Another
essential problem was the inaccessibility of bugs in JavaScript code. In many cases,
problems occurred outside the source code under developer control. The reason was a
malfunction in the code production performed by the container itself to render the
widgets. Furthermore, error messages were often cryptic and incomprehensible and
thus did not provide any hint to the original location of an error. In conjunction with
the above problems we had to experience that developer support by the SocialSite
team was not available at all. At the time of writing this document, it seems quite
obvious, that SocialSite is dead. After the initial experiments with SocialSite, we
communicated possible alternatives. The alternative usage of Apache Shindig instead
of SocialSite was also not successful for all our developers at that point in time.
However, due to the recently finished incubation process at Apache, we can expect to
receive support and more mature versions from the Shindig team in future. The
OpenSocial Development Environment (OSDE), which also uses a built-in Shindig
test server, was considered as a helpful tool with respect to the development of single
widgets, but proved to be impractical, when it comes to the development of multiple
intercommunicating widgets. Further problems were related to the incompatibility of
external JavaScript libraries with the Widget container, which resulted in strange code
rewriting effects or cross-domain issues. With special regard to the pubsub-based
inter-widget communication approach pursuing in ROLE, we experienced that at the
current time Shindig is in a transition phase of changing from the pubsub feature
included in the Google gadget API to another pubsub mechanism included in Open
Ajax Alliance Hub 2.0 [OpenAjaxAlliance, 10]. Regarding all of the above issues, we
can state that the collaborative distributed development process of a PLE was
challenging due to the lack of a common stable and reliable development
environment. However, the situation has by now improved tremendously, since
Shindig's incubation process has ended, and the OpenSocial specifications converge
more and more to a stable core.
With the long-term goal in mind to create a class of ROLE widgets supporting
arbitrary forms of real-time communication between learners, remote inter-widget
communication, interoperable data/metadata exchange, event broadcasting, etc., we
put a special focus on the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP)
[Saint-Andre, 09]. Due to its rich built-in properties and core features, its set of
official XMPP Extension Protocols (XEPs) and the variety of application use cases in
ROLE, we explored XMPP client development support especially in conjunction with
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
widget technologies and JavaScript libraries. In the following we will discuss our
experiences during the development of the PLE from Section 3.
Although there exist quite a number of XMPP libraries for JavaScript, we learned
that many of them are still insufficiently mature at least for the realization of our
goals, and definitely need improvement. In particular, we experimented with a
selection of libraries listed on the official XMPP website ( A
comparison of these libraries is presented in Table 1 and is thought to support
developers in their choice.
Connection
Code/Documentation Maturity
Supported Features & XEPs
dojox.xmpp
[Dojo, 10]
Core: IM, Presence, Roster
XEP-0004: Data Forms
XEP-0030: Service Discovery
XEP-0085: Chat State Notifications
XEP-0206: XMPP over BOSH
[XMPP4JS, 10]
Core: IM, Presence, Roster
XEP-0004: Data Forms
XEP-0030: Service Discovery
XEP-0049: Private XML Storage
XEP-0077: In-Band Registration
XEP-0085: Chat State Notifications
XEP-0100: Gateway Interaction
XEP-0206: XMPP over BOSH
strophe.js
[Strophe, 10]
XEP-0206: XMPP over BOSH
[JS.IO, 10]
(CSP) Comet
Table 1: Comparison of JavaScript Library Support for XMPP
Probably the most important notion was that libraries exhibited different levels of
code and documentation maturity and different sets of core and extension protocol
features implemented. The minimum level of functionality realized by all of the above
libraries is the emulation of persistent, stateful, two-way connections to an XMPP
server using techniques such as COMET or Bidirectional-streams Over Synchronous
HTTP (BOSH) [Paterson, 08], often in conjunction with additional libraries for
XMPP XML stanza construction and parsing. The next level of functionality was the
implementation of XMPP core services, i.e. instant messaging, presence, and roster
lists, which were only realized by dojox.xmpp and xmpp4js. Functionality beyond
XMPP core services often only include very basic XEPs, e.g. for service discovery,
server ping, data forms, etc., but does in all cases not include the implementation of
central XEPs supporting powerful communication techniques such as multiuser chat,
publish/subscribe, etc. Although code and documentation quality as well as the set of
supported XEPs in xmpp4j seemed superior, we decided to start the experimental
implementation of further XMPP XEPs based on dojox.xmpp, because it provides
cross domain solutions, is integrated into the well-established dojo toolkit, and is
designed to make use of the dojo widget framework for the provision of custom
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
XMPP-powered UI elements. By now, we have extended dojox.xmpp with
implementations of high-level support for various official XEPs, among them Multiuser Chat [Saint-Andre, 10], PubSub [Millard, 10] and smaller XEPs such as In-Band
registration or data forms. As future work, further central XEPs will be implemented
and evaluated in a whole class of XMPP-enabled Widgets.
Drawing the conclusions from our experiences, we can state that the technologies
we experimented with were insufficiently mature for the deployment of a stable
integrated prototype ROLE PLE assembled from a set of innovative tools realized
using a combination of different bleeding-edge Web technologies. However, we
finally managed to deploy prototypes for all five test-beds in their own productive
environments as well as in Graaasp [Bogdanov, 10] in a rather stable version, but still
with a lot of open issues to be tackled in later development stages of the ROLE
project, especially with regard to providing easy-to-use libraries for external
developers to enable large-scale extensions of the universe of ROLE-enabled learning
Conclusion and Outlook
In this paper we provide an overview of general technologies and concepts for
creating Open and Responsive Learning Environments. We applied these
technologies in two different test-beds, both using different scenarios. Results
gathered in these contexts show us, that Responsive Open Learning Environments
create enormous challenges on the psycho-pedagogical as well as on the technical
side. Some of the challenges were sketched in this paper. The ROLE project has
chosen a spiral “organic” development and deployment process to cope with the
challenges mentioned above. We started with very small scale projects only covering
partial requirements of the five test-beds of ROLE. This was necessary to understand
the different development cultures among the developers at the different ROLE sites
and also the language of the end users stating their requirements - an experience that
will surely help for the larger roll-out planned. Indeed, beside those challenges the
interplay between end users of personal learning environments and developers of
enabling technologies and products is crucial. It is not only a problem that the current
generation of developers does not recognize the time horizons covered in the
development of personal learning environments, thus making industrial scale
standards deployment inevitable, but also open source developers and company
developers do not understand each other. At the moment, flexibility and openness is
more on the side of the company developers.
In the near future, the development process is widened to cover more test-beds.
This is due to the necessary learning experience for developers that results developed
in the context of one scenario are not necessarily transferable other scenarios. As the
ROLE project is targeting the transitions of learning, the future scenarios involve
learners' shifts of interests and learning goals during the scenarios like leaving the
university with some degree of self-regulated learning and entering a company where
learning goals are only valid in the light of the company's strategy.
Friedrich M., Wolpers M., Shen R., Ullrich C., Klamma R., Renzel D. ...
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
Community's Seventh Framework Programme under grant
agreement no 231396 (ROLE project).