Sequential Recommendation with Self-Attentive
Multi-Adversarial Network
Ruiyang Ren1,4, Zhaoyang Liu2, Yaliang Li2, Wayne Xin Zhao3,4∗, Hui Wang1,4,
Bolin Ding2, and Ji-Rong Wen3,4
1School of Information, Renmin University of China
2Alibaba Group
3Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{reyon.ren, hui.wang, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, {jingmu.lzy, yaliang.li, bolin.ding}@alibaba-inc.com, 
Recently, deep learning has made significant progress in the task
of sequential recommendation. Existing neural sequential recommenders typically adopt a generative way trained with Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (MLE). When context information (called
factor) is involved, it is difficult to analyze when and how each individual factor would affect the final recommendation performance.
For this purpose, we take a new perspective and introduce adversarial learning to sequential recommendation. In this paper, we
present a Multi-Factor Generative Adversarial Network (MFGAN)
for explicitly modeling the effect of context information on sequential recommendation. Specifically, our proposed MFGAN has two
kinds of modules: a Transformer-based generator taking user behavior sequences as input to recommend the possible next items, and
multiple factor-specific discriminators to evaluate the generated
sub-sequence from the perspectives of different factors. To learn
the parameters, we adopt the classic policy gradient method, and
utilize the reward signal of discriminators for guiding the learning
of the generator. Our framework is flexible to incorporate multiple
kinds of factor information, and is able to trace how each factor
contributes to the recommendation decision over time. Extensive
experiments conducted on three real-world datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed model over the state-of-the-art
methods, in terms of effectiveness and interpretability.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Recommender systems; • Computing methodologies →Neural networks.
Sequential Recommendation, Adversarial Training, Self-Attentive
∗Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from .
SIGIR ’20, July 25–30, 2020, Virtual Event, China
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8016-4/20/07...$15.00
 
ACM Reference Format:
Ruiyang Ren, Zhaoyang Liu, Yaliang Li, Wayne Xin Zhao, Hui Wang,
Bolin Ding and Ji-Rong Wen. 2020. Sequential Recommendation with Self-
Attentive Multi-Adversarial Network. In Proceedings of the 43rd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR ’20), July 25–30, 2020, Virtual Event, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
10 pages. 
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems aim to accurately characterize user interests and provide personalized recommendations in a variety of
real-world applications. They serve as an important information
filtering technique to alleviate the information overload problem
and enhance user experiences. In most applications, users’ interests are dynamic and evolving over time. It is essential to capture
the dynamics of sequential user behaviors for making appropriate
recommendations.
In the literature, various methods have been proposed for sequential recommender systems. Early methods usually
utilize the Markov assumption that the current behavior is tightly
related to the previous ones . Recently, sequential neural networks such as recurrent neural network and Transformer 
have been applied to recommendation tasks as these networks can
characterize sequential user-item interactions and learn effective
representations of user behaviors . Besides, several studies
have proposed to incorporate context information to enhance the
performance of neural sequential recommenders . The
advantages of these sequential neural networks have been experimentally confirmed as they have achieved significant performance
improvements.
Typically, existing neural sequential recommenders adopt
a generative way to predict future items and learn the parameters
using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). However, it has been
found that MLE-based training is easy to suffer from issues such
as data sparsity or exposure bias in sequence prediction.
Especially, in such an approach, when context information (called
as factor in this paper) is incorporated, it has to be integrated with
the original sequential prediction component . The consequence is that various factors (e.g., price and brand of a product
in the e-commerce scenario) are either mixed in the sequential
context representations, or coupled with the black-box recommendation module. Therefore, we cannot accurately figure out when
and how each individual factor would affect the final recommendation performance. These disadvantages weaken or even impede
 
their applications in a wide range of decision making scenarios. It
is important to explicitly and effectively characterize the effect of
various factors in sequential recommender systems.
In the light of this challenge, we propose to use an adversarial training approach to developing sequential recommender systems. Indeed, the potential advantage of Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) has been shown in collaborative filtering methods . Different from prior studies, our novelty is to decouple
factor utilization from the sequence prediction component via adversarial training. Following the GAN framework , we set two
different components, namely generator and discriminator. In our
framework, the generator predicts the future items for recommendation relying on user-item interaction data alone, while the discriminator judges the rationality of the generated recommendation
sequence based on available information of various factors. Such
an approach allows more flexibility in utilizing external context information in sequential recommendation, which is able to improve
the recommendation interpretability.
To this end, in this paper, we present a novel Multi-Factor Generative Adversarial Network (MFGAN). Specifically, our proposed
MFGAN has two essential kinds of modules: (1) a Transformerbased generator taking user behavior sequences as input to recommend the possible next items, and (2) multiple factor-specific
discriminators to evaluate the generated recommendations from
the perspectives of different factors. Unlike the generator, the discriminator adopts a bi-directional Transformer-based architecture,
and it can refer to the information of subsequent positions for sequence evaluation. In this way, the discriminator is expected to
make more reliable judgement by considering the overall sequential
characteristics w.r.t. different factors. Due to the discrete nature of
item generation, the training of the proposed MFGAN method is
realized in a reinforcement learning way by policy gradient. The
key point is that we utilize the discriminator modules to provide
the reward signal for guiding the learning of the generator.
Under our framework, various factors are decoupled from the
generator, and they are utilized by the discriminators to derive supervision signals to improve the generator. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed MFGAN, we conduct extensive experiments
on three real-world datasets from different domains. Experimental
results show that the proposed MFGAN is able to achieve better
performance compared to several competitive methods. We further
show the multi-adversarial architecture is indeed useful to stabilize
the learning process of our approach. Finally, qualitative analysis
demonstrates that the proposed MFGAN can explicitly characterize
the effect of various factors over time for sequential recommendation, making the recommendation results highly interpretable.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to introduce
adversarial training into the sequential recommendation task, and
design the unidirectional generator for prediction and bidirectional
discriminator for evaluation.
• We propose a multi-discriminator structure that can decouple
different factors and improve the performance of sequential recommendation. We analyze the effectiveness and the stability of the
multi-adversarial architecture in our task.
• Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the benefits of the proposed MFGAN over state-of-theart methods, in terms of both effectiveness and interpretability.
PROBLEM DEFINITION
In this section, we first formulate the studied problem of sequential recommendation before diving into the details of the proposed
method. Let U and I denote a set of users and items, respectively,
where |U| and |I| are the numbers of users or items. Typically, a
user u has a chronologically-ordered interaction sequence of items:
{i1,i2, . . . ,it, . . . ,in}, where n is the total number of interactions
and it is the t-th item that user u has interacted with. For convenience, we use ij:k to denote the subsequence of the entire sequence,
i.e., ij:k = {ij, . . . ,ik }, where 1 ≤j < k ≤n. Besides, we assume
that each item i is associated with m kinds of contextual information, corresponding to m factors, e.g., artist, album and popularity
in music recommender system.
Based on the above notations, we now define the task of sequential recommendation. Formally, given the historical behaviors of
a user (i.e., {i1,i2, . . . ,it, . . . ,in}) and the context information of
items, our task aims to predict the next item that she/he is likely to
interact with at the (n + 1)-th step.
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first give an overview of the proposed Multi-
Factor Generative Adversarial Network (MFGAN) framework, and
then introduce the design of the generator and discriminators. The
details of the training process are also discussed in this section.
Multi-Factor Generative Adversarial
Network Framework
Figure 1 presents the overview of our proposed MFGAN framework
for sequential recommendation.
Basic Components. In this framework, we have two kinds of
components undertaking different responsibilities for sequential
recommendation:
(1) The upper component is the prediction component (i.e. generator G) which is a sequential recommendation model and successively generates the next items based on the current historical
sequence. Note that the generator will not use any context information from the item side. It only makes the prediction conditioned
on historical sequence data.
(2) The lower component is the evaluation component that is a
set of m discriminators {D1, D2, . . . , Dm} for judging the rationality of generated sequences by using the information from multiple
perspectives. Each discriminator performs the judgement from a
certain perspective based on the information of some corresponding
factor. For example, in music recommender system, we may have
multiple discriminators specially designed with category information, popularity statistics, artist and album of music, respectively.
Overall Procedure. Following standard GAN , the generator and multiple discriminators will play a min-max game. At the
t-step, the generator first generates a predicted item ˆit based on the
historical sequence {i1, . . . ,it−1}. Then, each discriminator takes
the t-length sequence {i1, . . . ,it−1, ˆit } as the input and evaluates
Multi-head
Self-attention
Generated Sequence
Self-attention Block
Real Sequence
Multi-head
Self-attention
Self-attention Block
Multi-head
Self-attention
Self-attention Block
Discriminator 1
Discriminator 2
Multi-head
Self-attention
Self-attention Block
Discriminator m
Policy Gradient
Multiple Discriminators
Figure 1: The overview of the proposed MFGAN model consisting of a generator and multiple discriminators. The upper and
the bottom framed parts correspond to the generator and multi-discriminator components, respectively.
the rationality of the generated sequence using the information of
some factor. The evaluation results are sent back to the generator
to guide the learning of the generator at the next round. Correspondingly, the discriminator is updated by taking the generated
sequence and actual sequence (i.e., ground-truth user behaviors) as
the training samples for improving its discriminative capacity. As
such, the two components force each other to improve in a mutual
reinforcement way.
Merits. There are three major merits of using such a framework for sequential recommendation. First, generally speaking, it
is relatively difficult to train a capable generation-based sequential
recommender using a direct optimization with a maximum likelihood loss (e.g., exposure bias or data sparsity ). We utilize
the discriminators to monitor the quality of the recommendation
results of the generator, which are able to gradually improve the
final recommendation performance. Second, it is more flexible to
incorporate various kinds of factor information into discriminators,
so that the generator can focus on the generation task itself. Such a
way is more resistible to useless or noisy information from context
data. It is easier to incorporate additional factors into an existing
model. Third, instead of modeling all the factors in a discriminator, our framework decouples the effect of each factor by using
multiple discriminators, which also improves the interpretability
(e.g., explaining why a special behavioral transition occurs) of the
generated sequences.
To instantiate the framework, we adopt the recently proposed
self-attentive neural architecture (e.g., Transformer ) to develop the components of generator and discriminators, since it has
been shown to be successful in various sequence-oriented tasks,
including sequential recommendation . While, it is flexible to
implement our framework with other classes of models in practice. In the following sections, we will introduce the details of both
components.
The Generator Component
In the MFGAN framework, let Gθ denote the generator component, parameterized by θ, where θ denotes the set of all the related
parameters in G. We develop the generator for sequential recommendation model by stacking the embedding layer, self-attention
block, and the prediction layer to generate the target items. Next,
we describe each part in detail.
Embedding Layer. We maintain an item embedding matrix
MG ∈R|I |×d to project original one-hot representations of items
to d-dimensional dense representations. Given a n-length sequence
of historical interactions, we apply a look-up operation from MG to
form the input embedding matrix E ∈Rn×d. Furthermore, we incorporate a learnable position encoding matrix P ∈Rn×d to enhance
the input representations. In this way, the input representations
EG ∈Rn×d for the generator can be obtained by summing two
embedding matrices: EG = E + P.
Self-attention Block. Based on the embedding layer, we stack
multiple self-attention blocks. A self-attention block generally consists of two sub-layers, a multi-head self-attention sub-layer and a
point-wise feed-forward network. Instead of attending information
of user sequences with a single attention function, multi-head selfattention mechanism has been adopted for effectively extracting the
information from different representation subspaces. Specifically,
multi-head self-attention is defined as below:
MultiHeadAtt(Fl) = [headi;head2; . . . ,headh]W O,
headi = Attention(FlW Q
where the Fl is the input for the l-th layer. When l = 0, we set Fl to
the input EG of the generator. Leth denote the number of heads. The
projection matrix W Q
∈Rd×d/h,W K
∈Rd×d/h,W V
and W O ∈Rd×d are the corresponding learnable parameters for
each attention head. The attention function is implemented by
scaled dot-product operation:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax( QKT
where Q = FlW Q
i , K = FlW K
i , and V = FlW V
i , which are the
linear transformations of the input embedding matrix. The temperature
d/h is the scale factor to avoid large values of the inner product. In sequential recommendation, we can only utilize
the information before current time step, and we apply the mask
operation to the output of the multi-head self-attention function,
removing all connections between Qi and Kj (for all cases of j > i).
As shown in Eq. (1), the multi-head attention function is mainly
built on the linear projections. We further endow the non-linearity
of the self-attention block by applying a point-wise feed-forward
network as:
PFFN(Fl) = [FFN(Fl
1)⊤; · · · ; FFN(Fl
FFN(x) = max(0,xW1 + b1)W2 + b2,
where W1,b1,W2,b2 are the trainable parameters and not shared
across layers.
Prediction Layer. At the final layer of the generator, we calculate the user’s preference over the item set through the softmax
Gθ (it |i1:t−1) = softmax(F L
where L is the number of self-attention blocks and MG is the maintained item embedding matrix defined in Section 3.2.1.
Factor-specific Discriminator Components
As mentioned before, we consider m kinds of factor information
that is useful to improve the sequential recommendation. Instead of
directly feeding them into the generator, we set a unique discriminator for each factor, such that various kinds of context information
can be utilized and decoupled via the factor-specific discriminators.
Specially, we have m discriminators DΦ = {Dϕ1, Dϕ2, . . . , Dϕm },
in which the j-th discriminator is parameterized by ϕj. The function of each discriminator is to determine whether the generated
recommendation sequence by the generator is rational or not. This
is cast as a binary classification task, i.e., discriminating between
generated or actual recommendation sequence. We assume that
different discriminators are equipped with different parameters and
work independently.
Embedding Layer. Considering a specific discriminator Dϕj ,
we first construct an input embedding matrix Ej
D ∈Rn×d for a nlength sequence by summing the factor-specific embedding matrix
Cj and the positional encoding matrix P, namely Ej
D = Cj + P.
To construct the Cj, we adopt a simple yet effective method: first
discretize the possible values of a factor into several bins, then set a
unique embedding vector for each bin, and finally derive Cj using
a look-up operation by concatenating the embeddings for the bin
IDs from the input sequence.
Architecture. To develop the discriminator, we adopt the similar architecture of the generator. In our framework, the generator
predicts the recommended sequence, and the discriminators are
mainly used to improve the generator. Hence, we adopt a relatively
weak architecture with only one self-attention block for avoiding
the case that the discriminator is too strong and cannot send suitable feedback to the generator. The one-layer self-attention block
is computed as:
Aj = MultiHeadAtt(Ej
H j = PFFN(Aj).
Note that unlike the generator, the self-attention block of the discriminator can refer to the information of subsequent positions
when trained at the t-th position. Hence, the discriminator adopts
a bi-directional architecture by removing the mask operation. In
this way, the discriminator can model the interaction between any
two positions, and make a more accurate judgement by considering
the overall sequential characteristics. While, the generator does not
utilize such bi-directional sequential characteristics. As such, the
discriminator is expected to provide additional supervision signals,
though it shares the similar architecture with the generator.
Finally, the degree of the rationality for the generated recommendation sequence is measured by a Multiple-Layer Perceptron (MLP):
ˆyj = MLP(H j
where ˆyj is the predicted degree of the rationality from the the MLP
component based on the output of the self-attention block H j. A
rationality score reflects the probability that a sequence is from
actual data distribution judged by some discriminator.
Since we have m discriminators w.r.t. different factors, we can
obtain a set of predicted rationality scores { ˆy1, ˆy2, . . . , ˆym}. As
will be illustrated later, these rationality scores can be used for
supervision signals to guide the learning of the generator.
Multi-adversarial Training
As described previously, there is one generator Gθ and multiple
discriminators DΦ = {Dϕ1, Dϕ2, . . . , Dϕn }. The generator Gθ successively predicts the next item based on historical sequence data,
and the discriminators try to discriminate between the predicted
sequence and the actual sequence. In this part, we present the
multi-adversarial training algorithm for our approach.
RL-based Formalization. Because sampling from the item set
is a discrete process, gradient descent cannot be directly applied
to solve the original GAN formulation for our recommendation
task. As such, following , we first formalize the sequential
recommendation task in a reinforcement learning (RL) setting. At
the t-step, the state s is represented by the previously recommended
sub-sequence i1:t−1 = {i1,i2, . . . ,it−1}; the action a is to select the
next item it for recommendation, controlled by a policy π that is
defined according to the generator: π(a = it |s) = Gθ (it |i1:t−1);
when an action is taken, it will transit from st to a new state s′,
corresponding to the sub-sequence i1:t = {i1,i2, . . . ,it }; taking an
action will lead to some reward r. The key point is that we utilize the
discriminator components to provide the reward signal for guiding
the learning of the generator. We define the expected return Q(s,a)
for a pair of state and action, namely the Q-function, as below
Q(s = i1:t−1,a = it ) =
where ˆyj is the rationality score (Eq. (8)) of current sequence according to the j-th discriminator, and ωj is the combination coefficient
defined through a λ-parameterized softmax function:
exp(λ ˆyj)
j′=1 exp(λ ˆyj′),
where λ is a tuning parameter that will be discussed later.
As the discriminator is updated iteratively, it gradually pushes
the generator to its limit, which will generate more realistic recommended items. Through multiple-factor enhanced architecture, the
generator can obtain guidance of sequential characteristics in the
interaction sequence from different perspectives.
Learning Algorithm. After the task is formulated as a RL
setting, we can apply the classic policy gradient to learn the model
parameters of the generator. Formally, the objective of the generator
Gθ (it |i1:t−1) is to maximize the expected reward at the t-th step:
J(θ) = E[Rt |i1:t−1;θ] =
Gθ (it |i1:t−1) · Q(i1:t−1,it ),
whereGθ (it |i1:t−1) andQ(i1:t−1,it ) are defined in Eq. (5) and Eq. (9),
respectively. Rt denotes the reward of a generated sequence. The
gradient of the objective function J(θ) w.r.t. the generator’s parameters θ can be derived as:
∇θ J(θ) = ∇θ
Gθ (it |i1:t−1) · Q(i1:t−1,it )
∇θGθ (it |i1:t−1) · Q(i1:t−1,it )
Gθ (it |i1:t−1)∇θ logGθ (it |i1:t−1) · Q(i1:t−1,it )
= Eit ∼Gθ (it |i1:t−1)[∇θ logGθ (it |i1:t−1) · Q(i1:t−1,it )].
We update the parameters of the generator using gradient ascent
as follows:
θ ←θ + γ∇θ J(θ),
where γ is the step size of the parameter update.
After updating the generator, we continue to optimize each discriminator Dϕj by minimizing the following objective loss:
−Ei1:t ∼Pdata[log Dϕj (i1:t )] −Ei1:t ∼Gθ [log(1 −Dϕj (i1:t )]},
where Pdata is the real data distribution.
Algorithm 1 presents the details of the training algorithm for
our approach. The parameters of Gθ and multiple discriminators
DΦ are pretrained correspondingly. For each G-step, we generate
the recommended item based on the previous sequence i1:t−1, and
then update the parameter by policy gradient with the reward
provided from multiple discriminators. For each D-step, the recommended sequence is considered as the negative samples and we
Algorithm 1 The learning algorithm for our MFGAN framework.
Require: generator Gθ ; discriminators DΦ = {Dϕ1, . . . , Dϕm };
user-item interactive sequence dataset S
1: Initialize Gθ , DΦ with random weights θ, Φ
2: Pre-train Gθ using MLE
3: Generate negative samples using Gθ for training DΦ
4: Pre-train DΦ via minimizing cross-entropy
for G-steps do
Generate the predicted item it using i1:t−1
Obtain the generated sequence i1:t
Compute Q(s = i1:t−1,a = it ) by Eq. (9)
Update generator parameters θ via policy gradient Eq. (12)
for D-steps do
Use Gθ to generate negative examples
Train m discriminators DΦ by Eq. (13)
16: until Convergence
take the actual sequence from training data as positive ones. Then
the discriminators are updated to discriminate between positive
and negative sequences accordingly. Such a process is repeated
until the algorithm converges.
Discussion and Analysis
In this section, we analyze the effectiveness and the stability of the
multi-adversarial architecture in our task.
As mentioned before, we train the MFGAN model in an RL way
by policy gradient. Since we have multiple discriminators, from
each discriminator we receive a reward to guide the training process
of the generator. Recall that we use a λ-parameterized softmax function to combine the reward signals from multiple discriminators
in Eq. (10). By using such a parameterization, our reward function
can be implemented in several forms:
(1) λ →−∞: it selects the discriminator with the minimum
reward, i.e., min;
(2) λ →+∞: it selects the discriminator with the maximum
reward, i.e., max;
(3) λ = 0: it becomes a simple average over all the discriminators,
i.e., mean;
(4) Others: it adopts a “soft” combination of multiple reward
Among the four cases, we first study two extreme strategies,
namely max and min. As shown in , it is too harsh for the generator by adopting the minimum reward from the discriminators. Let
pG(x) denote the distribution induced by the generator. The low
reward only indicates the position where to decrease pG(x), and
does not specifically indicate the position where to increase pG(x).
In addition, decreasingpG(x) will increasepG(x) in other regions of
distribution space X ( keeping
X pG(x) = 1), and the correctness
of this region cannot be guaranteed. Hence, the min strategy is
not good to train our approach. Conversely, max always selects
the maximum reward that is able to alleviate the above training
issue of min. However, since multiple factors are involved in the
discriminators, some “prominent” factor will dominate the learning
process, leading to insufficient training of other factors.
Compared with the former two cases, the latter two cases seem
to be more reasonable in practice. They consider the contributions
from all the discriminators. Specially, we can have an interesting
observation: the gradient ∇θ J(θ) of the generator calculated in
Eq. (11) is more robust for model learning due to the use of multiple
discriminators. The major reason is that the Q-function in Eq. (9) is
equal to zero if and only if Dϕj = 0 for all j, when all the discriminators give zero reward. Therefore, using multiple discriminators
is indeed useful to stabilize the learning process of our approach. In
our experiments, we do not observe a significant difference between
the last cases on our task. Hence, we adopt the simpler mean way
to set our reward function.
Our work is closely related to general sequence prediction studies with adversarial training or reinforcement learning .
Similar to SeqGAN , we set up two components with different
roles of generator and discriminator, respectively. Also, it is easy to
make an analogy between the two roles and the concepts of “actor” and “critic” in the actor-critic algorithm in RL . Compared
with previous sequential recommendation models , our
approach takes a novel perspective that decouples various factors
from the prediction component. In our model, each discriminator
has been fed with the information of some specific factor. Such a
way is able to enhance the interpretability of the generator, that
is to say, the reward values of discriminators can be treated as
the importance of influencing factors at each time step. With the
proposed framework, we believe there is much room to consider
more advanced implementations or functions for generator and
discriminators for improving sequential recommendation.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first setup the experiments, then report major
comparison results and other detailed analysis.
Dataset Construction
We construct experiments on three public datasets from different
domains, including MovieLens-1M movie , Yahoo! music1 and
Steam game. Since the Yahoo! dataset is very large, we randomly sample a subset of ten thousand users from the entire dataset.
We group the interaction records by users, sort them by the timestamps ascendingly, and form the interaction sequence for each user.
Following , we only keep the k-core dataset, filtering out unpopular items and inactive users with interaction records which are
fewer than k. We set k = 5, 10, 5 for the MovieLens-1M, Yahoo!
and Steam datasets, respectively.
The three datasets contain several kinds of context information.
We extract such context information as factors:
(1) For MovieLens-1M dataset, we select category, popularity,
and knowledge graph information as factors. Note that we treat the
knowledge base (KB) information as a single factor, since we would
like to develop a strong factor. We use the KB4Rec dataset to
obtain item-to-entity alignment mapping, and then obtain the KB
information from Freebase . We adopt the classic TransE to
learn the factor representation for KB information.
1 
(2) For Yahoo! dataset, we select category, popularity, artist and
album as factors.
(3) For Steam dataset, we select category, popularity, price and
developer as factors.
Note that for all the three datasets, we have incorporated a special
kind of factor, i.e., item ID. Although it has been utilized in the
generator, it can be utilized by the discriminator in a different way,
i.e., using a bi-directional Transformer architecture. Item ID can be
used as a reference to compare the usefulness of the other kinds of
factor information. Following , we split each user interaction
sequence into three parts: the last item in the interaction sequence is
treated as test data, the item just before the last is used for validation
and the rest data is considered as training data. The statistics of
three datasets after preprocessing are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Statistics of the three datasets.
#Interactions
Movielens-1m
Experimental Settings
Evaluation Protocol. To assess whether our method can improve the sequential recommendation, we adopt a variety of evaluation metrics widely used in previous works : Mean
Reciprocal Rank (MRR), top-k Normalized Discounted cumulative
gain (NDCG@10) and Hit Ratio (HR@10). Since the item set is
large, it is time-consuming to enumerate all the items as candidate.
For each positive item in the test set, we pair it with 100 sampled
items that the user has not interacted with as negative items. The
evaluation metrics can be computed according to the rankings of
these items. We report the average score over all test users.
Implementation Details. For our proposed MFGAN, we use
two self-attention blocks in the generator and one self-attention
block in discriminators. In both generator and discriminators, item
embeddings are shared in embedding layer and prediction layer.
We implement MFGAN with Tensorflow, and use Adam optimizer.
At the pre-training stage, we first train the generator and discriminators to converge separately. At the adversarial training stage, we
alternatively train the generator and discriminators with 100 epochs
and 1 epoch, respectively. The learning rates are set to 0.001 for
MovieLens-1M dataset, and 0.0002 for Steam and Yahoo! datasets,
and the dropout rates are all set to 0.2 for the three datasets. For
each factor, we discretize its possible values into several bins if
needed. Each bin is associated with an embedding vector. The item
embedding size and all the factor embedding sizes are set to 50, the
KB embedding size with TransE is set to 100. The mini-batch sizes
are set to 128 in generator and 16 in discriminators.
Comparison Methods. Here, we compare our propose approach MFGAN against a number of competitive baselines. Our
baselines include related methods on general and sequential recommendation with or without context information:
• PopRec: This is a method that sorts items by their popularity
to assign each item a rank, tending to recommend highly popular
items to users.
Table 2: Performance comparison of different methods for sequential recommendation task on three datasets. We use bold
and underline fonts to denote the best performance and second best performance method in each metric respectively.
• BPR : This is a classic personalized ranking algorithm that
optimizes the pairwise ranking loss function of latent factor model
with implicit feedback.
• FM : It uses a generic matrix factorization to learn the coefficients of combined features, considering the interactions between
different features.
• IRGAN : This method combines generative and discriminative information retrieval via adversarial training, in which a
simple matrix factorization is used for the discriminator.
• FPMC : It combines Matrix Factorization and Markov
Chain, which can simultaneously capture sequential information
and long-term user preference.
• GRU : It is a GRU-based sequential recommender with
session-parallel mini-batch training, which employs ranking-based
loss functions. We implement an enhanced version by replacing
one-hot vectors with pre-trained BPR vectors.
• GRUF : It proposes to incorporate additional feature vector
as the input of GRU networks, which incorporates auxiliary features
to improve sequential recommendation.
• SASRec : It is a next-item sequential recommendation
method based on the Transformer architecture, which adaptively
considers interacted items for prediction. This method is the stateof-the-art baseline for sequential recommendation.
• MFGAN: This is our approach introduced in Section 3.
Besides GRUF , there are other baselines that utilize context information. However, we have empirically found that the Transformer
architecture is more superior than other sequence neural networks
in sequential recommendation. Indeed, SASRec is significantly better than quite a few context-aware recommendation algorithms
with other RNN architectures. Therefore, our focus is how our approach improves over SASRec, and we omit other context-aware
baselines. Another note is that in comparison our MFGAN approach
only utilizes the generator to recommend items, i.e., context information or discriminators will not be used at the test stage.
Results and Analysis
The results of different methods for sequential recommendation
are presented in Table 2. It can be observed that:
(1) Among non-sequential recommendation baselines, we can
find that BPR outperforms other methods, and non-sequential recommendation methods overall perform worse than sequential recommendation methods. Specially, factorization machine (FM) does
not work very well in this task, since it still adopts the regression
loss and cannot effectively capture the preference order over two
items by a user. Besides, popularity seems to be a robust baseline
that gives substantial performance on our datasets. A major reason
is that there may exist the “rich-gets-richer” phenomenon in product
adoption, and using k-core preprocessing on our datasets further
enhances this trend.
(2) Among sequential recommendation baselines, the Markov
Chain-based method performs better on sparse dataset (i.e., the
game dataset) than dense datasets (i.e., the other two datasets). As
for two neural methods, GRU adopts the RNN-based architecture,
serving as a standard comparison method for sequential recommendation. With available context information, GRUF further improves
over the GRU method, indicating context information is useful in
our task. Furthermore, SASRec utilizes the powerful Transformer
architecture to develop the sequential recommender, achieving
the best performance among all the baselines. In natural language
processing, self-attention architecture has shown its superiority
in various tasks . Such an architecture is particularly useful when dealing with sequence data, which also works well in
sequential recommendation.
(3) Finally, we compare our proposed model MFGAN with the
baseline methods. It is clear to see that MFGAN is consistently better
than these baselines by a large margin. Our base architecture is a pretrained self-attentive generator. Different from the above models,
we adopt the multi-adversarial architecture to guide the learning
of the generator with various kinds of factor information. Note
that our generator has not directly used any context information,
and it is guided by the signals from the discriminators. Such a
comparison indicates the multi-adversarial training approach is
effective to improve the performance of self-attention architecture
for sequential recommendation.
Detailed Analysis on Our Approach
In this section, we further conduct a series of detailed experiments
to analyze the effectiveness of our approach.
Effect of Different Factors. In this part, we study the effect
of different kinds of factor information in our approach. We first
prepare the complete MFGAN model, and then remove one kind of
factor information at each time. In this way, we can study how each
individual factor contributes to the final performance for sequential
¬ Identifier
¬ Category
¬ Popularity
(a) Movielens-1m movie dataset.
¬ Identifier
¬ Category
¬ Popularity
(b) Yahoo! music dataset.
¬ Identifier
¬ Developer
¬ Category
¬ Popularity
(c) Steam game dataset.
Figure 2: Effect of different kinds of factor information in our framework for sequential recommendation. We report the
results using the NDCG@10 metric. “¬” indicates that we remove the corresponding factor information, while the rest factor
information is kept.
recommendation. Figure 2 presents the NDCG@10 results of factor
removal experiments for MFGAN. As we can see, all the factors
seem to be useful to improve the performance of our MFGAN,
except the factor developer on the Steam game dataset. The most
useful factors are knowledge graph, artist and popularity for the
three datasets, respectively. Interestingly, item ID is not always the
most useful feature for discriminators, indicating the importance
of other kinds of factor information.
Comparisons of Model Variants. In our model, we propose
several techniques to improve the performance of our approach.
Here, we construct comparison experiments to examine the effect
of these techniques: (1) Uni-directional using a uni-directional selfattention architecture in discriminators; (2) SDSF using a single
discriminator considering item ID as the only factor; (3) SDAF using
a single discriminator incorporating all factor embeddings using
simple vector concatenation. The first variant is used to illustrate
the effect of the bi-directional architecture, and the last two variants
are used to illustrate the effect of using multiple discriminators.
Table 3: Variant comparisons of our MFGAN framework on
Movielens-1m dataset.
Architecture
Uni-Directional
Table 3 presents the comparisons of these variants against our
complete approach and SASRec. We can see that all the variants
are worse than the complete approach. It indicates that the bidirectional architecture and multi-discriminator adversarial training are effective to improve the performance. However, the improvement with bi-directional architecture seems to be small in numerical
values. A possible reason is that the uni-directional Transformer
architecture is ready very competitive. While, the idea that utilizes
the bi-directional architecture in discriminators has important implications. As future work, it will be interesting to design other
architectures for generator and discriminator, respectively.
one discriminator
two discriminators
three discriminators
four discriminators
Figure 3: Convergence of loss with different numbers of discriminators in Movielens-1m dataset.
Note that the SDSF variant can be considered as an enhanced
implementation of SeqGAN , where the generator and the discriminator have been improved using the Transformer architecture.
SeqGAN is originally proposed for general sequence generation,
while it is easy to adapt to our task.
Besides the performance improvement, as discussed in Section 3,
using multiple discriminators is likely to stabilize the training of adversarial learning approaches. For this purpose, we further compare
the convergence of our objective function with a varying number
of discriminators during training process. As we can see in Fig. 3,
using more discriminators is faster to achieve a relatively stable
loss. The red and green lines (corresponding to use three or four
discriminators) become stable after about 2000 epochs, while the
other lines are not stable even after 4000 epochs. Another interesting observation is that using more discriminators seems to yield
a larger loss. We speculate that it has the similar effect of regularization, which prevents the model parameters from overfitting on
training data.
Qualitative Analysis on the
Recommendation Interpretability
Previous experiments have verified that our model is able to generate high-quality sequential recommendations. Another major
Identifier
Popularity
(a) A case from Movielens-1m movie dataset.
Identifier
Popularity
(b) A case from Yahoo! music dataset.
Figure 4: Two qualitative cases with our approach. In each figure, the upper part is the interaction sequence, and the lower
part corresponds to the lines of reward signal scores from some factors. The height of the histogram represents the reward
score within the interval (0, 1). We use the red color to highlight the highest bar (i.e., the dominant factor) at each time step.
For the two cases, we mainly focus on the category and artist factor, respectively.
benefit of our work is that our recommendations are highly interpretable due to the decoupled factors in the multi-adversarial
framework. Here, we present two illustrative examples in Fig. 4,
showing how our approach improves the recommendation interpretability with decoupled factors.
The first case (Fig. 4(a)) presents an interaction sequence of a
sample user from Movielens-1m dataset. As we can see, the first
two movies “Star War: episode VI” and “E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial”
have received higher reward signals from popularity, which is the
prominent factor at the beginning stage. Interestingly, seen from
the category line, the 3-rd, 6-th and 7-th movies are mainly driven
by the category factor. Given the the last two movies “Star War:
episode IV” and “Star War: episode V”, the user, influenced by early
popularity, seems to be a Star Wars fan or an action movie fan.
The second case (Fig. 4(b)) presents an interaction sequence
of a sample user from Yahoo! music dataset. Similarly, we can
check the effect of multiple factors at different time steps. Here, we
mainly analyze the artist factor, focusing on the 4-th, 6-th and 7-th
songs. Along the interaction sequence, this user switches among
different artists. Our model is able to capture such listening patterns:
when the user listens to a song of a previous artist (i.e., previously
appearing in the interaction sequence) occurs, the corresponding
artist factor becomes dominant in our model.
As a comparison, existing methods mainly focus on integrating
various kinds of context information into unified representations.
The two examples have shown the advantage of decoupling various
factors for sequential recommendation.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we review studies closely related to our work in two
Sequential Recommendation. Early works on sequential recommendation are mainly based on Markov Chain (MC) assumption.
For instance, Rendle et al. fuse the matrix factorization and firstorder Markov Chain for modeling global user preference and shortterm interests, respectively. Another line to model user behaviors is
resorting to the recurrent neural network, which has achieved great
success on sequential modeling in a variety of applications. Hidasi et
al. firstly introduce Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) to the sessionbased recommendation. A surge of following variants modify it by
introducing pair-wise loss function , attention mechanism ,
memory network , hierarchical structure , etc. Other architectures or networks have also been used , achieving
good performance. Moreover, context information is often used to
improve the recommendation performance and interpretability . Recently, self-attention network has achieved significant
improvement in a bunch of NLP tasks and inspired a new
direction on applying the self-attention mechanism to sequential
recommendation problem .
Generative Adversarial Network. Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) was originally proposed to mimic the generation
process of given data samples. Typically, GAN consists of two components: the generative model learns to map from a latent space to
a data distribution of interest, while the discriminative model distinguishes candidates produced by the generator from the true data
distribution. A surge of follow-up works either improve the GAN
framework by introducing more advanced training strategies, like
f-divergence , Wasserstein distance , MMD constraints 
or explore diverse applications under GAN framework .
In recommender systems, the idea of GAN has already been explored to some extent. IRGAN is firstly proposed to unify the
generative model and discriminative model in the field of information retrieval. Chae et al. follow this line and further improve the
training scheme by sampling a real-valued vector instead of a single
item index. Moreover, personalized determinantal point process
is utilized to improve recommendation diversity via adversarial
training .
Our work is related to the above studies, while has a different
focus. We are the first to apply adversarial training to sequential
recommender systems. By designing a multi-adversarial network,
our model is able to explicitly characterize the effect of each individual factor on sequential recommendation over time, which
improves the recommendation interpretability.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed a Multi-Factor Generative Adversarial Network (MFGAN) for sequential recommendation. In our
framework, the generator taking user behavior sequences as input is
used to generate possible next items, and multiple factor-specific discriminators are used to evaluate the generated sub-sequence from
the perspectives of different factors. We have constructed extensive experiments on three real-world datasets. Experimental results
have shown that our approach outperforms several competitive
baselines. Especially, we have found that using multiple discriminators is useful to stabilize the training of adversarial learning, and
also enhance the interpretability of recommendation algorithms.
Currently, we consider a simple setting where multiple discriminators are separately designed. As future work, we will investigate
how to design a more principled way to share discrimination information across different discriminators. We will also consider
incorporating explicit user preference in the discriminators.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 61872369 and 61832017, the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Research Funds of Renmin University of China under Grant No.18XNL
G22 and 19XNQ047, Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
(BAAI) under Grant No. BAAI2020ZJ0301, and Beijing Outstanding
Young Scientist Program under Grant No. BJJWZYJH012019100020098.
Xin Zhao is the corresponding author.