HAL Id: hal-00979464
 
Submitted on 16 Apr 2014
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Transformation Pursuit for Image Classification
Mattis Paulin, Jérôme Revaud, Zaid Harchaoui, Florent Perronnin, Cordelia
To cite this version:
Mattis Paulin, Jérôme Revaud, Zaid Harchaoui, Florent Perronnin, Cordelia Schmid. Transformation
Pursuit for Image Classification. CVPR - IEEE Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition, Jun 2014, Columbus, United States. pp.3646-3653, ￿10.1109/CVPR.2014.466￿. ￿hal-00979464￿
Transformation Pursuit for Image Classiﬁcation
Mattis Paulin 1,∗
J´erˆome Revaud1,∗
Zaid Harchaoui1,∗
Florent Perronnin2
Cordelia Schmid1,∗
2 Computer Vision Group, XRCE, France
A simple approach to learning invariances in image classiﬁcation consists in augmenting the training set with transformed versions of the original images.
However, given
a large set of possible transformations, selecting a compact subset is challenging. Indeed, all transformations are
not equally informative and adding uninformative transformations increases training time with no gain in accuracy.
We propose a principled algorithm – Image Transformation
Pursuit (ITP) – for the automatic selection of a compact set
of transformations. ITP works in a greedy fashion, by selecting at each iteration the one that yields the highest accuracy gain. ITP also allows to efﬁciently explore complex
transformations, that combine basic transformations. We
report results on two public benchmarks: the CUB dataset
of bird images and the ImageNet 2010 challenge. Using
Fisher Vector representations, we achieve an improvement
from 28.2% to 45.2% in top-1 accuracy on CUB, and an improvement from 70.1% to 74.9% in top-5 accuracy on ImageNet. We also show signiﬁcant improvements for deep
convnet features: from 47.3% to 55.4% on CUB and from
77.9% to 81.4% on ImageNet.
1. Introduction
The focus of this work is image classiﬁcation. This is a
very challenging problem because objects of the same class
may exhibit large variations in appearance. Such intra-class
variations fall into two categories. The intrinsic variability
corresponds to the fact that two instances of the same object class can be visually different, even when viewed under
similar conditions (e.g. different zebras have different patterns). The extrinsic variability refers to those differences in
appearance that are not speciﬁc to the object class (e.g. different viewpoints, lighting conditions, image compression).
To learn invariance, the classiﬁcation system should be
trained with as many variations of the considered objects
as possible. We use here the term “invariant” in a loose
manner, implying that a learning system is invariant if, for
∗LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhˆone-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.
Tone change
Figure 1: Illustrations of image transformations, on simple
icons and on an image from the CUB dataset.
a given object, the predicted label remains unchanged for
all possible variations of images of the class. Following
the taxonomy of , there are three approaches to building
invariant learning systems from ﬁnite training sets: (i) generating virtual examples by applying transformations to the
original samples to account for the variations that are expected at test time ; (ii) designing a feature representation which is inherently invariant to the variations to be expected ; (iii) embedding the invariance
in the structure of the learning system, a popular example
being convolutional nets . Examples of (ii) include
invariant kernels for support vector machines but are
limited to invariance to transformations satisfying a particular Lie group structure. On the other hand, examples of
(iii) usually correspond to learning architectures intended
to mimic biological visual systems that exhibit attractive invariance properties; it remains unclear however how
to reverse-engineer such architectures to build in relevant
invariances for a particular task.
We propose here to explore virtual example generation
(option (i)), by explicitly generating virtual examples at
training and at test time.
While it might be difﬁcult to
generate virtual samples that reﬂect intrinsic class variations (except for speciﬁc object classes such as pedestrians ), it is possible to generate virtual samples that
simulate extrinsic variations by applying simple geometric
and colorimetric transformations. In this work, we focus on
such transformations, as they have been shown to increase
classiﬁcation accuracy, especially on simple tasks such as
digit recognition , and, more recently, on ImageNet .
We believe that the selection of an effective set of transformations is essential for the success of the approach. Indeed, transformations that are too conservative (e.g. removing the ﬁrst column of pixels) have little if any impact,
whereas they come with signiﬁcant computational overhead
both at training and testing time. On the other hand, transformations that are too extreme (e.g. a vertical ﬂip) will lead
to unlikely images and may decrease classiﬁcation accuracy. We are not aware of any approach to selecting a set
of transformations except manually by trial and error. This
might be acceptable when the number of possible transformations is limited, for instance when dealing with small
(e.g. 256 pixels) black-and-white images of digits. However, such a manual selection process is not applicable when
there is a large number of possible transformations, a must
when dealing with realistic datasets. In this work, for instance, we consider 40 simple transformations as well as
their combinations which results in >1,000 possible transformations.
We propose a principled approach for selecting a set
of transformations, termed Image Transformation Pursuit (ITP). ITP computes a set of optimal transformations
from a large “dictionary” of transformations (see Fig. 1),
by iteratively and greedily selecting one transformation at
a time. ITP is reminiscent of pursuit algorithms such as
matching pursuit or basis pursuit , which compute a signal approximation from a dictionary by iteratively selecting
one atomic element at a time from the dictionary. Furthermore, ITP also allows to efﬁciently explore the set of second order transformations (e.g. crop+ﬂip), that correspond
to combinations of basic ﬁrst order transformations.
We report results for ITP on two public benchmarks: the
CUB dataset of Birds and the ImageNet 2010 challenge. On
both datasets we report signiﬁcant improvements for Fisher
as well as deep convnet features. One important conclusion
of our work is that it is crucial to apply transformations both
at training and test time for best performance.
2. Related Work
We focus our literature review on those works which
augment the training (and possibly test) set(s) by adding
“virtual examples”. This is a well-known approach to enforcing robustness of a learning system to variations of the
input. For image classiﬁcation and related problems, there
are two ways to apply this approach, either by applying a
transformation directly on the descriptor, or by applying a
transformation on the image and then computing a visual
descriptor.
Virtual examples. The ﬁrst strategy, equivalent to noise
injection, is itself equivalent in many cases to enforcing
a particular regularization functional. In particular, generating virtual examples by adding Gaussian noise directly
on the training examples is equivalent to ℓ2-regularization
for quadratic loss functions ; see 
for more general equivalence results including drop-out
noise . While the noise injection strategy is simple
to implement, it can be difﬁcult to interpret from a computer
vision point of view. Indeed, the virtual image corresponding to the noise-corrupted visual descriptor is intractable for
several noise distributions, and as a consequence the choice
of relevant noise distributions is unclear.
Virtual images. The second strategy works directly at the
image level. For instance, generate virtual images from the original ones using plausible transformations
such as crop and ﬂip. In contrast to the virtual examples
strategy, this strategy is more intuitive and easier to interpret, as one can consider realistic transformations. Yet, generating virtual images and extracting their features is significantly more expensive than adding noise directly on the
features. An exception is the digit recognition task, where
computing elastic deformation ﬁelds can be performed in
an elegant and computationally efﬁcient manner . Our
ITP approach applies the virtual images strategy by greedily
selecting a limited number of transformations from a large
dictionary, hence boosting performance without compromising scalability. Furthermore, it requires potentially no
prior knowledge, as it can work with arbitrarily large sets of
transformations.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that most previous works
only perform transformations on the training set . A few approaches also considered transforming the
test images . Our approach can beneﬁt from virtual
examples both at training and at testing time.
3. Learning with transformations
We ﬁrst describe the families of transformations that we
apply to the training and test images (Section 3.1). We then
explain the proposed Image Transformation Pursuit (ITP)
algorithm (Section 3.2). We ﬁnally discuss the score aggregation stage when transformed images are generated at test
time (Section 3.3).
3.1. Image transformations
We considered 7 families of transformations (for a total
for 40 possible transformations) as well as their combinations.
Flip. This transformation horizontally mirrors an image. It
encodes the natural symmetry of most scenes and objects
(digits are an exception). Many approaches use ﬂipping to
increase their training set size without prior knowledge, see
for instance .
Figure 2: Four of the eight homographies we use.
Crop. We consider the restriction of an image to a speciﬁc
sub-window. We use 10 different crops, deﬁned relatively to
the image size. Prior to training/testing, we randomly draw
10 sub-windows (x0, y0, x1, y1) with (x0, y0) ∈[0, 0.25]2
and (x1, y1) ∈[0.75, 1]2.
Homography. To model viewpoint changes, we consider
homographic transformations of the initial images. We restrict ourselves to horizontal and vertical pannings, and select 8 homographies (see Fig. 2).
Scale. We scale down images using bilinear interpolation.
We consider 5 downscaling factors, respectively
with n ∈{1, . . . , 5}.
Colorimetry.
We consider colorimetric transformations.
Similarly to , we compute the covariance matrix of
the RGB components on the whole dataset.
λ1, λ2, λ3 and p1, p2, p3 respectively its eigen-values and
-vectors, we add to each pixel p ∈ 3 a quantity
ε1λ1p1 + ε2λ2p2 + ε3λ3p3. We generate three different
random triplets (ε1, ε2, ε3) sampled from a normal distribution N(0; 0.1).
JPEG Compression. Despite being designed to minimize
the change observable by a human, JPEG compression can
have a dramatic effect on local descriptors. To account for
variations in image encoding, we consider three different
levels of JPEG compression: 30, 50 and 70.
Rotation. To be robust to camera orientation, we rotate
images around their centers. We consider 10 rotations of
{−15, −12, . . . , −3, +3, . . . , +12, +15} degrees.
Order-K Transformations. By order-K transformations,
we denote all compositions of K of the previously deﬁned
transformations (e.g. for K = 2, crop+ﬂip or crop+JPEG).
3.2. Image Transformation Pursuit (ITP)
In this section we assume that transformations are only
generated on the set of training images D = {x1, . . . , xn}.
Let T = {T1, . . . , T|T|} denote the set of |T| possible transformations. For simplicity, T1 denotes the identity. Let us
associate with each transformation Tk a binary variable bk
indicating whether Tk(D) should be added to the original
training set T1(D) (i.e. by default b1 = 1). The augmented
training set is:
Our goal is to ﬁnd the binary vector b = [b1 . . . b|T|] such
that training with Da yields the best possible accuracy on
the test set. Because the number of possible combinations
of transformations is exponential in |T|, it is impossible
to exhaustively test all combinations. We now propose a
tractable alternative.
Algorithm. Our transformation selection algorithm, called
ITP, relies on a greedy search strategy in the space T. We
start with the identity transformation T1, i.e. with original
images. We then maintain a set of current transformations
and monitor the gain on validation accuracy obtained by
adding a new transformation. For each candidate transformation T , we train a classiﬁer on a subset Da
train of Da,
to which we add T (Dtrain). Each classiﬁer is tested on
the remaining part Da
val ∪T (Dval); we use average prediction at test time on the transformed data, as in section 3.3.
The transformation that yields the best validation accuracy
is selected. The process is then iterated with the remaining
transformations. The algorithm stops after selecting a ﬁxed
number of transformations T ≤|T|, or when the gain in validation accuracy obtained by adding a new transformation
drops below a threshold; see Alg. 1.
Algorithm 1 Image Transformation Pursuit (ITP)
INPUTS: Dataset D. Set T of base transformations. Threshold ∆or number T of transformations.
INITIALIZATION: S = {T1}.
While |S| ≤T and perf. gain higher than ∆do
• split D into Dtrain and Dval.
• For T ∈T, T ̸∈S do
– Let S+ = S ∪{T }.
– train on S+(Dtrain)
– compute perf. PT on S+(Dval).
• S = S ∪{argmaxT PT }.
Selecting Order-K Transformations. By order-K transformations, we mean those transformations that combine K
base-level transformations. To select among the increasingly larger amount of order-K transformations, we propose two sub-optimal methods derived from our ITP algorithm. Both rely on the idea that if some transformations are
beneﬁcial to classiﬁcation, their composition is also likely
The ﬁrst alternative, which we call K-ITP, starts by running (K−1)-ITP until convergence of the validation accuracy, or until a ﬁxed number of transformations is chosen. Then, it generates all compositions of order K from
the returned transformations, and continues appending them
greedily in the same fashion as before.
The second alternative, which we call K-ITP-Scratch or
K-ITP-S, starts as before by generating the set S of order-
K −1 transformations by running (K−1)-ITP-S (1-ITP-S
equals ITP). The set S′ of all order-K transformations is
obtained by combining elements of S. A ITP procedure
is then started from scratch, drawing transformations from
Implementation Details. We consider linear SVM classi-
ﬁers trained with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) .
At each main iteration of ITP, we determine the gain offered
by a speciﬁc transformation at a low cost using the following strategy. Indeed, at iteration k (i.e. k transformations
are already selected), a classiﬁer wk is learned using SGD
on half of the training set augmented with these k transformations. For each (k+1)-th candidate transformation, an
SGD is run using wk as a warm start and few epochs. We
determine the initial learning rate η0 following the heuristic given in . We also cross-validate the λ regularization
parameter using values around the best parameter selected
at the previous main iteration. In our experiments, however,
this optimal value never changed across the main iterations.
Ranking Alternative. We also propose a simple one-step
alternative to ITP which we refer to as Transformation
Ranking or TR. As is the case for ITP, we start with the
original samples and quantify the gain that we would get by
adding the |T| possible transformations. We rank the transformations based on this gain and select the top T ≤|T|
transformations. Note that in this setting, the redundancy
between the transformations is not taken into account (only
the gain with respect to the original images).
3.3. Score aggregation
Virtual samples can also be generated for test images.
In this case, we need to compute for each transformed test
sample a score and to aggregate these scores. We now discuss possible alternatives for aggregation.
Averaging. We use the scores of all virtual examples as independent measures and average them to get a consensus
similarly to . Denoting by s(k)
the score given by the
classiﬁer for class k to the t-th transformation (t ≤T), we
deﬁne: s(k)
Maximum. We use the transformation that yields the best
score: s(k)
max := maxt s(k)
. It returns the prediction for
which the classiﬁer is the most conﬁdent.
Softmax Aggregation. The previous maximum scheme
can suffer from the presence of outliers, while the averaging
takes into account transformations with low conﬁdence. A
soft-max strategy s(k)
smax := log PT
t=1 exp s(k)
, provides an
intermediate solution.
4. Experiments
We ﬁrst describe the datasets and experimental set-up.
We, then, study the impact of different design choices on the
ITP algorithm. We also quantitatively compare the ITP, K-
ITP, K-ITP-S and TR algorithms and several baselines. Finally, we compare our method against the state-of-the-art on
large-scale and ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation datasets.
4.1. Datasets and experimental set-up
We report results on two challenging benchmarks.
CUB. The Caltech-UCSB-Birds-200-2011 dataset is a
ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation benchmark consisting of 200 bird
species and approximately 12,000 images. We use the provided training/test split: there are approximately 30 images
per class at both training and test time. The standard metric
on CUB is top-1 accuracy.
ILSVRC 2010. The 2010 ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge dataset consists of
1,000 classes from the ImageNet dataset1. It is split into
1.2M images for training, 50K for validation and 150K for
test. Following common practice, we report top-5 accuracy.
As it is expensive to run the transformation selection on the
full training set, we deﬁne a subset comprising 30 images
per class (30,000 images in total). In the following, we call
this subset ILSVRC-30. Except when conducting experiments on the full ILSVRC dataset, we report results on the
validation set.
The experimental set-up is as follows.
Image descriptors. We extract SIFT and color descriptors on a dense grid at multiple scales. Their dimensionality is reduced to 61 dimensions using PCA. Following , we append the patch location (x, y) and scale σ to
the patch descriptors thus resulting in 64-dim descriptors.
This strategy can lead to results on par with spatial pyramids at a lower cost .
To aggregate the per-patch descriptors, we use Fisher
Vectors (FV) with 256 Gaussians, thus leading to 32K-dim
representations. We then use PQ compression which
was shown to yield an almost-negligible loss of performance in large-scale classiﬁcation . We use their setting and subdivide the FV into sub-vectors of 8 dimensions
and assign 8 bits per sub-vector (1 bit per dimension on average).
SGD training. The SGD learning algorithm has three
hyper-parameters which we cross-validate: the regularization λ, the imbalance between positives and negatives β
and the number of SGD epochs. At each ITP iteration, we
evaluate the gain on validation accuracy after a warm start
with 1 epoch on CUB and 2 epochs on ILSVRC10-30. We
found these values to give satisfying results during our preliminary experiments.
Fusion of SIFT and color. Finally, conﬁdence scores obtained independently from SIFT FV and Color FV are simply averaged to get the ﬁnal prediction .
4.2. Impact of score aggregation
We assume that, after the selection pass, we have T −1
transformations per image, in addition to the original one,
so that each image has T representatives. We investigate the
following scenarios (Fig 3).
• Train 1/ Test 1: training and test are done only on the
original images (baseline).
• Train T/ Test 1: training is performed using the original as well as the transformed images, and test is done
on original test images.
• Train 1/ Test T: test is done on the transformed images,
and their scores are averaged, while training is done on
the original images.
• Train T/ Test T: training and test are done on the transformed images.
Table 1 shows that the “Train T/ Test T” scheme outperforms by far the other ones. This demonstrates the importance of applying transformations at both training and test
time. In what follows, we use this scheme for all experiments unless stated otherwise.
Score aggregation scheme. We compare the different
score aggregation schemes (Section 3.3) and provide results
in Table 2. We observe that all schemes yield similar results.
We therefore decide to use the simple average in the rest of
the experiments.
4.3. Transformation selection experiments
We now evaluate ITP. At each iteration, the algorithm
evaluates the gain in accuracy obtained for each candidate
Aggregation
CUB (top-1)
ILSVRC-30 (top-5)
Table 2: Comparison of score aggregation schemes.
ITP Iterations
Top-1 Accuracy (%)
validation SIFT
test color
validation color
ITP Iterations
Top-5 Accuracy (%)
validation SIFT
test color
validation color
Figure 4: Evolution of the validation and test accuracy with
respect to ITP iterations on CUB (left) and ILSVRC-30
transformation independently on a held-out validation set.
We plot the evolution of this validation score across iterations for the selected transformations, along with the accuracy computed on the full test set, in Fig. 4. The validation accuracy, although computed on a smaller set and
without waiting for the SGD to converge, is varying consistently with the full test accuracy in our experiments. This
validates empirically the core of our algorithm.
Next, we compare ITP to several other selection strategies. We ﬁrst consider the choice of just adding the ’ﬂip’
transformation, a rather common practice . The second choice to which we compare is a random selection of
transformations. This is to ensure that we do not get a similar increase in accuracy with any subset of transformations.
Finally, we compare with the TR variant of our algorithm,
which is a cheaper version of ITP (Section 3.2). Results are
presented in Fig. 5 and 6. As can be observed, the selection
obtained by ITP signiﬁcantly outperforms the ﬁrst two baselines (ﬂip and random). ITP itself performs at least on par
with the TR variant, and sometimes signiﬁcantly better (see
SIFT FVs on CUB or color FVs on ILSVRC-30). Overall,
both algorithms yield improvements and ITP outperforms
TR: for the fusion results, ITP and TR yield a relative improvement of +49% and +41% respectively on CUB, and
+21% and +19% on ILSVRC-30.
Fig. 7 (left) shows the ﬁrst ﬁve transformations selected
by ITP. We can see that crops are the most frequently selected transformations. We stack in Fig. 7 (right) the selected crops on the CUB dataset, thus leading to a saliency
map. They clearly focus on the center of the image. One
might argue from this observation that, by applying crops
at training and test time, we are just learning a prior on the
object location (i.e. a saliency map). To test this hypothesis, we perform the following experiment: for each train-
Transformations
Top-1 Accuracy (%)
T1+ﬂip SIFT
random SIFT
T1+ﬂip color
random color
Figure 5: Accuracy on CUB after adding up to ﬁve transformations with ITP, with random selection (5 trials averaged),
or with just ﬂip in addition to the original images (T1).
Transformations
Top-1 Accuracy (%)
Transformations
Top-5 Accuracy (%)
Figure 6: Evolution of the test accuracy on CUB (left) and
ILSVRC-30 (right) as a function of the number of transformations selected by ITP, or its cheaper TR variant.
Figure 7: First ﬁve selected transformations by ITP (left);
overlaying the different crops selected by 2-ITP-S for the
SIFT channel (right).
ing and test image, we extract local descriptors from all its
transformed versions and aggregate them in a single FV.
The patches which are present in multiple croppings are,
therefore, weighted more than patches which occur in few
or no crops. This is equivalent to weighting patches with
the saliency map . On CUB (resp. ILSVRC-30), for
SIFT+color we get 35.9% (resp. 44.6%) which is a signiﬁcant improvement over the 28.2% (resp. 40.4%) baseline –
see Table 1. Yet, this is only half of the improvement that
we get with ITP (resp. 42.0% and 48.7%). This result con-
ﬁrms that our approach is not merely learning a prior on the
object location, but also invariances.
4.4. Transformations of order 2
We reﬁne our selection strategy by incorporating transformations of order 2, i.e., transformations of transformations (e.g. combining ﬂip and crop). Because the number
of such combinations is huge (> 1,000), we adopt the strategy described in Section 3.2. For both variants K-ITP and
ITP (T = 5)
2-ITP (T = 10)
2-ITP-S (T = 5)
Table 3: Comparison of ITP and 2-ITP on CUB.
K-ITP-S, we select the T −1 = 5 transformations during
a ﬁrst pass of order-1 ITP. We, then, generate all possible
combinations of order-2 transformations from these. For
2-ITP, we continue the greedy selection for 5 additional iterations (i.e. in total, we will select T −1 = 10 transformations) while for 2-ITP-S we select in total 5 transformations, restarting from scratch with a dictionary of transformations combining the 5 previously selected order-1 transformations with their combinations.
Results for 2-ITP and 2-ITP-S are given in Table 3 for
CUB and in Table 6 for ILSVRC. Interestingly, we observe an improvement of the performance, compared to using only order-1 transformations. For instance, +3.5% on
CUB and +1.1% on ILSVRC-30 for 2-ITP-S. Note that
the difference in performance is marginal between the two
variants, while 2-ITP is signiﬁcantly more computationally
costly than 2-ITP-S—the cost of adding a new transformation grows quadratically with the number of selections. Table 4 shows that 2-ITP-S selects more order-2 than order-1
transformations, showing the interest of using higher order
transformations. See Fig. 9 for examples.
crop5× crop8
crop1×crop0
crop1×crop8
color1× crop1
crop5× crop1
crop1× scale0
ﬂip× color0
ﬂip× crop6
crop1×crop5
crop2×color0
crop1× crop6
Table 4: Transformations selected by 2-ITP-S.
4.5. Total training time vs. target accuracy
We plot the test accuracy as a function of the number
of iterations performed by the SGD in Fig. 8 (one SGD iteration corresponds to processing a single training image).
Interestingly, we observe that the learning process is faster
for higher numbers of transformations T. To better exhibit
this phenomenon, we show in Table 5 the number of training samples that the SGD algorithm has to process to reach
a certain accuracy on the test set. It can be observed that it
takes less time to reach a certain accuracy when T is larger
(i.e. in spite of a larger training set). For instance, on CUB,
reaching a 35% accuracy is achieved for T = 5 transformations after examining about 2 times less training samples
than for T = 2. Similarly, on ILSVRC-30, reaching an accuracy of 45% is achieved about 3 times faster for T = 5
than for T = 2—it corresponds to 35 epochs for T = 2
and only 5 epochs for T = 5. This is an interesting ﬁnd-
SGD Iterations (in thousands)
Top-1 Accuracy (%)
+T2 (crop5)
+T4 (crop1)
+T5 (crop6)
+T6(crop0)
SGD Iterations (in thousands)
Top-5 Accuracy (%)
+T3 (crop0)
+T4 (homo2)
+T5 (crop6)
+T6(crop1)
Figure 8: Test accuracy as a function of the number of SGD
iterations on CUB (left) and ILSVRC-30 (right), with SIFT.
CUB - Top-1 acc target
ILSVRC-30 - Top-5 acc target
Table 5: Number of training samples (in thousands) that the
SGD has to process to reach a given accuracy on the test
set, for a varying number of transformations T (here, after
fusion). The ’X’ sign means that the target accuracy cannot
be reached at all.
ing towards reducing the training time on large-scale image
classiﬁcation tasks.
4.6. Comparison to state of the art
CUB. In , the authors report results with a similar
pipeline. Using Fisher Vectors with 256 Gaussians, their
baseline yields 28.2% accuracy on the full images, and
31.0% after cropping the images to 90% (value optimized
on the validation set). Note that despite using slightly different descriptors, we obtain the same baseline as they do
(28.2%). Our best results on CUB (using 5 order-2 transformations) are signiﬁcantly higher (45.2%). Our method
even outperforms their scheme when they use bounding box
annotations for training (42.2% with DPM and 41.9% with
their data-driven approach).
ILSVRC 2010. As it is computationally expensive to apply
ITP on the full ILSVRC dataset, we instead use the same
transformations as those selected on ILSVRC-30. With this
set, we learn a classiﬁer using all images of ILSVRC 2010.
We experiment only with ITP and 2-ITP-S, as 2-ITP requires to replicate the dataset two times more than 2-ITP-S,
which takes too much memory. We report the top-5 accuracy on the test set in Table 6 (right). We improve over
our baseline from 70.1% to 74.9% in top-5 accuracy. On
the color channel, the improvement is even larger (+7%).
In comparison, the winning team of the challenge, NEC-
UIUC-Rutgers, achieved 71.8%.
We slightly outperform results in , i.e. 74.3% accuracy. Note, that we only use 32K-dim descriptors, while
they used 524K-dim descriptors. Recently, reports an
83.0% accuracy, but with a different classiﬁcation framework (deep learning); see next paragraph for a comparison
with their features.
Deep convolutional features. We investigate the effect of
ITP on the DeCAF features , to show (i) that our approach can signiﬁcantly improve over features with built-in
invariance properties and (ii) that the choice of transformations heavily depends on the features. These features consist of the output of the seventh layer of a deep convolutional
network, trained on the images of the ImageNet 2012 challenge. We use the publicly available implementation2. We
run an ITP pipeline to select ﬁve order-one transformations.
On CUB ﬂip, crop5, crop8, rot-12◦and rot9◦were selected.
On ILSVRC 2010 ﬂip, crop7, rot3◦, jpg70% and scale50%
were selected. On CUB, accuracy increases from 47.3% to
55.4% (+8.1), and from 77.9% to 81.4% (+3.5) on ILSVRC
2010. Note that DeCAF features are learned on the images
from the 2012 challenge, which only presents a partial overlap with the 2010 one. On CUB, for fair comparison with
the Fisher experiments, our results were conducted on the
full images, with no prior knowledge on the bounding box,
and therefore are lower than .
ILSVRC Full
Top-5 accuracy for ILSVRC10. (Left) Training
with 30 images per class and testing on the validation set.
(Right) Training with the full training set and results on the
5. Conclusion
The proposed Image Transformation Pursuit (ITP) algorithm allows to efﬁciently select a set of informative transformations while at the same time keeping a moderate training cost. Furthermore, it gracefully handles complex 2nd
order transformations that combine basic transformations.
ITP achieves signiﬁcant improvements in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy on both the CUB and the ImageNet 2010
challenge dataset, with only a handful of transformations,
both for Fisher-vector and convnet DeCAF features. Another conclusion of our work is that transforming test images and aggregating the corresponding scores is complementary to training set augmentation and leads to signiﬁcant
performance gains.
Acknowledgements This research was partially supported
by the grants “Axes” (EU), “Allegro” (ERC), “Gargantua”
(CNRS-Mastodons) and “FIRE-ID” (ANR).
2 
decaf-release/
color1×crop1
crop2×color0
Figure 9: Examples of transformed images on ILSVRC10 (transformations selected by 2-ITP-S, see Table 4).