Combining Self-Supervised Learning and Imitation for Vision-Based
Rope Manipulation
Ashvin Nair∗
Dian Chen∗
Pulkit Agrawal∗
Phillip Isola
Pieter Abbeel
Jitendra Malik
Sergey Levine
Abstract— Manipulation of deformable objects, such as ropes
and cloth, is an important but challenging problem in robotics.
We present a learning-based system where a robot takes as
input a sequence of images of a human manipulating a rope
from an initial to goal conﬁguration, and outputs a sequence
of actions that can reproduce the human demonstration, using
only monocular images as input. To perform this task, the robot
learns a pixel-level inverse dynamics model of rope manipulation directly from images in a self-supervised manner, using
about 60K interactions with the rope collected autonomously
by the robot. The human demonstration provides a high-level
plan of what to do and the low-level inverse model is used to
execute the plan. We show that by combining the high and
low-level plans, the robot can successfully manipulate a rope
into a variety of target shapes using only a sequence of humanprovided images for direction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Manipulation of deformable objects, such as ropes and
cloth, is an important but challenging problem in robotics.
Open-loop strategies for deformable object manipulation are
often ineffective, since the material can shift in unpredictable
ways . Perception of cloth and rope also poses a major
challenge, since standard methods for estimating the pose of
rigid objects cannot be readily applied to deformable objects
for which it is difﬁcult to concretely deﬁne the degrees
of freedom or provide suitable training data . Despite
the numerous industrial and commercial applications that an
effective system for deformable object manipulation would
have, effective and reliable methods for such tasks remain
exceptionally difﬁcult to construct. Previous work on deformable object manipulation has sought to use sophisticated
ﬁnite element models , , hand-engineered representations , , , , and direct imitation of human-provided
demonstrations , . Direct model identiﬁcation for ropes
and cloth is challenging and brittle, while imitation of human
demonstrations without an internal model of the object’s
dynamics is liable to fail in conditions that deviate from
those in the demonstrations.
In this work, we instead propose a learning-based approach to associate the behavior of a deformable object with
a robot’s actions, using self-supervision from large amounts
of data gathered autonomously by the robot. In particular, the
robot learns a goal-directed inverse dynamics model: given a
current state and a goal state (both in image space), it predicts
the action that will achieve the goal. Once this model is
∗Equal contribution.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
learned, our method can use human-provided demonstrations
as higher level guidance. In effect, the demonstrations tell
the robot what to do, while the learned model tells it how to
do it, combining high-level human direction with a learned
model of low-level dynamics. Figure 1 shows an overview
of our system.
Our method does not use any explicit parameterization of
the rope conﬁguration. Instead, we learn a model using raw
images of the rope, which provides representational ﬂexibility and avoids the need for manually specifying kinematic
models that may fail to adequately capture the full variability
of the deformable object. To handle high-dimensional visual
observations, we employ deep convolutional neural networks
for learning the inverse dynamics model.
Many interesting manipulation tasks require more than a
single step to achieve a desired goal state. For example, tying
a rope into a knot, stitching tissue during a surgery, and
lacing shoes all involve multiple steps of manipulation.
Learning to perform these tasks is much harder than
learning to perform small deformations, because only a very
speciﬁc set of chained actions will result in success. While
self-supervised learning of chained actions remains an open
challenge, here we alleviate the problem by employing a
small amount of imitation. At test time, the robot is provided
a sequence of images depicting each step in the task. Because
it has learned how to achieve small deformations between
current and target images, it can follow the sequence and
complete a multistep task.
One of the key challenges in self-supervised robot learning
is collecting enough data for learning skilled behaviors,
since the state and action space for practical manipulation
tasks is extremely large. In comparison to rigid objects,
deformable objects such as ropes can take on a much larger
range of conﬁgurations. This means that for self-supervised
learning of rope manipulation we require large amounts of
interaction data. To this end, we conﬁgured a Baxter robot
to autonomously collect interaction data with a rope without
any human intervention. To date, we have collected over 500
hours worth of data which has been publicly released at the
project website.
The main contribution of our work is to present a learningbased approach for rope manipulation that combines learned
predictive models with high-level human-provided demonstrations. The predictive model is learned autonomously
by the robot, using automatically collected data and selfsupervision. This model allows the robot to understand how
to manipulate a rope to reach target conﬁgurations. The
 
Robot execution
Human demonstration
Fig. 1: We present a system where the robot is capable of manipulating a rope into target conﬁgurations by combining a
high-level plan provided by a human with a learned low-level model of rope manipulation. A human provides the robot
with a sequence of images recorded while he manipulates the rope from an initial to goal conﬁguration. The robot uses a
learned inverse dynamics model to execute actions to follow the demonstrated trajectory. The robot uses a convolutional
neural network (CNN) for learning the inverse model in a self-supervised manner using 60K interactions with the rope with
no human supervision. The red heatmap on each image of the robot’s execution trace shows the predicted location of the
pick action and the blue arrow shows the direction of the action. This image is best seen in color.
human demonstrations, in the form of step-by-step images
of a rope undergoing a manipulation task, can then be used
at test time to indicate to the robot what should be done
to the rope, and the learned model can then be used to
determine how to do it. We evaluate our method on a Baxter
robot trained on our dataset of over 500 hours of real-world
rope manipulation, and demonstrate the ability of the system
to arrange a rope into a variety of shapes using high-level
human direction.
II. RELATED WORK
There has been signiﬁcant recent interest in learning
control policies directly from visual inputs using deep neural
networks. Impressive results have been obtained on playing
Atari games , a large suite of robotic tasks in simulation
 , , , , , and real world robotic manipulation tasks involving rigid objects in controlled settings
 , . Given that state of the art deep reinforcement
learning algorithms are data hungry, some recents works
learned to grasp , and push real world objects
by collecting large amounts of robot interaction data.
Manipulating deformable objects has been of great interest
to the robotics community . Prior works have considered
problems such as surgical suturing , , towel folding
 , knot tying and rope manipulation among many others.
Rope manipulation and knot tying are most closely related
to our work. Inoue et al. investigated the problem of
knot tying and following works used motion planning ,
ﬁxtures for open-loop execution and robotic hands with
tactile feedback . Morita et al. developed a system for
tying knots from visual observations that makes use of knot
theory to identify a sequence of knot states and then
execute motor primitives to achieve these states. Wakamatsu
et al. chose a sequence of robotic hand motion primitives
from rope cross states inferred by a planner to achieve a
desired knot from a given initial state of the rope. In contrast
to these works, our goal is not to tie knots but to manipulate
rope into a general conﬁguration by watching a human as
she manipulates the rope. Our system does not require any
rope-speciﬁc knowledge and is therefore generalizable to
manipulating other deformable objects.
Schulman et al. used non-rigid registration for
transferring human demonstrated trajectories for rope manipulation. In the learning from demonstration (LFD) paradigm,
an expert provides the robot with examples of observations
and the associated motor trajectories used to perform the
task. The robot then builds a model from this data that
outputs a policy for achieving the same task at test time.
A survey of learning from demonstration can be found in
 . One drawback of the LFD approach is that, if a robot
is to perform a wide suite of tasks, an expert is required to
provide demonstrations for each task individually. Instead, if
robots learn to imitate human behavior by simply observing
humans as they perform different tasks, robots could learn
much faster. Many past works have proposed solutions to
learning from visual demonstrations , , .
The closest to our work are Yang et al. and Kuniyoshi
et al. . Kuniyoshi et al. use a vision system to detect an
object and the exact pose of human hands to produce a sequence of robotic actions to copy the human demonstration.
Yang et al. predict object detections and grasp types that
are then used to infer the robotic actions using an action
parse tree. In contrast to these approaches that deal only with
rigid objects, we consider the signiﬁcantly harder problem of
manipulating a deformable object. In addition to integrating
human demonstrations, we let the robot collect supervised
data to build a predictive model of its actions, which can
then be used to infer how the robot can imitate the visual
demonstration provided by the expert.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We use a Baxter robot for all experiments described in the
paper. The robot manipulates a rope placed on a table in front
of it using only one arm. The arm has a parallel jaw gripper
that can rotate, open and close. One end of the rope is tied
to a clamp attached to the table. The robot receives visual
inputs from the RGB channels of a Kinect camera. The setup
is illustrated in Figure 1. The interaction of the robot with the
rope is constrained to a single action primitive consisting of
two sub-actions - pick the rope at location (x1, y1) and drop
the the rope at location (x2, y2), where (x1, y1, x2, y2) are
pixel coordinates in the input RGB image. It is possible to
manipulate the rope into many complex conﬁgurations using
just this action primitive, as show in Figure 2.
The robot collects data in a self-supervised manner by
randomly choosing pairs of pick and drop points in the
image. However, if we randomly choose a point on the
image, then most points will not be on the rope. Instead,
we use the point cloud from the Kinect to segment the rope
and then choose a pick point uniformly at random from this
segment. Once the pick point is chosen, the drop point can
be obtained as a displacement vector from the pick point. We
represent this displacement vector by the angle θ ∈[0, 2π)
and length l ∈ cm. Values of θ and l are uniformly
and randomly sampled from their respective ranges to obtain
the drop point. After choosing the pick and drop points, the
robot executes the following steps: (1) grasp the rope at the
pick point, (2) move the arm 5 cm vertically above the pick
point, (3) move the arm to a point 5 cm vertically above
the drop point, (4) release the rope by opening the gripper.
The pair of current and next image obtained after executing
the random action are used for training the inverse model
described in Section IV.
During autonomous data collection, it is very likely that
the rope will fall off the table or drift out of reach of the
robot and consequently halt the data collection process until
a manual reset if performed. For continuous collection of
data without human intervention, the robot performs a reset
action either after every 50 actions or if there are fewer
than 1000 pixels of rope in the robot’s workspace. The reset
action detects the end of the rope and then pulls the rope
in a ﬁxed direction to make it straight. This system can run
continuously for stretches of more than twenty hours without
any manual intervention.
IV. METHOD FOR ROPE MANIPULATION
Our goal is to have the robot watch a human manipulate
a rope and then reproduce this manipulation on its own. The
human provides a demonstration in the form of a sequence of
images of the rope in intermediate states toward a ﬁnal goal
state. Let V = {It|t = 1..T} represent this sequence. The
robot must execute a series of actions to transform I1 into
I2, then I2 into I3, and so on until the end of the sequence.
Fig. 2: A sample of validation set images visualized using
t-SNE over the image features learned by our model.
Notice that similar conﬁgurations of the rope appear near
each other, indicating the learned feature space meaningfully
organizes variation in rope shape.
A model that predicts the action that relates a pair of
input states is called an inverse dynamics model, and is
mathematically described in equation 1 below:
ut = F(It, It+1),
where It and It+1 are images of the current and next states
and ut is the action. We use convolutional neural networks
to learn the inverse model in a manner similar to , .
Details of training the inverse model and the process of
imitating an observed visual demonstration are described in
Sections IV-B and IV-C, respectively.
A. Neural Network Architecture Notation
Let the abbreviations Ck, Fk represent a convolutional
(C) layer with k ﬁlters, a fully-connected (F) layer with k
ﬁlters respectively. We used the ELU (Exponential Linear
unit) non-linearity after every convolutional/fully-connected
layer, except for the output layer. As an example of our
notation, C48-F500 refers to a network with 48 ﬁlters in
the convolution layer followed by ELU non-linearity and a
fully-connected layer with 500 units.
B. Self-Supervised Learning of the Inverse Model
Our neural network architecture consists of two streams
that transform each of the two input images into a latent
feature space, x. The architecture of these streams is C96-
C256-C384-C384-C256-C200. The ﬁrst ﬁve out of the six
layers have the same architecture as AlexNet. The neural
Fig. 3: We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) to build the inverse dynamics model. The input to the CNN is a pair
of images (It, It+1) and the output is the action that moves the rope from the shape in It into the shape in It+1. The action
is parameterized as (pt, θt, lt), where pt, θt, lt is the action location, direction, and length, respectively. ˆpt, ˆθt, ˆlt denote the
predictions. The CNN consists of two streams with shared weights that transform each image into a latent feature space
x. The representations xt, xt+1 are concatenated together and fed into fully-connected layers to predict the action. We use
approximately 60K rope interactions for training the CNN.
network weights of both the streams are tied. The latent
representations of the two images, (xt, xt+1), each size 200,
are concatenated and fed into another neural network with
the architecture F200-F200. This subnetwork provides a joint
non-linear feature representation of the current and next
image that is used to predict the action.
For the purpose of training, we turn action prediction into a
classiﬁcation problem by discretizing the action space. The
action is parameterized as a tuple (pt, θt, lt), where pt is
the action location, θt is the action direction and lt is the
action length. Each dimension of this tuple is independently
discretized. The action location is discretized onto a 20×20
spatial grid, and the direction and length are discretized
into 36 and 10 bins respectively. The predicted action tuple
is represented as (ˆpt, ˆθt, ˆlt) Treating action prediction as
classiﬁcation makes training the network easier and accounts
for multimodality in the output distribution, which can occur
when multiple actions exist that move the rope from the same
initial to ﬁnal conﬁguration.
A na¨ıve way of training the neural network would be to
classify each of the three action elements independently. In
order to model the joint discrete distribution of the action
P(pt, θt, lt) in a way that does not increases exponentially in
size with the number of dimensions, we decompose the joint
distribution as P(pt, θt, lt) = P(pt)P(θt|pt)P(lt|θt, pt). The
neural network ﬁrst predicts a distribution over 400 different
possible pick locations. The argmax of this distribution
(ˆpt) is chosen as the pick location. One-hot encoding of the
pick location is passed along with state features (xt, xt+1)
to predict a distribution over possible action directions (θt).
Then the argmax over the action direction distribution (ˆθt) is
one-hot encoded and concatenated with the one-hot encoding
of ˆpt and state features to predict ˆlt.
We initialize the ﬁrst ﬁve layers of the network using
pre-trained AlexNet weights obtained by training for image
classiﬁcation on the ImageNet challenge . For the ﬁrst
5K iterations we set the learning rate of these convolutional
layers to be 0. For the rest of the training we set the learning
rate to 1e-4, and use the Adam optimizer . All the
other layers are initialized with small normally distributed
weights and trained from the ﬁrst iteration with a learning
rate of 1e-4. Approximately 60K pairs of before and after
image collected autonomously by the robot were used for
training the inverse model. A separate validation set of
2.5K before/after image pairs was used for hyper-parameter
C. Imitating Human Demonstration
With the help of an inverse model, the robot can deform
the rope by small amounts. Different speciﬁc sequences of
such small deformations can be used to manipulate the rope
in different ways. However, learning a chain of actions that
manipulate the rope into conﬁgurations of interest such as
knots, is non-trivial. In this work we mitigate this challenge
by using visual demonstrations from a human. The robot
receives as input the sequence of images depicting each stage
of the manipulation performed by a human demonstrator
to reach a desired rope conﬁguration from an initial rope
conﬁguration. We denote this sequence of demonstration
images as V = {I′
t|t ∈(1 . . . T)} where I′
T depicts the
Let I1 be the initial image the I′t be the goal image. The
robot ﬁrst inputs the pair of images (I1, I′
2) into the learned
inverse model and executes the predicted action. Let I2 be
the visual state of the world after the action is executed. The
robot then inputs (I2, I′
3) into the inverse model and executes
the output action. This process is repeated iteratively for T
time steps. In some cases the robot predicts a pick location
that does not lie on the rope. For these cases we use the
rope segmentation information to ﬁnd the point on the rope
that is closest to predicted pick location to execute the pick
primitive.
D. Active Data Collection
With randomized data collection it is unlikely that the
robot would place the rope in interesting conﬁgurations
and therefore the model may not be accurate at performing
tasks such as knot-tying that require moving the rope into
Knot (success)
Knot (failure)
Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison of the robot’s performance in imitating the human demonstration for arranging the rope into
W, S, L and knot conﬁgurations. The upper row in each example shows the sequence of demonstration images provided as
input to the robot and the second (lower) row shows the states achieved by the robot as it tries to follow the demonstrated
trajectory. The blue arrow on each image of the robot’s execution trace shows the direction and the location of the pick point
of the action performed by the robot. Please see the supplementary materials on the project website for more examples.
complex conﬁgurations. In order to bias data collection
towards interesting conﬁgurations, we collected a set of 50
images of the rope when it was manually arranged in a
random conﬁguration (i.e. the goal buffer). We then used
a model trained with 30K randomly collected data points
and instead of randomly sampling an action, we randomly
sampled a image from the goal buffer and set that as the
goal image. We passed the current and goal image into the
inverse model and used the action predicted by the inverse
model for data collection.
V. EVALUATION PROCEDURE
The performance of the robot was evaluated by tasking
it to reconﬁgure the rope from a given initial conﬁguration
into target conﬁgurations of varying complexity depicting
“L”, “S”, “W” shapes and a knot.
The performance was quantitatively measured by calculating the distance between the rope conﬁgurations in
the sequence of images provided from the human demonstration and the sequence of images achieved by the
robot after executing the actions from the inverse dynamics model. The distance between two rope conﬁgurations is computed by ﬁrst segmenting the rope in each
image, then aligning points in these two segmentations
with thin plate spline robust point matching (TPS-RPM)
 and calculating the mean pixel distance between the
matched points. We compare the performance of our method
against a hand-engineered baseline, a nearest neighbor
baseline, and our method without imitation (see Section
V-A). Videos of the self-supervised data collection, the
demonstrations, and autonomous executions are available at
 
A. Baseline
Hand-Engineered baseline: The ﬁrst baseline we compare
against is a hand-engineered method that takes as input
the sequence of images from the human demonstration. For
inferring which action should be executed to transform the
rope from the conﬁguration in It into the conﬁguration in
It+1, we ﬁrst segment the rope in both the images, and use
TPS-RPM to register the segments. In the absence of a model
of rope dynamics, a simple way to move the rope into a target
conﬁguration is to pick the rope at the point with the largest
deformation in the ﬁrst image relative to the second and then
drop the rope at the corresponding point in the second image.
As the point with largest distance may be an outlier, we use
the point at the 90th percentile of the deformation distances
for the pick action.
Nearest Neighbor baseline: To evaluate whether the neural
network simply memorized the training data, we compared
our method to a nearest neighbor baseline. Given the current
image (It) and the target image in the human demonstration
t+1), a pair of images (Ik, Ik+1) in the training set that
is closest to (It, I′
t+1) is determined and the ground truth
action used to collect this training sample is executed by the
robot. As the distance metric for nearest neighbor calculation,
we used Euclidean distance in raw RGB space after downsampling images to 32 × 32.
No Imitation baseline: For understanding how critical is
imitation for manipulating the rope into desired shape, we
evaluated the learned model by feeding in only the initial
and goal image (I1, I′
T ) without any intermediate steps. The
inverse model takes these images as inputs and the robot
executes the predicted action and image I2 is obtained. Next,
the pair (I2, I′
T ) is fed into the inverse model to infer the next
action to execute and this process is repeated iteratively for
the same number of steps as in the human demonstration.
VI. RESULTS
Figure 4 qualitatively shows that using the learned inverse
dynamics model, the robot is capable of re-conﬁguring the
rope into many different shapes. It can also be seen that when
TPS-RPM Error (pixels)
TPS-RPM Error (pixels)
Nearest Neighbor
No Imitation
Hand-Engineered
Fig. 5: Performance comparison of the proposed method
against the baselines described in Section V-A. Performance
is measured as the TPS-RPM distance metric between the
rope conﬁgurations in the sequence of images achieved by
the robot and the ones provided by human demonstration.
Lower distance indicates better performance. Each subplot
shows performance for a different target shape. Our method
outperforms the baseline methods.
the rope is not bent sharply, the robot is more accurate at
manipulation.
Figure 5 compares the performance of our method against
the hand-engineered, nearest neighbor and no-imitation baselines described in Section V-A. Each subﬁgure shows the
performance for a different target conﬁguration. The x-axis
in each subﬁgure corresponds to the number of intermediate
images that were provided to the robot via demonstration.
The y-axis corresponds to the TPS-RPM distance between
the rope conﬁguration achieved by the robot and the corresponding rope conﬁguration in the actual demonstration.
Lower values indicate better performance.
For every sequence, mean accuracy and standard deviation
are reported across 10 different repeats of two human demonstration sequences. The results demonstrate that our method
outperforms various baselines including a hand-engineered
baseline (i.e. TPS-RPM baseline), indicating that through
self-supervision, the robot has learned a dynamics model of
rope motion that is useful for manipulation.
A. Scaling with amount of data
Figure 6 shows that a model trained with 60K data points
out of which 30K were collected using random sampling and
other 30K using active sampling signiﬁcantly outperforms a
model trained with only 30K data points. Our method can
successfully tie knots 38% of the time. Due to the lack
of 60K randomly collected training points, at the moment
we cannot conclude how useful is active data sampling as
TPS-RPM Error (pixels)
Knot Tying Success Rate
Imitation?
Fig. 6: The performance of our method improves both in
manipulating the rope in desired shapes and tying knots. The
results indicate that with larger amounts of data even better
performance can be achieved.
compared to random sampling. We will include these results
in the next revision of our paper.
B. Importance of Imitation
How important are human demonstrations for manipulating the rope into a desired conﬁguration? Results in Figure
5 show that when the robot was only provided the initial
and ﬁnal images instead of all the images in the human
demonstration sequence, the performance is signiﬁcantly
worse. Figure 6 further shows that without imitation robot is
able to tie the knot only 11/50 times instead of 19/50 times
with imitation.
C. Generalization to other ropes
We tested if the learned model is successfully able to manipulate new ropes by qualitatively evaluating performance
on a white jute rope that was signiﬁcantly stiffer than the red
rope used in the training and a black cotton rope that was
signiﬁcantly thinner and less stiff than the red rope used
in the training. We found that the robot was successfully
able to conﬁgure these ropes into relatively simpler “L”
and “S” shapes. Even though the model was trained using
interaction data from a single rope, it generalizes to other
ropes. This shows that instead of learning features speciﬁc
to the particular rope used for data collection, our model
learns features that generalize to other ropes.
One possible reason that the robot is unsuccessful at
manipulating the white rope into more curvy “W” and knot
conﬁgurations is that the rope is too stiff to bent into curves
necessary for forming the “W” and the knot. With the black
rope the robot was able to successfully manipulate the rope
until the penultimate step in tying a knot, but failed at
completing the knot. We also ran experiments where we
changed the background from green to white and found that
our model was unsuccessful at rope manipulation. This result
is not surprising because all our training data is collected
using a single background and it is expected that with
training data collected on diverse backgrounds our method
would be able to generalize to novel backgrounds. The video
demonstrations of these experiments are available at the
project website.
VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a learning-based method for
ﬂexible manipulation of deformable objects such as ropes.
Our method is based around self-supervision: we train a
predictive model of rope behavior using data of rope interaction collected autonomously by the robot. This model
predicts, given the current and target image of a rope,
which action the robot can execute to put the rope into the
target conﬁguration. We combine our method with human
demonstrations by allowing a human user to supply stepby-step images that show the rope undergoing a variety of
manipulations. These demonstrations tell the system what
it should do with the rope at test time, while the learned
model is used to determine how to do it. Our experiments
indicate that we can use our learned model to arrange the
rope into a variety of different shapes using only high-level
demonstration images.
One limitation of our approach is that, in its current form,
it cannot learn to manipulate new objects exclusively by
watching human demonstrations, since performing a manipulation task requires a model that can effectively predict the
motion of the object, and this model is learned from the
robot’s own experience. In principle, this limitation could be
overcome simply by collecting data from a large number of
object manipulation scenarios, so as to learn a single model
that generalizes effectively across objects. A more nuanced
approach might involve correlating the behavior of objects in
the human demonstrations with other previously experienced
manipulations, so as to put them into correspondence and
infer the behavior of an object for which prior experience
is unavailable. In both cases, lifting this limitation is a
promising direction for future work.
Although we demonstrate a variety of rope manipulation
scenarios, our experiments are limited in scope, primarily
due to limits on the amount of data that we can collect in
reasonable time on a single robotic platform. For instance,
most of our experiments use a single rope on a single
background. Although we demonstrate that our model can
successfully manipulate new ropes with signiﬁcantly different material and texture properties into simple conﬁgurations,
it fails to manipulate them into more complex conﬁgurations. If provided with substantially more robot-hours and a
greater variety of ropes and environments, a similar model
could in principle learn a more generalizable notion of rope
manipulation. State-of-the-art results in image recognition
and segmentation indicate that deep convolutional neural
networks have the capacity to generalize to a wide range
of scenes and objects when provided with enough data ,
which suggests that the same kind of generalization could
in principle be obtained by predictive models of deformable
objects with enough data.
VIII. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS AND VIDEOS
Supplementary
performance
 
IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER award
(#IIS-1351028), NSF SMA-1514512, ONR MURI N00014-
14-1-0671, and ONR YIP.