City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Bussone, A., Stumpf, S. & O'Sullivan, D. . The Role of Explanations on
Trust and Reliance in Clinical Decision Support Systems. Paper presented at the 2015
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics, 21-10-2015 - 23-10-2015, Dallas, USA.
This is the accepted version of the paper.
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version.
Permanent repository link: 
Link to published version:
Copyright: City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City,
University of London available to a wider audience. Copyright and Moral Rights
remain with the author(s) and/or copyright holders. URLs from City Research
Online may be freely distributed and linked to.
Reuse: Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge.
Provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is
not changed in any way.
City Research Online
City Research Online: 
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: 
The Role of Explanations on Trust and Reliance in
Clinical Decision Support Systems
CONFERENCE PAPER · OCTOBER 2015
3 AUTHORS, INCLUDING:
Adrian Bussone
City University London
2 PUBLICATIONS 0 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Dympna O'Sullivan
City University London
42 PUBLICATIONS 119 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate,
letting you access and read them immediately.
Available from: Adrian Bussone
Retrieved on: 12 January 2016
The Role of Explanations on Trust and Reliance in
Clinical Decision Support Systems
Adrian Bussone, Simone Stumpf, Dympna O'Sullivan
Centre for Human Computer Interaction Design
School of Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering
City University London
London, United Kingdom
 , , Dympna.O' 
Abstract— Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) are
increasingly used by healthcare professionals for evidence-based
diagnosis and treatment support. However, research has
suggested that users often over-rely on system suggestions – even
if the suggestions are wrong. Providing explanations could
potentially mitigate misplaced trust in the system and overreliance. In this paper, we explore how explanations are related
to user trust and reliance, as well as what information users
would find helpful to better understand the reliability of a
system's decision-making. We investigated these questions
through an exploratory user study in which healthcare
professionals were observed using a CDSS prototype to diagnose
hypothetic cases using fictional patients suffering from a balancerelated disorder. Our results show that the amount of system
confidence had only a slight effect on trust and reliance. More
importantly, giving a fuller explanation of the facts used in
making a diagnosis had a positive effect on trust but also led to
over-reliance issues, whereas less detailed explanations made
participants question the system's reliability and led to selfreliance problems. To help them in their assessment of the
reliability of the system's decisions, study participants wanted
better explanations to help them interpret the system's
confidence, to verify that the disorder fit the suggestion, to better
understand the reasoning chain of the decision model, and to
make differential diagnoses. Our work is a first step toward
improved CDSS design that better supports clinicians in making
correct diagnoses.
Keywords— CDSS; Trust; Reliance; Explanations; Reliability;
User Study
I. INTRODUCTION
Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) can help support
choices faced by clinicians through applying stored health
knowledge to observations. CDSS are already used for a
variety of purposes to improve health care: screening and
prevention , medication decision-making , therapeutic
planning and diagnostics , etc. However, the use of CDSS
is not without problems. They are not perfectly reliable
because they operate under conditions of uncertainty, and thus
the correctness of their outputs may be affected by the quality
of the decision-making of the system or the data and inputs it is
given . Therefore it is critical that clinicians using these
systems do not trust them blindly.
Previous research has shown that users are not always
sensitive to the reliability of automated systems, and often trust
the system more than themselves . This can lead to
misuse of the system through over-reliance – also known
as 'automation bias' – that comes from placing too much
trust in the system and results in the user's agreement with
incorrect system suggestions. Similarly, there might be
instances of disuse , in which users do not follow correct
suggestions, i.e. issues of self-reliance.
It has been suggested that the intelligibility of system
behavior is an important factor in ensuring that the user
understands how the CDSS operates . This in turn could
help clinicians identify if the system has erred and also ensure
that the clinician forms a more accurate picture of the system's
reliability. However, current CDSS designs rarely address how
to make the system's functioning intelligible to clinical users.
The role of explaining the reasoning of intelligent systems
has been investigated . Some work has been carried out
on exposing the reasoning through various explanation types
 , such as why it made the suggestion and/or the system's
confidence that the suggestion is correct. Previous work has
shown that providing explanations can increase users'
understanding of how the system operates and that it is
better to expose as much information as possible about what
the system uses to make its decisions to improve intelligibility
Fig. 1. Interaction between a clinical user and a CDSS, highlighting the
relationship between explanations, reliance, and trust. Explanations from the
system could help clinicians with assessing reliability and prevent over-reliance
or self-reliance.
 . However, there is still a lack of knowledge about the
impact of explanations on building trust and countering overreliance, as some research suggests that explanations lead to
more correct decisions whilst others suggest they can also
lead to worse decision-making by the clinician .
We explored these issues as part of the EMBalance project
( in a CDSS prototype that supports
primary care physicians to diagnose and treat balance
disorders. While balance problems affect 40% of adults over
the age of 40 in the U.K., and are the most common reason for
clinical visits in individuals over 60, best practices on how to
diagnose and appropriately treat balance disorders are still not
widespread within primary care and usually require over four
consultations and possibly referrals to specialists before a
diagnosis is made . Thus, a CDSS could substantially
increase the correct diagnosis of conditions that cause vertigo,
tinnitus, and falls (e.g. Meniere's Disease, benign paroxysmal
positional vertigo, etc.) in a shorter period of time, based on
information about a patient's medical history, symptoms and
clinical examinations. However, it is vital in the design of such
a system to consider what information would help physicians
ensure that the diagnoses the system suggested are indeed
correct, i.e. how explanations affect trust in the system and
reliance on the system's decisions (Fig. 1).
This paper presents the results of an exploratory user study
to investigate the effects of explanations on the users of a
CDSS. Our research questions were:
RQ1. What effects do Confidence explanations have on users
trusting a CDSS and relying on system suggestions?
RQ2. What effects do Why explanations have on users trusting
a CDSS and relying on system suggestions?
RQ3. What should be explained to help clinicians better assess
the appropriateness of the system's suggestion?
Our results provide a first insight into understanding the
role of CDSS explanations on users’ trust and reliance, and
propose how explanations can be used as part of CDSS design
to improve and facilitate further assessment of system
reliability.
We will first provide an overview of related work in this
area. We then describe the study set-up in more detail and
present the results of our investigations. We conclude with a
discussion of the implications of our work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. System Reliability and Use
Previous work has shown that users often misuse or disuse
an automated system such as a CDSS . Suggestions
made by a CDSS can be wrong and thus the user cannot rely
on them completely. However, it has also been found that users
may not always be sensitive to the system's reliability, and
perceive it as highly accurate or reliable, even more so than
other humans . Thus, users may believe a system to
be more reliable than it actually is and misuse it by agreeing
with incorrect suggestions, a behavior known as over-reliance
 . Previous studies have shown that over-reliance is widespread in CDSS use and that it can be more
pronounced in users with low confidence in their abilities or
judgment . This is a major concern when targeting a CDSS
at clinicians who do not have specialized knowledge. On the
other hand, there is also evidence that an unreliable system
may cause disuse, which might cause clinicians to over-ride
suggestions , even if those suggestions are correct,
causing self-reliance. How to counteract over-reliance and
self-reliance has not yet been extensively researched in the
CDSS community.
B. Assessing System Reliability and Trust
A CDSS often applies highly complex and multi
dimensional reasoning that is difficult for a user to understand
 and explanations are often provided by the system to
help the user understand what it is doing . Previous
work has stressed the importance of explaining various aspects
of the decision-making process to users , and these
different kinds of explanation types – for example, Confidence
explanations showing the probability of the diagnosis being
correct and Why explanations providing facts used in reasoning
about the diagnosis – have been used previously in CDSS .
Recent work has suggested that explanations need to be
carefully designed to be sound and complete but without
overwhelming users with unnecessary information .
Systems that are understandable seem to help users
determine if the output is appropriate and could
therefore form an effective solution to address the problem of
assessing a system's reliability. However, explanations have
also been shown to increase user trust in the system's reliability
 , which could in turn lead to over-reliance. Therefore,
trust and reliance need to be judiciously balanced so that users
do not trust the system too much nor understand too little. Our
research addresses explanations and their relationship to trust
and reliance, as well as what types of explanations would help
practitioners better assess the reliability of CDSS suggestions.
III. STUDY SET-UP
To investigate the relationship between explanations, trust
and reliance, we conducted an exploratory between-group user
study employing two different versions of a CDSS prototype in
which we manipulated the explanations shown to participants.
We conducted a qualitative analysis on the participants'
decision-making, their trust, and their 'think-aloud' and
interview responses.
A. Participants
Seven primary care practitioners and one nurse practitioner
(5 male, 2 female), with an average of 6.5 years experience
took part in the study. All had completed clinical training in
general medicine and had been involved in examining and
diagnosing patients, but none had specialized knowledge on
disorders.
experienced
healthcare
practitioners with no specialist knowledge are target users for a
CDSS, these participants made ideal candidates for our study.
Participants were recruited through advertisements sent to
medical network groups, forums, medical schools, and local
primary care offices. They were given a small incentive for
participating in the study.
B. Vignettes
In order to simulate the experience of diagnosing patients
with balance-related complaints and to maintain consistency of
information provided, we created eight clinical vignettes. Each
clinical vignette described a fictitious patient's age and gender,
(including
occupation
drinking/smoking habits), symptoms, and the results of four
clinical examinations, based on clinical expertise in our
research project. Each key fact in a vignette was printed on a
separate piece of paper that was given to participants as the
study progressed, mimicking the iterative disclosure of
information during a consultation. Table 1 shows an overview
of the information provided for all eight vignettes.
C. Prototypes
As part of our study, we developed a CDSS interface with
which participants could interact (Fig. 2). Participants entered
medical history, symptoms, and examination results from the
clinical vignettes and then received a suggested diagnosis from
the prototype. Instead of a fully automated system, we used a
"Wizard of Oz" approach in which the behavior of the software
is controlled by the researcher unbeknown to the participant; in
our prototype we simply mocked up the diagnoses and
associated explanations.
The diagnoses were explained in two ways within the
prototype. First, alongside each diagnosis the prototype showed
a Confidence explanation in the form a percentage of certainty.
In order to investigate the effect of this type of explanation on
reliance, i.e. whether a high percentage caused over-reliance,
we manipulated this to be either high or low: half of the
vignettes' associated diagnoses were randomly given a
percentage below 30% while the other half were given a high
percentage above 75%.
Second, the prototype showed a Why explanation through a
list of facts based on the vignettes that were associated with the
formation of the diagnosis. We created two versions of the
prototype interface in order to manipulate the level of
information provided as part of these explanations. The
Comprehensive version showed all items from medical history,
symptoms, and examination results (Fig. 3, left) whereas the
Selective prototype listed only examination results (Fig. 3,
A danger of using a CDSS is that the user agrees with an
incorrect suggestion, known as over-reliance. To investigate
this aspect in our study, four out of the eight vignettes
concluded with suggested diagnoses that were incorrect. We
ensured that the incorrect diagnoses were not trivial to identify
by participants: the diagnosis still shared some symptoms or
examination results with the correct diagnosis. To be able to
isolate the impact of Confidence explanations and Why
explanations on trust and reliance, we balanced incorrect
diagnoses across these conditions (see Table 1, last column).
D. Procedure
Participants either used the Comprehensive or Selective
version of the prototype in a between-group study design. We
considered a within-subject design but decided that this would
be too confusing to participants, making the prototype appear
to be unpredictable. To counter any confounding effects due to
participant's level of experience, we balanced group
assignment based on their stated level of knowledge of balance
disorders. Overall, four participants used the Comprehensive
version while three used the Selective version. Each participant
was asked to consider eight vignettes; one participant was only
able to complete four vignettes. This resulted in a total of 52
vignettes completed altogether: 28 by the Comprehensive
group and 24 by the Selective group.
TABLE 1. THE CLINICAL VIGNETTES USED IN THE STUDY
Examinations
Diagnosis,
Confidence,
In/Correct
Vestibular
(Incorrect)
menopausal,
Right-­‐sided
intolerance,
intolerance
Vestibular
Age-­‐related
Imbalance,
(Incorrect)
units/week,
non-­‐smoker,
fluctuating,
bi-­‐lateral
spontaneous
Non-­‐smoker,
units/week
Bi-­‐lateral
Dix-­‐Hallpike:
Horizontal
units/week
Dix-­‐Hallpike:
Horizontal
Vestibular
(Incorrect)
Unemployed
packs/week
units/week
Horizontal
Positional
nystagmus,
Positional
Nystagmus,
Positional
Vertebro-­‐
Ischaemia,
(Incorrect)
Each study session lasted approximately 1.5 hours. Before
they were asked to consider the vignettes, participants were
familiarized with the CDSS prototype and were told that the
suggestions made by the prototype might not always be
correct. Regarding how the system determined a diagnosis, the
participants were told only that it has a database; no further
detail was provided. They then rated their trust of the system,
before using the system for the first time. The main part of the
study consisted of a participant considering each of the eight
vignettes in turn, entering the information provided into the
prototype and then considering the suggested diagnoses, either
accepting the diagnosis as correct or rejecting it as incorrect.
Hence, the task performed by participants in our study is akin
to CDSS use in a real-world application during a typical
consultation workflow (Fig. 4). As they worked through the
vignettes using the prototype, we asked them to "think aloud"
to verbalize their thoughts and reasoning. At the end of the
study, participants were asked to rate their trust toward the
prototype post-use and they were interviewed about the
explanations' impact on their experience.
E. Data Collection and Analysis
We used the difference between the trust ratings
participants provided pre- and post-use, rated on a 7-point
Likert scale ranging from 'distrust completely' (a rating of 1) to
'trust completely' (a rating of 7), to measure the impact of the
explanations on their assessment of the reliability of the tool.
We also investigated the effects of the explanations on
system reliance through their verbal responses by noting how
often participants agreed with a diagnosis made by the system,
how often they made the 'right' decision (i.e. they agreed with
the correct diagnosis or rejected the wrong diagnosis) and how
often participants made the 'wrong' decision (i.e. they agreed
with the wrong diagnosis or disagreed with a right diagnosis).
All sessions were video recorded, screen captured and
Fig. 2. Example interface of the CDSS prototype used in the study. Participants were able to enter medical history, symptoms and the results of clinical
examinations to be shown a diagnosis.
Fig. 3. The two versions of the prototype. The Comprehensive version (left) showed all information associated with a diagnosis while the Selective version
(right) showed a less detailed explanation.
transcribed. We used a thematic analysis approach to better
understand the participants' thoughts about the explanations'
impact on trust, and what further information would have
helped them understand the reasoning of the CDSS.
We used a qualitative approach to analyze all of our data,
giving raw counts to illustrate our findings. Due to the low
sample size, we did not conduct any statistical tests but instead
include visualizations which provide an intuitive description of
the data distribution.
IV. RESULTS
We address our research questions in turn. Table 2 shows,
for each participant using the two versions, the frequency of
the diagnoses made by the system ('System Suggestions'
columns) and the frequency of decisions made by participants
('Decisions by Participants' columns).
A. Confidence Explanations (RQ1)
To understand the effect that Confidence explanations had
on reliance, we analyzed participants' decisions to agree with
the system based on the percentage – either high or low – that
was shown with the diagnostic suggestion (Table 2, 'By
Confidence' columns). Overall there were 52 suggestions that
participants saw, equally split between high and low
percentages. Participants agreed with both roughly equally
(Fig. 5): 21 when they were being shown with high confidence
percentages, compared with 18 with low confidence
percentages. In addition, only one participant mentioned the
system's confidence as an important factor in trusting the
"There is this degree of certainty that makes me trust more
in this system." [C04]
These results seem to indicate that high system confidence
had only a slight effect that led participants to over-rely. The
small impact is surprising considering existing design
guidelines ; possible reasons for this result will be further
described in section IV.C.
B. Why Explanations (RQ2)
We next turned our investigation to the impact of Why
explanations on participants' tendency to rely on the system. To
do this, we first compared how many times participants who
Comprehensive
explanations made 'right' decisions (i.e. agreeing with a correct
suggestion or disagreeing with an incorrect one) vs. 'wrong'
decisions (i.e. disagreeing with a correct suggestion or agreeing
with an incorrect one). Again, we found that both groups did
roughly equally well (Table 2, 'By Right/Wrong Decisions'):
out of 52 suggestions, participants in the Comprehensive group
made 16 'right' decisions, whereas the Selective group made 14
'right' decisions (Fig. 6, black ticks and crosses). It would
therefore appear that the amount of information provided in an
explanation had no impact on the correctness of the decisions
made by participants.
However, there is an important difference between agreeing
with a system suggestion that is incorrect versus disagreeing
with a correct one. While both are wrong, the former indicates
an over-reliance on the system, whereas the latter shows that
the user does not simply follow what the system presents. In
both groups, participants made wrong decisions in over half of
the instances. We therefore looked into the pattern of making
'wrong' decisions in more detail, first when participants agreed
TABLE 2. FREQUENCIES OF SUGGESTIONS AND DECISIONS, BY PARTICIPANT
Participant
Suggestions
Participants
Confidence
Right/Wrong
Confidence
Confidence
Confidence
Comprehensive
Fig. 4. Flow of main study task
with incorrect suggestions and then when they disagreed with a
correct one.
Our results show that the amount of information presented
in the Why explanation does seem to matter in agreeing with
incorrect suggestions. Participants in the Comprehensive group
agreed with more suggestions and also with more incorrect
ones, whereas participants in the Selective group agreed with
only 7 incorrect ones (Fig. 6, top row). Hence, these findings
suggest that the participants in the Comprehensive group
tended to agree with incorrect suggestions made by the system
and suffered from over-reliance.
A possible reason for this over-reliance was that the
participants receiving Comprehensive explanations were
exposed to additional justifications, convincing them to go
along with the system even though they knew that the system
sometimes erred. The verbalizations of participants show the
persuasive
Comprehensive
explanation,
disregarding their own diagnostic hypothesis and agreeing with
an incorrect suggestion:
"I guess this thing knows more than me. The system knows
more than me. I'll accept [the diagnosis]." [C02]
"I would never have thought it would be this, but the
software is telling me it is. It's made me reconsider." [C04]
Further evidence for this persuasive effect of Why
explanations comes from the participants' trust ratings. Three
of the four participants trusted the system more after being
given Comprehensive explanations, while only one of the
Selective group showed an increase in trust (Fig. 7).
We wondered about what aspects of the Comprehensive
Why explanations could have persuaded participants to trust the
system. Our analysis showed that this seemed to occur in three
main ways. First, the explanations convinced participants that
the system used up-to-date and detailed medical knowledge to
determine the suggestion. For example:
"More, [the explanations] make me trust it more. It's proof
that the system is matching the information with digital
medical knowledge." [C04]
Second, participants thought that the system had a way to
determine salient features that mattered in a diagnosis:
"The things it gives me there - on that last screen - for the
most part, the salient features, they're the most important thing
when making a diagnosis of x or y." [C02]
These prominent features were thought to directly lead to a
diagnosis:
"There's a link behind that – an algorithm that links with
my patient's information. So there is an algorithm that knows
the latest research in medical knowledge – this test is positive,
so literature says that this test is related to specificity or
sensitivity with this disease." [C04]
Third, comprehensive explanations also seemed to inspire
greater trust because it led participants to believe that the
system used a method of reasoning similar to their own. Work
in automated and context-aware systems has suggested that a
user's trust is impacted by their perception of the system's
abilities and perception that the system follows their own
reasoning . The results from this study suggest the same
to hold true for users of clinical decision support systems:
"They do impact my trust. It seems to me like it follows the
system of, you know, the same system of decision-making that
we use." [C03]
Fig. 6. Number of instances in which participants using either the
Comprehensive or Selective version agreed (✓) or disagreed (✗) with the
system's suggestion, and whether those decisions were 'right' (black) or
'wrong' (red). The Comprehensive group agreed more frequently, while
the Selective group often disagreed, even if the suggestion was correct.
Fig. 5. Number of instances across all participants of either agreeing
or disagreeing with a suggestion when associated with a high or low
Confidence explanation. Participants agreed slightly more often with
suggestions associated with high percentages than with low ones.
Fig. 7. Trust ratings per participant before using the system (circles) and
after system use (crosses). Participants who saw Comprehensive Why
explanations (blue) usually increased their trust increased trust compared
to the Selective group (green).
We then turned our investigation back to the pattern of
wrong decisions made when participants disagreed with a
correct system suggestion, i.e. the flip-side of over-reliance.
Nearly one third of the decisions made by the Selective group
were disagreements, including three with correctly suggested
diagnoses, whereas the ratio of disagreements in the
Comprehensive group was much lower, and only one of them
was with a correct suggestion. This suggests that showing less
information in the explanations caused unwarranted selfreliance, that is, if not given enough information a user may
choose to rely on their own limited knowledge rather than that
of a CDSS.
We then looked at possible reasons for self-reliance and
how it related to trust. Because the selective explanations
showed only the matching examination results, these
participants assumed the CDSS did not consider the symptoms
or medical history of the patient:
"It's focusing solely on the investigation, the examinations,
whereas the way that I work, I focus more on the history and
the story that [the patients] give me. It only says exams, so it
does lower my confidence." [S03]
Thus, the Selective explanations caused the participants to
perceive that the system applied a reasoning process that is
inadequate compared to their own:
"I know it doesn't take into account the things that I would
have been looking for, for example the clinical details that I
would have thought were relevant. So it doesn't take that into
account so I know it's not thinking along the same lines that I
am." [S02]
The results presented here suggest that more information
presented as part of system explanations might lead users of a
CDSS to over-rely on the system and accept more incorrect
diagnoses. It is hence tempting to avoid explanations altogether
so as not to persuade users to trust suggestions blindly and
cause over-reliance. However, this approach might also be
counter-productive as less information in explanations led to
self-reliance and made participants choose wrong diagnoses;
this effect might be worsened if no explanations are provided
C. Desired Explanations (RQ3)
It has been suggested that explanations can help a user to
identify a system's mistakes but maybe different
information is needed than that provided in our study. We next
investigated the information that could be included in
explanations to support clinical users in assessing the reliability
of system suggestions. In this section, we consider the
statements made by all participants together, rather than by
group. From our thematic coding of the data four desirable
types of explanatory information emerged, each of which will
be described in turn.
1) How sure are you, and how do you know that?
Simply showing a Confidence explanation as a certainty
percentage proved problematic. Four participants made
comments that showed they did not understand what the
percentage meant. Indeed, there are many ways that the term
'certainty'
interpreted,
participants'
understanding of the percentage reflected this ambiguity. For
"So when it says the certainty is 19%, um… What does that
mean? Because it's got a diagnosis of Meniere's here and so is
that sort of like saying that the certainty of the diagnosis is a
19% chance of that being correct?" [S03]
In some instances, participants not only questioned the
meaning of the percentage but also showed that it was
important to them to understand how the system derived the
Confidence explanation:
"Where does this figure come from? Where does the
software calculate the low degree of this figure?" [C04]
The need for additional explanation appeared to be even
higher when the percentage was low or counter to what was
expected. Perhaps these questions are triggered by the surprise
experienced by the participants; it has been shown that
explanations become important 'when the user perceives an
anomaly' . The instances we observed show this kind of
critical thinking followed after a surprise, for example:
"The ones I would agree with are the ones with the lowest
degree of certainty and that kind of puzzles me because the
only time I had a plausible diagnosis it was something
completely unrelated, or something I hadn't even remotely
thought about and it had a high degree of certainty. You see
what I mean? That was the only time I had something in mind
and something completely different comes up with a pretty high
degree of certainty." [C04]
"It sounds like that's what it is, but I don't know why the
system is not certain." [C02]
In addition, it appeared that these participants were also
looking for Confidence explanations that would cover the
suggested diagnosis in relation to all other possibilities:
"Is that sort of like, that's basically it and all other things
are rejected?" [S03]
"Why some of it is 81% and some of it is 17%? Does it
mean it's not too sure but it is pointing to this [diagnosis]?"
"If this is the only diagnosis that it has come up with, then
why is the certainty so low?" [C02]
Providing a Confidence explanation for a suggestion in the
form of a percentage is common practice in CDSS design and
has been included in design guidelines for increasing system
intelligibility . However, our results suggest that this is not
enough. First, the system needs to clearly communicate what
the figure means; this could be done through careful selection
of terminology or a general definition available on request.
Second, system confidence should be shown for all possible
suggestions so that users can understand the suggestion being
made in context of the wider decision-making. Last, it is
important to show how confidence was derived from the
evidence presented, perhaps upon the user's request when the
percentage is felt to be low or surprising.
2) Does the disorder fit the suggestion?
Four participants also requested a disease description in
addition to the suggested diagnosis. The additional details
requested could be broken down into two types: risks and
symptoms, and a summary of a typical case.
Some of the statements made by three participants showed
that they wanted the system to show a list of common risk
factors, causes, or symptoms associated with the suggested
diagnosis, even when the system provided the facts it used to
make a diagnosis. For example:
"I'd want to see other things that would cause it. Because
it's some sort of stroke. So any other risk factors – patient
weight, history of heart disease, history of angina?" [C02]
"Okay, like... Having a little summary. Like, if it's
Meniere's, to say 'Features such as hearing loss and tinnitus
suggest Meniere's disease or Acoustic Neuroma.' Something
like that." [C03]
"So, I don't know what side it's on and I can't remember, I
think with Vestibular Schwannoma you tend to get it on one
side… That would've helped me make my diagnosis." [S01]
Another common request was for a description of a typical
case, for example:
"For example, it'd be a little blurb. They would be 90 years
old, they have this unexplained imbalance, all other tests are
normal, all other things have been ruled out, it's for days
rather than minutes that she gets these intermittent dizziness
things, and then it would be easy to be like 'she fits this
criteria, this criteria, and this criteria, so I believe it's this
diagnosis.'" [S02]
This suggests that users could benefit from being able to
verify that the suggestion does indeed correspond with the
suggested diagnosis. This seems especially important if the
user lacks experience in the domain yet still carries the
responsibility of making the final diagnostic decision. It
appears that providing risk factors and symptoms could help
clinicians identify whether the suggestion fits the described
disorder, thereby double-checking the system's reasoning. The
typical case information, on the other hand, could help them to
assess how much the suggestion fits – whether this is a typical
or atypical presentation of the disorder.
3) Why, in detail?
The Why explanations provided a list of the patient
information that led to the suggested diagnosis, but four
participants mentioned that three additional types of
information would be appreciated: the signs pointing against
the diagnosis, the pathological link between the findings and
the diagnosis, and the weights that the decision model assigns
to different parts of the patient's information.
In decision-making, it is important to weigh up the pros and
cons, and to seek both confirming and counter-evidence .
Statements made by participants in our study reiterated this,
pointing out that the system should also explain the arguments
against the current suggestion:
"So, in medicine it's not just the positives, it's the negatives
that you look out for as well. If I have a very clear positive, if
that was the only thing I had about the patient then that's fine,
but I'd have to have the strong negatives. Only then would I
accept a diagnosis." [S02]
Other instances showed that the list of facts was too
simplistic and needed to be supplemented by some deeper
chain of reasoning. Statements made by two participants
suggest that presenting the pathological link between the
patient information and the suggested diagnosis would be
desirable. For example:
"So, like, if it said 'Dix Hallpike shows rotational
nystagmus which is suggestive of autillis in the ear canal
causing patient's vertigo symptoms in combination with
positional element' then I would understand that." [C01]
Without the system describing the pathological link, the list
of matching information was seen as merely a regurgitation of
the information that was previously input:
"All it says is that they've got migraines, which they've
obviously come in and told me. It's triggered by diet, which it
could be. They've got some tinnitus and vertigo. So, it just tells
me what I know already. It doesn't explain why it's come to that
conclusion. See what I mean?" [C01]
Previous research on medical reasoning show that less
experienced physicians rely heavily on their 'knowledge of
underlying pathophysiology and anatomy,' or biomedical
knowledge, when trying to reach a diagnosis . In many of
the decision-making instances the participants, who did not
have expertise in balance disorders, drew biomedical
inferences from the provided patient data. These statements
suggest that if the system were to provide these connections for
them, the users would feel more confident in understanding if
the diagnosis is correct.
Finally, three participants requested an indication of how
much the features contributed to the diagnosis. These instances
showed a desire for insight on the decision model, specifically
the weights that were assigned to the various pieces of patient
information:
"I think if it explained the significance of positive findings
on an examination then I would be more willing to accept it."
These results seem to suggest that clinicians would
appreciate explanations that more closely reflect how they
reason and that also explain the underlying decision model
used to make these suggestions. This could lead to better
understanding why a particular suggestion was made; however,
this also has be carefully balanced against leading users to
over-rely on the diagnosis.
4) Differential diagnosis
A differential diagnosis is, simply put, an alternative
diagnosis that a physician tries to 'rule out' or disprove. In
effect, there is a process of elimination in this reasoning
procedure, instead of using inference from symptoms. This is
associated with, but distinct from, wanting both positive and
negative evidence for a diagnosis. In one quarter of the
suggestions made by the system, participants desired the
system to follow or show this procedure:
"It would be helpful to sort of say: 'The second differential
is xyz and these are the things which it fulfills. But the Hallpike
result is normal and therefore it seems against it.'" [S02]
The instances in which it was mentioned often coincided
with uncertainty on the clinician's behalf:
"As I said before, when I'm not sure of the diagnosis I
would want it to suggest other things it could be." [C02]
"So it's sometimes quite useful to look at differential
diagnoses because it kind of prompts you to think 'Actually,
yeah, that might be a possibility.'" [S03]
Moreover, a differential was seen as a way to determine if
the system was correct:
"Lots of things match lots of disease profiles. That's why we
work with a differential diagnosis." [C01]
These results suggest that showing competing hypotheses –
a differential diagnosis – is a necessary explanation to include
in any CDSS designed to aid a user in assessing a suggestion.
Providing one or more differentials would enable the user to
make a more informed decision by weighing the positives and
negatives of each disorder. A system capable of computing and
presenting differential diagnoses in addition to a primary
diagnosis would allow the clinical user to explore and examine
the broader picture.
V. DISCUSSION
We acknowledge some limitations of our study. First, our
results are limited in their generalizability due to the low
sample of participants, despite our best efforts. Other work
endeavoring to target primary care physicians would do well to
consider the difficulty in recruiting these end users, especially
as their time constraints places considerable burdens in
involving them in any research projects. Second, our study did
not follow a full factorial experiment which also would have
required a large number of participants to validate any
hypotheses. At this stage, to inform a model of how trust,
reliance and explanations are possibly related, we focused on a
small set of aspects aimed at gathering a snapshot of the
decision-making process of clinicians interacting with a CDSS.
Further studies are required to include other contextual factors
and considerations to flesh out this model, and larger studies
are needed to validate this slowly evolving model in clinical
Although there are limitations, our results provide
preliminary indications on some important points. Our study
has both practical implications regarding CDSS design and the
future direction of research in this area, arising from a greater
understanding of the relationship between trust and reliance,
more knowledge about the role of explanations in trust and
reliance, and how to create better explanations to help users
assess system reliability.
First, our findings indicate a strong relationship between a
user's trust in a CDSS and their reliance on the system. CDSS
users who trust the system highly are also likely to over-rely on
the system's suggestions, while users who distrust the system
are likely to rely on their own knowledge, even if it is poor.
This is an issue that is difficult to address. In the early stages of
system use, promoting user trust is often necessary in order for
the system to be adopted. However, as shown here, this trust
could then also lead to over-reliance and potentially dangerous
clinical outcomes. Thus, a system needs to inspire an
appropriate amount of trust but more work is needed to find
the right balance between trust and reliance.
This issue also needs to be considered in the wider context
of how trust in a system is established. Trust can also be
influenced by other factors in system use, such as previous
experience with similar systems, personal characteristics of the
user, and the reliability of the system's reasoning. Previous
work has suggested that presenting metrics about the accuracy
of the decision model – like the sensitivity and specificity –
could provide the user with a more rounded understanding of
the system's reliability . Given the confusion regarding the
Confidence explanation, it is possible that these metrics would
provide additional help to clinician to calibrate their trust and
reliance. However, we currently do not know enough about
these aspects and their relationship to trust and, in turn,
Second, our results indicate that explanations have effects
on trust and reliance. Whilst a more detailed explanation may
promote over-reliance, we argue that providing no explanation
at all is not a viable option as they are desirable and necessary.
Our results showed that without providing explanations there is
a danger that users will rely too much on themselves because
they do not understand how the system works. The four new
explanation types identified in this study suggest that
explanations are a necessity for users in order for them to
accurately assess the veracity of a CDSS's suggestion.
However, more work is needed to establish the impact of
explanations on perceived intelligibility of the prototype and
the link to trust and reliance.
Finally, our work has suggested the need for more and
better CDSS explanations. This raises questions about how
these explanations should be communicated in the interface as
well as their effects of trust and reliance. Explanations are
designed and hence choices have to be made as to how much,
when, and how this information is presented, not only to avoid
over-reliance, but also to avoid information overload. Only
careful and extensive evaluation with users will be able to
establish appropriate design guidelines. Furthermore, these
user studies also will be able to tell us more about the impact of
these new explanation types on the trust and reliance of users.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented the results of an
exploratory user study investigating the effects of explanations
on trust and reliance of CDSS suggestions, through a prototype
developed as part of the EMBalance project.
We have shown that:
• Confidence explanations did not seem to sway participants
to increase their trust and reliance on the system. However,
explaining more about how sure the system is could still be
helpful to clinicians to assess reliability;
• Comprehensive Why explanations promoted over-reliance
while Selective Why explanations promoted self-reliance,
and both can lead to incorrect diagnoses. This seemed to be
because explanations had an effect on trust in the system.
CDSS design will need to strike a careful balance to result
in appropriate trust.
• Clinicians
appropriateness of a system's suggestion if provided with
explanations that allow them to verify the disorder fits the
suggested diagnosis, to follow the reasoning to obtain the
suggested diagnosis, and be shown differential diagnoses.
However, more work is needed to understand the impact of
these explanation types on intelligibility, trust and reliance.
Ultimately, the findings of this research take a first step
toward understanding how explanations can support healthcare
professionals in better decision-making with a CDSS so that
the true benefits of this collaborative work can be realized by
clinicians and patients alike:
"Working in general practice is a hard job. I sit here on my
own. I have to use my own knowledge. So this is like having
another person. I think that's very good." [C03]
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the participants of our study. This research has
been supported by EU FP7, EMBalance project grant number