DeepFM: A Factorization-Machine based Neural Network for CTR Prediction
Huifeng Guo∗1 , Ruiming Tang2, Yunming Ye†1, Zhenguo Li2, Xiuqiang He2
1Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2Noah’s Ark Research Lab, Huawei, China
 , , 2{tangruiming, li.zhenguo, hexiuqiang}@huawei.com
Learning sophisticated feature interactions behind
user behaviors is critical in maximizing CTR for
recommender systems. Despite great progress, existing methods seem to have a strong bias towards
low- or high-order interactions, or require expertise feature engineering. In this paper, we show
that it is possible to derive an end-to-end learning model that emphasizes both low- and highorder feature interactions.
The proposed model,
DeepFM, combines the power of factorization machines for recommendation and deep learning for
feature learning in a new neural network architecture. Compared to the latest Wide & Deep model
from Google, DeepFM has a shared input to its
“wide” and “deep” parts, with no need of feature
engineering besides raw features. Comprehensive
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of DeepFM over the existing models for CTR prediction, on both benchmark data and commercial data.
Introduction
The prediction of click-through rate (CTR) is critical in recommender system, where the task is to estimate the probability a user will click on a recommended item. In many recommender systems the goal is to maximize the number of
clicks, so the items returned to a user should be ranked by
estimated CTR; while in other application scenarios such as
online advertising it is also important to improve revenue, so
the ranking strategy can be adjusted as CTR×bid across all
candidates, where “bid” is the beneﬁt the system receives if
the item is clicked by a user. In either case, it is clear that the
key is in estimating CTR correctly.
It is important for CTR prediction to learn implicit feature
interactions behind user click behaviors. By our study in a
mainstream apps market, we found that people often download apps for food delivery at meal-time, suggesting that the
(order-2) interaction between app category and time-stamp
∗This work is done when Huifeng Guo worked as intern at
Noah’s Ark Research Lab, Huawei.
†Corresponding Author.
Figure 1: Wide & deep architecture of DeepFM. The wide and deep
component share the same input raw feature vector, which enables
DeepFM to learn low- and high-order feature interactions simultaneously from the input raw features.
can be used as a signal for CTR. As a second observation,
male teenagers like shooting games and RPG games, which
means that the (order-3) interaction of app category, user gender and age is another signal for CTR. In general, such interactions of features behind user click behaviors can be highly
sophisticated, where both low- and high-order feature interactions should play important roles. According to the insights
of the Wide & Deep model [Cheng et al., 2016] from google,
considering low- and high-order feature interactions simultaneously brings additional improvement over the cases of considering either alone.
The key challenge is in effectively modeling feature interactions. Some feature interactions can be easily understood,
thus can be designed by experts (like the instances above).
However, most other feature interactions are hidden in data
and difﬁcult to identify a priori (for instance, the classic association rule “diaper and beer” is mined from data, instead
of discovering by experts), which can only be captured automatically by machine learning. Even for easy-to-understand
interactions, it seems unlikely for experts to model them exhaustively, especially when the number of features is large.
Despite their simplicity, generalized linear models, such as
FTRL [McMahan et al., 2013], have shown decent performance in practice. However, a linear model lacks the ability to learn feature interactions, and a common practice is
to manually include pairwise feature interactions in its feature vector. Such a method is hard to generalize to model
high-order feature interactions or those never or rarely appear
in the training data [Rendle, 2010]. Factorization Machines
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
(FM) [Rendle, 2010] model pairwise feature interactions as
inner product of latent vectors between features and show
very promising results. While in principle FM can model
high-order feature interaction, in practice usually only order-
2 feature interactions are considered due to high complexity.
As a powerful approach to learning feature representation, deep neural networks have the potential to learn sophisticated feature interactions.
Some ideas extend CNN
and RNN for CTR predition [Liu et al., 2015; Zhang et
al., 2014], but CNN-based models are biased to the interactions between neighboring features while RNN-based
models are more suitable for click data with sequential dependency. [Zhang et al., 2016] studies feature representations and proposes Factorization-machine supported Neural
Network (FNN). This model pre-trains FM before applying
DNN, thus limited by the capability of FM. Feature interaction is studied in [Qu et al., 2016], by introducing a product layer between embedding layer and fully-connected layer,
and proposing the Product-based Neural Network (PNN). As
noted in [Cheng et al., 2016], PNN and FNN, like other deep
models, capture little low-order feature interactions, which
are also essential for CTR prediction. To model both lowand high-order feature interactions, [Cheng et al., 2016] proposes an interesting hybrid network structure (Wide & Deep)
that combines a linear (“wide”) model and a deep model. In
this model, two different inputs are required for the “wide
part” and “deep part”, respectively, and the input of “wide
part” still relies on expertise feature engineering.
One can see that existing models are biased to low- or highorder feature interaction, or rely on feature engineering. In
this paper, we show it is possible to derive a learning model
that is able to learn feature interactions of all orders in an endto-end manner, without any feature engineering besides raw
features. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a new neural network model DeepFM
(Figure 1) that integrates the architectures of FM and
deep neural networks (DNN). It models low-order feature interactions like FM and models high-order feature interactions like DNN. Unlike the wide & deep
model [Cheng et al., 2016], DeepFM can be trained endto-end without any feature engineering.
• DeepFM can be trained efﬁciently because its wide part
and deep part, unlike [Cheng et al., 2016], share the
same input and also the embedding vector. In [Cheng et
al., 2016], the input vector can be of huge size as it includes manually designed pairwise feature interactions
in the input vector of its wide part, which also greatly
increases its complexity.
• We evaluate DeepFM on both benchmark data and commercial data, which shows consistent improvement over
existing models for CTR prediction.
Our Approach
Suppose the data set for training consists of n instances
(χ, y), where χ is an m-ﬁelds data record usually involving
a pair of user and item, and y ∈{0, 1} is the associated label indicating user click behaviors (y = 1 means the user
clicked the item, and y = 0 otherwise). χ may include categorical ﬁelds (e.g., gender, location) and continuous ﬁelds
(e.g., age). Each categorical ﬁeld is represented as a vector of one-hot encoding, and each continuous ﬁeld is represented as the value itself, or a vector of one-hot encoding after discretization. Then, each instance is converted to (x, y)
where x = [xfield1, xfield2, ..., xfiledj, ..., xfieldm] is a ddimensional vector, with xfieldj being the vector representation of the j-th ﬁeld of χ. Normally, x is high-dimensional
and extremely sparse. The task of CTR prediction is to build a
prediction model ˆy = CTR model(x) to estimate the probability of a user clicking a speciﬁc app in a given context.
We aim to learn both low- and high-order feature interactions.
To this end, we propose a Factorization-Machine based neural network (DeepFM). As depicted in Figure 11, DeepFM
consists of two components, FM component and deep component, that share the same input. For feature i, a scalar wi
is used to weigh its order-1 importance, a latent vector Vi is
used to measure its impact of interactions with other features.
Vi is fed in FM component to model order-2 feature interactions, and fed in deep component to model high-order feature
interactions. All parameters, including wi, Vi, and the network parameters (W (l), b(l) below) are trained jointly for the
combined prediction model:
ˆy = sigmoid(yF M + yDNN),
where ˆy ∈(0, 1) is the predicted CTR, yF M is the output of
FM component, and yDNN is the output of deep component.
FM Component
Figure 2: The architecture of FM.
The FM component is a factorization machine, which
is proposed in [Rendle, 2010] to learn feature interactions
for recommendation. Besides a linear (order-1) interactions
among features, FM models pairwise (order-2) feature interactions as inner product of respective feature latent vectors.
1In all ﬁgures of this paper, a Normal Connection in black refers
to a connection with weight to be learned; a Weight-1 Connection,
red arrow, is a connection with weight 1 by default; Embedding,
blue dashed arrow, means a latent vector to be learned; Addition
means adding all input together; Product, including Inner- and
Outer-Product, means the output of this unit is the product of two
input vector; Sigmoid Function is used as the output function in
CTR prediction; Activation Functions, such as relu and tanh, are
used for non-linearly transforming the signal;The yellow and blue
circles in the sparse features layer represent one and zero in one-hot
encoding of the input, respectively.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
It can capture order-2 feature interactions much more effectively than previous approaches especially when the dataset is
sparse. In previous approaches, the parameter of an interaction of features i and j can be trained only when feature i and
feature j both appear in the same data record. While in FM, it
is measured via the inner product of their latent vectors Vi and
Vj. Thanks to this ﬂexible design, FM can train latent vector
Vi (Vj) whenever i (or j) appears in a data record. Therefore,
feature interactions, which are never or rarely appeared in the
training data, are better learnt by FM.
As Figure 2 shows, the output of FM is the summation of
an Addition unit and a number of Inner Product units:
yF M = ⟨w, x⟩+
⟨Vi, Vj⟩xi · xj,
where w ∈Rd and Vi ∈Rk (k is given)2. The Addition
unit (⟨w, x⟩) reﬂects the importance of order-1 features, and
the Inner Product units represent the impact of order-2 feature
interactions.
Deep Component
Figure 3: The architecture of DNN.
The deep component is a feed-forward neural network,
which is used to learn high-order feature interactions. As
shown in Figure 3, a data record (a vector) is fed into the neural network. Compared to neural networks with image [He
et al., 2016] or audio [Boulanger-Lewandowski et al., 2013]
data as input, which is purely continuous and dense, the input of CTR prediction is quite different, which requires a
new network architecture design. Speciﬁcally, the raw feature input vector for CTR prediction is usually highly sparse3,
super high-dimensional4, categorical-continuous-mixed, and
grouped in ﬁelds (e.g., gender, location, age). This suggests
an embedding layer to compress the input vector to a lowdimensional, dense real-value vector before further feeding
into the ﬁrst hidden layer, otherwise the network can be overwhelming to train.
Figure 4 highlights the sub-network structure from the input layer to the embedding layer. We would like to point out
the two interesting features of this network structure: 1) while
the lengths of different input ﬁeld vectors can be different,
2We omit a constant offset for simplicity.
3Only one entry is non-zero for each ﬁeld vector.
4E.g., in an app store of billion users, the one ﬁeld vector for user
ID is already of billion dimensions.
Figure 4: The structure of the embedding layer
their embeddings are of the same size (k); 2) the latent feature vectors (V ) in FM now serve as network weights which
are learned and used to compress the input ﬁeld vectors to the
embedding vectors. In [Zhang et al., 2016], V is pre-trained
by FM and used as initialization. In this work, rather than using the latent feature vectors of FM to initialize the networks
as in [Zhang et al., 2016], we include the FM model as part of
our overall learning architecture, in addition to the other DNN
model. As such, we eliminate the need of pre-training by FM
and instead jointly train the overall network in an end-to-end
manner. Denote the output of the embedding layer as:
a(0) = [e1, e2, ..., em],
where ei is the embedding of i-th ﬁeld and m is the number
of ﬁelds. Then, a(0) is fed into the deep neural network, and
the forward process is:
a(l+1) = σ(W (l)a(l) + b(l)),
where l is the layer depth and σ is an activation function. a(l),
W (l), b(l) are the output, model weight, and bias of the l-th
layer. After that, a dense real-value feature vector is generated, which is ﬁnally fed into the sigmoid function for CTR
prediction: yDNN = W |H|+1 · a|H| + b|H|+1, where |H| is
the number of hidden layers.
It is worth pointing out that FM component and deep component share the same feature embedding, which brings two
important beneﬁts: 1) it learns both low- and high-order feature interactions from raw features; 2) there is no need for expertise feature engineering of the input, as required in Wide
& Deep [Cheng et al., 2016].
Relationship with Other Neural Networks
Inspired by the enormous success of deep learning in various applications, several deep models for CTR prediction
are developed recently. This section compares the proposed
DeepFM with existing deep models for CTR prediction.
As Figure 5 (left) shows, FNN is a FM-initialized feedforward neural network [Zhang et al., 2016]. The FM pretraining strategy results in two limitations: 1) the embedding
parameters might be over affected by FM; 2) the efﬁciency is
reduced by the overhead introduced by the pre-training stage.
In addition, FNN captures only high-order feature interactions. In contrast, DeepFM needs no pre-training and learns
both high- and low-order feature interactions.
For the purpose of capturing high-order feature interactions,
PNN imposes a product layer between the embedding layer
and the ﬁrst hidden layer [Qu et al., 2016]. According to
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Figure 5: The architectures of existing deep models for CTR prediction: FNN, PNN, Wide & Deep Model
Table 1: Comparison of deep models for CTR prediction
High-order
No Feature
Pre-training
Engineering
Wide & Deep
different types of product operation, there are three variants:
IPNN, OPNN, and PNN∗, where IPNN is based on inner
product of vectors, OPNN is based on outer product, and
PNN∗is based on both inner and outer products. Like FNN,
all PNNs ignore low-order feature interactions.
Wide & Deep
Wide & Deep (Figure 5 (right)) is proposed by Google to
model low- and high-order feature interactions simultaneously. As shown in [Cheng et al., 2016], there is a need for expertise feature engineering on the input to the “wide” part (for
instance, cross-product of users’ install apps and impression
apps in app recommendation). In contrast, DeepFM needs
no such expertise knowledge to handle the input by learning
directly from the input raw features.
A straightforward extension to this model is replacing LR
by FM (we also evaluate this extension in Section 3). This
extension is similar to DeepFM, but DeepFM shares the feature embedding between the FM and deep component. The
sharing strategy of feature embedding inﬂuences (in backpropagate manner) the feature representation by both lowand high-order feature interactions, which models the representation more precisely.
Summarizations
To summarize, the relationship between DeepFM and the
other deep models in four aspects is presented in Table 1. As
can be seen, DeepFM is the only model that requires no pretraining and no feature engineering, and captures both lowand high-order feature interactions.
Experiments
In this section, we compare our proposed DeepFM and the
other state-of-the-art models empirically. The evaluation result indicates that our proposed DeepFM is more effective
than any other state-of-the-art model and the efﬁciency of
DeepFM is comparable to the best ones among all the deep
Experiment Setup
We evaluate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our proposed
DeepFM on the following two datasets.
1) Criteo Dataset: Criteo dataset 5 includes 45 million users’
click records. There are 13 continuous features and 26 categorical ones. We split the dataset into two parts: 90% is for
training, while the rest 10% is for testing.
2) Company∗Dataset: In order to verify the performance of
DeepFM in real industrial CTR prediction, we conduct experiment on Company∗dataset. We collect 7 consecutive days
of users’ click records from the game center of the Company∗
App Store for training, and the next 1 day for testing. There
are around 1 billion records in the whole collected dataset.
In this dataset, there are app features (e.g., identiﬁcation, category, and etc), user features (e.g., user’s downloaded apps,
and etc), and context features (e.g., operation time, and etc).
Evaluation Metrics
We use two evaluation metrics in our experiments: AUC
(Area Under ROC) and Logloss (cross entropy).
Model Comparison
We compare 9 models in our experiments: LR, FM, FNN,
PNN (three variants), Wide & Deep (two variants), and
DeepFM. In the Wide & Deep model, for the purpose of eliminating feature engineering effort, we also adapt the original
Wide & Deep model by replacing LR by FM as the wide part.
In order to distinguish these two variants of Wide & Deep, we
name them LR & DNN and FM & DNN, respectively.6
Parameter Settings
To evaluate the models on Criteo dataset, we follow the parameter settings in [Qu et al., 2016] for FNN and PNN: (1)
dropout: 0.5; (2) network structure: 400-400-400; (3) optimizer: Adam; (4) activation function: tanh for IPNN, relu for
other deep models. To be fair, our proposed DeepFM uses
the same setting. The optimizers of LR and FM are FTRL
and Adam respectively, and the latent dimension of FM is 10.
To achieve the best performance for each individual model
on Company∗dataset, we conducted carefully parameter
study, which is discussed in Section 3.3.
5 
6We do not use the Wide & Deep API released by Google, as
the efﬁciency of that implementation is very low. We implement
Wide & Deep by ourselves by simplifying it with shared optimizer
for both deep and wide part.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Performance Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the models listed in Section 3.1 on
the two datasets to compare their effectiveness and efﬁciency.
Efﬁciency Comparison
The efﬁciency of deep learning models is important to realworld applications.
We compare the efﬁciency of different models on Criteo dataset by the following formula:
|training time of deep CT R model|
|training time of LR|
. The results are shown in
Figure 6, including the tests on CPU (left) and GPU (right),
where we have the following observations: 1) pre-training
of FNN makes it less efﬁcient; 2) Although the speed up of
IPNN and PNN∗on GPU is higher than the other models,
they are still computationally expensive because of the inefﬁcient inner product operations; 3) The DeepFM achieves
almost the most efﬁcient in both tests.
Figure 6: Time comparison.
Effectiveness Comparison
The performance for CTR prediction of different models on
Criteo dataset and Company∗dataset is shown in Table 2
(note that the numbers in the table are averaged by 5 runs of
training-testing, and the variances of AUC and Logloss are in
the order of 1E-5), where we have the following observations:
• Learning feature interactions improves the performance
of CTR prediction model. This observation is from the
fact that LR (which is the only model that does not consider feature interactions) performs worse than the other
models. As the best model, DeepFM outperforms LR
by 0.82% and 2.6% in terms of AUC (1.1% and 4.0% in
terms of Logloss) on Company∗and Criteo datasets.
• Learning high- and low-order feature interactions simultaneously and properly improves the performance
of CTR prediction model.
DeepFM outperforms the
models that learn only low-order feature interactions
(namely, FM) or high-order feature interactions (namely,
FNN, IPNN, OPNN, PNN∗). Compared to the second
best model, DeepFM achieves more than 0.34% and
0.41% in terms of AUC (0.34% and 0.76% in terms of
Logloss) on Company∗and Criteo datasets.
• Learning high- and low-order feature interactions simultaneously while sharing the same feature embedding for high- and low-order feature interactions learning improves the performance of CTR prediction model.
DeepFM outperforms the models that learn high- and
low-order feature interactions using separate feature embeddings (namely, LR & DNN and FM & DNN). Compared to these two models, DeepFM achieves more than
0.48% and 0.44% in terms of AUC (0.58% and 0.80%
in terms of Logloss) on Company∗and Criteo datasets.
Table 2: Performance on CTR prediction.
Overall, our proposed DeepFM model beats the competitors by more than 0.34% and 0.35% in terms of AUC and
Logloss on Company∗dataset, respectively. In fact, a small
improvement in ofﬂine AUC evaluation is likely to lead to a
signiﬁcant increase in online CTR. As reported in [Cheng et
al., 2016], compared with LR, Wide & Deep improves AUC
by 0.275% (ofﬂine) and the improvement of online CTR is
3.9%. The daily turnover of Company∗’s App Store is millions of dollars, therefore even several percents lift in CTR
brings extra millions of dollars each year.
Moreover, we
also conduct t-test between our proposed DeepFM and the
other compared models.
The p-value of DeepFM against
FM & DNN under Logloss metric on Company∗is less than
1.5 × 10−3, and the others’ p-values on both datasets are less
than 10−6, which indicates that our improvement over existing models is signiﬁcant.
Hyper-Parameter Study
We study the impact of different hyper-parameters of different deep models, on Company∗dataset. The order is: 1) activation functions; 2) dropout rate; 3) number of neurons per
layer; 4) number of hidden layers; 5) network shape.
Activation Function
According to [Qu et al., 2016], relu and tanh are more suitable for deep models than sigmoid. In this paper, we compare
the performance of deep models when applying relu and tanh.
As shown in Figure 7, relu is more appropriate than tanh for
all the deep models, except for IPNN. Possible reason is that
relu induces sparsity.
Figure 7: AUC and Logloss comparison of activation functions.
Dropout [Srivastava et al., 2014] refers to the probability that
a neuron is kept in the network. Dropout is a regularization
technique to compromise the precision and the complexity of
the neural network. We set the dropout to be 1.0, 0.9, 0.8, 0.7,
0.6, 0.5. As shown in Figure 8, all the models are able to reach
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
their own best performance when the dropout is properly set
(from 0.6 to 0.9). The result shows that adding reasonable
randomness to model can strengthen model’s robustness.
Figure 8: AUC and Logloss comparison of dropout.
Number of Neurons per Layer
When other factors remain the same, increasing the number
of neurons per layer introduces complexity. As we can observe from Figure 9, increasing the number of neurons does
not always bring beneﬁt. For instance, DeepFM performs stably when the number of neurons per layer is increased from
400 to 800; even worse, OPNN performs worse when we increase the number of neurons from 400 to 800. This is because an over-complicated model is easy to overﬁt. In our
dataset, 200 or 400 neurons per layer is a good choice.
Figure 9: AUC and Logloss comparison of number of neurons.
Number of Hidden Layers
As presented in Figure 10, increasing number of hidden layers improves the performance of the models at the beginning,
however, their performance is degraded if the number of hidden layers keeps increasing, because of overﬁtting.
Figure 10: AUC and Logloss comparison of number of layers.
Network Shape
We test four different network shapes: constant, increasing,
decreasing, and diamond.
When we change the network
shape, we ﬁx the number of hidden layers and the total number of neurons. For instance, when the number of hidden layers is 3 and the total number of neurons is 600, then four different shapes are: constant (200-200-200), increasing (100-
200-300), decreasing (300-200-100), and diamond (150-300-
150). As we can see from Figure 11, the “constant” network
shape is empirically better than the other three options, which
is consistent with previous studies [Larochelle et al., 2009].
Figure 11: AUC and Logloss comparison of network shape.
Related Work
In this paper, a new deep neural network is proposed for CTR
prediction. The most related domains are CTR prediction and
deep learning in recommender system.
CTR prediction plays an important role in recommender
system [Richardson et al., 2007; Juan et al., 2016]. Besides
generalized linear models and FM, a few other models are
proposed for CTR prediction, such as tree-based model [He et
al., 2014], tensor based model [Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme,
2010], support vector machine [Chang et al., 2010], and
bayesian model [Graepel et al., 2010].
The other related domain is deep learning in recommender
systems. In Section 1 and Section 2.2, several deep learning models for CTR prediction are already mentioned, thus
we do not discuss about them here.
Several deep learning models are proposed in recommendation tasks other than
CTR prediction . [Salakhutdinov et al., 2007; Sedhain et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2015] propose to improve Collaborative Filtering via deep learning. The authors of [Wang and Wang, 2014;
van den Oord et al., 2013] extract content feature by deep
learning to improve the performance of music recommendation. [Chen et al., 2016] devises a deep learning network to
consider both image feature and basic feature of display adverting. [Covington et al., 2016] develops a two-stage deep
learning framework for YouTube video recommendation.
Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed DeepFM, a factorization-machine
based neural network for CTR prediction, to overcome the
shortcomings of the state-of-the-art models. DeepFM trains
a deep component and an FM component jointly. It gains
performance improvement from these advantages: 1) it does
not need any pre-training; 2) it learns both high- and loworder feature interactions; 3) it introduces a sharing strategy of feature embedding to avoid feature engineering. The
experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate that 1)
DeepFM outperforms the state-of-the-art models in terms of
AUC and Logloss on both datasets; 2) The efﬁciency of
DeepFM is comparable to the most efﬁcient deep model in
the state-of-the-art.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by NSFC under Grant
61572158, National Key Technology R&D Program
of MOST China under Grant No. 2014BAL05B06, Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant No.
JSGG20150512145714247 and JCYJ20160330163900579.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)