Unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing
what machines really learn
Sebastian Lapuschkin1, Stephan Wäldchen2, Alexander Binder3, Grégoire Montavon2, Wojciech Samek1 &
Klaus-Robert Müller2,4,5
Current learning machines have successfully solved hard application problems, reaching high
accuracy and displaying seemingly intelligent behavior. Here we apply recent techniques for
explaining decisions of state-of-the-art learning machines and analyze various tasks from
computer vision and arcade games. This showcases a spectrum of problem-solving behaviors
ranging from naive and short-sighted, to well-informed and strategic. We observe that
standard performance evaluation metrics can be oblivious to distinguishing these diverse
problem solving behaviors. Furthermore, we propose our semi-automated Spectral Relevance
Analysis that provides a practically effective way of characterizing and validating the behavior
of nonlinear learning machines. This helps to assess whether a learned model indeed delivers
reliably for the problem that it was conceived for. Furthermore, our work intends to add a
voice of caution to the ongoing excitement about machine intelligence and pledges to
evaluate and judge some of these recent successes in a more nuanced manner.
 
1 Department of Video Coding & Analytics, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, Einsteinufer 37, 10587 Berlin, Germany. 2 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Technische Universität Berlin, Marchstr. 23, 10587 Berlin, Germany. 3 ISTD Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8
Somapah Rd, Singapore 487372, Singapore. 4 Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-ku Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea. 5 Max Planck Institut für Informatik, Campus E1 4, Stuhlsatzenhausweg, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence and requests for
materials should be addressed to W.S. (email: ) or to K.-R.Mül. (email: )
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:1096 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1234567890():,;
rtiﬁcial intelligence systems, based on machine learning
(ML), are increasingly assisting our daily life. They enable
industry and the sciences to convert a never ending
stream of data—which per se is not informative—into information that may be helpful and actionable. ML has become a basis of
many services and products that we use.
While it is broadly accepted that the nonlinear ML methods
being used as predictors to maximize some prediction accuracy,
are effectively (with few exceptions, such as shallow decision
trees) black boxes; this intransparency regarding explanation and
reasoning is preventing a wider usage of nonlinear prediction
methods in the sciences (see Fig. 1a why understanding nonlinear
learning machines is difﬁcult). Due to this black-box character, a
scientist may not be able to extract deep insights about what the
nonlinear system has learned, despite the urge to unveil the
underlying natural structures. In particular, the conclusion in
many scientiﬁc ﬁelds has so far been to prefer linear models1–4 in
order to rather gain insight (e.g. regression coefﬁcients and correlations) even if this comes at the expense of predictivity.
Recently, impressive applications of ML in the context of
complex games (Atari games5,6, Go7–9, Texas hold’em poker10)
have led to speculations about the advent of ML systems
embodying true “intelligence”. In this note we would like to argue
that for validating and assessing machine behavior, independent
of the application domain (sciences, games, etc.), we need to go
beyond predictive performance measures, such as the test set
error, towards understanding the AI system.
When assessing machine behavior, the general task solving
ability must be evaluated (e.g. by measuring the classiﬁcation
accuracy, or the total reward of a reinforcement learning system).
At the same time it is important to comprehend the decisionmaking process itself. In other words, transparency of the what
and why in a decision of a nonlinear machine becomes very
effective for the essential task of judging whether the learned
strategy is valid and generalizable or whether the model has based
its decision on a spurious correlation in the training data (see
Fig. 2a). In psychology the reliance on such spurious correlations
is typically referred to as the Clever Hans phenomenon11. A
model implementing a ‘Clever Hans’-type decision strategy will
likely fail to provide correct classiﬁcation and thereby usefulness
once it is deployed in the real world, where spurious or artifactual
correlations may not be present.
While feature selection has traditionally explained the model
by identifying features relevant for the whole ensemble of training
data12 or some class prototype13–16, it is often necessary, especially for nonlinear models, to focus the explanation on the
predictions of individual examples (see Fig. 1b). A recent series of
work13,17–22 has now begun to explain the predictions of nonlinear ML methods in a wide set of complex real-world problems
(e.g. refs. 23–26). Individual explanations can take a variety of
forms: An ideal (and so far not available) comprehensive explanation would extract the whole causal chain from input to output.
In most works, reduced forms of explanation are considered,
typically, collection of scores indicating the importance of each
input pixel/feature for the prediction (note that computing an
explanation does not require to understand neurons individually).
These scores can be rendered as visual heatmaps (relevance maps)
that can be interpreted by the user.
In the following we make use of this recent body of
work, in particular, the layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP)
Linear classification
Sepal width (cm)
Sepal width (cm)
Iris setosa (red)
Iris virginica (green)
Iris versicolor (blue)
Linear classification
S1: sepal width
S2: sepal width
S2: sepal width
V1: sepal width
Explaining individual classification decisions
Non-linear classification
S1: sepal width & length
V1: sepal length
Important features for
individual predictions
Important features for
whole ensemble of data
‘‘To detect a boat look
in the middle of the picture!’’
"To detect this boat look
at the wheelhouse!"
‘‘To detect this boat look
at the bow!’’
Non-linear classification
Sepal length (cm)
Sepal length (cm)
‘‘To detect this boat look
at the sails!’’
Fig. 1 Explanation of a linear and non-linear classiﬁer. a In linear models the importance of each feature is the same for every data point. It can be expressed
in the weight vector perpendicular to the decision surface where more important features have larger weights. In nonlinear models the important features
can be different for every data point. In this example, the classiﬁers are trained to separate “Iris setosa” (red dots) from “Iris virginica” (green dots) and
“Iris versicolor” (blue dots). The linear model for all examples uses the sepal width as discriminative feature, whereas the non-linear classiﬁer uses
different combinations of sepal width and sepal length for every data point. b Different features can be important (here for a deep neural network) to
detect a ship in an image. For some ships, the wheelhouse is a good indicator for class “ship”, for others the sails or the bow is more important. Therefore
individual predictions exhibit very different heatmaps (showing the most relevant locations for the predictor). In feature selection, one identiﬁes salient
features for the whole ensemble of training data. For ships (in contrast to e.g. airplanes) the most salient region (average of individual heatmaps) is the
center of the image
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:1096 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
method18 (cf. section “Layer-wise relevance propagation”), and
discuss qualitatively and quantitatively, for showcase scenarios,
the effectiveness of explaining decisions for judging whether
learning machines exhibit valid and useful problem solving
abilities. Explaining decisions provides an easily interpretable and
computationally efﬁcient way of assessing the classiﬁcation
behavior from few examples (cf. Figure 2a). It can be used as a
complement or practical alternative to a more comprehensive
Turing test27 or other theoretical measures of machine intelligence28–30. In addition, the present work contributes by further
embedding these explanation methods into our framework
SpRAy (spectral relevance analysis) that we present in section
“Methods”. SpRAy, on the basis of heatmaps, identiﬁes in a semiautomated manner a wide spectrum of learned decision behaviors
and thus helps to detect the unexpected or undesirable ones. This
allows one to systematically investigate the classiﬁer behavior on
whole large-scale datasets—an analysis which would otherwise be
practically unfeasible with the human tightly in the loop. Our
semi-automated decision anomaly detector thus addresses the last
mile of explanation by providing an end-to-end method to
evaluate ML models beyond test set accuracy or reward metrics.
Identifying valid and invalid problem-solving behaviors. In this
section, we will investigate several showcases that demonstrate the
effectiveness of explanation methods like LRP and SpRAy for
understanding and validating the behavior of a learned model.
First, we provide an example where the learning machine
exploits an unexpected spurious correlation in the data to exhibit
what humans would refer to as “cheating”. The ﬁrst learning
machine is a model based on Fisher vectors (FV)31,32 trained on
the PASCAL VOC 2007 image dataset33 (see Supplementary
Note 5). The model and also its competitor, a pretrained deep
Horse-picture from Pascal VOC data set
Artiﬁcial picture of a car
Source tag
tag present
Not classiﬁed
Pinball - relevance during game play
Breakout - relevance during training
Relative relevance
Training epoch
Fig. 2 Assessing problem-solving capabilities of learning machines using explanation methods. a The Fisher vector classiﬁer trained on the PASCAL VOC
2007 data set focuses on a source tag present in about one-ﬁfth of the horse ﬁgures. Removing the tag also removes the ability to classify the picture as a
horse. Furthermore, inserting the tag on a car image changes the classiﬁcation from car to horse. b A neural network learned to play the Atari Pinball game.
The model moves the pinball into a scoring switch four times to activate a multiplier (indicated as symbols marked in yellow box) and then maneuvers the
ball to score inﬁnitely. This is done purely by “nudging the table” and not by using the ﬂippers. In fact, heatmaps show that the ﬂippers are completely
ignored by the model throughout the entire game, as they are not needed to control the movement of the ball. c Development of the relative relevance of
different game objects in Atari Breakout over the training time. Relative relevance is the mean relevance of pixels belonging to the object (ball, paddle,
tunnel) divided by the mean relevance of all pixels in the frame. Thin lines: six training runs. Thick line: average over the six runs
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:1096 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
neural network (DNN) that we ﬁne-tune on PASCAL VOC, show
both excellent state-of-the-art test set accuracy on categories, such
as ‘person’, ‘train’, ‘car’, or ‘horse’ of this benchmark (see
Supplementary Table 3). Inspecting the basis of the decisions with
LRP, however, reveals for certain images substantial divergence,
as the heatmaps exhibiting the reasons for the respective
classiﬁcation could not be more different. Clearly, the DNN’s
heatmap points at the horse and rider as the most relevant
features (see Supplementary Figure 11). In contrast, FV’s heatmap
is most focused onto the lower left corner of the image, which
contains a source tag. A closer inspection of the data set (of
9963 samples33) that typically humans never look through
exhaustively, shows that such source tags appear distinctively
on horse images; a striking artifact of the dataset that so far had
gone unnoticed34. Therefore, the FV model has ‘overﬁtted’ the
PASCAL VOC dataset by relying mainly on the easily identiﬁable
source tag, which incidentally correlates with the true features, a
clear case of ‘Clever Hans’ behavior. This is conﬁrmed by
observing that artiﬁcially cutting the source tag from horse
images signiﬁcantly weakens the FV model’s decision while the
decision of the DNN stays virtually unchanged (see Supplementary Figure 11). If we take instead a correctly classiﬁed image of a
Ferrari and then add to it a source tag, we observe that the FV’s
prediction swiftly changes from ‘car’ to ‘horse’ (cf. Figure 2a) a
Supplementary
Supplementary Figures 12–17 for further examples and analyses).
The second showcase example studies neural network models
(see Supplementary Figure 2 for the network architecture) trained
to play Atari games, here Pinball. As shown in ref. 5, the DNN
achieves excellent results beyond human performance. Like for
the previous example, we construct LRP heatmaps to visualize the
DNN’s decision behavior in terms of pixels of the pinball game.
Interestingly, after extensive training, the heatmaps become
focused on few pixels representing high-scoring switches and
loose track of the ﬂippers. A subsequent inspection of the games
in which these particular LRP heatmaps occur, reveals that DNN
agent ﬁrstly moves the ball into the vicinity of a high-scoring
switch without using the ﬂippers at all, then, secondly, “nudges”
the virtual pinball table such that the ball inﬁnitely triggers the
switch by passing over it back and forth, without causing a tilt of
the pinball table (see Fig. 2b and Supplementary Figure 3 for the
heatmaps showing this point, and also Supplementary Movie 1).
Here, the model has learned to abuse the “nudging” threshold
implemented through the tilting mechanism in the Atari Pinball
software. From a pure game scoring perspective, it is indeed a
rational choice to exploit any game mechanism that is available.
In a real pinball game, however, the player would go likely bust
since the pinball machinery is programmed to tilt after a few
strong movements of the whole physical machine.
The above cases exemplify our point, that even though test set
error may be very low (or game scores very high), the reason for it
may be due to what humans would consider as cheating rather
than valid problem-solving behavior. It may not correspond to
true performance when the latter is measured in a real-world
environment, or when other criteria (e.g. social norms which
penalize such behavior35) are incorporated into the evaluation
metric. Therefore, explanations computed by LRP have been
instrumental in identifying this ﬁne difference.
Let us consider a third example where we can beautifully
observe learning of strategic behavior: A DNN playing the Atari
Supplementary
investigated network architectures). We analyze the learning
progress and inspect the heatmaps of a sequence of DNN models
in Fig. 2c. The heatmaps reveal conspicuous structural changes
during the learning process. In the ﬁrst learning phase the DNN
focuses on ball control, the handle becomes salient as it learns to
target the ball and in the ﬁnal learning phase the DNN focuses on
the corners of the playing ﬁeld (see Fig. 2c). At this stage, the
machine has learned to dig tunnels at the corners (also observed
in ref. 5)—a very efﬁcient strategy also used by human players.
Detailed analyses using the heatmap as a function of a single
game and comparison of LRP to sensitivity analysis explanations,
can be found in the Supplementary Figures 4–10 and in the
Supplementary Movie 2. Here, this objectively measurable
advancement clearly indicates the unfolding of strategic behavior.
Overall, while in each scenario, reward maximization, as well as
incorporating a certain degree of prior knowledge has done the
essential part of inducing complex behavior, our analysis has
made explicit that (1) some of these behaviors incorporate
strategy, (2) some of these behaviors may be human-like or not
human-like, and (3) in some case, the behaviors could even be
considered as deﬁcient and not acceptable, when considering how
they will perform once deployed. Speciﬁcally, the FV-based image
classiﬁer is likely to not detect horses on the real-world data; and
the Atari Pinball AI might perform well for some time, until the
game is updated to prevent excessive nudging.
All insights about the classiﬁer behavior obtained up to this
point of this study require the analysis of individual heatmaps by
human experts, a laborious and costly process which does not
scale well.
Whole-dataset analysis of classiﬁcation behavior. Our next
experiment uses SpRAy to comprehend the predicting behavior of
the classiﬁer on large datasets in a semi-automated manner.
Figure 3a displays the results of the SpRAy analysis when applied
to the horse images of the PASCAL VOC dataset (see also Supplementary Figures 19 and 20). Four different strategies can be
identiﬁed for classifying images as “horse”: (1) detect a horse and
rider (Fig. 3b), (2) detect a source tag in portrait-oriented images
(Fig. 3c), (3) detect wooden hurdles and other contextual elements of horseback riding (Fig. 3d), and (4) detect a source tag in
landscape-oriented images (Fig. 3e). Thus, without any human
interaction, SpRAy provides a summary of what strategies the
classiﬁer is actually implementing to classify horse images. An
overview of the FV and DNN strategies for the other classes and
for the Atari Pinball and Breakout game can be found in Supplementary Figures 23–25 and 30–32, respectively.
The SpRAy analysis could furthermore reveal another ‘Clever
Hans’-type behavior in our ﬁne-tuned DNN model, which had
gone unnoticed in previous manual analysis of the relevance
maps. The large eigengaps in the eigenvalue spectrum of the
DNN heatmaps for class “aeroplane” indicate that the model uses
very distinct strategies for classifying aeroplane images (see
Supplementary Figure 23). A t-SNE visualization (Supplementary
highlights
structure.
unexpected strategy we could discover with the help of SpRAy
is to identify aeroplane images by looking at the artiﬁcial padding
pattern at the image borders, which for aeroplane images
predominantly consists of uniform and structureless blue background. Note that padding is typically introduced for technical
reasons (the DNN model only accepts square-shaped inputs), but
unexpectedly (and unwantedly) the padding pattern became part
of the model’s strategy to classify aeroplane images. Subsequently
we observe that changing the manner in which padding is
performed has a strong effect on the output of the DNN classiﬁer
(see Supplementary Figures 26–29).
We note that while recent methods (e.g. ref.
characterized whole-dataset classiﬁcation behavior based on
decision similarity (e.g. cross-validation-based AP scores or
recall), the SpRAy method can pinpoint divergent classiﬁer
behavior even when the predictions look the same. The speciﬁcity
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:1096 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
of SpRAy over previous approaches is thus its ability to ground
predictions to input features, where classiﬁcation behavior can be
more ﬁnely characterized. A comparison of both approaches is
given in Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary Figures 21
Discussion
Although learning machines have become increasingly successful,
they often behave very differently from humans37,38. Commonly
discussed ingredients to make learning machines act more
human-like are, e.g. compositionality, causality, learning to
learn39–41, and also an efﬁcient usage of prior knowledge or
invariance structure (see e.g. refs. 42–44). Our work adds a
dimension that has so far not been a major focus of the machine
intelligence discourse, but that is instrumental in verifying the
correct behavior of these models, namely explaining the decision
making. We showcase the behavior of learning machines for two
application ﬁelds: computer vision and arcade gaming (Atari),
where we explain the strategies embodied by the respective
learning machines. We ﬁnd a surprisingly rich spectrum of
behaviors ranging from strategic decision making (Atari Breakout) to ‘Clever Hans’ strategies or undesired behaviors, here,
exploiting a dataset artifact (tags in horse images), a game
loophole (nudging in Atari Pinball), and a training artifact (image
padding). These different behaviors go unnoticed by common
Input data for ‘‘Horse’’
Classifier
Eigenvalue-based
clustering
Relevance heatmaps for
‘‘Horse’’ decision
Large eigengaps
Small eigenvalues
Identified strategies for
detecting ‘‘Horse’’
‘‘Aeroplane’’
‘‘Bicycle"
‘‘Bottle’’
‘‘Diningtable’’
‘‘Motorbike’’
‘‘Person’’ ‘‘Pottedplant’’
‘‘Bird’’ ‘‘Sheep’’
‘‘Tvmonitor’’
Class predictions
Fig. 3 The workﬂow of spectral relevance analysis. a First, relevance maps are computed for data samples and object classes of interest, which requires a
forward and a LRP backward pass through the model (here a Fisher vector classiﬁer). Then, an eigenvalue-based spectral cluster analysis is performed to
identify different prediction strategies within the analyzed data. Visualizations of the clustered relevance maps and cluster groupings supported by t-SNE
inform about the valid or anomalous nature of the prediction strategies. This information can be used to improve the model or the dataset. Four different
prediction strategies can be identiﬁed for classifying images as “horse”: b detect a horse (and rider), c detect a source tag in portrait oriented images,
d detect wooden hurdles and other contextual elements of horseback riding, and e detect a source tag in landscape-oriented images
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 10:1096 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
evaluation metrics, which puts a question mark to the current
broad and sometimes rather unreﬂected usage of ML in all
application domains in industry and in the sciences.
With the SpRAy method we have proposed a tool to systematize the investigation of classiﬁer behavior and identify the broad
spectrum of prediction strategies. The SpRAy analysis is scalable
and can be applied to large datasets in a semi-automated manner.
We have demonstrated that SpRAy easily ﬁnds the misuse of the
source tag in horse images, moreover and unexpectedly, it has
also pointed us at a padding artifact appearing in the ﬁnal ﬁnetuning phase of the DNN training. This artifact resisted a manual
inspection of heatmaps of all 20 PASCAL VOC classes, and was
only later revealed by our SpRAy analysis. This demonstrates the
power of an automated, large-scale model analysis. We believe
that such analysis is a ﬁrst step towards conﬁrming important
desiderata of AI systems, such as trustworthiness, fairness, and
accountability in the future, e.g. in context of regulations concerning models and methods of artiﬁcial intelligence, as via the
general data protection regulation (GDPR)45,46. Our contribution
may also add a further perspective that could in the future enrich
the ongoing discussion, whether machines are truly “intelligent”.
Finally, in this paper we posit that the ability to explain decisions made by learning machines allows us to judge and gain a
deeper understanding of whether or not the machine is
embodying a particular strategic decision making. Without this
understanding we can merely monitor behavior and apply performance measures without possibility to reason deeper about the
underlying learned representation. The insights obtained in this
pursuit may be highly useful when striving for better learning
machines and insights (e.g. ref. 47) when applying ML in the
Layer-wise relevance propagation. LRP18 is a method for explaining the predictions of a broad class of ML models, including state-of-the-art neural networks
and kernel machines. It has been extensively applied and validated on numerous
applications23,26,34,48–50. The LRP method decomposes the output of the nonlinear
decision function in terms of the input variables, forming a vector of input features
scores that constitutes our ‘explanation’. Denoting x = (x1,…,xd) an input vector
and f(x) the prediction at the output of the network, LRP produces a decomposition R = (R1,…,Rd) of that prediction on the input variables satisfying
Rp ¼ f ðxÞ:
Unlike sensitivity analysis methods51, LRP explains the output of the function
rather than its local variation52 (see Supplementary Note 3 for more information
on explanation methods).
The LRP method is based on a backward propagation mechanism applying
uniformly to all neurons in the network: Let aj ¼ ρ P
i aiwij þ bj
be one such
neuron. Let i and j denote the neuron indices at consecutive layers, and Σi, Σj the
summation over all neurons in these respective layers. The propagation mechanism
of LRP is deﬁned as
where zij is the contribution of neuron i to the activation aj, and typically depends
on the activation ai and the weight wij. The propagation rule is applied in a
backward pass starting from the neural network output f(x) until the input
variables (e.g. pixels) are reached. Resulting scores can be visualized as a heatmap
of same dimensions as the input (see Supplementary Figure 1).
LRP can be embedded in the theoretical framework of deep Taylor
decomposition22, where some of the propagation rules can be seen as particular
instances. Note that LRP rules have also been designed for models other than
neural networks, in particular, Bag of Words classiﬁers, Fisher vector models, and
LSTMs (more information can be found in the Supplementary Note 3 and
Supplementary Table 1).
Spectral relevance analysis. Explanation techniques enable inspection of the
decision process on a single instance basis. However, screening through a large
number of individual explanations can be time consuming. To efﬁciently investigate classiﬁer behavior on large datasets, we propose a technique: spectral relevance
analysis (SpRAy). SpRAy applies spectral clustering53 on a dataset of LRP explanations in order to identify typical, as well as atypical decision behaviors of the
machine-learning model, and presents them to the user in a concise and interpretable manner.
Technically, SpRAy allows one to detect prediction strategies as identiﬁable on
frequently reoccurring patterns in the heatmaps, e.g., speciﬁc image features. The
identiﬁed features may be truly meaningful representatives of the object class of
interest, or they may be co-occurring features learned by the model but not
intended to be part of the class, and ultimately of the model’s decision process.
Since SpRAy can be efﬁciently applied to a whole large-scale dataset, it helps to
obtain a more complete picture of the classiﬁer behavior and reveal unexpected or
‘Clever Hans’-type decision making.
The SpRAy analysis is depicted in Fig. 3 (see also Supplementary Note 6) and
consists of four steps: Step 1: Computation of the relevance maps for the samples of
interest. The relevance maps are computed with LRP and contain information
about where the classiﬁer is focusing on when classifying the images. Step 2:
Downsizing of the relevance maps and make them uniform in shape and size. This
reduction of dimensionality accelerates the subsequent analysis, and also makes it
statistically more tractable. Step 3: Spectral cluster analysis (SC) on the relevance
maps. This step ﬁnds structure in the distribution of relevance maps, more
speciﬁcally it groups classiﬁer behaviors into ﬁnitely many clusters (see
Supplementary Figure 18 for an example). Step 4: Identiﬁcation of interesting
clusters by eigengap analysis. The eigenvalue spectrum of SC encodes information
about the cluster structure of the relevance maps. A strong increase in the
difference between two successive eigenvalues (eigengap) indicates well-separated
clusters, including atypical classiﬁcation strategies. The few detected clusters are
then presented to the user for inspection. Step 5 (Optional): Visualization by tstochastic neighborhood embedding (t-SNE). This last step is not part of the
analysis strictly speaking, but we use it in the paper in order to visualize how
SpRAy works.
Since SpRAy aims to investigate classiﬁer behavior, it is applied to the heatmaps
and not to the raw images (see Supplementary Figures 20, 24 and 25 for
comparison).
Code availability. Source code for LRP and sensitivity analysis is available at
 Source code for Spectral
Clustering and t-SNE as used in the SpRAy method is available from the scikitlearn at Source code for the
Reinforcement-Learning-based Atari Agent is available at 
spragunr/deep_q_rl. Source code for the Fisher Vector classiﬁer is available at
 Our ﬁne-tuned DNN
model can be found at 
Data availability
The datasets used and analyzed during the current study are available from the following
sources. PASCAL VOC 2007: 
PASCAL VOC 2012: Atari
emulator: 
Received: 6 December 2017 Accepted: 11 February 2019