Snapshot Serengeti, high-frequency
annotated camera trap images of
40 mammalian species in an
African savanna
Alexandra Swanson1,2, Margaret Kosmala1,†, Chris Lintott2, Robert Simpson2,
Arfon Smith3 & Craig Packer1
Camera traps can be used to address large-scale questions in community ecology by providing systematic
data on an array of wide-ranging species. We deployed 225 camera traps across 1,125 km2 in Serengeti
National Park, Tanzania, to evaluate spatial and temporal inter-species dynamics. The cameras have
operated continuously since 2010 and had accumulated 99,241 camera-trap days and produced 1.2 million
sets of pictures by 2013. Members of the general public classiﬁed the images via the citizen-science website
www.snapshotserengeti.org. Multiple users viewed each image and recorded the species, number of
individuals, associated behaviours, and presence of young. Over 28,000 registered users contributed
10.8 million classiﬁcations. We applied a simple algorithm to aggregate these individual classiﬁcations into a
ﬁnal ‘consensus’ dataset, yielding a ﬁnal classiﬁcation for each image and a measure of agreement among
individual answers. The consensus classiﬁcations and raw imagery provide an unparalleled opportunity to
investigate multi-species dynamics in an intact ecosystem and a valuable resource for machine-learning and
computer-vision research.
Design Type(s)
observation design • time series design • species comparison design
Measurement Type(s)
mammalian species abundance
Technology Type(s)
Camera-trap
Factor Type(s)
Sample Characteristic(s)
savanna • Serengeti National Park
1Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA.
2Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson Building, Oxford, OX1 3RH, UK.
Planetarium, Department of Citizen Science, Chicago, IL 60605, USA. †Present address: Department of
Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA. Correspondence and
requests for materials should be addressed to A.S. (email: ).
SUBJECT CATEGORIES
» Community ecology
» Population dynamics
» Biodiversity
Received: 8 December 2014
Accepted: 29 April 2015
Published: 9 June 2015
www.nature.com/scientificdata
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
Background & Summary
Over the last 20 years, camera traps—remote, automatic cameras—have revolutionized wildlife ecology
and conservation and are now emerging as a key tool in the broader disciplines of behavioural,
population, and community ecology1. Historically, cameras have been used to document the presence of
rare species in understudied protected areas2,3 or estimate densities of individually identiﬁable animals4.
But advances in digital technology have increased capacity while lowering prices, resulting in a dramatic
increase in the number and diversity of camera trap studies5. While traditional analytical approaches for
camera trapping data require individually identiﬁable animals1,4,6, recent developments have allowed the
expansion of camera trap inference to multiple ‘unmarked’ species1,7–9. Although camera-trap surveys are
increasing in popularity and scope, they can produce overwhelming amounts of data10–12, highlighting
the need for efﬁcient image processing techniques. Here we describe the datasets generated by Snapshot
Serengeti, a large-scale survey that (1) deployed 225 camera traps across a 1,125 km2 area in the Serengeti
National Park, Tanzania from 2010–2013, (2) used a citizen science website (www.snapshotserengeti.org)
to process millions of images, and (3) used a simple algorithm to ensure high reliability of the resultant
species classiﬁcations.
We established the Snapshot Serengeti camera survey to evaluate spatial and temporal dynamics of large
predators and their prey. Serengeti National Park (SNP) is the core of a 25,000 km2 savannah ecosystem that
straddles the Kenya-Tanzania border in East Africa. The Serengeti is dominated by the annual migration of
the combined 1.6 million wildebeest and zebra that follow the seasonal rainfall onto the nutrient rich
plains13. Since the 1960s, the Serengeti Lion Project has monitored lion population numbers and ranging
patterns14, and the Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute (TAWIRI) has surveyed major herbivore numbers
via ﬂight counts and aerial photography15–19. Our camera survey expands upon historical monitoring by
providing the ﬁrst continuous systematic data on all of the larger predator and prey species, day and night,
across several years. We set out 225 cameras within a 1,125 km2 grid inside the long-term lion study area
that covers the intersection of open plains and savannah woodlands (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2), and spans a 1.67-fold
rainfall gradient and 1.44-fold productivity gradient (T.M. Anderson, unpublished data.). The camera-trap
grid offers systematic coverage of the entire study area (as per O’Brien et al.20) and ensures at least two
cameras per home range for each medium to large mammalian species.
Between June 2010 and May 2013, the survey operated for a total of 99,241 camera-trap days and
produced 1.2 million image sets (each image set contains 1–3 photographs taken in a single burst of ~1 s).
In collaboration with The Zooniverse (www.zooniverse.org), the world’s most popular citizen science
platform, we developed the website www.snapshotserengeti.org that allowed members of the general
public to view and classify each image, identifying species, counting the number of individuals, and
characterizing behaviours (Fig. 3).
Every image set was circulated to multiple users to improve data accuracy. More than 28,000
registered users and ~40,000 unregistered users contributed 10.8 million classiﬁcations for the 1.2 million
image sets. We applied a simple plurality algorithm to produce a ‘consensus dataset’ of ﬁnal classiﬁcations
for each image set. The consensus classiﬁcations were validated against 4,149 ‘gold-standard’ image-sets
that had been classiﬁed by experts, revealing 96.6% accuracy for species identiﬁcations and 90% accuracy
for species counts..
Of the 1.2 million image sets, Snapshot Serengeti volunteers indicated that 322,653 contained animals;
the remainder were misﬁres that had been triggered by heat or vegetation. The volunteers identiﬁed
48 different species and species groups, including rare and elusive animals such as aardwolf and zorilla
(see Table 1).
In this report we describe the ﬁeld methods, citizen science interface, and consensus algorithm used to
produce the following datasets:
(1) Images: Full-resolution images produced by the survey.
(2) Raw classiﬁcation data: All individual classiﬁcations made by all users on all image sets.
(3) Consensus data: Single classiﬁcation per image set produced by applying the consensus algorithm to
raw classiﬁcations, along with image metadata (date, time, location).
(4) Operation Dates: Metadata of when each camera was operational
(5) Gold-standard data: Expert classiﬁcations for a subset of 4,149 image sets.
We anticipate broad interdisciplinary re-use of these datasets with applications that span basic and
applied ecology, citizen-science research, machine learning, and computer vision. The consensus dataset
provides species-speciﬁc capture histories that can be analysed in a number of ways to evaluate
population and community dynamics, either within Serengeti or as part of a larger cross-reserve analysis
(see Usage Notes for details). The applications for this dataset extend beyond ecological research. For
example, increasing the quality of citizen-science data is an area of active research21–24. Computer science
and informatics researchers can use the raw (un-aggregated) citizen-science answers to develop more
complex aggregation algorithms and to test their performance against the gold-standard dataset25.
Additionally, computer-vision researchers need large human-annotated sets of imagery as training sets
in machine-learning algorithms26. Our collaborators are currently using this dataset to automate
species detection, classiﬁcation and similar-species differentiation, as well as to develop combined
human-machine learning systems and imaging systems for searchable colour. Subsets of the consensus
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
dataset have also been used in classrooms to engage students in authentic research that spans ecology,
animal behaviour, and computer science (see Usage Notes for examples).
Field methods
We set up an initial camera survey at 200 sites within the long-term Serengeti Lion Project study area
from June to November 2010 (Fig. 1a). Cameras were re-installed in February 2011 and have operated
Figure 1. Snapshot Serengeti study area. (a) Serengeti National Park. Long-term lion project study area is
indicated by dotted line; camera-trap study area is indicated by dashed line. (b) Camera trap layout within the
long-term Lion Project Study Area. Camera locations are plotted over tree cover (extracted from Landsat
imagery), with darker green indicating increased tree cover per 30 m2-grid cell.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
continuously thereafter. We expanded the survey from 200 to 225 traps in February 2012 and it is
currently on-going. This paper describes data collected until May 2013.
The camera-trap layout placed each camera at the centre of a 5 km2 grid cell (Fig. 1b), so as to
offer systematic coverage of the entire study area and allow simultaneous monitoring of multiple
species1,20,27–29. The precise location of each camera was selected as the nearest suitable tree to the predetermined centre point of each grid cell, which was typically within 250 m of the centre. We selected
sites to minimize camera misﬁres by prioritizing trees that offered shade and by avoiding trees
surrounded by tall grass. Where no trees were available within 1 km of the grid cell centre point, we
placed cameras on metal poles (Fig. 2).
We set cameras ~50 cm above ground level to capture medium to large vertebrates, housed in
steel cases that were attached to trees with 10 cm hardened-steel lag bolts. We trimmed tall grass to
o30 cm, and removed low-hanging branches to minimize risk of camera misﬁres and improve the
unobstructed view from the camera. Cameras were pointed to minimise obstructions or risk of misﬁres
rather than with respect to compass direction.
Figure 2. Camera trap placement. Camera traps in steel cases were placed on trees when available (left,
n = 195) and steel poles when no trees were within 1,000 m of the grid-cell centre (right, n = 35).
Figure 3. Online interface for www.snapshotserengeti.org. The Snapshot Serengeti website interface. The
primary interface with all available species options (left) and ﬁlters that help narrow users’ choices when
classifying species (right).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
Total capture events
bat eared fox
Grant’s gazelle
guinea fowl
hartebeest
hippopotamus
honey badger
kori bustard
lion female&cub
other bird
rhinoceros
secretary bird
spotted hyena
striped hyena
Thomson’s gazelle
vervet monkey
wildebeest
Table 1. Raw number of capture events for each species as identiﬁed by using the plurality algorithm on
volunteer classiﬁcations.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
We primarily used Scoutguard (SG565) incandescent cameras. We initiated the survey using
DLC Covert II cameras with an infrared ﬂash, but poor night-image quality prompted the transition to
incandescent cameras. The cameras deployed in 2011 included a mixture of DLC Covert Reveal and
SG565. Since 2012, all cameras and replacements have been SG565. Animals and weather damaged
approximately 15% of cameras annually, requiring repeated replacement.
All survey cameras used passive infrared sensors that were triggered by a combination of heat and
motion. Although standard camera-trapping protocols recommend setting sensitivity to ‘high’ for warm
climates, this produced unacceptable levels of misﬁres by the movements of tall vegetation or shadows,
thus we set sensor sensitivity to ‘low’ to minimize misﬁres. The detection radius and ﬁeld of view were
approximately 14 m and 45° for all cameras.
We set all cameras to take 3 photos per trigger in the daytime. At night, infrared-ﬂash cameras took
3 photos per trigger, but incandescent-ﬂash cameras could only take 1 image per trigger due to ﬂash
limitations (and occasional camera malfunction created a small number of image sets with varying
numbers of images). We refer to each trigger as a ‘capture event’ and the resulting 1–3 images as an
‘image set’; capture events are the units of analysis for ecological studies and comprise the results
presented here. We set cameras to ensure at least 1-minute delay between capture events to prevent the
memory card being ﬁlled to capacity by a single individual or herd.
Maintenance.
We checked each camera every 6–8 weeks. Except in cases of camera malfunction or
damage, this schedule was sufﬁcient to replace batteries and SD cards and ensure continuous operation.
We labelled SD cards with the Site ID and the date retrieved and reviewed images in the ﬁeld to ensure
that the camera had functioned properly. We then installed new SD cards and triggered cameras to
photograph placards that indicated Site ID, date, and time.
Data management
We wrote Python scripts to extract date/time from the image ﬁles and season, site, and card information
from the directory structure. Common errors that arose from camera malfunction (typically due
Interacting
Image set retired as Consensus—10 matching species identiﬁcations (see Fig. 4b)
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
ASG0010cz5
Image set retired as Consensus—10 matching species identiﬁcations (see Fig. 4c)
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
ASG0000009
spotted hyena
Table 2. Sample classiﬁcations for image set retired in Fig. 4 as consensus (10 matching classiﬁcations). Each
row represents a classiﬁcation event by a different user.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
to animal or weather damage) included: the recording of videos instead of still images, incorrect
time-stamps for a portion of images, and only 1–2 photos per capture event instead of three. We wrote
code in Python, MySQL, and R to ﬂag and correct these errors in the metadata.
Data processing
We partnered with the online citizen science platform The Zooniverse (www.zooniverse.org)
to develop the Snapshot Serengeti website (www.snapshotserengeti.org), an online interface where the
general public helps process camera trap data. The Snapshot Serengeti website utilizes the Zooniverse’s
platform Ouroboros, written in Ruby on Rails ( Volunteer
classiﬁers interact with a custom-built JavaScript front-end to classify image sets and results are saved in a
MongoDB datastore. Each classiﬁcation is recorded alongside the time of classiﬁcation and the identity of
the classiﬁer in the form of either a unique identiﬁer assigned by the Zooniverse (for logged in users) or
an IP address (for users who have not logged in). Ouroboros also allows for custom rules for image-set
retirement, as discussed below, and the system can scale rapidly to cope with the demands of a popular
site. The interface and images are hosted on Amazon Web Services via Amazon’s Simple Storage
Service (S3).
On the Snapshot Serengeti interface (Fig. 3), volunteers identify species in each image set,
count the number of individuals, classify behaviour, and indicate the presence/absence of young. For
image sets that contain more than one image, volunteers initially see the second image in the set and can
toggle between images or use the ‘play’ feature to animate the images. We designed the task ﬂow to help
guide people with no background knowledge through the process of identifying the animal(s) in question
from 48 possible species and species groups while still providing a rapid route to classiﬁcation for more
knowledgeable participants. Users ﬁlter potential species matches by morphological characteristics such
as horn shape, body shape, colour, pattern, and tail shape or jump straight to selecting from a list of all
species. A ‘nothing here’ button allows users to classify image sets without any animals present. We do
not offer an ‘impossible’ or ‘I don’t know’ option because previous testing on a small-scale prototype
Interacting
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
G. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
T. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
G. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
G. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
T. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
T. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
ASG000xzxd
G. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
G. gazelle
ASG000xzxd
Table 3. Sample classiﬁcations for image set retired in Fig. 4 as complete (25 total classiﬁcations). Each row
represents a classiﬁcation event by a different user. Image set retired as Complete—not reaching consensus but
having been viewed by 25 people (see Fig. 4d).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
indicated that such answers were overused and provided no information on the actual species
classiﬁcation, thus wasting volunteer effort. Image difﬁculty (and probability of being correct) can instead
be assessed by measuring variance across individual volunteer answers (see Technical Validation)
Circulation and retirement.
We circulate each image set to multiple users and retire image sets from
circulation when they have met one of the following criteria (see Table 2 and 3 & Fig. 4 for examples):
●Blank: the ﬁrst 5 classiﬁcations are ‘nothing here’.
●Blank_Consensus: 10 ‘nothing here’ classiﬁcations, not necessarily consecutive.
●Consensus: 10 matching classiﬁcations of species or species combination (e.g., 10 identiﬁcations of ‘lion’
or 10 identiﬁcations of ‘lion-zebra’); these classiﬁcations do not have to be consecutive.
●Complete: 25 total non-‘nothing here’ classiﬁcations (does not require consensus for any single species).
Note that volunteers classiﬁed Snapshot Serengeti data faster than images were produced, and images
were re-circulated for classroom use and testing the value of additional classiﬁcations. As a result, the
number of classiﬁcations (11–57 for images containing animals) generally exceeded the number needed
for retirement under the above rules.
Data aggregation
We implemented a simple plurality algorithm to transform the volunteer classiﬁcations for each image set
into a single aggregated species identiﬁcation. First, we calculated the number of different species present
in an image set as the median number of different species identiﬁed across all users for that image set.
For all image sets, we assigned the one (or more) species with the most ‘votes’ as the aggregated answer.
We calculated the number of individuals present for each identiﬁed species as the median number
reported for that image set for that species by all volunteers. We also calculated the proportion of users
who chose each behavioural activity or presence of young.
To assess the accuracy of aggregated classiﬁcations, we calculated an evenness index, using all
non-blank classiﬁcations for each image set. When all classiﬁcations were in agreement, we assigned the
value zero, indicating high accuracy. Otherwise, we used Pielou’s evenness index , calculated
i¼1pi ln pi
=ln S, where S is the number of different species chosen among all volunteers, and pi is
the proportion of ‘votes’ that species i received. The Pielou evenness index ranges from 0 to 1, with 0
indicating low evenness and high accuracy and 1 indicating high evenness and low accuracy. Note that
the Pielou evenness index is expected to be high for image sets with multiple species and therefore is not a
useful gauge of accuracy in these cases.
Figure 4. Sample Snapshot Serengeti images. Sample images from image sets retired from Snapshot Serengeti
as (a) blank: receiving ﬁve consecutive ‘nothing here’ classiﬁcations, (b-c) consensus: receiving 10 matching
species classiﬁcations, and (d) complete: receiving 25 classiﬁcations regardless of agreement. Note that the
plurality algorithm correctly arrived at ‘giraffe,’ ‘spotted hyena,’ and ‘impala’ for images b-d, respectively
(see Tables 2 and 3 for individual classiﬁcations).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
Code availability
Classiﬁcation Interface.
The code used to create the Snapshot Serengeti web interface is publicly
available at (current) and archived on ﬁgshare30.
Data processing and consensus calculation.
The scripts used to process the data and calculate the
consensus classiﬁcations are publicly available at 
(current) and archived on ﬁgshare31.
Data Records
All classiﬁcation data and metadata are publicly available at Dryad (Data Citation 1).
Images: (all_images.csv; 3,198,737 data rows) URL information for retrieving each image; 1 record per
image. All images in this data descriptor can be accessed at htt #ps://snapshotserengeti.s3.msi.umn.edu/
‘S1/B04/B04_R1/
S1_B04_R1_PICT0012.JPG’ yields the full URL: 
B04_R1/S1_B04_R1_PICT0012.JPG. Pasting this value into a browser will display the image in the
browser. Note that while we provide all images via the University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute,
this is not a proper archive site. Currently, there are no archiving systems or organizations available for
storing the terabytes of images from our study. We hope that image archiving options will become
available in the near future.
●CaptureEventID: A unique identiﬁer for each capture event and resultant image set.
●URL_Info: A URL sufﬁx to be appended to ‘htt#ps://snapshotserengeti.s3.msi.umn.edu/’ to yield the full
URL of the image.
Raw classiﬁcation data: (raw_data.csv; 10,530,564 data rows) Raw classiﬁcation dataset; 1 record per
unique user, capture event, and species. Includes images retired as ‘Blank’ and ‘Blank_consensus.’
●CaptureEventID: A unique identiﬁer for each capture event and resultant image set.
●ClassiﬁcationID: A unique identiﬁer for each classiﬁcation event (one user classifying a single capture
event). If a single user identiﬁes multiple species within a capture event, they share the same
classiﬁcation ID.
●UserID: Unique user ID for logged-in users; sessionID (unique computer & browser information) for
non-logged-in users.
●Species: Species selected from a list of 48 options or ‘blank’ for ‘nothing here’
●Count: Number of individuals, estimated as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11–50 or 51+.
●Standing: Binary indicator of whether any individuals are standing.
●Resting: Binary indicator of whether any individuals are resting.
●Moving: Binary indicator of whether any individuals are moving.
●Eating: Binary indicator of whether any individuals are eating.
●Interacting: Binary indicator of whether any individuals are interacting (including both intra- and
inter-speciﬁc interactions).
●Babies: binary indicator of whether young were present.
Consensus classiﬁcation data and metadata: (consensus_data.csv; 334,671 data rows) Applying the
plurality algorithm to the raw classiﬁcation data yielded a single classiﬁcation per capture event,
accompanied by measures of uncertainty and difﬁculty. Each species classiﬁed in a single capture event
receives its own record and species-speciﬁc measures of uncertainty. Metadata (data/time & location) are
provided to facilitate ecological analyses. This dataset excludes all images retired as ‘Blank’ or
‘Blank_consensus.’
●CaptureEventID: A unique identiﬁer for each capture event and resultant image set. Links to
CaptureEventID from raw classiﬁcation data.
●NumImages: The number of images in the image set/capture event.
●DateTime: The date-time stamp is reported in yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss. Time zone is UTC + 3:00. Note
that daylight savings time is not observed in Tanzania.
●SiteID: The alpha-numeric site code.
●LocationX, LocationY: UTM X and Y coordinates of the site (datum Arc1960, zone 36S)
●NumSpecies: The number of species in this capture event.
●Species: Species of animal in the capture event (one of 48 possibilities).
●Count: Median number of individuals, estimated as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11–50 or 51+.
●Standing: The proportion of users who selected this behaviour for this species.
●Resting: The proportion of users who selected this behaviour for this species.
●Moving: The proportion of users who selected this behaviour for this species.
●Eating: The proportion of users who selected this behaviour for this species.
●Interacting: The proportion of users who selected this behaviour for this species.
●Babies: The proportion of users who selected ‘young present’ for this species.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
●NumClassiﬁcations: The total number of users who classiﬁed this capture event.
●NumVotes: The total number of users who selected this species for this capture event.
●NumBlanks: The number of users who selected ‘nothing here’ for this capture event.
●Evenness: The Pielou evenness index of species classiﬁcations for the capture event.
Proportion Correct
wildebeest
hartebeest
Thomson’s gazelle
other bird
Grant’s gazelle
guinea fowl
spotted hyena
hippopotamus
lion (female&cubs)
kori bustard
secretary bird
vervet monkey
lion (male)
rhinoceros
Table 4. Accuracy of aggregate classiﬁcations of species in 4,149 image sets in comparison with expert
classiﬁcations. Total indicates the number of image sets containing that species, as identiﬁed by experts .
*Correct indicates the subset of those image sets for which the plurality algorithm arrived at the correct answer.
Proportion Correct is given by # Correct / Total. Note that the 30 image sets marked as ‘impossible’ by experts
do not appear in this table. Twenty-nine image sets were marked impossible due to insufﬁcient amount of
detail to make a deﬁnitive identiﬁcation; one image set was marked impossible because it contained an animal
(duiker) not in the list of 48 species available to the volunteers.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
Operation dates: (search_effort.csv; 1,128 data rows) The dates that each camera was active and
functioning properly, extracted from the image EXIF data as the ﬁrst and last dates of valid photographs
on a given SD card. Valid photographs are deﬁned as those taken while the camera was secured on the
tree pointing outwards (as opposed to photos taken after a camera was torn down and facing the ground).
●Site ID: The alpha-numeric site code.
●Start date: Date of ﬁrst valid image on a given SD card.
●End date: Date of last valid image on the SD card.
Gold standard data: (gold_standard_data.csv; 4,432 data rows) Expert classiﬁcations for 4,149 capture
events. Note that gold-standard answers are more accurate than answers provided by a single expert
because multiple experts reviewed all images for which any single expert expressed uncertainty. In 0.2%
of images, the panel of experts agreed that no authoritative species identiﬁcation could be made; those
images are marked as ‘impossible.’
●CaptureEventID: Same as in the raw and reduced classiﬁcation data.
●NumSpecies: The number of species in this capture event.
●Species: One of the 48 possibilities or ‘impossible.’
●Count: Number of individuals, estimated as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11–50 or 51+.
Technical Validation
We asked ﬁve researchers with extensive wildlife identiﬁcation experience to classify 4,149 randomly
selected image sets containing animals using the Snapshot Serengeti interface; 263 image sets received two
expert classiﬁcations and 8 image sets received three, for a total of 4,428 classiﬁcations. The experts noted
whether any image sets were especially difﬁcult or whether they thought the image was identiﬁable at all.
In cases where experts disagreed with the results of the plurality algorithm or had marked an image set as
particularly difﬁcult or impossible, AS and CP made the ﬁnal authoritative identiﬁcation. Thus, the gold
standard dataset included a small number of images that were agreed by multiple experts to be
‘impossible’ to identify. Because the Snapshot Serengeti interface does not allow ‘impossible’ as an option,
the consensus answers for these images are incorrect by deﬁnition. We compared citizen-science
classiﬁcations derived from the plurality algorithm with the expert-classiﬁed ‘gold standard’ dataset to
assess accuracy of species identiﬁcations and counts of individuals.
Of the 4,149 image sets viewed by experts, 96.6% of algorithm-derived answers agreed with the expert
species classiﬁcation, though the accuracy rate varied by species (Table 4). Of the 142 image sets in which
the algorithm did not agree with the experts, 21% (n = 30) were marked as ‘impossible’ by experts, 29.5%
(n = 42) reﬂected cases where the algorithm only identiﬁed one of two species identiﬁed by experts
(for example, only zebra in an image set where both wildebeest and zebra had been present), 3.5%
involved cases where the algorithm indicated two species whereas the experts only reported one, and
45.8% (n = 65) reﬂected true errors in which the algorithm reported the wrong species. The most
common mistakes included misidentiﬁcation of birds (n = 11) and incorrectly identifying Grant’s gazelles
as Thomson’s gazelles (n = 11).
Variance in raw classiﬁcations strongly predicted whether image sets were classiﬁed correctly. Image
sets for which the algorithm differed from expert IDs had higher levels of disagreement among raw
Species Counts
* Validated
Proportion Exactly Correct
Proportion within+/ −1 bin
Table 5. Validation of species counts against expert classiﬁcations for image sets with a single species.
*Validated is the total number of counts validated by experts. Proportion Exactly Correct reﬂects the proportion
of algorithm-derived counts that matched expert classiﬁcations exactly. Proportion within +/ −1 reﬂects the
proportion of algorithm-derived accounts that fell within 1 count bin above or below the expert classiﬁcation.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
classiﬁcations: the mean evenness score (+/ −standard error) was 0.451 (+/ −0.004) for correct answers
versus 0.725 (+/ −0.014) for incorrect answers. Classiﬁcations of images that experts identiﬁed as
‘impossible’ are considered to be incorrect. We provide guidelines in the Usage Notes for using measures
of disagreement to measure certainty that a consensus classiﬁcation is correct and to target image sets for
review or exclusion in any given analysis.
For image sets where the plurality algorithm accurately captured all or a subset of species present, we
compared the species-speciﬁc counts reported by the algorithm to expert classiﬁcations (n = 4,269 species
counts). 76.4% of algorithm-derived counts matched expert counts exactly, and 92.98% of algorithmderived counts were within +/ −1 bin of the expert classiﬁcation (Table 5). Accuracy varied by the
number of individuals present: users were > 97% accurate when counting a single individual and least
accurate distinguishing between 5–10 individuals.
Usage Notes
We envision broad applications for these datasets in ecology, informatics, computer vision, and
education. Here we provide additional details and guidelines.
Ecological analyses
The consensus classiﬁcations are equivalent to raw data produced by standard camera trapping surveys
and include all metadata necessary for applying robust analytical procedures that explicitly consider
variations in detection probability. We provide dates of activity for every camera trap, as well as dates,
times, and locations for every image. Researchers can thus aggregate camera activity (‘search effort’) and
species-speciﬁc capture histories into time spans suitable for relative abundance indices32–34, single and
multi-season occupancy modelling8,35–38 across multiple scales39, dynamic and multi-species occupancy
modelling1,40–42, hierarchical binomial or n-mixture models43,44. All images are downloadable and
identiﬁed to species, so capture histories of individually recognized animals can be constructed for species
with distinct pelage patterns (e.g., cheetahs, leopards, hyenas, civets, genets, etc.). In such cases,
sophisticated mark-recapture analyses can permit spatially-explicit inference45,46.
Note that ecological analyses sometimes require higher species-identiﬁcation accuracy than the 97%
returned by the consensus algorithm. Our three ‘certainty’ metrics for consensus answers reﬂect image
difﬁculty and likelihood of being correct and thus provide guidelines for targeting ‘uncertain’ images for
expert review or exclusion from the analysis (see certainty and difﬁculty section below).
Citizen science and informatics analyses
Crowdsourcing and citizen science are being used increasingly often to produce science datasets22–24, but
they require robust methods to measure and validate data quality. While our consensus dataset derives
from a simple plurality algorithm, more complex algorithms can improve upon these results. For
example, Hines et al.25 weighted raw classiﬁcations by individual accuracy, raising overall accuracy to
98%. Our raw classiﬁcation dataset could be used to develop and test algorithms that employ userweighting or even apply a Bayesian framework to incorporate information about species likelihood based
on previous or subsequent images.
Computer vision
Object search-and-recognition research requires large data sets of labelled imagery. Reliable data sets of
wild animals are rare, due to the enormous task of hand-annotating large numbers of images. By using
the raw images together with the consensus dataset, machine-learning algorithms could be developed to
automatically detect and identify species, using part of the dataset for training the image-recognition
algorithm and the rest for testing the algorithm. Raw images could be used separately, or in conjunction
with the consensus data set, to research automatic detection of textures, patterns, and other
characteristics of outdoor scenes.
Higher education teachers can use the consensus dataset and metadata to develop curricula around the
scientiﬁc method, using charismatic fauna to engage students. As examples, students can ask questions
about species abundances and distributions, daily activity patterns and seasonal movements. The dataset
can be tailored by the instructor for use by undergraduates for authentic research experiences. (See http://
www.cbs.umn.edu/explore/education-outreach/hhmi/projects/nonmajor/serengeti as an example.) This
dataset is also suitable for graduate level coursework in ecology, informatics, and computer vision. (See
 
Projects.html as an example.)
Dataset and calculation details
The 48 possible ‘species’ options include four ‘group’ categories: human, bird (other), reptiles, and rodents.
‘Human’ reﬂects any human activity, including vehicles and hot-air balloons. We made no effort to
distinguish among species of hare, jackal, and mongoose. Additionally, lions were split into two
categories: Lion (male) and Lion (female & cubs).
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150026 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.26
Users typically selected as many behaviours as applicable for a given species in each image but
sometimes classiﬁed two individuals as displaying two different behaviours by listing the same species
twice. For example, an image with one standing zebra and one moving zebra might receive one
classiﬁcation of ‘1 zebra, standing’ and ‘1 zebra, moving’—resulting in multiple classiﬁcations of the
same species with the same ClassiﬁcationID. We standardized classiﬁcations by combining multiple
classiﬁcations of the same species within a single ClassiﬁcationID before applying the consensus
algorithm. So ‘1 zebra, standing’ and ‘1 zebra, moving’ were combined to form ‘2 zebras, standing and
moving,’ which was the most common classiﬁcation for such images. Note that the raw classiﬁcation data
set contains separate assessments made by each volunteer and thus does not combine multiple records
within ClassiﬁcationID for any single image.
Certainty & difﬁculty measures
The plurality algorithm produces classiﬁcations that are97% correct on average. However, the accuracy
varies by species and difﬁculty and certain analyses may require greater accuracy than obtained from the
plurality algorithm. ‘Percent support’ for each species in each image set can be calculated as NumVotes/
NumClassiﬁcations and reﬂects the proportion of users who identiﬁed that species as present in the image
set. High values indicate high certainty. High values for NumBlanks and Evenness (for single species
image sets) tend to reﬂect more difﬁcult image sets for which the consensus vote is more likely to be
incorrect. We found that when some users were unsure of their classiﬁcation, they used the ‘nothing here’
option instead of guessing a species. As a result, difﬁcult images are more likely to have more blank
classiﬁcations. As described in the Technical Validation, higher evenness score reﬂects lower agreement
among classiﬁcations and were more likely to be incorrect for single species captures. To increase
certainty of datasets for analyses, analyses can be restricted to data that meet any threshold for percent
support, Evenness, or NumBlanks.