+ Human Brain Mapping 1:153-171 +
Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series
K.J. Friston, P. Jezzard, and R. Turner
The Neurosciences Institute, La Jolla, California (K.J.F.) and Laboratory of Cardiac Energetics,
NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Ma ryland (P. J., R.T.)
Abstract: A method for detecting significant and regionally specific correlations between sensory input
and the brain's physiological response, as measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is
presented in this paper. The method involves testing for correlations between sensory input and the
hemodynamic response after convolving the sensory input with an estimate of the hernodynamic
response function. This estimate is obtained without reference to any assumed input. To lend the
approach statistical validity, it is brought into the framework of statistical parametric mapping by using a
measure of cross-correlations between sensory input and hemodynamic response that is valid in the
presence of intrinsic autocorrelations. These autocorrelations are necessarily present, due to the
hemodynamic response function or temporal point spread function.
Key words: functional MRI, time-series, statistical parametric mapping, significance, visual, cross-
B 1994 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
correlations, autocorrelations
INTRODUCTION
This article is about the analysis of functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) data obtained during
activation studies of the human brain. The problem
addressed is how to identify regionally specific and
significant correlations between a time-dependent
sensorimotor or cognitive parameter and measured
changes in neurophysiology [Bandettini et al., 1993;
Friston et al., 1993al. This problem has a number of
well-established solutions in position emission tomog-
raphy (PET) functional imaging, in which activation
studies are almost universally analyzed using some
form of statistical parametric mapping [Friston et al.,
19901. However, some special issues need to be consid-
ered when dealing with MRI data.
Received for publication September 9, 1993; revision accepted
January 18,1994.
Address reprint requests to K.J.
Friston at his present address: MRC
Cyclotron Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, DuCane Road, London
W12 OHS, England.
Statistical parametric maps (SPMs) are images whose
voxel values are distributed, under the null hypoth-
esis, according to some known probability density
function. The null hypothesis is usually that there are
no significant activations or correlations between sen-
sorimotor parameters and central physiology. SPMs
are treated as smooth multidimensional statistical pro-
cesses and thresholded such that the probability of
acquiring an activated region by chance (over the
entire SPM) is suitably small (e.g., 0.05). The methods
for determining the appropriate threshold have only
recently been developed [Friston et al., 1991; Worsley
et al., 19921.
Two fundamental aspects of MRI data that bear
directly on detecting significant correlations are:
The hemodynamic response to sensory input
(evoked changes in neuronal activity) is transient,
delayed, and dispersed in time.
Because the sampling interval of some MRI tech-
niques is typically much shorter than the time-
constants of hemodynamic changes, the resulting
time-series can show substantial autocorrelation.
o 1994 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
4 Friston et al. 4
Transient aspects of the hernodynamic response
The transient nature of the hemodynamic response
is usually attributed to a physiological uncoupling of
regional cerebral perfusion and oxygen metabolism
[Fox et al., 19881. The result is a time-dependent (but
uncharacterized) change in the relative amounts of
venous oxy- and deoxy-hemoglobin. Due to the differ-
ential magnetic susceptibility of oxy- and deoxy-
hemoglobin, a transient change in intravoxel dephas-
ing is observed. This change subtends the measured
signal [Kwong et al., 1992; Ogawa et al., 1992; Bandet-
tini et al., 1992). The physiological mechanisms that
mediate between neuronal activity and physiology at
the level of perfusion and cerebral metabolism, are
known to have time-constants in the millisecond (ms)
to seconds (s) range. In vivo optical imaging of
microcirculatory events in the visual cortex of mon-
keys suggests the following sequence of activity-
dependent changes:
eter and hemodynamic response, the sensory param-
eter must first be subject to the same delay and
dispersion as that mediating between neuronal activ-
ity and hemodynamics. More formally, the correlation
of interest is between the MRI time-series and the
sensory input convolved with the hemodynamic re-
sponse function. This is the first observation on which
the proposed approach is predicated.
Stationary aspects of the hernodynamic response
Due to the dispersive nature of the response func-
tion, the hemodynamics at any voxel will be inher-
ently smooth or autocorrelated in time. This autocorre-
lation will be evident even in the absence of evoked
changes in neuronal activity. One can think of hemo-
dynamics as the result of convolving a neuronal
process with an effective hernodynamic response func-
tion, where the neuronal process comprises evoked
transients and intrinsic activity. In mathematical terms,
this can be modeled as:
200-400 ms after the onset of neuronal activity,
highly localized oxygen delivery occurs, followed
300-400 ms later by an increase in blood volume.
After 1,000 ms, a substantial rise in oxyhemoglo-
bin is seen [Frostig et al., 19901.
MRI data concur with this latter observation, suggest-
ing a rise in relative oxyhemoglobin that is maximal
after 4-10 s [Bandettini, 19931. The delay and disper-
sion associated with the hemodynamic response to
the onset of neuronal activity is, therefore, substantial
when compared with the sampling interval typical of
fast [e.g., echo-planar imaging, (EPI)] MRI times-series
(100 ms-5 s). This is important because the correlations
between evoked changes in neuronal activity and
measured hemodynamics will be displaced and dis-
persed (smeared) in time. Simply correlating a sensory
parameter (reflecting input at a neuronal level) with
the hemodynamic response will miss significant cross-
correlations that are distributed in time according to
the delay and dispersion of the hernodynamic response
For example, if the delay rendered a sinusoidal
sensory input and the hernodynamic response out of
phase by ~ / 2 ,
the correlation would be zero. The
hemodynamic response function can be thought of as
a temporal point spread function that not only smooths
sensory input but also applies a shift in time. In other
words, these functions describe the physiological re-
sponse to a point (delta function or impulse) input, if
one were able to present such a stimulus. Clearly, to
assess the true "correlation" between a sensory param-
x(t) = A{E(v) + ~ ( t ) )
where x(t) is the observed signal at a particular time
(t), A{.} is a convolution operator modeling the effect
of the response function, E(V) is the evoked neuronal
transient as a function of time from stimulus onset (v),
and z(t) is an uncorrelated neuronal process represent-
ing fast intrinsic neuronal dynamics. The reason for
characterizing the intrinsic component in this way
comes from the observation that autocorrelations in
neuronal dynamics are most substantial in the 10-
100-ms range [Aertsen and Preissl, 1991; Nelson et al.,
19921 and are, therefore, very fast compared with
hemodynamics. Clearly, if neural dynamics showed
slower autocorrelations, the effective hernodynamic
response would embody some elements attributable
to these slow neuronal changes. This model highlights
the fact that observed autocorrelations have at least
two components: an evoked component due to the
convolved neuronal transient that is phase-locked to
the stimulus or task onset, and intrinsic autocorrela-
tions that result from intrinsic neuronal activity.
To the extent that the above model is true, the
autocorrelations and response function are directly
related. In particular, when no evoked changes in
neuronal activity occur (or any components phase-
locked to stimulus onset have been removed), the
intrinsic autocorrelations can be used to determine the
response function. The relationship (between intrinsic
autocorrelations and the effective response function)
furnishes a way of estimating the response function
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
directly from the physiological data that avoids any
assumptions about the input or evoked neuronal
activity. This is the second tenet on which the pro-
posed approach is based and is important because it
ensures that no bias exists when testing these assump-
tions post hoc.
Finally, temporal smoothness or autocorrelations
are important from the point of view of detecting sig-
nificant correlations between the input and observed
response. Even if no neuronal response is evoked, the
presence of intrinsic autocorrelations will increase the
probability of a spurious and high correlation coeffi-
cient. This follows from the fact that the effective degrees
of freedom associated with a measured correlation will
be smaller than the number of time points or scans. In
simple terms, for two time-series of fixed length, the
probability of obtaining a high correlation coefficient,
by chance, increases with smoothness. When assessing
the significance of cross-correlations between two
time-series, it is therefore necessary to account explic-
itly for the autocorrelations expected under the null
hypothesis (in this case the intrinsic autocorrelations).
This is the third tenet of our approach.
The stationariness of the intrinsic autocorrelations
(and implicitly the response function) referred to
above are in time. Stationariness in time does not
imply stationariness in space. In other words, it is
possible for the response function and the autocorrela-
tive behavior of hemodynamics to vary from region to
region, or voxel to voxel.
The relationship between intrinsic autocorrelations
(both spatial and temporal) and the effective degrees
of freedom is a general one and affects the analysis of
all functional imaging data, using any form of statisti-
cal parametric mapping. In what follows, this theme
occurs twice-in
deriving a statistical quotient, which
tests for significant temporal cross-correlations in the
presence of intrinsic autocorrelations; and threshold-
ing the resulting statistical parametric maps, which are
spatially autocorrelated.
We present below:
the theoretical aspects of assessing the signifi-
cance of correlations between sensory (cognitive
or motor) parameters and hemodynamic re-
sponses measured with MRI
an application to real data, and
an evaluation of the hemodynamic response func-
tion used in the preceding two subsections.
The objective of the described approach is to pro-
duce a statistical parametric map that can be thresh-
olded to identify significant correlations between a
given input parameter and regional hemodynamics.
This requires a statistical parameter that tests the
significance of the above correlation, and a technique
for thresholding the SPM that renders the probability
of identifying a significant region by chance suitably
small (e.g., 0.05). The latter techniques have already
been established in the context of functional imaging,
using the theory of stationary Gaussian processes with
known or measurable autocorrelation [Friston et al.,
19911. The problem, therefore, reduces to defining a
statistic that tests for the presence of significant cross-
correlations in the presence of intrinsic autocorrela-
The following relies on the theory of stationary
stochastic processes and, in particular, their represen-
tation in the frequency domain. The interested reader
will find an excellent review of the important standard
results (a number of which are used below) in Cox and
Miller [1980, pp. 309-3371. Covariance refers to the
average or expectation of the product of two processes
x and y (E{x(t) . y(t)}), after normalization to zero-
mean. Correlations refer to the same thing but when
the processes are normalized to unit variance. Correla-
tions can be thought of as normalized covariances.
Cross-correlation pXy(7) and cross-covariancefunctions yxy(~)
are functions that represent the magnitude of correla-
tion or covariance as a function of the temporal
displacement T (lag) between the processes x(t) and
y(t) (E(x(t) . y(t + T)}). Autocorrelation and autocovari-
ance functions, pXx(7) and yxx(~),
are simply the correla-
tions or covariances of a process with itself at some
time T later (E{x(t) . x(t + T ) ) ) . Clearly yxx(0) is the
variance of x(t).
Hernodynamic response function
In what follows, the expressions are in continuous
time and assume that real fh4RI time-series are reason-
ably approximated by continuous space-time pro-
cesses. Let the observed MRI time-series, at any point
in the brain, be modeled by a function of time x(t) and
let a time-dependent sensorimotor or cognitive param-
eter of interest be similarly modeled by c(t). We will
refer to this parameter as the contrast. In analyses of
(co-)variance, the contrast is used to test for a specific
profile of time-dependent changes. Both here and in
general, the contrast has zero-mean and unit variance.
The effects of delay and dispersion of the hemody-
namic response are modeled by a convolution opera-
tor A( .], e.g.:
c(t - T ) . h(T) dT.
+ Friston et al. +
The function h(T] is the (impulse) response function
and has an equivalent representation in frequency
space (o = 2~rf where f is frequency) called the trans-
fer function H(w): The transfer function is simply the
Fourier transform of the response function h(T]. The
particular form of h{T} reflects our assumptions (or
knowledge) about the effective hemodynamic re-
sponse function. It is a function of delay T . The average
or expected delay is simply the expectation associated
with h[T]. Similarly, the dispersion is the variance of
In the following, we assume a Poisson form for
The Poisson distribution is a parsimonious choice
because its mean and variance are equal and are
defined by a single parameter A. Keep in mind that the
values of T in Equation 3 are real positive integers. In
what follows, T has units of seconds. (If the repeat time
is not an integer valued number of seconds, then
Equation 3 could be replaced by a y-distribution with
appropriate moments.) It is, of course, possible to use
forms of h(T] that do not assume a relationship
between delay and dispersion (see Discussion). We
will validate the choice of a Poisson form in a subse-
quent section.
To account for the effects of delay and dispersion on
the cross-correlations between x(t) and c(t), we apply
A{.] to c(t) and examine the correlation between x(t)
and h(c(t)]. The contrast c(t) convolved with the
hemodynamic response function h(T} represents a
new contrast, which has been corrected for delay and
dispersive effects, and will be referred to as y(t). The
(power) spectral density of y(t) [gy(o)] is simply
related to the spectral density of c(t) [g,(o)] and the
transfer function H(o) [Cox and Miller, 19801:
way product of the spectral densities of c(t), h(7), and
x(t). The spectral density of x(t), under the null
hypothesis of no evoked neuronal activity, is specified
by the intrinsic autocorrelations. Given that these
spectral densities are either known or can be esti-
mated, the distribution of yXy(7), under the null hypoth-
esis, can be determined. These arguments are now
presented more formally.
The cross-covariance between the MRI time-series
x(t) and the convolved contrast y(t) will itself be a
stationary stochastic process with zero-mean. Further-
more, because yXy(7) is obtained by convolving x(t)
with y(t), yXy(7) represents a weighted sum of x(t) and,
by central limit theorem, will tend to a Gaussian
distribution [this assumption is only strictly true when
c(t) has non-zero values over an interval that is large
compared with the width of yXx(7)]. The variance of
Y x y ( 4 is:
where gxy(o) is the cross-spectral density of processes
x(t) and y(t) [Cox and Miller, 19801. gxy(w) can be
interpreted as the second-order probabilistic character-
istics (variance) of the orthogonal process sxy(o), in the
frequency domain, that is equivalent to yxy(~)
time domain, where (cf. Parseval's theorem):
where * denotes complex conjugate and sx(w) and
sy(o) are the spectral representations of processes x(t)
Let [u] = u.u*. Now if s,(w)
are independent
{equivalently ifxft) and y(t) are independent):
Testing for significant cross-correlations in the
presence of intrinsic autocorrelations
In this subsection, we observe that yx,(0), the covari-
ance of interest, has approximately a Gaussian distribu-
tion. The variance of this distribution (over many
realizations at one voxel or many voxels in one
realization) is the same as the variance of yXy(7) over
time T . The variance of yXy(7) is its spectral density,
integrated over frequencies. Because yXy(7) is eff ec-
tively the contrast, convolved with the response func-
tion, convolved with the MRI time-series, its spectral
density, under the null hypothesis, is simply the three-
[cf. Theorem 6F in Grimmett and Welsh, 19861. Equa-
tion 7 expresses the fact that the cross-spectral density
is the product of the densities of the two underlying
processes, given that they are independent (i.e., no
systematic phase relationship exists). Combining Equa-
tions 5 and 7:
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
Equation 8 expresses the variance of the cross-
covariance function as an integral (sum) over all
frequencies. The variance at each frequency, under
the null hypothesis, is the product of the variances
(spectral densities) of the underlying processes.
The stationariness of yXy(.) implies that the variance
of yXy(7) is not a function of time and, therefore,
V(yxy(0)] (over multiple realizations) = V{yx,(~)} (over
time). So, the quotient:
will, under the null hypothesis, have (roughly) a
Gaussian distribution of unit variance and zero-mean.
This is also called the z-score. A statistical parametric
map of ((0) is referred to as a SPMjz}. c(0) can be
thought of as the correlafion between x(t) and y(t) times
the square root of the effective degrees of freedom (v).
To compute v, one needs to estimate gy(o) and gx(o).
The estimation of gy(o) is straightforward. However,
the estimation of gx(w) due to intrinsic autocorrela-
tions [gx(w) under the null hypothesis] requires a little
more thought.
Estimating g,(w),
gx(w), and the hemodynamic
response function h(T)
Clearly, if c(t) and h(7) were sufficiently well be-
haved, gy(w) could be determined analytically as in
Equation 4 [using g,(o) and H(o)]. However, in prac-
tice it is considerably easier simply to compute the
spectral density of y(t) [after convolving c(t) with h ( ~ ) ]
using fast Fourier transforms, and thereby estimate
g,(w) directly.
The estimation of gx(o), the spectral density of the
MRI time-series, under the null hypothesis, is more
problematic, given that the short and noisy time-series
that are typically available, and that the null hypoth-
esis is (hopefully) seldom true and the autocorrela-
tions (and spectral densities) of x(t) will contain both
evoked and intrinsic components. To obtain an esti-
mate of gx(w), under fhe null hypofhesis, it is necessary to
discount evoked contributions. This is simply achieved
by removing components that are phase-locked to the
stimulus onset. In our work, this is done by analyzing
the time-series from one stimulus-cycle minus the
time-series from another, namely, the phase-shifted
differences. A.related device, called the ”shift predictor,”
is found in the analysis of separable neuronal spike-
trains recorded with multiunit electrodes. The shift
predictor is used to remove the confounding effect of
stimulus-locked firing, when assessing the CYOSS-
correlations between two units. In the present case,
we wish to remove confounding stimulus-locked ef-
fects on estimated autocorrelations. In the following
xp(t) will refer to the difference in ( p ) phase-shifted
MRI time-series. From Equations 1 and 2,
where q is the stimulus or task period (or cycle length),
and p is an integer greater than 0. Because z(t) is
modeled as an uncorrelated stochastic process (innova-
tion), the spectral and auto-correlative properties of
xp(t) correspond to those of x(t) in the absence of
evoked transients. Equivalently, under the null hypoth-
esis, Pxx(.>
= P x p x p b ) and gx(w>/varlx(t)l = g x p ( 4 /
var{xp(t)l.
Although it is possible to estimate gxp(o) by subject-
ing xp(t) to Fourier transformation, we use the follow-
ing expedient method. If one assumes that the intrin-
sic autocorrelations [pxpxp(h)] can be modeled by a
Gaussian autocorrelation function of the form:
[Cox and Miller, 19801. The constants of proportional-
ity implicit in Equation 11 cancel in Equation 9 and do
not affect v. The parameter ut reflects the intrinsic
smoothness of x(t) and is estimated in a computation-
ally efficient way using the equality:
ut = var(x,(t)] . [2 var{d~,/dt]j-*/~.
This relationship follows from Equation 11 and the
standard result: V[dx/dt} = -Y;~:(O) [Cox and Miller,
19801. Refer to Friston et al. for a more thorough
discussion. Whatever phase-shifting strategy is used,
xp(t) will always be shorter than x(t). From a practical
point of view, this means that the low-frequency
components of gx(w) cannot be estimated directly.
Modeling gx(o) with a Gaussian (or any other) distribu-
tion provides for an estimate of these low compo-
Friston et al.
A process with autocovariance given by Equation 11
is obtained by convolving a random uncorrelated
process with a Gaussian point spread function of
parameter ut. If one were to assume (see Equation 10)
that the MRI time-series were a result of convolving an
unknown but uncorrelated underlying neuronal pro-
cess with the temporal point spread function h(T),
then the estimate of ut also specifies A (the delay or
dispersion). This follows from the fact that the Gauss-
ian and Poisson functions are very similar for large
values of A (they are identical in the limit) where:
The empirically derived value of ut, based on the
data set described below, was 0.92 scan. This corre-
sponds to a delay and dispersion (A) of 7.69 s, which
falls comfortably in the reported ranges [Bandettini,
19931. There is no direct information about delay (as
opposed to dispersion) in ut. The reason that our
hemodynamic response function can be entirely speci-
fied by ut depends on the Poisson assumption implicit
in Equation 3.
To summarize this section: A single parameter ut can
be estimated from the ratio of the variances of the
time-series and its derivative. This parameter (tempo-
ral smoothness) not only provides an efficient and
complete estimate of the spectral density of the time-
series (assuming the density is Gaussian), but it can
also be used to fix the parameter of the response
function (assuming the function is Poisson). This
single parameter is all that one needs to estimate, in
calculating the effective degrees of freedom (v) for the
correlation of interest.
Thresholding the SPM[z)
The final stage of analysis involves identifying a
threshold that protects against experiment-wise false
positives. The key thing to note is that, due to the
spatial autocorrelations in the SPM(z], the number of
voxels expected to be above threshold (u) is far more
than the number of regions (or maxima) above thresh-
old. Because we are concerned with activated regions
(connected subsets of the total excursion set = t(0) 2 u)
and not voxels, a Bonferroni correction is not appropri-
ate (a Bonferroni correction is based on the expected
number of voxels). Current approaches [Friston et al.,
1991; Worsley et al., 19921 use the fact that the
relationship between the probability of getting at least
one region above u (P) and the expected number of
regions (or maxima) (k), tends to equality as u gets
very large. The expected number of maxima depends
on the threshold (u), smoothness (us), and size of the
SPM (S). For an SPM{z] of D dimensions:
[Hasofer, 1978; Adler and Hasofer, 19811. us is the
spatial smoothness of the SPM and is estimated accord-
ing to Equation 12, but using partial derivatives in
space over rows and columns. The appropriate thresh-
old is chosen such that P = 0.05. Refer to Friston et al.
(19911 for a derivation of an equivalent equation
(directly in terms of regions) in the context of func-
tional imaging. A related approach based on the Euler
characteristic has also been devised [Worsley et al.,
19921. It is, of course, acceptable to present SPMs
thresholded without this correction for multiple non-
independent comparisons. In this case, the SPM is
referred to as “descriptive,” and an uncorrected one-
tailed threshold of P = 0.001 is usually recommended
(i.e., 3.09 for SPM{z]). Thresholding and interpreting
SPMs comprise, a branch of spatial statisks that is
receiving a lot of attention. The thresholding de-
scribed in this paper represents a simple and estab-
lished approach, but is not necessarily the most power-
ful. Refer to Friston et al. [in press] for a more current
The theories presented above used processes in
continuous time and relied on a number of approxima-
tions (usually exact in the limit). To assess the robust-
ness of the expressions presented here, we applied the
results to a simulated MRI data set.
Validation using simulated data
The parameters of the simulated data were chosen
to correspond to the real MRI data analyzed in the
next section. Sixty images of 32 X 32 voxels were
created by convolving an uncorrelated random num-
ber field with a three-dimensional Gaussian kernel of
parameter 1.4 voxels, within the images, and 0.9 over
time. The data were phase-shifted and subtracted,
assuming a stimulus-cycle period of 20 scans. In the
example presented here, and in those below, the
differences between all possible pairs of stimulus-
cycles were analyzed and the results averaged over all
pairs. According to Equation 12, the estimate of tempo-
ral smoothness was 0.905 scan and compares well with
the expected value of 0.9. Assuming a repeat time of 3
s, these simulated data would have a temporal smooth-
ness (crJ of 2.71 s. This degree of smoothness would be
produced by a temporal point spread function of
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
Poisson parameter 7.37 s. ((7) was computed, accord-
ing to Equation 9, for all voxels, using a square-wave
contrast c(t) period of 20 scans (10 scans ”on” and 10
scans ”off’) and a Poisson response function with X =
7.37 s. The resulting distribution of { ( T ) was deter-
mined by pooling across voxels and lag (.).
simulated distribution was compared with the theoreti-
cally predicted Gaussian distribution.
The results of this simulation are shown in Figure 1.
The response function is shown (top left) with the
resulting contrast before [c(t)] and after [y(t)] convolu-
tion with h(.) (top right). The agreement between the
empirical and theoretical distributions of ((7) is clearly
evident (lower left). The corresponding SPM{z] of {(O)
is shown in the lower right. The highest value of ((0)
obtained in this realization was 3.57. The time-series
from the corresponding voxel is displayed with the
contrasts (dotted line, top right). These high values
(and apparent “following” of the contrast) can easily
occur by chance and should not be overinterpreted in
real data. No value exceeded the corrected threshold
(broken vertical line, bottom left), which was 3.79
according to Equation 14 and the post hoc estimate of
spatial smoothness (Equation 12). This estimated spa-
tial smoothness (averaged over both dimensions) was
1.45 voxels and compares favorably with the expected
value of 1.4 voxels.
ANALYSIS OF MRI TIME-SERIES
Data acquisition
The data used to illustrate the method were a
time-series of 64 gradient-echo EPI single coronal
slices (5 mm thick, 64 x 64 voxels) through the calca-
rine sulcus and extrastriate areas. Images were ob-
tained every 3 s from a single subject using a 4.0-T
whole body system, fitted with a small (27-cm diam-
eter) z-gradient coil (TE 25 ms, acquisition time 41 ms).
Photic stimulation (at 16 Hz) was provided by goggles
fitted with light-emitting diodes. The stimulation was
off for the first ten scans (30 s), on for the second ten,
off for the third, and so on. Images were reconstructed
without phase correction. The data were interpolated
from 64 x 64 voxels to 128 x 128 voxels. Each voxel
thus represented 1.25 x 1.25 x 5 mm of cerebral tissue.
Data preprocessing
Image manipulations and data analysis were per-
formed in Matlab (Mathworks Inc., Sherborn, MD).
The first four scans were removed to avoid magnetic
saturation effects. The scans were corrected for (slight)
subject movement using nonlinear minimization and
a computationally efficient cubic interpolation algo-
rithm [Keys, 19811. Images were translated and rotated
to minimize the sum of squares between each of the 64
images and their average (both scaled to the same
mean intensity) using the Levenberg-Marquardt
method [More, 19771. Only the 36 x 60 voxel subparti-
tions (of the original images) containing the brain
were subject to further analysis. All the time-series, for
each voxel, were normalized to a mean of zero and
convolved, in the time domain, with a Gaussian filter
(full width at half maximum = 1.5 voxels) to suppress
thermal noise.
Computing ((0)
The real data were treated in an identical fashion to
the simulated data. The temporal smoothness (a7)
estimated using Equation 12 to be 0.92, as mentioned
above. This estimate was the mean over all intracere-
bra1 voxels and corresponded to a value of 7.69 s for A,
the parameter of our assumed Poisson response func-
tion h(7). To demonstrate that modeling intrinsic
autocorrelations with a Gaussian form is reasonable,
the empirical intrinsic autocorrelation functions and
corresponding spectral density [gx(w)] are shown in
Figure 2. These functions were obtained by averaging
estimates over the differences between all pairs of 20
scan stimulation periods (phase-shifted differences).
The data were windowed with a Hanning function
before being subject to Fourier transform. The solid
lines in Figure 2 correspond to the autocorrelations
(and spectral density) that would be obtained by
convolving an uncorrelated innovation with a Poisson
function of parameter 7.69 s. The determination of the
appropriate Poisson parameter does not require com-
putation of either the autocorrelation function or
spectral density, but uses the variance of the first
derivatives as in Equation 12. These data are pre-
sented only to validate the Gaussian approximation
The contrast c(t) used in this example was, again, a
square-wave that was positive during photic stimula-
tion and negative otherwise. c(t) had zero-mean and
unit variance. The measured correlation between y(t)
and the MRI time-series x(t) was computed for all
voxels and scaled by ,/u according to Equation 9 to
produce ((0). Jv was 4.58, corresponding to 21 effective
degrees of freedom. In other words, one accrues a
“degree of freedom” every 2.85 scans. The reason v is
the same for all voxels is that we assumed that the
response function and intrinsic autocorrelations (and
for gx(0).
Friston et al. +
response function
time {scans}
convolved contrast {y(t)}
time {scans}
Analysis of a simulated data set. Top left: The assumed hemody-
namic response function h($, which has a Poisson distribution with
parameter 7.37 s. Top right: The original square-wave contrast
[broken line, c(t)], the contrast convolved with assumed response
function [solid line, y(t)], and the response of the simulated voxel
data x(t) that best correlated with the convolved contrast (dotted
line). Bottom left: The distribution (over voxels and time) of [(T)
calculated according to Equation 9 (dotted line). This distribution is
indistinguishable from that predicted theoretically (solid line). The
broken vertical line is the threshold that any value would have to
reach to be considered significant at P = 0.05 according to Equation
14. Bottom right: The corresponding SPM(z), a statistical paramet-
ric map of ((0). The gray scale is arbitrary and has been scaled to
the maximum and minimum of the SPM.
spectral density) were the same everywhere. Clearly,
one does not have to assume this (see Discussion).
The results of this analysis are given in Figure 3. The
hemodynamic response function, based on the empiri-
cally determined "smoothness" of the time-series, is
displayed to the left of the contrast before and after
convolution. The dotted line in the top right graph is
the response of the voxel showing the greatest correla-
tion. The distribution of ((0) (bottom left) is dramati-
cally skewed, with almost all voxels showing a marked
positive correlation with the convolved contrast. The
highest value of i(0) was 4.44. The corresponding
SPM{z] is displayed in the bottom right.
Thresholding the SPM
The spatial smoothness (a,) was computed accord-
ing to Equation 12 over all the rows and columns of
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
time {seconds}
frequency { c ycl es/sec}
Actual and assumed intrinsic autocorrelation and spectral densities.
Empirical estimates of the intrinsic autocorrelation function and
spectral density compared with those based on temporal smooth-
ness. Left: The autocorrelation function of the difference between
the MRI time-series from one stimulus cycle and another (phase-
shifted differences), averaged over all voxels and all pairs of cycles
the SPM{z]. The means of these estimates was 1.46
voxels, or 1.81 mm. With a search volume (S) of 2,160
voxels, and a P value of 0.05, the threshold according
to Equation 14 was 3.97. Figure 4 shows the results of
this thresholding. The picture on the left illustrates
that the number of voxels above the threshold far
exceeds the number of regions. The reason for this is,
of course, spatial smoothness in the underlying pro-
cess. This discrepancy between the expected number
of suprathreshold voxels and the expected number of
regions in the excursion set means that a Bonferroni
correction based on voxel expectation is not appropri-
ate. This follows from the fact that one requires the
expected number of regions to be 0.05. The striate and
extrastriate regions constituting the excursion set can
all be considered significant in a strict statistical sense.
They include V1 bilaterally and (on the right) V2
dorsal to the calcarine fissure. Extrastriate regions in
the fusiform, lingual, and dorsolateral cortices are also
A null analysis
To demonstrate the specificity of the approach, we
repeated an identical analysis but changed the period
(broken line). The autocorrelation function obtained by convolving
an uncorrelated innovation with a Poisson function based on the
measured temporal smoothness is also shown (solid line). Right:
The corresponding empirical (dots) and assumed (solid line)
spectral densities of the phase-shifted differences.
of the contrast c(t) from 20 scans to 16 scans. This
simple manipulation eliminated all the significant
voxels. In fact, the highest value of {(O) was only 2.719.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 5 using
the same format as in Figures 1 and 3.
VALIDATION OF THE HEMODYNAMIC
RESPONSE FUNCTION
Validation in the time domain
Thus far, it has been assumed that the hemody-
namic response function h(7) is reasonably “correct,”
and we have proceeded to assess the ability of the
contrast c(t) to explain the observed changes. One can
take the opposite approach and estimate h(7) by
assuming c(t) is correct. In previous sections, we have
assumed a Poisson form for h(7) and have used the
empirically determined temporal smoothness to specify
an appropriate parameter. In this section, we present a
post hoc validation of h(7) by computing it directly,
using the contrast c(t) as the input function and the
brain’s response as the output function. Although this
could be done at each voxel, a more robust estimate is
obtained if some global response is used. This global or
Friston et al.
response function
convolved contrast (y(t)}
time {seconds}
time (seconds}
Analysis of a real data set. As for Figure I, but using real data. In this case, the distribution (lower left) is for ((0) (dotted line) and is
dramatically skewed with respect to the distribution predicted under the iiull hypothesis (solid line).
distributed output function was the response of the
first spatial mode (principal component or eigenim-
age) based on the between-voxel covariances.
The first spatial mode or eigenimage is defined by
the first eigenvector of the covariance matrix of the
MRI time-series. If x corresponds to a matrix with 60
rows (one for each scan) and 2,160 columns (one for
each voxel) of the time-series for each voxel, then the
eigenvector solution e is simply computed using
singular value decomposition [Golub and Van Loan,
19911 such that:
xTx.e = e . R
denotes transposition and R is a diagonal
matrix of eigenvalues. The column of e corresponding
to the largest eigenvalue is the first spatial mode or
eigenimage el. This mode constitutes a distributed
brain system with high intracovariance or functional
connectivity. Refer to Friston et al. [1993b] for a
complete discussion. The response of el is given by:
r = x ' e ,
where r is a column vector of length 60. Using
least-squares deconvolution, one can directly estimate
the response function that best transforms input c(t) to
output r. The results of this deconvolution are shown
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
signficiant covariances
Thresholding the SPM[z]. Left: The SPM(z) from Figure 3 is presented as a surface rendering, with
the corrected threshold (corrected for multiple nonindependent comparisons according to Equation
14). Right: The resulting “excursion set” is highlighted and includes VI and several extrastriate
regions according to the atlas of Talairach and Tournoux [ 19881.
in Figure 6, where the ”memory” of the convolution
has been restricted to ten scans. The first eigenimage
or mode (top left) reveals high loadings in the same
areas identified by the more conventional (hypothesis-
led) analysis of the previous sections. The correspond-
ing response is shown with the contrast (top right).
The results of the least-squares deconvolution (dots)
agree remarkably with the hemodynamic response
function based only on the temporal autocorrelations
(broken line). The predicted and actual responses of
the first mode are compared in the lower right. The
predicted time courses are simply the contrast con-
volved with h(7) (broken line) and the empirically
determined response function (solid line). It is appar-
ent that the empirical response function has a slightly
more protracted tail, with some hint of biphasic structure.
One might conjecture that this feature may reflect macro-
vascular effects as remote regions are drained.
Validation in the frequency domain
The hemodynamic response function “behaves es-
sentially as a low-pass filter in the detection of neuro-
nal firing” [Bandettini, 19931. In other words, higher-
frequency inputs are more severely attenuated than
low-frequency inputs. The dependency of output
variance on input frequency is captured by the
(squared) transfer function 1H(w) I seen in Figure 7
(left). This example is for a Poisson parameter of 5 s
and demonstrates the downwards modulation of out-
put variance with increasing frequency of a periodic
input. For example, the variance of a periodic input at
0.1 cycles/s (a stimulus cycle length of 10 s) is attenu-
ated to about 20 percent. The hemodynamic response
function can provide quite a powerful prediction of
the brain’s capacity to follow a periodic stimulus when
presented at increasing frequencies. Bandettini et al.
have examined this phenomenon using fast, self-
paced, sequential finger-thumb opposition at different
on-off switching frequencies, ranging from period
lengths of 50 s (e.g./ 25 s of finger opposition and 25 at
rest) to 2 s. The data reported in Bandettini are
in terms of relative activation or amplitude of re-
sponse. These data are in excellent agreement with
theoretical predictions based on a Poisson hemody-
namic response function (Fig. 7, left). The theoretical
values were derived by simply convolving a square-
wave contrast of appropriate frequency with a Pois-
son response function (parameter 5 s) and taking the
maximum amplitude difference. The Poisson param-
eter used here (5 s) is smaller than that calculated on
the basis of our photic stimulation data and may
reflect a number of differences, including:
differences in the neuronal response to varying
task conditions
+ Friston et al.
time {seconds}
Null analysis of real data. Exactly as for Figure 3, but with a change to the contrast (the “on-off’ cycle period has been reduced from 20
scans to 16). The impact on the distribution of ((0) (lower left) is clearly evident.
differences due to relative microvascular and mac-
rovascular contributions to the hemodynamic re-
sponse (secondary to different acquisition param-
eters), or
differences in motor vs. visual cortex, hemody-
namic response.
analysis are shown in Figure 8 as a distribution of
phase differences between the contrast [c(t)J and the
signal [x(t)] over all intracranial voxels. Distribution is
broad, but centered on the delay estimated on the
basis of temporal smoothness alone. Anecdotally it
appears that the longer delays (greater phase-differ-
ences) are characteristic of regions that would be more
subject to macrovascular effects (see next section).
Validation in terms of phase shifts
A simple and powerful way to estimate the delay
associated with the hemodynamic response is to com-
pute the phase shifts of the largest Fourier component
of the input sequence at each voxel. The results of this
Effects of changing h
In this final section, we present a brief analysis of the
effects of changing X. To assess the sensitivity of
+ Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series +
1 st eigenimage {mode}
delay = 7.70 se
..................... *..-..
Estimating the response function directly. Top left: The first spatial
mode or eigenimage of the real data. The gray scale is arbitrary and
has been scaled to the image maximum. Darker means a higher
loading. Only positive loadings are shown. Note the correspon-
dence between this profile and the significantly “activated” regions
in Figure 3. Top right: The assumed input c(t) (solid line) and the
response of the first mode or eigenimage (dots). Lower left: The
detecting significant correlations to changes in the
parameter A, we repeated the analysis based on {(O)
while systematically increasing A from 0 to 16 s in 0.1-s
steps. We used the “exceedence proportion” as an
index of the overall or ”omnibus” sensitivity to signifi-
cant correlations. The exceedence proportion is the
proportion of voxels in the SPM{z} that are above
threshold. This exceedence proportion has been used
input and response (1st mode}
time (seconds}
time {seconds}
response function based only on the intrinsic temporal smoothness
(a function of the variance of the first derivative) of the MRI data
(broken line) and the response function obtained by least-squares
deconvolution (dots), based on an assumed input c(t) and the first
mode’s response. Lower right: The actual response (dots) and the
response predicted using the Poisson response function (dotted
line) and the least-squares deconvolution estimate (broken line).
for some years as a rough guide to the omnibus
significance of SPMs [Friston et a]., 19901 and has
recently been the subject of some rigorous statistical
analysis [Worsley and Vandal, submitted].
The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 9
(top). The first thing to note is that the greatest
exceedence proportion is obtained for values of A in
the range 6 to 8 s. The value used in the previous
6 Friston et al.
modulation tranfer function
input frequency { cycles/sec}
on-off cycle period {seconds}
Transfer functions. Left: The modulation transfer function expressed as the square of the frequency
representation of a hernodynamic response function. Right: Relative activation expressed as a
function of “on-off’ cycle length. The data are copied from the graphical data in Bandettini [ 19931,
and the solid line represents that predicted with a hernodynamic response function of Poisson form
and parameter 5 s.
section (7.69) is marginally suboptimal (the best value
was 6.6 s). One explanation for this was found in a
closer analysis of these results.
If the optimal value of A is computed for each voxel,
one observes a systematic and spatially ordered change
as one moves from striate cortex to extrastriate cortex,
with the extrastriate cortices preferring a shorter delay
and dispersion. In other words, some regions of occipi-
tal cortex respond in a more acute and phasic way to
the same sensory input than do others. Figure 8 (lower
right) shows these voxel-specific optimal values of A
for all voxels that showed a reasonable correlation
with the convolved contrast (noncorrected threshold
of P = 0.001, lower left). This result is not surprising,
given the reported evidence for phase shifts in re-
sponse profiles (of several seconds) in MRI data
[Bandettini, 19931. What is surprising here is that the
extrastriate regions appear to respond before primary
visual cortex does. Obviously many potential neuro-
nal and hemodynamic explanations exist for this (e.g.,
slice reentrant large draining vessels). However, one
interesting possibility is that V1 responses are modu-
lated by reentrant connections [Edelman, 19781 from
extrastriate regions. This particular aspect of interre-
gional dynamics will be addressed in a subsequent
In conclusion, based on the exceedence proportion,
the approach appears robust as long as A is within a
second or so of the real delay and dispersion.
DISCUSSION
We have described what we consider to be a
reasonable characterization of MRI time-series in terms
of regionally specific correlations between a sensorimo-
tor or cognitive input and the hemodynamic response.
This approach is based on the correlations between
the MRI signal and the input sequence convolved
with an estimate of the hemodynamic response func-
tion. The hemodynamic response function (in this
paper) was assumed to be Poisson and was deter-
mined using the observed autocorrelations in the
physiological data (having removed stimulus-locked
components). To give this approach statistical validity,
it was brought into the framework of statistical para-
metric mapping by using a statistical parameter that
tests for significant cross-correlations (between sen-
sory input and physiological response) in the presence
Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series
analysis of delay in terms of phase
phase difference (seconds)
Phase differences and delay. The distribution of phase differences between the contrast and the response at each voxel. The phase
difference was computed for the largest Fourier component of the contrast (input). The vertical broken line is the delay estimated on the
basis of temporal smoothness.
of intrinsic autocorrelations; and using established
thresholding techniques to render the probability of
finding a significant region, by dhance, suitably small
In particular, the proposed statistic ((0) has a Gauss-
ian distribution, under the null hypothesis, and the
resulting map of <(O) constitutes a SPM{z). c(O) is
simply the correlation between convolved sensory
input and hemodynamic response, scaled by a factor
that can be thought of as the square root of the
effective degrees of freedom w. w is a function of the
distribution and overlap of the two processes in
frequency space.
One important aspect of this work is that the
hemodynamic response function, or temporal point
spread function, is estimated without reference to any
assumed input (it is estimated using intrinsic autocor-
relations in the physiological data only). Any estima-
tion based on the sensory input would clearly result in
a rather circular exercise, in that the technique would
be biased towards the input function used.
A number of alternative approaches to the problem
of detecting significant cross-correlations exist, some
of which we have evaluated. One obvious approach is
to use the maximum cross-correlation between c(t)
and x(t) over some reasonable interval YJT),,,~~. This is
+ Friston et al. +
I a rg es t zeta (0)
lambda (seconds}
threshold {u} = 3.09
Effects of changing the response function. Top: The exceedence
proportion (number of voxels above threshold P = 0.001) as a
function of A. Lower left The SPM(z) thresholded at a descriptive
(noncorrected) level of P = 0.001 (one-tailed). In this instance, the
voxel values are the largest ((0) obtained over a range of A. Lower
right: The optimal value of A for all voxels surviving a P = 0.001
simply achieved by computing y,,(~) and thresholding
in space and time according to Equation 14. For slice
data, the SPM{y,,(7)) represents a three-dimensional
process. For volume MRI data, the corresponding SPM
would be four-dimensional. We have tried this ap-
proach and found it to be less sensitive and robust
than the one we have presented. Another test for
significant cross-correlations would be to integrate
y,,(~) over some reasonable interval, or, more gener-
ally, take a weighted sum over an interval. In fact, the
method described in this paper is exactly equivalent to
taking a weighted sum of ycx(7), where the weighting
is defined by the hemodynamic response function
corresponding lambda
threshold (voxels highlighted in the lower left). The optimal value of
A is defined as that which provides the greatest ((0). The gray scale
is arbitrary with small values of A (faster and more acute responses)
being brighter. Note that VI (centrornedial dark areas) appear to
be subject to the greatest delay and dispersion.
h(7). This can be seen by noting that the weighted sum
of the cros~-covariance function is obtained by the
three-way convolution [c(t) O x(t)] 0
h(7). By the
commutivity of the convolution operator (O),
equal to [c(t) O h ( ~ ) ] 0
x(t). The latter expression rep-
resents the cross-correlation between the convolved
contrast and x(t), which is precisely what has been
The choice of a Poisson form for the hemodynamic
response function means that delay and dispersion
are totally confounded. We have examined the effects
of varying the assumed delay and dispersion sepa-
rately, using the exceedence proportion as a measure
Analysis of Functional MRI Time-Series
of omnibus sensitivity. In these analyses, we used the
y-distribution, which has two parameters and allows
the independent manipulation of mean and variance.
We did not report the results of this analysis because
they did not contribute any significant insight. In
general, the exceedence proportion showed exactly
the same dependence on delay as for the Poisson
form. The dependence on dispersion was much less
marked. We could have used a Gaussian response
function and set the delay equal to dispersion (for
large values of A, this and the Poisson function are the
same). The aesthetic advantage of the Poisson func-
tion is that it only exists for positive lag (7).
Obviously, there are many variants on the details
we have presented here. The central tenets of the
approach are:
Regonal specific associations are assessed be-
tween neuronal activity and a stimulus or task
parameter in terms of correlations.
The appropriate correlation is between the ob-
served hemodynamic response and the hypoth-
esized input, which has been convolved with a
response function.
The response function is specified without refer-
ence to an assumed input.
Care is taken to ensure that, in the absence of any
response, intrinsic temporal and spatial autocorre-
lations do not subtend spurious correlations (i.e.,
the experiment-wise false-positive rate is main-
tained at a suitably low level).
Within these constraints, a number of variants
deserve mention. First, in the analysis above, it was
assumed that the response function and intrinsic
autocorrelations were the same for all voxels. An
identical analysis performed in parallel for each voxel
would allow for regional variation in the response
function. Our analyses (see last section) suggest that
these regional variations can be substantial. This exten-
sion would certainly increase sensitivity, but would
require long time-series, to ensure robust estimates of
the intrinsic spectral density gx(o). A second variant
would involve estimating the response function on
the basis of independent data; for example, a second
study or dividing the same study into two sections
and using the SVD or PCA approach and least-squares
deconvolution (Haxby J, personal communication).
Although we used temporal smoothness to estimate
both the intrinsic spectral density of the MRI signal
and the response function, it is important to note that
the first application is mandatory; the second is not.
Any response function will, under the null hypothesis,
render the distribution of {(O) Gaussian. Despite the
fact that sensitivity to real change will be optimized
when the dispersion or variance of the response
function "matches" the intrinsic autocorrelations, no
statistical requirement exists for this matching to be
implemented. In other words, the response function is
a personal choice. Complicated biphasic response
functions are attractive in the sense that they are
capable of modeling the "undershoot" effect. How-
ever, the data did not suggest that this extension was
justified in the examples above.
One particular constraint imposed by a Poisson
form is that delay and dispersion are yoked. This may
be inappropriate for some data, and this constraint
should not be considered a cornerstone of the pro-
posed method. One particular fallacy of linkmg the
delay and dispersion is revealed when considering the
effect of temporal smoothing of the data to increase
signal to noise. Here, the underlying response func-
tion will be subject to this smoothing; and its effective
dispersion will increase. This would be correctly de-
tected and modeled by post hoc estimates of smooth-
ness. However, the "correct" delay will not have
changed. In some instances, it may be best to fix the
response function to some appropriate delay and
allow its variance to be dictated by uf (e.g., using the
y-distribution).
In the method presented, the impact of thermal
noise was suppressed by temporal smoothing at a data
preprocessing stage. With longer time-series, it may be
possible to adopt a more formal approach by segregat-
ing the data into an uncorrelated white (or Raleigh)
noise and a physiological autocorrelated process. Many
linear devices exist for this sort of analysis (e.g.,
autoregressive and moving average models). How-
ever, they are usually not considered in the context of
very short time-series.
Correlations or categories?
The principle of correlating sensorial or behavioral
parameters with cerebral excitation has a long history
in neuroscience, from the days of Goltz and Ferrier
[eg, Ferrier, 1875; Goltz, 1881; Phillips et al., 19841 to
modern-day approaches that use exogenous stimula-
tion, e.g., magneto-simulation or endogenous activity
(PET and MRI). Correlations in microelectrode record-
ing and functional imaging data have received special
attention recently, as they are a possible index of
functional and effective connectivity [Gerstein and
Perkel, 1969; Friston et al., 1993133.
Although a fundamental equivalence exists be-
tween testing for specific time-dependent changes
with contrasts in analysis of (co-)variance of PET data
and correlating a time-dependent parameter with
+ Friston et al. +
MRI data , it is important to acknowl-
edge the differences: MRI data represent time-series
that lend themselves directly to signal processing. For
example, in this paper, using a few standard results
from the theory of stochastic processes, one can solve
the problem of detecting cross-correlations in the
presence of autocorrelations and avoid what could
have been a discursive and dense statistical analysis.
This paper has focused exclusively on correlations
for detecting significant activations. An alternative,
found in the recent functional MRI literature, is to
categorize the MRI time-series into activation and
baseline scans and express the mean difference in
some form. Researchers have had profound reserva-
tions about this approach related to the observation
that the residual MRI signal around the mean for each
stimulus-cycle is not normally distributed [Baker J,
personal communication]. The analysis presented in
this paper concurs with these reservations. Although
the residual variability about the convolved contrast
y(t) is normally distributed, the probability that it will
be similarly distributed about a horizontal line run-
ning from stimulus onset to offset is low. The MRI
time-series reflects a true dynamic response to an
input, characterized by its response function. To pre-
tend that this response following stimulus onset con-
stitutes a single category is not really tenable. The
proper way to categorize these time-series conceptu-
ally is in terms of offset from stimulus onset. For
example, the set of first scans after stimulus onset is a
different category from the set of second scans follow-
ing stimulus onset. The residuals about the means of
these categories will be normally distributed. The
convolved contrast implicitly assumes the latter form
of categorization because only these scans have the
same values of y(t).
Implicit in phase-shifting (as a tool to estimate
intrinsic autocorrelations) is the requirement that
stimulus cycles are continuously repeated. A funda-
mental point to be made here is: If implementation of
intrasubject signal averaging in its broadest sense is
the goal, then multiple presentations of the same
stimulus-cycle are obligatory (the more the better).
This places significant constraints on experimental
design. The key theme, again, is that the object that is
averaged is a complete stimulus-cycle, not repeated scans
within a cycle. A failure to recognize this will sacrifice all
the rich nonlinear information about an evoked neuro-
nal and hemodynamic transient for the apparent ease
of simple categorical comparisons. Ironically, this non-
linearity invalidates a parametric approach to averag-
ing scans from the same stimulus-cycle (see above).
In the context of MRI data, correlational approaches
offer many advantages over alternative approaches.
One key issue is that the correlation between sensory
input and hemodynamics will not be sensitive to any
artifact that is orthogonal (independent) to the input.
These artifacts include movement artifacts and low-
frequency aliasing artifacts due to an interaction be-
tween the repeat time and cardiac, respiratory, and
heart rate variability cycles. The proposed approach
has the following interesting feature regarding move-
ment artifacts. Because the effect of movement on
signal is not subject to delay or dispersion (whereas
the effect of evoked neuronal activity is), convolving
the contrast with a hemodynamic response function
will render the correlations insensitive to movement
associated with changing stimuli or tasks.
In conclusion, we hope to have presented some
reasonable solutions to a relatively simple problem-
how to identify regionally specific correlations be-
tween sensory, cognitive, or behavioral parameters
and cerebral physiology measured with functional
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Jack Belliveau, John Baker, Jim
Haxby, and Nick Lange for helpful discussions about
these issues. The work by K.J.F. was performed as part
of the Institute Fellows in Theoretical Neurobiology
research program at The Neurosciences Institute,
which is supported by the Neurosciences Research
Foundation. The Foundation receives major support
for this research from the J.D. and C.T. MacArthur
Foundation and the Lucille P. Markey Charitable
Trust. K.J.F. was a W.M. Keck Foundation Fellow.