Multi-period Optimal Energy Procurement and
Demand Responses in Smart Grid with Uncertain
Libin Jiang and Steven H. Low
Abstract—We propose a simple model that integrates multiperiod electricity markets, uncertainty in renewable generation,
and real-time dynamic demand response. A load-serving entity
decides its day-ahead procurement to optimize expected social
welfare a day before energy delivery. At delivery time when
renewable generation is realized, it sets prices to manage demand
and purchase additional power on the real-time market, if necessary, to balance supply and demand. We derive the optimal dayahead decision, propose real-time demand response algorithm,
and study the effect of volume and variability of renewable
generation on these optimal decisions and on social welfare.
Consider a set N of households/users that are served by a
single load-serving entity (LSE). The LSE participates in the
wholesale electricity markets (day-ahead, real-time balancing,
and ancillary services, etc) to purchase electricity from generators and then sell it to the users in the retail market. We aim
to capture three major aspects of future smart grids: multitimescale energy procurement by the LSE, uncertain supply
of renewable energy, and active demand management by the
users. Our goal is to propose an approach to optimally integrate
demand response and power procurement.
Consider a discrete-time model that models a day. Each
day is divided into T timeslots of equal duration, indexed by
t ∈T := {1,2,···,T}. The duration of a timeslot can be 15,
30, or 60 mins, corresponding to the time resolution at which
energy dispatch or demand response decisions are made.
The system operates as follows. By a certain time, say,
noon of the day before delivery, the LSE decides the amount
Pd := (Pd(t), t ∈T ) of power to schedule on the day-ahead
market for each period t in the following day. This incurs a cost
cd(Pd(t);t) for slot t. At this decision time, the information
available to the LSE is the probability distribution of renewable
production Pr := (Pr(t), t ∈T ) in the next day; and the
information available to user i is his utility functions ui(xi(t);t)
where xi(t) is his consumption in slot t. By time t−, we assume
that the renewable-energy generation Pr(t) have been realized.
Then the users decide their actual demand xi(t) ∈[xi(t), ¯xi(t)]
in slot t; and the LSE decides to use Po(t) ≤Pd(t) from the
scheduled day-ahead power (which incurs an operation cost of
co(Po(t);t)), and purchases Pb(t) ≥0 on the real-time market
(with a cost cb(Pb(t);t)), to satisfy the demand (i.e., such that
Po(t)+Pb(t)+Pr(t) ≥∑i xi(t)). It is desirable to use as much
The authors are with the Division of Engineering & Applied Science,
Caltech. Emails: {libinj, slow}@caltech.edu
renewable power as possible; for simplicity, we assume Pr(t)
incurs no cost.
Assume that all cost functions are increasing and convex,
and the utility functions are increasing and strictly concave.
Our goal is to maximize the expected welfare, where the
welfare is the total user utility minus the costs of supply.
II. OPTIMAL ENERGY PROCUREMENT AND DEMAND
In this extended abstract, we focus on the case without
time correlation in demand. (The case with such correlation is
discussed in .) In this case, maximizing the expected social
welfare of the day reduces to independently maximizing the
expected social welfare for each time slot. We consider slot
t, and omit the notation t for brevity. We derive the optimal
solution using backwards induction.
At real time (i.e., at time t−), Pd for slot t has been chosen,
which incurs a cost of cd(Pd). Also, Pr has been realized.
So, the LSE cooperates with the users to solve the following
ui(xi)−co(Po)−cb(Pb)}
xi ≤xi ≤¯xi,∀i;Po,Pb ≥0,
Pr +Po +Pb ≥∑
Associate dual variables μ1 and μ2 with the constraint (1)
and (2) respectively. The above problem can be solved in a
distributed way by a primal-dual algorithm (Algorithm 2 in
 ). Let μ∗
2 be the optimal dual variables (obtained after
the algorithm converges), then μ∗
2 is the real-time price the
LSE imposes on the users.
So, if the LSE chooses Pd as the day-ahead power, the
expected welfare is W(Pd) := E[ ˜W(Pd;Pr)]−cd(Pd). We show
in that ˜W(Pd;Pr) is concave in Pd, and
∂˜W(Pd;Pr)/∂Pd = μ∗
if ˜W(Pd;Pr) is differentiable at point Pd. Therefore, a stochastic
subgradient algorithm the converges to the set of optimal Pd
is as follows. The algorithm is run one day in advance by
simulating the real-time system.
Algorithm: Deciding the day-ahead power
1) Initially, let P0
2) In step m+1 = 1,2,..., the LSE generates a sample of Pr
based on its distribution (denoted by Pm
r ). Run Algorithm
2 in with the sample to ﬁnd μ∗
1, and denote it by μ∗m
Then, compute
where αm = 1/(m+1) is the step size.
III. EFFECT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY ON SOCIAL WELFARE
We investigate how the statistics of the renewable energy
affects the maximal expected welfare maxPd≥0{W(Pd)}. Assume that the renewable energy is parametrized by a,b > 0 as
Pr(a,b) := a· μr +b·Vr
where μr > 0 is a constant, and Vr is a zero-mean random
variable. So, a and b are indicators of the mean and variance of
Pr(a,b). Denote by W ∗(Pr(a,b)) the maximal expected welfare
when the renewable energy is Pr(a,b).
Proposition 1: (i) When a is ﬁxed, W ∗(Pr(a,b)) is nonincreasing with b; (ii) When b is ﬁxed, W ∗(Pr(a,b)) is nondecreasing with a; (iii) W ∗(Pr(s,s)) is non-decreasing with
s > 0, where s is, for example, the size of the renewable energy