A Survey of Intrusion Detection in Wireless Network Applications
Robert Mitchell and Ing-Ray Chen
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
{rrmitche, irchen}@vt.edu
Information systems are becoming more integrated into our lives. As this integration deepens, the importance of securing
these systems increases. Because of lower installation and maintenance costs, many of these systems are largely networked
by wireless means. In order to identify gaps and propose research directions in wireless network intrusion detection
research, we survey the literature of this area. Our approach is to classify existing contemporary wireless intrusion
detection system (IDS) techniques based on target wireless network, detection technique, collection process, trust model
and analysis technique. We summarize pros and cons of the same or diﬀerent types of concerns and considerations
for wireless intrusion detection with respect to speciﬁc attributes of target wireless networks including wireless local
area networks (WLANs), wireless personal area networks (WPANs), wireless sensor networks (WSNs), ad hoc networks,
mobile telephony, wireless mesh networks (WMNs) and cyber physical systems (CPSs). Next, we summarize the most
and least studied wireless IDS techniques in the literature, identify research gaps, and analyze the rationale for the degree
of their treatment. Finally, we identify worthy but little explored topics and provide suggestions for ways to conduct
keywords: classiﬁcation, intrusion detection, security,
wireless networks
Ad hoc on demand distance vector
Code division multiple access
Cyber physical system
Distributed denial of service
Denial of service
Dynamic source routing
Equal error rate
False negative
False positive
Finite state machine
General packet radio service
Groupe sp´ecial mobile
Host based intrusion detection system
Intrusion detection system
Local security authority subsystem
Long term evolution
Mobile ad hoc network
Medical CPS
Mobile group CPS
Network based intrusion detection
Received signal strength indication
Remote terminal unit
Smart grid CPS
Signal to noise ratio
Support vector machine
True negative
True positive
Unmanned aircraft CPS
Unmanned air vehicle
Universal mobile telecommunications
Vehicular ad hoc network
Wireless industrial sensor network
Wireless local area network
Wireless mesh network
Wireless personal area network
Wireless sensor network
1. Introduction
Intrusion detection is an important research topic with
many potential applications.
Along with intrusion prevention, response and tolerance, intrusion detection is one
tool that can defend against the real-world cyber attacks
threatening critical systems.
These attacks include the
Stuxnet attack on Iranian engineering facilities , proof
of concept attacks on insulin pumps and cardiac devices , the DoS attack on a German power grid operator
 , the exﬁltration attack on a Spanish power grid vendor
 and the exﬁltration attack on US UAVs .
MGCPSs, MCPSs, SGCPSs and UACPSs are critical wireless network systems because of their human impact. For
a battalion of 25 ﬁreﬁghters, failure of their MGCPS can
 
January 19, 2014
be fatal to the group or an individual. One of the primary
functions of a ﬁrst responder MGPCS is to provide situational awareness regarding hazardous materials.
MGCPS does not identify a dangerous chemical in the environment and route that information correctly, the entire
team is in jeopardy. For a hospital with 833 beds (e.g., Inova Fairfax Hospital), failure of their MCPS can be fatal to
an individual. One of the primary functions of an MCPS
is to administer analgesics. Overmedicating a patient will
cause cardiac arrest. Another MCPS primary function is
to provide cardiac support. Doing so when unnecessary
or failing to do so when appropriate will kill the patient.
While they are not life-critical, the scope of a SGCPS can
be enormous. In July 2012, 620 million customers in India
lost power for up to two days. A combat vehicle belonging
to a UACPS could use weapons against noncombatants.
In addition, a surveillance vehicle could ﬂy into a densely
populated area or critical resource (power substation, water treatment plant, center of government).
Malicious behavior damages the network by violating conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity, nonrepudiation or privacy; for example, a node in a mobile
telephony network masquerades as another node in order
to defeat the integrity of the billing function. Selﬁsh behavior is a non-community minded action; for example,
a node in a Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) does not
forward packets. Generically, we use the term adversary
to refer to an undesirable node that exhibits selﬁsh or malicious behavior. We make this distinction because it is
critical to consider the attack model when evaluating a
defensive technique.
Figure 1: Spectrum of Network Security Measures.
Figure 1 shows the spectrum of network security measures, starting from intrusion prevention, then intrusion
detection and as a last resort, intrusion tolerance. It is
useful to think of network security measures in the time
domain. The ﬁrst opportunity a network operator has to
defeat an adversary is when that adversary attempts to
enter the network. An intrusion prevention measure stops
the adversary at the network edge. One simple example is
a group key users must provide to access the network. A
more sophisticated example is an authentication scheme;
this extends the group key concept to distinguish individual users. A third example is a survey tool that identiﬁes
vulnerabilities in system conﬁguration that facilitate penetration .
Intrusion prevention is not eﬀective against some attacks: any attack involving an insider/authenticated node,
for example. An intrusion detection technique would ﬁnd
adversaries that have crossed the border of the network.
One simple approach to ﬁnd intruders is to look for nodes
who have anomalous network traﬃc proﬁles.
Shin et al. point out that intrusion detection is not
eﬀective against some attacks: any passive attack, such as
eavesdropping, for example. Because intrusion detection
cannot be 100% eﬀective, robust systems must consider
intrusion tolerance which seeks to survive and operate in
the presence of adversaries who have penetrated the network and evaded detection. Intrusion tolerance measures
can be static techniques that involve some form of redundancy; examples of static intrusion tolerance techniques
are parallel or k-of-n designs. With these designs, if an
attack causes an outage in one module, other modules can
accommodate its load. Intrusion tolerance measures can
also be dynamic techniques that involve a response at runtime; an example of dynamic intrusion tolerance is a load
balancing mechanism.
When employing these network security measures,
wireless IDSs must address several factors which distinguish them from wireline IDSs.
First, wireless network
nodes are more transient than their wireline counterparts;
the wireless IDS threat model must encompass red (adversarial), blue (friendly) and green (nonaligned) nodes that
come and go in seconds rather than weeks. Also, the wireless environment is rich with metadata that is not present
in the wireline environment such as signal strength and
clarity (SNR); this has two implications. The wireless IDS
audit function must leverage features unique to the wireless environment, and it must poise for success by placing sensors in a way that establishes the most favorable
geometry. Finally, the wireless IDS audit function must
accommodate data sets that are incomplete due to network partition or aﬀected by error (noise and bias). Data
set noise sources include independent emitters (intentional
jamming and benign channel competition), multipath interference (reﬂection in urban and subterranean environments) obstructions (terrain, vegetation and human made
structures), atmospheric conditions (clouds and precipitation), variable signal strength (due to mobility and power
control) and antenna placement (due to operational restrictions). Adversaries introduce bias into the data set;
while this is the case in wireline networks, wireless adversaries are diﬀerent than their wireline counterparts. Wireless adversaries can deny the physical medium to legitimate users by jamming and do not need physical access to
a facility to attack .
This survey paper is about intrusion detection. In particular, we classify existing IDS techniques in the literature, discuss their merits and drawbacks when applying to
certain wireless systems, summarize strengths and weaknesses in intrusion detection research and suggest future
research areas. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the core functionality of intrusion
detection in wireless environments. Section 3 provides a
tree for organizing existing IDS protocols and explains the
dimensions used for IDS classiﬁcation. Section 4 surveys
current intrusion detection literature and classiﬁes existing
IDS techniques using the criteria from Section 3. Section
5 discusses lessons learned. Section 6 presents our conclusion and suggests future research directions.
2. Intrusion Detection Functions and Metrics in
Wireless Networks
2.1. Core Intrusion Detection Functions
An IDS implements two core functions:
• collecting data regarding suspects
• analyzing the data
Examples of collection are: logging system calls on the local node, recording traﬃc received on a network interface
and hearsay reputation scores (multitrust data or recommendations). Examples of analysis are: pattern matching,
statistical analysis and data mining.
Figure 2: Defense In Depth.
The literature is abundant in these core functions.
One common theme is that network defense should always have depth/be layered.
These layers provide concentric zones with increasing levels security; the most sensitive data/functions are positioned within the innermost
Figure 2 illustrates the concept of defense in
depth .
Furthermore, there are situations where an
inline/network gateway approach cannot eﬀectively deal
with even outside attackers: Inbound traﬃc on a wireless network is not conﬁned to passing through a single
point of presence. CPSs are large scale, geographically dispersed, federated, heterogeneous, life-critical systems that
comprise sensors, actuators, control and networking components. First responder situational awareness systems,
pervasive health care systems, smart grids and unmanned
aircraft systems are some examples of CPSs. A CPS with
federated control may have gateways to several agencies or
organizations. Therefore, network defense should always
have an all around scope/360 degree coverage. Figure 3
illustrates the concept of all around defense. In historical kinetic warfare, there is a “front line” that defensive
resources are focused on; e.g., the Maginot Line of World
War II. In modern kinetic warfare, there is no “rear security area” where forces can relax their guard; this concept translates directly to the cyber battleﬁeld. A system
manager cannot secure a resource by only applying security appliances to the public-facing interfaces (e.g., the web
page). Rather, security appliances must be positioned at
all entry points to the system (e.g., business/mission partner intranet links, telecommuter VPNs and WiFi access
Figure 3: All Around Defense.
2.2. Intrusion Detection Performance Metrics
IDS researchers traditionally use three metrics to measure performance: false positive rate (FPR), false negative
rate (FNR), and detection rate (DR) . A false positive occurs when an IDS identiﬁes a
well-behaved node as an intruder; the literature also refers
to this as a false alarm; speciﬁcity is the complement of
false positive rate (1 −FPR).
A false negative occurs
when an IDS identiﬁes a malicious or selﬁsh node as wellbehaved; the literature also refers to this as a failure to
report . On the other hand, a detection (a true
positive) occurs when an IDS correctly identiﬁes a malicious or selﬁsh node ; true positive rate is synonymous with sensitivity and recall. Some
researchers measure eﬀectiveness using accuracy, which is
calculated by 1 −FPR −FNR.
Some research attempts to establish eﬀective new metrics in order to enrich IDS research. Detection latency is
a rarely used but critical means to measure IDS performance . Regardless of the attack model (passive
or active), an earlier detection enables an earlier response.
For target systems with resource limitations, power consumption, communications overhead and processor load
are important metrics as well.
There are several variations on this theme. Ma et al. measure the time for
an arbitrary number of nodes to exhaust their energy when
using a given technique. Misra et al. measure packet
sampling eﬃciency. Packet sampling eﬃciency is the percentage of analyzed packets the IDS identiﬁes as malicious;
the basic idea is that it is wasteful to sample lots of packets when only a few trigger an intrusion detection. Misra
et al.’s design increases the sampling rate if the detection
rate is above the penalty threshold and lowers the sampling
rate if the detection rate is below the penalty threshold.
Packet sampling eﬃciency must be balanced with detection rate. Packet sampling eﬃciency is directly related to
penalty threshold, while detection rate is inversely related
to penalty threshold. High packet sampling eﬃciency is
good, but it cannot come at the expense of low detection
rate. The critical problem here is separating low detection
rates that come as a result of a placid environment using
strong intrusion detection parameters and low detection
rates that come as a result of relaxed intrusion detection
parameters in a hostile environment. Farid and Rahman
 measure time required to train their IDS and time
required to analyze test data.
On the other hand, some studies attempt to establish
metrics that are conceptually sound but have weaknesses
in practice. Foo et al. measure survivability as the
ability of a system to serve customers and resist security violations. Shin et al. and Bella et al. use
application-speciﬁc trust or reputation in their analysis;
these metrics measure the goodness of nodes in terms of
the speciﬁc business rules for a given purpose-built system. Furthermore, Shin et al. supplement this statistic with quantity of invalid content distributed and fairness
of load balance. It is not clear how researchers can apply
these narrowly focused metrics to the research area as a
whole. The relevance of survivability, application-speciﬁc
trust and reputation are questionable as Foo et al., Shin
et al. and Bella et al. leave their justiﬁcation as open questions.
Finally, some studies attempt to establish metrics yet
proven useful. Li et al. borrow EER from the ﬁeld
of biometrics to measure performance; this is the rate at
which false negatives (reject error) and false positives (accept error) are equal . Li et al. make a strong assumption in asserting these rates are inversely related; if they
are directly related, then EER is undeﬁned because there
could be many points where false negative and positive
rates are equal. Haddadi and Sarram test if a given
IDS technique can detect each of a number of speciﬁc attacks. While this statistic is simple and elegant, it lacks
context: it cannot tell a complete story.
3. Classiﬁcation
Figure 4: A Classiﬁcation Tree for Intrusion Detection Techniques
for Wireless Networks.
Figure 4 shows a classiﬁcation tree for classifying existing IDS techniques in wireless networks.
We classify
the intrusion detection literature based on six criteria (or
dimensions):
1. Target System: this criterion describes the intended
environment for the IDS;
2. Detection Technique:
this criterion distinguishes
IDSs based on their basic approach to analysis;
3. Collection Process: this criterion contrasts behavior
based IDSs from traﬃc based IDSs;
4. Trust Model: this criterion separates IDSs that share
raw data or analysis results from standalone IDSs;
5. Analysis Technique: this criterion distinguishes simple pattern matching from sophisticated data mining
approaches with regard to the particular implementation; while Detection Technique deﬁnes what the
IDS looks for, Analysis Technique deﬁnes how the
IDS looks for it;
6. Response Strategy:
this criterion contrasts active
from passive response strategies;
The classiﬁcation tree organizes intrusion detection techniques in the literature to ﬁnd gaps in IDS research and
therefore identify research directions.
Below we discuss
each classiﬁcation dimension in detail.
Figure 5: System Dimension of Intrusion Detection Literature.
3.1. Target System
The performance of any intrusion detection technique
will vary based on its environment.
IDS techniques
have been developed for the following networking systems:
WLANs, WPANs, WSNs, ad hoc networks, mobile telephony, WMNs and CPSs. Figure 5 shows the IDS “system” dimension characteristics of these networking systems in terms of network size (large versus small), mobility (stationary versus mobile) and capability (powerful
versus economical). This ﬁgure expresses generalizations
of each target system; counterexamples exist for some of
these trends. Below we provide a brief overview of these
networking systems.
3.1.1. Wireless Local Area Networks
WLANs use radios and protocols implementing the
IEEE 802.11 series of speciﬁcations to network nodes
within a 250 m range.
Tao and Ruighaver provide a comprehensive survey of intrusion detection that
is speciﬁc to WLAN applications. The focus for WLAN
IDSs is high detection rate.
Detection of zero-day (unknown) attacks for nodes facing the Internet and selftuning parameters for nodes administered by non-experts
in unanticipated conﬁgurations are challenges shared with
WPAN IDS. Interoperability, privacy requirements, unde-
ﬁned concept of operations, zero-day attack vulnerability and self-organization are WLAN features relevant to
IDS. High interoperability and erratic proﬁles distinguish
WLAN from other wireless applications.
3.1.2. Wireless Personal Area Networks
WPANs use radio communication to interconnect a
handful of user operated devices within a 10 m range.
Bluetooth and ZigBee are two widely adopted WPAN technologies. Interoperability, privacy and secrecy are key concerns in WPAN research. The focus for WPAN IDSs is
low processor and memory burden. Detection of zero-day
(unknown) attacks for nodes facing the Internet and selftuning parameters for nodes administered by non-experts
in unanticipated conﬁgurations are challenges shared with
WLAN IDS. Energy conservation is not a major challenge
for WPANs because they are attended networks where
recharging is part of the concept of operations. Managing
high false positives is not a major challenge for WPANs
because they are attended, and a falsely evicted node can
be rekeyed and returned to the network easily. Interoperability, privacy requirements, undeﬁned concept of operations, zero-day attack vulnerability and self-organization
are WPAN features relevant to IDS. WPANs diﬀer from
WLANs by radio range, protocol and form factor. Especially short wireless links distinguish WPAN.
3.1.3. Wireless Sensor Networks
WSNs are purpose-built systems whose scale spans a
wide range. Deployments may comprise a large count of
sensor nodes and a few base station nodes or only a modest number of sensor nodes with a single base station. We
distinguish WSNs from WLANs and WPANs despite sharing physical and link layer protocols because WSNs are
purpose-built, their energy is non-replenishable, they have
uniﬁed administration (i.e., they are non-federated), they
are unattended and they are free of infrastructure. The
low-cost, unattended sensor nodes are equipped with sensors and/or actuators that run on battery and have strict
size, weight and power requirements.
The base station
nodes have wired communications and unlimited power,
and they may be attended. WSNs often extend oﬀthe
shelf WPAN link layer technologies. Their typical indoor
radio range is 10 m while their outdoor footprint can reach
100 m. Developing eﬀective IDS techniques that can conserve energy of resource constrained sensors is one major
challenge. Another major challenge is to dynamically control IDS settings to trade high false positives oﬀfor low
false negatives to maximize the lifetime of a WSN. Drozda
et al. propose that if cascading classiﬁcation is applied, it is possible to trade detection rate oﬀfor energy
cost without an eﬀect on false negatives. These authors
also note that trading false positives oﬀfor low false negatives is tricky without a misclassiﬁcation cost matrix, but
with such a ﬁxed matrix, this is straightforward. The focus for WSN IDSs is a low processor and memory burden.
Highly redundant WSNs tolerate high false positive rates
well. In some cases they are homogeneous systems with
large degrees of sensor and radio overlap; these conﬁgurations fade gracefully when nodes fail (e.g., due to energy
exhaustion, damage from a hostile environment or capture
by an adversary). Three things distinguish WSNs from
other wireless applications: First, processor, memory, energy and channel are scarce resources. Second, WSNs are
usually not mobile; this limits the variability of the features mentioned in Section 1. Figure 5 generalizes here;
while there are examples of mobile WSNs, they are not
the general case .
Third, the rhythm of a WSN is
highly predictable: speciﬁcally, processing, memory, energy and channel will conform to a proﬁle during normal
operation. Hierarchical organization, tight concept of operations, non-replenishable energy, limited memory and
processor and unattended operation are WSN features relevant to IDS.
3.1.4. Ad Hoc Networks
Ad hoc networks encompass MANETs and Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs).
MANETs are selfconﬁguring mobile networks; they are open in the sense
that there is no centralized management which increases
ﬂexibility.
Like WSNs, they have no infrastructure requirement.
The lack of centralized authentication blurs
the concept of an intruder. Hence, some researchers argue
that reputation management is a more natural ﬁt than
traditional intrusion detection. Likewise, tolerance measures with reform potential supplant eviction or other permanent sanctions. MANETs typically extend an 802.11
technology; therefore, their typical radio range is 250 m.
The focus for ad hoc network IDSs is distributed design.
Highly transient populations distinguish ad hoc networks
from other wireless applications. Mobility, federation and
lack of infrastructure are ad hoc network features relevant
to IDS. Evicting detected nodes in ad hoc networks may
be diﬃcult or impossible so operating in their presence is
a speciﬁc challenge for IDSs in ad hoc networks.
3.1.5. Mobile Telephony
Mobile telephony networks consist of many handsets
and a few base stations.
Consumers own and operate
handsets which are inexpensive and widely available from
many vendors. Service providers own and operate base stations which are signiﬁcant investments. Base stations can
be terrestrial (cellular networks) or overhead (satellite networks). Terrestrial examples of mobile telephony networks
are: CDMA, GPRS, GSM, UMTS and LTE. Overhead examples of mobile telephony networks are: INMARSAT and
Mobile telephony radio ranges vary widely: terrestrial
networks tend to be smaller while satellite networks tend
to be larger. For example, a GSM microcell provides 2 km
of coverage while a Thuraya spot beam provides 450 km of
coverage . Mobile telephony IDS techniques must not
interfere with quality of service; speciﬁcally, the challenge
here is to minimize false positives. False positives in mobile
telephony result in a legitimate subscriber not using the
network (i.e., not generating revenue). On the other hand,
mobile telephony IDS techniques must establish nonrepudiation as regards billing; speciﬁcally, the challenge here
is to minimize false negatives. Another challenge mobile
telephony IDS techniques face is limited memory present
in handsets and base stations; Section 3.2 will explain
how this favors anomaly based approaches.
Privacy is
the ﬁnal challenge to mobile telephony IDS techniques because of the tight coupling between a user and a handset.
Geographic location and connection endpoints (e.g., websites visited, SMS sources and sinks and calling and called
voice numbers) are rich sources of audit data, however it
is Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) and must be
respected. Minimizing retained proﬁle data is a complementary approach to meeting these last two challenges.
The focus for mobile telephony IDSs is high detection
rate and low communications burden. These are concerns
for the other target systems, but with mobile telephony
they are especially important. A low detection rate results
in intruders violating the nonrepudiation facet of their security; subscribers will protest their bills causing lost revenue due to non-payment and protest responses. A high
communications burden limits the channel available for
revenue generating ﬂows.
Especially long wireless links
and federated control distinguish mobile telephony from
other wireless applications. Terrestrial mobile telephony
links span tens of kilometers while satellite links span thousands of kilometers. Mobile telephony control is federated
among the corporate or government owned infrastructure
and the many subscriber owned handsets.
Mobility, hierarchical organization, federation, limited
memory and processor and privacy requirements are mobile telephony features relevant to IDS.
3.1.6. Wireless Mesh Networks
WMNs are highly-connected, purpose-built networks.
The high degree of connection enables them to self-heal.
In contrast with ad hoc networks, they are well-planned to
balance cost, eﬃciency and reliability requirements. Nodes
are typically stationary, although it is not uncommon for
leaf nodes to be mobile.
WMNs extend oﬀthe shelf
link layer technologies such as mobile telephony, 802.11
(WLAN) or 802.16 (WiMAX); radio range varies accordingly (250 m to 50 km).
Their high-connectedness and
mission-orientation make WMNs an ideal application for
IDS technology; the focus for WMN IDSs is high detection and low false positive rates. These are concerns for
the other target systems, but they are especially important
in WMNs. The ideal environment (e.g., tight concept of
operation, high redundancy, relaxed memory and processor constraints and replenishable energy) leaves advancing
the state of the art for the core metrics as the best line
of investigation. High availability, plentiful resources and
optimal antenna placement distinguish WMN from other
wireless applications.
Redundancy and tight concept of
operations are WMN features relevant to IDS.
3.1.7. Cyber Physical Systems
CPSs have multiple control loops, strict timing requirements, a wireless network segment, predictable network
traﬃc and contain legacy components. Some articles refer
to this environment as a WISN . CPSs fuse cyber (network components and commodity servers) and physical
(sensors and actuators) domains. They use federated control due to stakeholders with diﬀerent interests and concepts of operations. CPSs must self organize due to scale
and cannot be readily patched due to certiﬁcation. They
may contain human actors and mobile nodes. The term
Mobile CPS indicates a CPS with mobile nodes.
are trending towards heterogeneous, oﬀ-the-shelf components and open interfaces. CPSs may operate in locations
that are dangerous due to heat, hazardous materials or
CPSs extend oﬀthe shelf link layer technologies such as WPAN, mobile telephony, 802.11 (WLAN) or
802.16 (WiMAX); radio range varies accordingly (10 m to
50 km). The attack model for a CPS encompasses short
and long duration attacks. A reckless adversary can enter the network and immediately disrupts the concerned
processes to cause a catastrophe. On the other hand, a
more sophisticated adversary may take care to not disrupt
normal system operation in order to propagate and set up
a distributed attack launched at one point in time. This
is the brand of attack Stuxnet used . For this reason, speed of detection is the key challenge in CPS IDS.
It is worth mentioning that we have not found this metric being studied in the literature.
The focus for CPS
IDSs is leveraging unique CPS traits (sensor inputs, algorithms and control outputs) and detecting unknown attacks.
Real-time requirements, tight concept of operations, legacy components and federation are CPS features
relevant to IDS.
3.2. Detection Technique
Figure 6: Detection Technique Dimension of Intrusion Detection Literature.
Figure 7: Comparison of Detection Techniques.
In this section, we ﬁrst describe existing IDS detection techniques including anomaly based, signature based,
speciﬁcation based and reputation based techniques. Then
we discuss the eﬀectiveness of IDS detection techniques
applying to various wireless networks discussed earlier in
Section 3.1. Figures 6 and 7 show the detection technique
dimension and compare the various detection techniques,
respectively.
3.2.1. Anomaly Based Intrusion Detection
Anomaly based intrusion detection approaches look for
runtime features that are out of the ordinary. The ordinary
can be deﬁned with respect to the history of the test signal
(unsupervised) or with respect to a collection of training
data (semi-supervised). Clustering is an example of unsupervised machine learning . Beware some authors 
refer to training data as a “signature.” Some approaches,
known as semi-supervised, train with a set of truth data.
Other approaches, known as unsupervised, train with live
data . Researchers take diﬀerent approaches for discrete, continuous and multivariate data sets.
of a discrete data set are dialed numbers or system state;
Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) can be applied to
discrete data over an interval while Hamming distance can
be applied to discrete data instantaneously. Position and
data rate is an example of a continuous data set; this type
of data calls for a system of thresholds since exact matches
will be rare.
An example of a multivariate data set is
a 3-tuple of position, RSSI and time; Machine learning
approaches (e.g. genetic programming, clustering, neural
networks and Bayesian classiﬁers) are useful for this brand
The key advantage of anomaly based approaches is
they do not look for something speciﬁc. This eliminates
the need to fully specify all known attack vectors and keep
this attack dictionary current. One major disadvantage of
this category is the susceptibility to false positives. For
example, Hall et al. investigated an anomaly based
approach with a false positive rate as high as 100%. Another major disadvantage of this category is the training/proﬁling phase, during which the system is vulnerable.
(This only applies to semi-supervised techniques.) Chandola et al. provide a comprehensive survey of anomaly
based intrusion detection that is general to all applications. White et al. refer to anomaly based approaches
as user or group proﬁling; Porras and Neumann refer
to this as a proﬁle based approach.
approaches
into conventional statistics based approaches and nonparametric methods. Data clustering and support vector
machines (SVM) are examples of non-parametric methods
 . A feature is a component of a multivariate data set
(e.g., start time, end time, data source, data sink and position) . The size of the feature set is a coarse indicator
of eﬃciency for anomaly based approaches; larger feature
sets suggest a larger memory requirement and higher microprocessor use. Xiao et al. point out that feature
selection is a key research problem with anomaly based
approaches: more features do not necessarily give better
3.2.2. Speciﬁcation Based Intrusion Detection
Speciﬁcation based intrusion detection looks for abnormal performance at the system level; contrast this with
anomaly based intrusion detection that analyzes speciﬁc
user proﬁles or data ﬂows. Speciﬁcation based intrusion
detection approaches formally deﬁne legitimate behavior
and indicate an intrusion when the system departs from
this model .
One major advantage of speciﬁcation
based intrusion detection is a low false negative rate. Only
situations that violate what a human expert previously de-
ﬁned as proper system behavior generate detections. By
deﬁnition, these approaches only react to known bad behavior; the theoretical basis is a bad node will disrupt
the formal speciﬁcation of the system. Another major advantage of speciﬁcation based intrusion detection is the
system is immediately eﬀective because there is no training/proﬁling phase. The key disadvantage of speciﬁcation
based intrusion detection is the eﬀort required to generate
a formal speciﬁcation.
Speciﬁcation based intrusion detection approaches are especially eﬀective against insider
attacks as they focus on system disruption. On the other
hand, they are not the best approach for outside attackers
because the speciﬁcation (e.g., state machine or grammar)
is application-speciﬁc and pertains to actions that only an
insider can take. An outsider is not capable of generating
transitions in the governing state machine or transforms
in the deﬁning grammar.
Speciﬁcation based intrusion detection is a form of
anomaly based intrusion detection where no user, group
or data proﬁling is used. Instead legitimate behaviors are
speciﬁed by humans and a nodes misbehavior is measured
by its deviation from the speciﬁcation.
This allows for
lightweight intrusion detection to be deployed in systems
with severe resource constraints where user, group or data
proﬁling is not possible.
3.2.3. Signature Based Intrusion Detection
Signature based intrusion detection approaches look for
runtime features that match a speciﬁc pattern of misbehavior. Some sources refer to this approach as misuse detection , supervised detection , pattern
based detection or intruder proﬁling .
One major advantage of this category is a low false
positive rate. By deﬁnition, these approaches only react
to known bad behavior; the theoretical basis is a good node
will not exhibit the attack signature. The key disadvantage of this category is that the techniques must look for
a speciﬁc pattern; a dictionary must specify each attack
vector and stay current. An attack signature can be a univariate data sequence: for example, bytes transmitted on
a network, a program’s system call history or applicationspeciﬁc information ﬂows (sensor measurements in a WSN
or CPS). One sophistication is to combine simple data sequences into a multivariate data sequence . The important research problem in this ﬁeld is creating an eﬀective
attack dictionary . Signature length is a coarse indicator of eﬃciency for signature based approaches; longer signatures suggest a larger memory requirement and higher
microprocessor use. Signature based approaches are more
eﬀective against outsider attacks; malicious outsiders presumably will exhibit well known signatures in the course
of penetrating the network.
3.2.4. Reputation Management
The primary function of a reputation manager is to detect nodes exhibiting selﬁsh behavior rather than violating
security. However, in the presence of malfeasance, reputation managers must also guard against colluding nodes
intent on enhancing their reputation. Bella et al. identify the main problem in MANET Reputation Management as distributing reputation scores. Reputation Management approaches are particularly applicable to large
networks where establishing a priori trust relationships is
not feasible. Examples of metrics reputation managers use
are packets forwarded over packets sourced, packets forwarded over non-local packets received and packets sent
over packets received.
Choosing the metric is a matter
of design philosophy. Using packets forwarded over nonlocal packets received mitigates a bias present in packets
over packets sourced. Weighting data is a key problem for
the analysis: data points have diﬀerent signiﬁcance across
the time domain (recent data may be more or less valuable than historical) as well as across sources (experienced
data is more valuable than observed data which is more
valuable than multitrust data). Reputation management
is especially relevant to ad hoc applications in MANETs
and VANETs.
3.2.5. Eﬀectiveness of Detection Techniques Applying to
Wireless Systems
In this section, we reason why certain detection techniques are more eﬀective than others when applying to
certain wireless systems.
Anomaly based designs are more eﬀective than the
other designs for mobile telephony base stations, WMNs
and attended CPSs. The common theme these systems
share is a well deﬁned concept of operations, i.e., they are
mission-oriented/purpose-built and thus have predictable
proﬁles. These systems also have unique aspects which favor anomaly based designs. For example, for WMNs the
attack model must include insider threats against whom
anomaly based designs are more eﬀective. For attended
CPSs, due to federated control and safety criticality, maintenance of attack dictionary updates (for signature based
intrusion detection) is diﬃcult. For wireless systems that
favor anomaly based designs, their ability to detect unknown attacks oﬀsets their higher false positive rate and
computational complexity.
Signature based designs are more eﬀective than the
other designs for WLANs, WPANs and mobile telephony
handsets. The common themes these systems share are
an ill-deﬁned concept of operations/unpredictable proﬁles
and ease of maintenance (that is, attack dictionary updates). Maintenance is easy for WLANs and WPANs because of their human attendant. The large storage capacities of WLANs also facilitates attack dictionary management. Maintenance is easy for mobile telephony handsets
because of their high connectivity and human attendant.
In addition to other shared themes, WLANs and WPANs
favor signature based designs because of their concern for
outsider threats. For wireless systems that favor signature
based designs, their low false positive rate oﬀsets their
inability to detect unknown attacks and large storage requirement.
Speciﬁcation based designs are more eﬀective than the
other designs for WSNs and unattended CPSs because of
their predictable proﬁles and limited resources (storage
and channel). The channel scarcity does not accommodate dictionary updates and the limited storage limits the
size of the attack dictionary.
For wireless systems that
favor speciﬁcation based designs, neither anomaly nor signature based designs are viable due to computational or
storage limitations; a speciﬁcation based design oﬀers an
eﬀective way for them to provide security. Because of high
sensor redundancy, false positives are less important than
false negatives in WSNs; they can tolerate unwarranted
sensor evictions in the same fashion as sensors exhausting
their energy or succumbing to its hostile environment.
Reputation management designs are more eﬀective
than the other designs for ad hoc networks. The ill deﬁned
concepts of operations of ad hoc networks reduce the eﬀectiveness of anomaly based designs. Maintenance diﬃculty,
due to lack of connectivity, reduces the eﬀectiveness of signature based designs. Their egalitarian nature makes ad
hoc networks an ideal application for reputation management designs. These unique conditions led to the innovation of reputation managers for these systems. Reputation
managers are not a good choice for hierarchical networks if
they have a tightly speciﬁed communication infrastructure
that cannot accommodate the associated gossip. Wireless
systems that favor reputation based designs are highly federated (lack central authority) and have highly transient
populations.
3.3. Collection Process
Figure 8: Collection Process Dimension of Intrusion Detection Literature.
Figure 8 shows the data collection dimension for classifying IDS approaches.
There are two ways to collect
data before data analysis, namely, behavior based collection and traﬃc based collection.
We ﬁrst describe the
essentials of behavior and traﬃc based collection. Then
we discuss the eﬀectiveness of behavior and traﬃc based
collection in various wireless systems. It is clear that both
collection processes are important from the perspective of
attack detection when there are attacks on both hosts and
networks that join them.
3.3.1. Behavior Based Collection
IDSs using behavior based collection analyze logs maintained by a node or other audit data, such as ﬁle system
details, to determine if it is compromised. One major advantage of using behavior based collection approaches is
scalability; this is attractive for large scale applications
like WSN and mobile telephony. Another major advantage of using behavior based collection approaches is decentralization; this is attractive for infrastructure-less applications like ad hoc networks. One major disadvantage
of a behavior based collection is each node has to perform
additional work to collect, if not analyze, their audit data.
This is relevant in resource constrained applications like
WSN and mobile telephony. Another major disadvantage
of this technique is that a sophisticated attacker can cover
their tracks by modifying the audit data on the captured
node. A third disadvantage of this technique is that it can
be OS or application speciﬁc (depending on the particular
content of the logs) . Behavior based collection is not
used widely in wireless environment applications .
3.3.2. Traﬃc Based Collection
IDSs using traﬃc based collection study network activity to determine if a node is compromised. This audit can
be general (traﬃc/frequency analysis) or protocol-speciﬁc
(deep packet inspection).
The key advantage regarding
resource management is that individual nodes are free of
the requirement to maintain or analyze their logs.
key disadvantage regarding data collection is that the effectiveness of a traﬃc based technique is limited by the
visibility of the nodes collecting audit data. Thus, it is
challenging to arrange traﬃc based collection sensors to
get complete intra-cell and inter-cell pictures of network
activity .
3.3.3. Eﬀectiveness of Collection Processes Applying To
Wireless Systems
In this section, we reason why certain collection processes are more eﬀective than others when applying to certain wireless systems.
Traﬃc based collection typically is more eﬀective
than behavior based collection for most wireless systems.
WLANs, WPANs and ad hoc networks have transient user
populations, making it hard for a node to collect behavior data of a suspect roaming in the system. WSNs and
mobile telephony handsets have limited storage, making
behavior based collection impractical. While it does not
have obvious beneﬁts for the collection function, WMNs
should employ traﬃc based collection, as their high degree of connectivity results in a great data set for traﬃc
based analysis when using this process. CPSs are under
federated control, so administrative concerns may prevent
an intrusion detector in one segment from accessing user
logs in another segment. In many situations, the wireless
environment beneﬁts audit data collection by providing
features that are not present in the wireline environment;
for example, an IDS that uses traﬃc based collection to
record signal strength from a set of well positioned sensors
has a powerful data set.
Behavior based collection typically is not more eﬀective than traﬃc based collection in a wireless system. One
rare example is that mobile telephony base stations favor
behavior based collection because they use wireline communication and have large storage capacities.
situations, the wireless environment disrupts, rather than
enriches audit data collection; for example, if the RF interference is too great or node geometry is too unfavorable,
behavior based collection is a better choice than traﬃc
based collection.
Here we should note that some papers use the terms
HIDS and NIDS when referring to behavior based collection and traﬃc based collection, respectively .
While certain wireless systems may favor one or the
other, both traﬃc and behavior based collection processes
are important from the perspective of attack detection
when there are both network and host centric attacks.
The adversary chooses the attack vector; “the enemy has
a vote” as warﬁghters say. Security appliances must organize their defense based on the threat model and not
merely based on what is convenient.
3.4. Trust Model
Figure 9: Trust Model Dimension of Intrusion Detection Literature.
Figure 10: Comparison of Trust Models.
Figures 9 and 10 show the trust model dimension for
classifying IDS approaches and the comparison of trust
models, respectively. The trust model dictates what data
a monitor node uses to audit trustee nodes. Experienced
data, which is a ﬁrsthand account, is highly trusted. Reported data, which is a thirdhand account, is least trusted;
bad nodes can “ballot stuﬀ” for their confederates and
badmouth the good actors. Observed data falls between
experienced and reported data in credibility. It is available
for any trustee to audit, but colluding adversaries can create acts of “reputation theater” to boost their reputation
 . There are two basic trust models, namely, multitrust
and unitrust. We ﬁrst describe the essentials of multitrust
and unitrust. Then we discuss the eﬀectiveness of multitrust and unitrust in various wireless systems.
3.4.1. Multitrust
Multitrust is the concept of using hearsay/reported
information (data from witnesses or third parties).
and Issarny call this type of information a recommendation.
Contrast recommendations with what Shin
et al. call direct monitoring. This hearsay information can be raw data or an analysis result. Using multitrust together with behavior based collection mitigates a
key weakness: the opportunity for capable adversaries to
cover their tracks. Multitrust often appears in the context
of reputation management which is most applicable to ad
hoc applications such as MANET and VANET. However,
giving weight to others’ recommendations in a federated
environment leads to a dilemma: On one hand, a node
places enough trust in neighbors to include their hearsay
in reputation calculations. On the other hand, nodes are
suspicious enough of their environment to measure and
respond to the reputation of their neighbors. Therefore,
multitrust is better suited to increasing the security of
managed/authenticated environments rather than to establishing a basic level of security in ad hoc environments
such as MANETs or VANETs.
Reputation managers require two levels of trust: the
“outer circle” of trust regards the system function in general while the “inner circle” of trust regards the multitrust
function speciﬁcally. The literature uses the term trustworthiness in reference to this “inner circle” credibility
 . Because the eﬀectiveness of traﬃc based approaches
are limited by radio range in wireless environments, multitrust oﬀers an advantage for these applications. The literature sometimes calls multitrust approaches cooperative;
it further distinguishes them as distributed or hierarchical
3.4.2. Unitrust
We classify some IDSs as unitrust, which some research
refers to as standalone. In contrast with multitrust designs, a unitrust design does not use reported information;
a unitrust design relies on direct monitoring. The advantage of a unitrust design is the data is completely reliable;
the IDS does not need to apply safeguards to prevent or
tolerate biased reports from adversaries.
The disadvantage of a unitrust design is the smaller data set; the IDS
only acts on the data it experiences or observes.
3.4.3. Eﬀectiveness of Multitrust versus Unitrust Applying
to Wireless Systems
In this section, we discuss the eﬀectiveness of multitrust vs.
unitrust as applying to various wireless systems. Here we should note that the discussion is based
on the assumption that only multitrust or unitrust is
being used.
We recognize that many reputation and
trust management systems actually take into consideration of both multitrust and unitrust in trust composition
 .
Multitrust is more eﬀective than unitrust for mobile
telephony and WMNs.
The common theme these systems share is a high level of trust. In mobile telephony,
this high level of trust follows from their strong authentication; billing accuracy requires this strong authentication to be in place. In WMNs, stationary infrastructure
nodes are inherently trustworthy while mobile terminal
nodes are not. These wireless systems must use a trusted
agent/authenticator to broker multitrust data in order to
guarantee its provenance. The majority of contemporary
reputation systems are based on multitrust because of the
beneﬁts of multitrust over unitrust in making use of the existing multitrust knowledge for intrusion detection. Wireless systems with highly transient populations can make
the most use of multitrust designs.
Unitrust is more eﬀective than multitrust for WLANs,
WPANs, WSNs, ad hoc networks and CPSs. The common
theme these systems share is diﬃculty in establishing trust.
For WLANs, WPANs and ad hoc networks, this is due to
the transience of the terminal nodes. For WSNs, this is
due to the vulnerability of sensor nodes to capture because
they are unattended. For CPSs, this is due to federated
control of CPSs; authentication may not span segments of
the CPS. In general, the lack of trust and authentication
in these systems makes multitrust diﬃcult. However, one
drawback of a unitrust approach is the loss of additional
situational awareness a multitrust system can oﬀer.
one example, a newly arrived intrusion detector will not
have any audit data that preceded its arrival. As another
example, an unfavorably located intrusion detector on a
wireless network will not have any audit data transmitted
beyond its radio range. In these examples, the intrusion
detector will use an unnecessarily small set of audit data.
In spite of WLANs, WPANs, WSNs, ad hoc networks and
CPSs favoring unitrust in some ways, multitrust reputation systems allow an entity entering the network to use
the existing knowledge in trust to deal with incomplete
and uncertain information. Wireless systems with highly
persistent populations, good visibility and minimal trust
will favor unitrust designs.
3.5. Analysis Technique
Figure 11: Analysis Dimension of Intrusion Detection Literature.
Figure 12: Comparison of Analysis Techniques.
Figures 11 and 12 show the analysis dimension for classifying IDS approaches and the comparison of analysis
techniques, respectively. We ﬁrst describe the essentials
of pattern matching and data mining. Then we discuss
the eﬀectiveness of pattern matching and data mining in
various wireless systems. Analysis is the second of the two
core IDS functions discussed in Section 2. There are two
ways to analyze data, namely, pattern matching and data
mining; we classify analysis techniques along these lines.
3.5.1. Pattern Matching Analysis Techniques
A pattern matching approach simply scans an input
source. Signature based approaches scan for entries in the
attack dictionary (known bad proﬁles). Semi-supervised
anomaly based approaches scan for deviations from expected performance (known good proﬁles).
Reputation
based approaches scan proﬁle data to measure
some criteria established prior to deployment.
3.5.2. Data Mining Analysis Techniques
The unsupervised variants of anomaly based IDSs are
examples of data mining .
3.5.3. Combined Analysis Techniques
 blend both pattern matching and data mining techniques. Machine learning techniques blur the line
between pattern matching and data mining approaches.
Speciﬁcally, the literature contains research applying genetic programming, clustering (as regards data mining),
neural networks and Bayesian classiﬁers to intrusion
detection. Some research focuses analyzing the audit data
 . These studies treat the analysis function as a black box while proposing data collection
innovations.
3.5.4. Eﬀectiveness of Analysis Techniques Applying to
Wireless Systems
In this section, we reason why certain analysis techniques are more eﬀective than others when applying to
certain wireless systems.
No target system clearly favors pattern matching
or data mining.
Wireless network nodes and WMNs
have large storage capabilities and can update their attack dictionaries easily, which are conducive to pattern
However, their ill deﬁned concepts of operations/unpredictable proﬁles are conducive to data mining.
WSNs have well deﬁned concepts of operations,
which are conducive to pattern matching. However, their
limited storage capabilities and maintenance diﬃculty
are conducive to data mining.
Ad hoc networks have
large storage capabilities which are conducive to pattern
However, their ill deﬁned concepts of operations/unpredictable proﬁles and maintenance diﬃculty
are conducive to data mining.
Mobile telephony handsets can update their attack dictionaries easily, which
is conducive to pattern matching.
However, their limited storage capabilities and ill deﬁned concepts of operations/unpredictable proﬁles are conducive to data mining.
CPSs have large storage capabilities and well deﬁned concepts of operations, which are conducive to pattern matching. However, their maintenance diﬃculty is conducive to
data mining. Consequently, the literature is abundant in
adopting both pattern matching and data mining techniques . Wireless systems with minimal computational resources and a static attack model will favor
pattern matching. Wireless systems with suﬃcient computational resources can beneﬁt from data mining by evolving to address a dynamic adversary.
4. Classifying Existing Intrusion Detection Techniques
This section applies the criteria Section 3 established
to the current research on intrusion detection in wireless
environments. We survey 60 existing IDS techniques in
the literature and classify them according to the classi-
ﬁcation tree in Figure 4.
The intent is to examine the
most and least intensive research in IDS to date and identify research gaps yet to be explored. We summarize our
ﬁndings in Tables 1-7 based on the “system” dimension of
IDS techniques. Table 8 classiﬁes generic IDS techniques
without any system designation.
4.1. WLANs
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize six IDS
technique in WLANs and summarize the results in Table
4.1.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Zhong et al. use an online k-means algorithm to
cluster network traﬃc to detection intruders. Speciﬁcally,
their criteria is the suspect’s distance from the largest
The pro of this study is: ﬁnding that nominal
features (for example, wireless access point (WAP) identi-
ﬁer), instead of numerical features (ordinal, interval or ratio) confuses results. The cons of this study are: marginal
detection rates (65.3 to 82.5%) and strong assumptions
(the majority of network activity is normal and the normal activity clusters tightly). The authors detect nodes
that source an abnormally high number of packets: these
could be probing or DoS attacks.
The anomaly based IDS in that relies on RSSI
is one example of using raw multitrust data to detect
anomaly behaviors. The pro of this study is that it improves performance by using multitrust data from untrusted nodes. The con of this study is that it does not
accommodate mobility. Their approach focuses on spoofing attacks.
4.1.2. Anomaly + Signature Based Designs
Hairui and Hua address lack of IDS interoperability
with Multi-agent Based Distributed WLAN IDS (MAB-
DIDS). In their two-tier analysis function, the Data Analysis Agent performs coarse detection while the Management Agent performs ﬁne detection based on the initial
Table 1: Classiﬁcation of WLAN IDSs
collection
multianalysis
Zhong Technique 
data mining
Nodeprints 
pattern matching
MABDIDS 
anomaly + signature
behavior + traﬃc
pattern matching
Haddadi Technique 
anomaly + signature
pattern matching
Yuan Technique 
anomaly + signature
data mining
Sneeze 
pattern matching
ﬁndings of Data Analysis Agents.
The response agents
(Data Analysis and Management) can coordinate to eﬃciently and eﬀectively collect more extensive data on possible intruders. The pro of this study is a fully distributed
design. The con of this study is a lack of numerical results.
The authors do not tie their IDS to any attack type.
Haddadi and Sarram propose a combined anomaly
and signature based IDS using traﬃc based collection. In
their two-tier analysis function, signature and anomaly detection modules run in parallel to form the ﬁrst stage. If
they cannot classify the data as an attack or normal, they
forward the audit data to a second stage a probable attack
detection module for review. The pro of this study is that
it uses a realistic data set for testing. The con of this study
is a lack of numerical results. The authors focus on man
in the middle and DoS attacks.
Yuan et al. use an immunological approach inspired
by danger theory and dendritic cells (a type of antigen
presenting cell) to create a four-layer IDS. They combine
signature and anomaly based detection techniques. Yuan
et al.’s approach is informed by danger theory in the sense
that it detects damage rather than the adversary itself.
One key idea is that dendritic cells are ineﬀective initially
but learn to be eﬀective after exposure to adversaries;
this is analogous to an unsupervised anomaly based detection technique. The authors establish the immunological metaphor by mapping antigens, dendritic cells, signals,
immune memory and immune response to network traﬃc,
detectors, detector and correlation output, an attack dictionary and danger handling, respectively. The authors focus on zero-day (unknown) attacks: speciﬁcally, the KDD
Cup 1999 data set. This paper relies on the Dendritic Cell
Algorithm (DCA) that seems to be a population of linear
classiﬁers, as observed by Stibor et al. .
4.1.3. Signature Based Designs
Sampangi et al. propose the Sneeze algorithm to
detect intruders on a WLAN and locate them. Their approach is biomimetic in the sense that it detects and expels
an intruder at the network edge in the same fashion an organism’s respiratory system does to a foreign body at the
nose in the course of sneezing. The BSSID/MAC of every valid access point is on a whitelist. The basic idea is
that APs monitor one another by searching for unrecognized BSSID/MACs. If an AP running Sneeze ﬁnds an
unrecognized BSSID/MAC, it rekeys and notiﬁes the system administrator. The response (sneeze-analog) has two
aspects: rekeying and a human searching the area surrounding the reporting AP and removing the rogue AP.
Sneeze is essentially a signature based detection technique
with a traﬃc based collection process and simple pattern
matching. The authors focus on attacks involving a rogue
access point/man in the middle.
4.2. WPANs
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize three IDS
techniques in WPANs and summarize the results in Table
4.2.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Yang, et al. studied Grid-based clustering over
K-neighborhood (GREEK) which is targeted for WPAN
(ZigBee, speciﬁcally) applications.
The authors use an
anomaly-based detection technique, a traﬃc-based collection approach and data mining (clustering, speciﬁcally)
analysis. Their attack model considers only physical intruders.
Yang, et al. collected data empirically.
the authors did report numerical results related to the ef-
ﬁciency of data mining, they did not report data related
to intrusion detection (for example, true positive or false
positive rate).
4.2.2. Anomaly + Signature Based Designs
Moyers, et al. studied Multi-Vector Portable IDS
(MVP-IDS) which is targeted for WPAN applications.
The authors use a combined anomaly and signature-based
detection technique, a combined behavior (battery current, speciﬁcally) and traﬃc-based collection approach and
pattern matching analysis. Their attack model considers
resource depletion attacks. While Moyers, et al. did claim
one MVP-IDS module [Bluetooth Attack Detection and
Signature System (BADSS)] achieved a 100% detection
rate with only a 2.97% false positive rate, the authors did
not provide numerical results on key metrics for the complete system.
Table 2: Classiﬁcation of WPAN IDSs
collection
multianalysis
GREEK 
data mining
MVP-IDS 
anomaly + signature
behavior + traﬃc
pattern matching
Bluetooth IDS 
pattern matching
4.2.3. Signature Based Designs
OConnor and Reeves studied Bluetooth IDS which
is targeted for WPAN (Bluetooth, speciﬁcally) applications. The authors use a signature-based detection technique, a traﬃc-based collection approach and pattern
matching analysis. Their attack model includes scanning,
DoS and exﬁltration. OConnor and Reeves collected data
empirically using four diﬀerent Bluetooth devices as victims. The authors only reported numerical results for detection latency.
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize 14 IDS techniques in WSNs and summarize the results in Table 3.
4.3.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Da Silva et al. propose a centralized IDS that uses
traﬃc based collection.
The authors apply seven types
of rules to audit data: interval, retransmission, integrity,
delay, repetition, radio transmission range and jamming.
The pro of the study is their design’s modest energy demand. The cons of the study are performance (detection
rates as low as 30% and false positive rates as high as 50%)
and the inability to detect unknown attacks. The authors
consider message delay, replay, wormhole, jamming, data
alteration, message negligence, blackhole and greyhole attacks.
Drozda et al. pursue a biology-inspired intrusion
detection approach targeted for WSN applications. This
is a semi-supervised anomaly-based design. The authors
used JiST/SWANS to simulate a network with 1718 nodes
exchanging traﬃc at a low, constant bit rate (272 bps).
Their attack model includes greyhole attacks and attacks
where the adversary chooses random packets to delay for a
random time interval. Drozda et al. conﬁgure the subject
WSN with 236 bad nodes (14%).
Their data indicates
detection rate for their technique ranges from 41.14 to
99.94% and false positive rate ranges from 2.22 to 62.07%
depending on window size and number of rounds.
Rajasegarar et al. study an anomaly-based IDS for
WSN applications called Elliptical Anomaly (EA). Their
approach is distributed, and they claim it provides the
same accuracy as a contemporary centralized approaches
while using less energy and exhibiting a lower detection
latency. The energy savings stems from the reduction in
audit data passed over the network.
Data transmission
typically dominates the energy usage of a WSN node, so
they correctly reason the additional microprocessor load
is justiﬁed. The authors provide detection rate and false
positive rate data supporting their accuracy claim but
do not show evidence to support their energy eﬃciency
or detection latency claims. Speciﬁcally, the authors pit
EA against Nearest Neighbor (NN), Kth Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Average of K Nearest Neighbors (AvgKNN)
and Distance Based Outliers (DBO) techniques. The authors use empirical data from four data sets: Intel Berkeley
Research Laboratory (IBRL) Great Barrier Reef (GBR)
Great Duck Island (GDI) and a data set they synthesized.
Xiao et al. propose a semi-supervised IDS called
Machine Learning (ML) that uses a Bayesian classiﬁer.
ML performs detection on each sensor node in order to
remove data before it taints the network data ﬂow via
aggregation or other in-network processing. They adapt
machine learning to the resource constraints of a WSN by
limiting the feature set to three parameters. Network related (for example, packet collisions) or host related (for
example, power consumption) data can drive their classi-
ﬁer. The pros of this study are numerical results and comparative analysis with contemporary approaches TPDD
and DAD. The con of this study is the weak attack model;
the authors only consider packet replay attacks.
Mao proposes a multitrust design for heterogeneous WSNs formed by four layers: network, semantic,
model and cooperative. The author refers to sensors that
participate in the IDS as agents and to other sensors that
do not participate in IDS as common nodes. Agents form a
multitrust relationship within and between groups to perform anomaly based IDS functions. The pro of this study
is the ﬁnding that an agent to common node ratio of 1:1
eﬀectively trades cost and eﬀectiveness. The author does
not tie the proposed IDS to any attack type.
4.3.2. Anomaly + Signature Based Designs
Misra et al. create Simple LA Based Intrusion Detection (S-LAID) by extending Learning Automata based
protocol for Intrusion Detection (LAID) to WSNs by making it more eﬃcient and energy aware; the learning automata select optimal points in the WSN to hunt for intruders.
The authors balance energy eﬃciency and detection eﬀectiveness by changing the fraction of inbound
packets sampled based on detection rate; the basic idea is
to spend constrained resources liberally when the environment is hostile and to conserve those resources otherwise.
Table 3: Classiﬁcation of WSN IDSs
collection
multianalysis
da Silva Technique 
pattern matching
Drozda Technique 
data mining
data mining
pattern matching
Mao Technique 
pattern matching
S-LAID 
anomaly + signature
pattern matching
Ma Technique 
anomaly + signature
ATRM 
reputation
Hur Technique 
reputation
pattern matching
reputation
reputation
Onat and Miri
Technique 
Zamani Technique 
Ioannis Technique 
speciﬁcation
The pro of this study is a fully distributed design. The con
of this study is the attack model which considers the integrity and availability dimensions of security; it does not
consider conﬁdentiality, privacy or non-repudiation. The
authors focus on data manipulation attacks.
Ma et al. propose a non-cooperative game theory
based IDS which models income for the cluster head and
the attacker: cluster head income is a function of the cost
of running the IDS, the utility of the cluster head and
whether the cluster head is under attack while attacker
income is a function of the cost of eﬀecting the attack,
the utility of the attack target and whether the target
is running the IDS. The authors assume a cluster based
network topology and sensors in the WSN are stationary
and homogeneous; only cluster heads run the IDS. The
con of this study is the detection rate, which is as low as
70%. The authors consider jamming, exhaustion, routing
and ﬂooding attacks.
4.3.3. Reputation Based Designs
Boukerche et al. propose an IDS called Agent
based Trust and Reputation Management (ATRM) that
relies on a piece of trusted software, a Trust and Reputation Assessor (TRA), running on all nodes. Sensors exchange trust instruments and reputation certiﬁcates. The
pros of this study are a fully distributed approach and minimal communication overhead and energy use. The con of
this study is a strong assumption that the mobile agent
always operates correctly, even on a captured node.
Hur et al. propose an IDS that crosschecks redundant sensor readings. Clusters select an aggregator, which
forwards sensor data to the sink, based on trustworthiness
scores. The pro of this study is the detailed treatment of
the trustworthiness formula which is based on: distance,
quantity and quality of data produced and energy remaining. The con of this study is that their threat model does
not consider cooperating malicious nodes.
The authors
focus on data manipulation attacks.
Ganeriwal et al. propose an IDS called Reputation
based Framework for Sensor Networks (RFSN) that calculates reputation scores based on similarity of data reported
by sensors with overlapping coverage. RFSN uses density
based outlier detection to generate reputation scores, integrates reputation scores into a trust score using a Bayesian
formulation and lowers trust scores over time if they are
not refreshed. The pro of this investigation is the experimental design: the authors simulate their design, implement it and collect data in both lab and operational environments.
Chen proposes an IDS called Task based Trust
framework for Sensor Networks (TTSN). TTSN manages
reputation on a per task (for example, sensing, packet forwarding, cluster management, time synchronization and
localization) basis for each sensor rather than using a single metric for each node.
TTSN uses an aging factor,
γ to weight the per task reputation score.
The pro of
this study is comparative analysis with contemporary approaches ATSN and RFSN. The con of this study is a lack
of numerical results: aggregate false positive, false negative and detection rates are more useful than trust score
over time for a single node. The author considers packet
forwarding, time synchronization and data manipulation
4.3.4. Signature Based Designs
Onat and Miri use RSSI and trustee-sourced packet
arrival rate to detect intruders in WSNs. The authors use
a signature based detection technique auditing data from a
traﬃc based collection process which considers multitrust
data. Onat and Miri theorized that buﬀer sizes limited by
memory constraints would lower false positives, however
experimental results did not support this. Their attack
model includes spooﬁng and resource depletion.
Zamani et al. studied an IDS using a signature
based detection technique auditing data from a using a
traﬃc based collection process inspired by immunology
and danger theory. Molecular patterns (MPs) are the signature analogs in this design. The authors’ approach was
informed by the distributed nature of a biological immune
system. Zamani et al.’s design has two types of IDS actors:
stationary agents (thymus, bone marrow, lymph node and
local tissue) act like body tissues and mobile agents (B
cells, T cells and antigen presenting cells) play the role of
immune cells. The authors’ detection criteria hinges on
costimulation which is the weighted sum of the totals of
safe concentration levels, danger concentration levels and
density of matching molecular patterns. They report false
negative and false positive rates of 40.0 and 8.23%, respectively. Their attack model focuses on DDoS.
4.3.5. Speciﬁcation Based Designs
Ioannis et al. propose a multitrust IDS with traﬃc
based collection that audits the forwarding behavior of suspects to detect blackhole and greyhole attacks launched by
captured nodes based on the the rate (versus the count) of
speciﬁcation violations. Intrusion detectors use majority
voting to compensate for slander attacks from malicious
nodes and unintentional hidden node collisions. The pro
of this study is the identiﬁcation of a 2 : 1 cooperative
(voting based) audit period to local (speciﬁcation based)
audit period ratio as the best practice based on the trade
between false negative rate and detection latency. Intrusion detectors vote asynchronously; the con of this study
is the authors’ brief discussion on how to manage vote
4.4. Ad Hoc Networks
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize seven IDS
techniques in ad hoc networks and summarize the results
in Table 4.
4.4.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Saraﬁjanovi´c
immunology-inspired
applications.
unsupervised
anomaly-based approach and focus on four concepts: a
virtual thymus, clustering, a danger signal and memory
detectors.
They intend to advance the state of the art
by eliminating the training phase used by contemporary
semi-supervised anomaly-based approaches, adapting to
changes in user proﬁle and reducing the false positive
anomaly-based
approaches.
Saraﬁjanovi´c and Le Boudec’s attack model consider
greyhole attacks on user data and DSR protocol.
authors provide three performance metrics: true positive
rate, false positive rate and detection latency (s).
Zhang and Lee propose a semi-supervised, distributed, multitrust traﬃc based IDS. The authors’ design audits a generic routing table, but they argue that
their approach generalizes to any ad hoc routing, MAC
or application layer protocol. Zhang and Lee base their
prototype on the RIPPER classiﬁer. The authors weight
reported data based on proximity; reported data from a
close neighbor is more important than the same data from
a distant neighbor. They use majority voting at the system level to clarify low conﬁdence results at the node level.
Zhang and Lee govern a key metric (false positive rate) in
their design by parameterizing RIPPER so that it results
in unclassiﬁed data at a rate equal to or below the desired
false positive rate.
Zhang et al. is an extension of
 in which they compare RIPPER with SVM Light and
report simulation results for AODV, DSDV and DSR environments. SVM Light outperformed RIPPER for AODV
and DSR, but the RIPPER and SVM Light results were
similar for DSDV. Their attack model focuses on routing
4.4.2. Reputation Based Designs
Bella et al. propose a behavior based IDS that
bases node reputation on the energy it uses for others in
comparison with the energy it uses for itself: speciﬁcally,
the ratio of packets forwarded to packets sourced. They
calculate aggregate reputation score as the weighted sum
of the locally observed reputation score, the Neighbor Reputation Table (NRT) value, historical global reputation
score, the Global Reputation Table (GRT) value and a
third party recommendation; the design ages scores such
that the reputation of inactive nodes deteriorates.
con of this study is that nodes that do not have a demand
for forwarding will be penalized unfairly; also, using reputation score similarity as the key metric is not intuitive.
The authors focus on detecting selﬁsh nodes.
Buchegger and Le Boudec propose a distributed
IDS called CONFIDANT which extends DSR by measuring reputation with “no forwarding” behavior. The authors distinguish three levels of multitrust: experienced
data is a ﬁrsthand account which has the most weight, observed data which has less weight than experienced data
happens in the neighborhood (within radio range) and reported data which has less weight than experienced or observed data is an account coming from outside the neighborhood. Borrowing from the ﬁeld of ecology, they classify
nodes into one of three categories: suckers (who always
assist neighbors), cheats (who never assist neighbors) and
grudgers (who assist neighbors until they experience nonreciprocation). One pro of this study is the capability for
reformed or falsely detected nodes to rejoin the network.
The authors focus on detecting selﬁsh nodes.
Michiardi and Molva propose an IDS called CORE.
Neighbors of a suspect calculate its subjective reputation
score from experience of some property f (for example,
Table 4: Classiﬁcation of Ad Hoc Network IDSs
collection
multianalysis
Saraﬁjanovi´c Technique 
data mining
Zhang and Lee
data mining
Technique 
Bella Technique 
reputation
pattern matching
CONFIDANT 
reputation
pattern matching
reputation
pattern matching
Vigna Technique 
Speciﬁcation Based
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
Monitoring of AODV 
DSR routing or packet forwarding) weighting earlier and
later observations diﬀerently, and nodes calculate a suspect’s functional reputation over multiple f weighting various f diﬀerently and aging (decreasing over time) the reputations of inactive nodes. In CORE, each node regards
every other node as either trusted (positive reputation)
or misbehaving (negative reputation); nodes deny service
requests and ignore reputation information from misbehaving nodes. Pros of this study are the toleration of slander attacks and distinct sanctions for selﬁsh and malicious
nodes. The cons of this study are the dependent variables:
number of evaluations used to calculate global reputation
and variance of global reputation. The authors focus on
detecting selﬁsh nodes.
4.4.3. Signature Based Designs
Vigna et al. propose a multitrust traﬃc based IDS.
The authors focus on auditing AODV data. They instrument a physical experiment; in contrast, most of the literature relies on modeling or simulation results. The authors
claim, on aggregate, a 95% detection rate and a 6% false
positive rate.
They found packet drop attacks had the
best detection rate and spooﬁng attacks had the lowest
false positive rate. Vigna et al. consider spooﬁng, blackhole, resource depletion and routing attacks.
4.4.4. Speciﬁcation Based Designs
Tseng et al. use an AODV based FSM to establish
a speciﬁcation for a traﬃc based IDS. Distributed network
monitors maintain an FSM for each routing transaction
(request and reply). States are normal, alarm or suspicious; in suspicious states, the network monitor asks its
peers for additional insight on the transaction. The con of
this study is the reliance on a modiﬁcation of AODV to
support their design; speciﬁcally, this extended AODV has
one additional ﬁeld, previous node, in each message. The
authors consider man in the middle and tunneling attacks.
4.5. Mobile Telephony
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize seven IDS
techniques in mobile telephony and summarize the results
in Table 5.
4.5.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Hall et al. propose Anomaly Based Intrusion Detection (ABID), a semi-supervised IDS that uses a machine
learning technique (Instance Based Learning) and is based
on mobility proﬁles. The authors point out an IDS based
on mobility is particularly eﬀective against node capture
attacks because the thief will likely have a diﬀerent movement pattern than the owner. Two controls parameterize
their system: precision level (PL) enlarges or constrains
the granularity of the location data (digits of precision
used from latitude/longitude), and sequence length (SL)
extends or reduces the size of tracks under analysis. ABID
classiﬁes test data that is too similar to the training data
as anomalous in order to counter a proﬁle replay attack.
The con of this study is the extremely long training phase:
up to six months. The authors focus on replay and node
capture attacks.
Li et al. propose a cross layer behavior based IDS
using neural networks called Host based Multi-level Behaviour Proﬁling Mobile IDS (HMBPM). They prosecute
application layer features such as URL visited, network
layer features such as packets transmitted and machine
layer features such as microprocessor load. Li et al. establish three Radial Basis Function neural nets for analysis:
one each for call details, device usage and Bluetooth activity; the Multi-Level Behaviour Selector changes the neural
net feature set over time as the behavior pattern changes.
The con of this study was the error rate which is as high
as 36.4%. The authors focus on spooﬁng and node capture
Samfat and Molva propose a multitrust IDS called
Intrusion Detection Architecture for Mobile Networks
(IDAMN) that runs in real-time (it can detect an intruder
while a call is in progress) and distributes computation hierarchically. The authors minimize the amount of proﬁle
data which enhances privacy and prevents proﬁle replay attacks. IDAMN uses three techniques to detect intrusions:
studying user velocity to detect clones, looking for dispar-
Table 5: Classiﬁcation of Mobile Telephony IDSs
collection
multianalysis
data mining
HMBPM 
data mining
IDAMN 
pattern matching
pattern matching
Gibraltar 
pattern matching
MABIDS 
pattern matching
ity between switch/base station activity and user density
and comparing user behavior with user proﬁle. IDAMN
user proﬁles have three components: mobility/itinerary,
call details and speech. For the call details component of
the user proﬁle, IDAMN weights recent data more heavily
than older data. For the mobility component of the user
proﬁle, IDAMN weights frequent itineraries more heavily
than rare itineraries. The pro of this study is the false
positive rate which ranges from 1 to 7%. The con of this
study is the detection rate which is as low as 60%. These
results are counterintuitive: generally, anomaly detection
techniques have weak false positive rates and excellent detection rates.
The authors focus on spooﬁng and node
capture attacks.
4.5.2. Signature Based Designs
Jacoby et al. propose a collection approach called
Battery Based Intrusion Detection (BBID) and a detection technique called Host Analysis Signature Trace Engine (HASTE). The authors argue that behavior based collection is the best ﬁt for resource constrained applications,
such as mobile telephony handsets. The attack model of
Jacoby et al. is speciﬁc; they detect attackers who prevent
the target device from entering a lower Advanced Power
Management (APM) power state in order to exhaust its
energy prematurely. The authors concede that these attacks can be detected by other means, but the detection
latency is unacceptable. As a clariﬁcation, they refer to
their signature based approach as “rule based anomaly detection.” BBID analyzes power consumption in each state
and the transition pattern between states.
One pro of
this study is the accommodation of diﬀerences in battery
technologies (for example, Li-ion versus NiMH) and operating conditions (for example, temperature). The con
of this study, which the authors point out, is that BBID
itself will aﬀect the power consumption of a handset and
therefore has the possibility to interfere with its results.
Martin et al. propose an IDS called Power Secure
Architecture (PSA) to guard against their novel attack
model: attackers who exhaust the target battery prematurely via service request, benign and malignant power
attacks. PSA combines resource management with an intrusion detection design called Energy Signature Monitor.
As a clariﬁcation, they refer to expected or normal behavior as a signature. Martin et al. associate a power signature
with each process that runs on the target. One con of this
study is a lack of numerical results. Another con of this
study is a questionable threat model; the authors treat an
animated GIF served by a web page as an attack.
Castle et al. propose an IDS called Gibraltar that
builds upon the prior work in .
Prior to going online, the authors created signatures for several forms of
attack by proﬁling the battery current. Gibraltar includes
a static, reactive response component that collects additional audit data [process, network and (Windows) registry activity] for forensic use. One pro of this study is the
tiered dictionary which is distributed across handsets and
servers. The authors focus on DoS and LSASS attacks.
Kannadiga et al. propose an IDS called Mobile
Agent Based IDS (MABIDS). This design comprises transient thick mobile agents (MAs) on ﬁxed infrastructure
nodes, transient thin MAs on mobile nodes and a mobile agent server (MAS). Thick MAs perform collection
and analysis functions while thin MAs only perform collection; the MAS performs the related analysis in the latter
case. The MAS dispatches thick MAs to ﬁxed infrastructure nodes when they may be under attack and thin MAs
to mobile nodes on a periodic basis. The design rationale is
to take advantage of the power of the ﬁxed infrastructure
nodes, leverage the rich data set present on nodes when
under attack and conserve resources of the mobile nodes.
To clarify, the authors use the term “remote” to refer to
mobile nodes and “mobile” to refer to the transient agents
the MAS may dispatch to both ﬁxed and mobile nodes.
One con of this study is a lack of numerical results. The
authors say their design is relevant to DoS, buﬀer overﬂow
and doorknob rattling attacks.
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize four IDS
technique in WMNs and summarize the results in Table 6.
4.6.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Wang et al. propose a cross layer detection technique that pursues data from the physical, link and net-
Table 6: Classiﬁcation of WMN IDSs
collection
multianalysis
Cross-layer
data mining
Based IDS 
anomaly + signature
Li Technique 
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
Probability
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
Based IDS 
work layers of the stack. The speciﬁc machine learning
technique (Bayesian network, decision tree or SVM) is a
control variable in the experiment. The pros of this study
are excellent detection and false alarm rates for diﬀerent
attacks for their cross layer design compared to a single (network) layer design. Their attack model considers
probe ﬂooding, blackhole and greyhole attacks.
4.6.2. Anomaly + Signature Based Designs
Yang et al. study a hierarchical and proxy based
(contrast with behavior based) IDS approach called Hierarchical Proxy based Topology (HPT). Their main contribution deals with a multitrust framework: Each neighborhood within the WMN has a proxy that collects and
analyzes audit data. If the local proxy cannot determine
if a node is an intruder or not, it escalates the audit to
the central console which may request input from other
local proxies. One con of this study is a lack of numerical
results. The authors do not tie their IDS to any attack
4.6.3. Speciﬁcation Based Designs
Li et al. propose a multitrust IDS that uses a speciﬁcation based design that checks for contention window
conformance; following a collision, intruders do not stand
down for as long as they should. IDS roles are based on
the WMN role; gateways, mesh routers and mesh clients
perform diﬀerent IDS functions and respond diﬀerently to
detections. The con of this study is the weak attack model
which only considers selﬁsh adversaries. The authors focus
on detecting selﬁsh nodes.
Zhou et al. study a traﬃc based collection approach
using 802.16 (WiMAX) mesh network administration
Mesh Network Conﬁguration (MSH-NCFG),
Mesh Network Entry (MSH-NENT), Mesh Distributed
Scheduling (MSH-DSCH), Mesh Centralized Scheduling
(MSH-CSCH) and Mesh Centralized Conﬁguration (MSH-
CSCF). Multitrust data plays a key part in their design: it
compares the communication state a node reports for itself
with the state other nodes report for it. Less similarity indicates a higher probability of attack. The communication
state consists of base station and subscriber station visibility; the authors extract this state from the mesh network
administration messages. One con of this study is a lack
of numerical results. The authors focus on sinkhole and
wormhole attacks.
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize four IDS
techniques in CPSs and summarize the results in Table 7.
4.7.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Tsang and Kwong propose a multitrust IDS called
Multi-agent System (MAS). Their analysis function, Ant
Colony Clustering Model (ACCM), is biologically inspired
by its namesake, the ant colony. The authors intend for
ACCM to reduce the characteristically high false positive
rate of anomaly based approaches while minimizing the
training period by using an unsupervised approach to machine learning. MAS is hierarchical and contains a large
number of roles:
monitor agents collection audit data,
decision agents perform analysis, action agents eﬀect responses, coordination agents manage multitrust communication, user interface agents interact with human operators and registration agents manage agent appearance
and disappearance. Tsang and Kwong’s results indicate
ACCM slightly outperforms the detection rates and signiﬁcantly outperforms the false positive rates of k-means
and expectation-maximization approaches. One pro of this
study is that it uses a standard data set, KDD Cup 1999,
for testing. Another pro of this study are the great false
positive results: the ACCM false positive rate peaks at
The authors focus on zero-day (unknown) attacks:
speciﬁcally, the KDD Cup 1999 data set.
The IDS in that relies on voting is one example of using anomaly detection results in the context of
multitrust. One con of this study is the lack of simulation
to validate the probability model. The authors consider
data manipulation and spooﬁng attacks.
4.7.2. Anomaly + Signature Based Designs
Porras and Neumann study a hierarchical multitrust behavior based IDS called Event Monitoring
Enabling Responses to Anomalous Live Disturbances
(EMERALD) using complementary signature based and
Table 7: Classiﬁcation of CPS IDSs
collection
multianalysis
ACCM/MAS 
behavior + traﬃc
data mining
HPMIDCPS 
pattern matching
EMERALD 
anomaly + signature
pattern matching
Shin Technique 
anomaly + signature
anomaly based analysis.
The authors identify a signature based analysis trade between the state space created/runtime burden imposed by rich rule sets and the
increased false negatives that stem from a less expressive rule set. Porras and Neumann highlight two speciﬁc
anomaly based techniques using statistical analysis: one
studies user sessions (to detect live intruders), and the
other studies the runtime behavior of programs (to detect
malicious code). EMERALD provides a generic analysis
framework that is ﬂexible enough to allow anomaly detectors to run with diﬀerent scopes of multitrust data (service,
domain or enterprise). One con of this study is a lack of
numerical results. The authors do not tie their IDS to any
attack type.
Shin et al. present an extension of an existing WSN
technique using one hop clustering; in a one hop cluster
every member falls within radio range of the cluster head.
They combine one hop clustering for eﬀective intrusion
detection (the “second” clustering) with multi hop clustering for eﬃcient data aggregation (the “ﬁrst” clustering)
into a hierarchical two level clustering approach to strike a
balance between security and eﬃciency. This results in a
four layer hierarchy: member nodes (MN) are the leaves,
cluster heads (CH) manage MNs, gateways bundle clusters and a base station is the root of the hierarchy. These
diﬀerent roles analyze audit data the same way, but they
respond diﬀerently. This heterogeneous approach has the
advantage of minimizing the question of trustworthiness;
the CHs need to establish trust while the MNs do not.
They demonstrate that one hop clustering is particularly
eﬀective when detecting spooﬁng attacks. One pro of this
study is the numerical results; the authors report detection rates for jamming, spooﬁng, hello ﬂooding, data manipulation, greyhole, eavesdropping, routing and sinkhole
attacks. One con of this study is the results are conﬂicting; for example, they claim a 25 - 43% detection rate for
spooﬁng attacks in a table summarizing average detection
rate and a 60 - 100% detection rate for spooﬁng attacks in
a ﬁgure that plots average detection rate as a function of
hop counts.
4.8. Others
We apply the classiﬁcation tree to organize 15 IDS
techniques not speciﬁcally designed for WLANs, WPANs,
WSNs, ad hoc networks, mobile telephony, WMNs or
CPSs and summarize the results in Table 8.
4.8.1. Anomaly Based Designs
Stibor et al. perform immunology-inspired IDS research. The authors examine the DCA from a mathematical perspective and its applicability to anomaly detection.
They claim its parallelism limits its utility in this domain
and base their analysis on the deterministic variant of the
DCA. Stibor et al. show how to represent the signal processing element of the DCA as a set of linear classiﬁers.
The authors do not anchor their study to a single brand
of wireless network or provide performance data.
Farid and Rahman investigate a semi-supervised
approach to the analysis function of a traﬃc based IDS.
They extend the naive Bayesian algorithm into their Improved Adaptive Bayesian Algorithm (IABA). The key innovation of IABA is a feedback loop allowing the model
to learn from misclassiﬁed test data; learning amounts
to changing attribute weights.
The pros of this study
are demonstrated improvements in training times, testing
times, false positives and false negatives. The authors focus on zero-day (unknown) attacks: speciﬁcally, the KDD
Cup 1999 data set.
Jones and Li study an IDS using behavior based
collection that applies statistical analysis to timing enriched system call sequences by extending the work of
Hofmeyr et al. in and Lee and Stolfo in . In the
training phase, their design identiﬁes all k length system
call sequences in a set of normal training data and includes
the time interval between calls and calculates a mean and
standard deviation vector over the time intervals for each
cluster, (each instance of a sequence is a case and the collection of all cases for a sequence is a cluster) applies three
ﬁlters to the data set to qualify it and (they calculate a
z-score for each case and discards cases (rows) above za, ignore time intervals (columns) with a normalized standard
deviation that is above Cs and remove clusters where less
than Tv of cases pass the ﬁrst ﬁlter) calculates the fraction of usable cases in the training data, Pv. In the testing
phase they repeat this procedure on a suspect session (Pv
is retitled Pm in this phase); if Pm ≪Pv, then their design detects an intrusion. The con of this study is a lack of
numerical results: externally valid metrics like aggregate
false positive, false negative and detection rates are more
useful than z, Pv and Pm scores. The authors focus on
shellcode attacks.
Table 8: Classiﬁcation of Generic Wireless Network IDSs
collection
multianalysis
Deterministic DCA 
data mining
data mining
Jones Technique 
pattern matching
Snort 
OSSEC 
pattern matching
Signature Apriori 
Ying Technique 
pattern matching
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
speciﬁcation
pattern matching
ADEPTS 
IDAM&IRS 
pattern matching
AHA/AAIRS 
4.8.2. Signature Based Designs
OSSEC is a free and open source behavior based IDS
implementation .
Many recent behavior based techniques extend it by transforming signatures into an OS-
SEC rule set. OSSEC supports multitrust by incorporating remote “agents” into their framework. The pro of this
work is that it provides an open vehicle to apply signature
based IDS innovations. The authors do not tie their IDS
to any attack type.
Han et al. investigate an IDS using traﬃc based
collection that applies data mining to the distribution and
content of network traﬃc. The authors focus on attack
dictionary generation based on deep packet inspection and
call their innovation for this capability Signature Apriori.
The pro of this work is the experimental design; the authors empirically study Signature Apriori using three real
world attack techniques (glacier, IIS unicode exploit and
IPHacker).
White et al. investigate dynamic response measures targeted for large networks using Cooperating Security Managers (CSM), a system of behavior based IDSs
that cooperate in a decentralized fashion. CSM correlates
results from multiple sources (associates them with a single
attack). White et al. identify a spectrum of intrusion responses ranging from low impact responses that are appropriate for weak or low probability attacks to high impact
responses that are appropriate for severe or high probability attacks. One con of this study is the requirement to
run trusted software on a suspect node; another con of this
study is the alerting of the node originating the suspicious
behavior which gives the adversary the opportunity to reduce aggression while still causing damage. The authors
do not tie their IDS to any attack type but talk through a
doorknob rattling attack as an example.
4.8.3. Speciﬁcation Based Designs
Uppuluri and Sekar propose a means and a
methodology for specifying a system called Behavioral
Monitoring Speciﬁcation Language (BMSL), which speci-
ﬁes both normal and abnormal behaviors for an IDS using
traﬃc and behavior collection; BMSL models the event
details and event sequencing.
The authors’ IDS transforms BMSL programs into detection engines (DEs). The
methodology of Uppuluri and Sekar begins with specifying generic system behaviors, then focuses on highly privileged functions, then speciﬁes application speciﬁc behaviors, then tailors the speciﬁcation for each installation and
ends by specifying misuse signatures. They combine the
BMSL approach to speciﬁcation based IDS with a signature based IDS in order to match the detection rate of a
signature based IDS. The pro of this study is a 100% detection rate. One con of this study is the requirement to store
and update a large attack dictionary which eliminates one
of the beneﬁts of speciﬁcation over signature based designs.
Another con of this study, which the authors acknowledge,
is that BMSL does not eﬀectively model time; for example,
benign user error may account for one failed authentication in one day while ten failed authentications in a minute
may indicate an adversary trying to crack the authentication. The authors focus on detecting attacks present in
the 1999 DARPA/AFRL and 1999 DARPA/Lincoln Labs
data sets.
Sekar et al. use extended ﬁnite state automata (EF-
SAs) to establish a speciﬁcation for a traﬃc based IDS.
They combine the EFSA approach to intrusion detection
with an anomaly based IDS that uses unsupervised machine learning.
The con of this study is requiring the
IDS to run a processor and core memory intensive machine learning module which eliminates one of the ben-
eﬁts of speciﬁcation over anomaly based designs.
authors focus on detecting attacks present in the 1999
DARPA/Lincoln Labs data set.
Ko et al. propose Distributed Program Execution
Monitor (DPEM) which uses the Parallel Environment
Grammars (PE-grammars) language for an IDS using behavior collection. The con of this study is a lack of numerical results: externally valid metrics like aggregate false
positive, false negative and detection rates would be useful in addition to detection latency. The authors focus on
attacks on rdist, sendmail and binmail UNIX programs.
4.8.4. Combined Designs
Snort is a free and open source traﬃc based IDS implementation . Many recent traﬃc based collection techniques extend it by transforming signatures into a Snort
rule set. The authors claim that Snort can operate as an
anomaly based or a signature based IDS. The pro of this
work is that it provides an open vehicle to apply anomaly
or signature based IDS innovations. The authors do not
tie their IDS to any attack type.
Ying et al. propose a behavior based IDS that combines log ﬁle analysis with neural network backpropagation. This is a combined approach with a log ﬁle analyzer,
which must be initialized with a rule set, detecting signatures and a semi-supervised neural network detecting
anomalies. The con of this study, which the authors point
out, is an extensive training period which can span weeks.
The authors do not tie their IDS to any attack type.
Svecs et al. present an IDS called Cross-layer
Intrusion Detection and Response (XIDR). XIDR combines both detection techniques (anomaly and signature
based) and collection approaches (behavior and traﬃc
based) and use both local and global intrusion responses.
XIDR measures user history (by noting positive events
like successful authentication or negative events like failed
authentication, probative actions and previous alerts),
conﬁdence of intrusion detection (giving more conﬁdence
to detections stemming from more speciﬁc rules) and
the cost of intrusion response (assigning greater cost to
lower layer responses); it uses these to choose an intrusion response. Their results suggest that cross layer detection and response is particularly eﬀective when history (a table associating IP addresses with security related events) informs the decision making.
The con of
this study is a nonintuitive metric: false negative, false
positive or detection rates would be more clear than
1 −XIDR performance/single layer performance. The authors focus on SQL injection attacks.
Mu et al. study the response function using Intrusion Detection Alert Management and Intrusion Response
System (IDAM&IRS). The authors identify and create a
taxonomy for 15 response factors which serve as input to
intrusion response functions.
They identify two components to intrusion response: response start time (as opposed to response duration time) and response measure;
they propose that diﬀerent response factors should inform
each of these two components. This paper claims that contemporary response functions disregard negative impacts
on the network (eﬀect on legitimate users) and only consider positive impacts (eﬀect on intruders).
The con of
this study is a lack of any numerical results. The authors
do not tie their IDS to any attack type.
Foo et al. investigate the response function by focusing on attack containment and tolerance using Adaptive Intrusion Tolerant System (ADEPTS) which extends
 . Negative impact on the system, detection conﬁdence
and threat level (the ratio of false negatives to false positives) inform the response function. The authors present
Portable I-graph Generation that transforms a system services description (SNet) and set of vulnerability descriptions into modiﬁed fault trees which identify opportunities for containment. Each node in the I-graph is the goal
of some attack and has a compromised conﬁdence index
(CCI) score which indicates the probability of compromise. They measure ADEPTS by the fraction of system
functions available during an attack; disruption caused
by response measures and successful attacks decrease this
survivability score. When computing candidate response
measures, ADEPTS uses the SNet edge types leading to
the endangered node and response index.
Response index compares the eﬀectiveness and disruptiveness of the
response measure.
ADEPTS decreases the eﬀectiveness
index for a measure if it continues to receive alerts for an
intruder and increases the eﬀectiveness index for a measure if it runs to completion. The pro of this study is a
rich attack model. One con of this study is the CCI calculation which departs from established probability techniques. Another con of this study is the strong assumption
that truth data is available at runtime to determine false
positives and negatives. The authors consider DoS, data
manipulation and exﬁltration attacks.
Ragsdale et al. study adaptive analysis and response functions using Adaptive Hierarchical Agent based
IDS (AHA) and Adaptive Agent based Intrusion Response
System (AAIRS). In AHA, management agents tune analysis by running diﬀerent quantities of tool agents based on
threat level, diﬀerent types of tool agents based on attack
vector and changing the conﬁdence associated with the
detection results based on false positives and false negatives.
Their response function contains a feedback loop
governed by the eﬀectiveness of previous responses and
detection conﬁdence (false positives over true positives).
AAIRS improves on contemporary designs by basing intrusion responses not only on the type of attack but also
the speciﬁc parameters of the attack . The con of this
study, like Foo et al. , is the strong assumption that
truth data is available at runtime to determine false positives, false negatives and detections. The authors do not
tie their IDS to any attack type.
5. Lessons Learned
In this section, we discuss the commonality and variability of IDS techniques as applying to various wireless
systems and report lessons learned. We ﬁrst discuss the
pros and cons of IDS techniques and thus their suitability
of applying to various wireless systems. Then, we discuss
the most and least studied IDS techniques in the literature based on our survey. Lastly, we identify gaps yet to
be explored and revisit IDS techniques that deserve further
research for certain wireless systems.
Tables 9 and 10 summarize the pros and cons of IDS
techniques, respectively, as applying to various wireless
Table 11 identiﬁes the most and the least researched IDS techniques. That is, which IDS techniques
have been researched the most or the least in a given wireless system. These tables use the target system dimension
to aggregate the survey results from Section 4.
5.1. Pros and Cons of IDS Techniques as Applying to
Wireless Systems
Here we discuss the suitability of IDS techniques in
terms of their pros and cons when applying to various
wireless systems. Refer to Tables 9 and 10.
Signature based approaches, because of their minimal
processing burden, avoidance of empirical training data
can beneﬁt WPANs and mobile telephony (speciﬁcally
handsets); these applications have limited processing capabilities, lack a well deﬁned concept of operations and can
easily update attack dictionaries. Also, because of their
minimal processing burden, signature based approaches
can beneﬁt WSNs and CPSs (speciﬁcally RTUs) which
have limited processing capabilities.
Mobile telephony and CPSs, because they have well de-
ﬁned concept of operations where anomalies will sharply
contrast baseline behavior, can beneﬁt from anomaly
based approaches. Also, anomaly based approaches, because of their strength in detecting unknown attacks, can
beneﬁt WLANs, WPANs and ad hoc networks which have
a lot of untrusted actors. WSNs can beneﬁt from anomaly
based approaches because of their minimal nonvolatile
storage requirement; an anomaly based approach does not
require an attack dictionary.
WSNs and CPSs, which have well deﬁned concepts of
operation from which humans can extract invariant conditions, can beneﬁt from speciﬁcation based approaches.
Reputation based approaches can beneﬁt all systems
in ﬁnding selﬁsh nodes. They will especially beneﬁt applications for which selﬁsh nodes are considered intolerable
and a sanctioning policy on selﬁsh nodes is well deﬁned.
Behavior based approaches, because they can exploit
their consistent behavior, can beneﬁt WSNs and CPSs
which have well deﬁned concepts of operation.
WLANs, WPANs, ad hoc networks, mobile telephony and
WMNs do not have this property, they can beneﬁt from behavior based approaches because of their minimal memory
burden; the alternative, a traﬃc based approach, requires
a lot of storage.
Traﬃc based approaches can beneﬁt WSNs, WMNs
and CPSs which are typically stationary because the lack
of mobility will eliminate one source of error in the data
set. Speciﬁcally, data sets will not have artifacts caused by
changes in distance, multipath reﬂections or obstructions.
While WLANs, WPANs, ad hoc networks and mobile telephony are more mobile, they can beneﬁt from traﬃc based
approaches because their data sets are rich with features
unavailable to wireline applications such as RSSI and SNR.
Multitrust based approaches can beneﬁt WMNs which
have a stable set of neighbors and strong trust relationships; this enhances the credibility of multitrust data.
Also, multitrust based approaches can beneﬁt WSNs and
CPSs which at least have a stable set of neighbors. While
WLAN, WPAN, ad hoc network and mobile telephony
populations are more dynamic, they can beneﬁt from multitrust based approaches because a data set expanded by
multitrust provides a fuller picture of the system even if
that data set is biased by untrusted inputs . They key
problem in this case is weighting trusted data more heavily
than untrusted data.
Because they cannot store a large attack dictionary,
WPAN, WSN, and mobile telephony (especially handset)
applications present a challenge for signature based approaches.
While they can accommodate a large attack
dictionary, ad hoc network, WMN and CPS applications
will struggle to keep the attack dictionaries fresh for signature based approaches.
Because of potential revenue loss in mobile telephony
and the sanctioning of life-critical nodes in CPS applications, anomaly based approaches present a challenge because of their high false positive rates. Although they are
free of ﬁnancial and life-critical concerns, WLAN, WPAN
and ad hoc network applications lack a well deﬁned concept of operations and anomalies will not sharply contrast
baseline behavior. Finally, WSN and WMN applications
will struggle to manage the high false positive rates of
anomaly based approaches.
WLAN, WPAN, ad hoc network, mobile telephony and
WMN applications present a challenge for speciﬁcation
based approaches because an expert will struggle to distill a speciﬁcation for applications without well deﬁned
use cases. Although they do have well deﬁned use cases,
speciﬁcation based approaches still require a costly expert
analysis to produce a speciﬁcation for WSN and CPS applications.
Because of potential revenue loss in mobile telephony
and the sanctioning of life-critical nodes in CPS applications, reputation based approaches present a challenge because they target selﬁsh nodes rather than bad nodes. A
mobile telephony operator still generates revenue from selfish nodes and a CPS needs selﬁsh nodes for continuity of
operation.
Although they are free of ﬁnancial and lifecritical concerns, WLAN, WPAN, WSN, ad hoc network
and WMN applications will still struggle to manage the
Table 9: Pros of IDS Techniques For Wireless Networks
processing
processing
constrained
constrained
resources,
persistent
speciﬁcation
well deﬁned
well deﬁned
reputation
multitrust
Table 10: Cons of IDS Techniques For Wireless Networks
dictionary
dictionary
dictionary
dictionary
dictionary
dictionary
dictionary
high false
high false
reliability
speciﬁcation
common use
reputation
reliability
inconsistent
inconsistent
inconsistent
inconsistent
visibility
visibility
visibility
visibility
multitrust
population
population
population
population
population
sanctioning of good but selﬁsh nodes.
Because their proﬁles are unpredictable,
WPAN, ad hoc network, mobile telephony and WMN
applications present a challenge for behavior based approaches. Although they have predictable behaviors, WSN
and CPS applications will still struggle with behavior
based approaches when facing a dormant attacker. An effective attacker does not necessarily attack the target system immediately: An opportunistic attacker lies in wait
until the environment favors his cause, and an insidious
attacker remains dormant until his force reaches a critical
mass inside the target’s domain .
Because of their limited storage, especially WPAN,
WSN and mobile telephony (especially handset) applications present a challenge for traﬃc based approaches. Although they have more substantial storage, ad hoc network, WMN and CPS applications will still struggle with
traﬃc based approaches using multitrust because diﬀerent
positions will have diﬀerent visibility.
Because their dynamic populations make it diﬃcult to
form trust relationships, WLAN, WPAN, ad hoc network
and mobile telephony applications present a challenge for
multitrust based approaches. Also, their federated populations cause the same diﬃculty for CPS applications.
Although their populations are more stable and managed
unilaterally, WSN and WMN applications will still struggle with multitrust based approaches due to increased storage burden.
5.2. Most Studied IDS Techniques in the Literature
We summarize the most and least studied IDS techniques in Table 11. Topics with no research are marked
with cyan, those with little research are marked with grey
and topics with signiﬁcant research are marked with red.
Further, each topic is ﬁlled with a number quantifying exactly the number of existing works cited on the topic, with
× indicating that it deserves research attention.
We mark the most studied IDS techniques as applied to various systems with red in Table 11.
Specifically, signature based techniques applied to WLANs,
WSNs and mobile telephony, anomaly based techniques
applied to WLANs, WSNs, mobile telephony and CPSs,
speciﬁcation based techniques applied to WMNs, reputation based techniques applied to WSNs and ad hoc networks, behavior based collection techniques applied to
mobile telephony, traﬃc based collection techniques applied to WLANs, WSNs, ad hoc networks, mobile telephony, WMNs and CPSs and multitrust techniques applied to WLANs, WSNs, ad hoc networks, mobile telephony, WMNs and CPSs are well studied.
In general, these correspond with high eﬃcacy applications we identiﬁed in Sections 3.2.5, 3.3.3, 3.4.3 and 3.5.4.
5.3. Least Studied IDS Techniques in the Literature
Table 11 indicates there is no research (marked with
cyan) in IDS techniques as applied to various wireless
Speciﬁcally, there is no research with regard
to signature based techniques applied to WMNs and
CPSs, speciﬁcation based techniques applied to WLANs,
WPANs, mobile telephony and CPSs, reputation based
techniques applied to WLANs, WPANs, mobile telephony,
WMNs and CPSs and behavior based techniques applied
to WLANs, WPANs and WMNs.
Table 11 indicates there is little research (marked with
grey) in IDS techniques as applied to various wireless systems. Speciﬁcally, there is little research with regard to
signature based techniques applied to ad hoc networks,
anomaly based techniques applied to ad hoc networks and
WMNs, speciﬁcation based techniques applied to WSNs
and ad hoc networks and behavior based techniques applied to WSNs, ad hoc networks and CPSs.
In general, these correspond with low eﬃcacy applications we identiﬁed in Sections 3.2.5, 3.3.3, 3.4.3 and 3.5.4.
5.4. Revisiting IDS Techniques and Gaps in IDS Research
From Tables 9, 10 and 11 we identiﬁed several gaps in
the literature. Many of these gaps do not need investigative attention, but some do.
Few have applied signature based designs to ad hoc
networks, and none have applied them to WMNs or CPSs.
The inability to detect unknown attacks and the need to
store and update a large attack dictionary makes signature
based designs unsuitable for these target systems.
Few have applied anomaly based designs to ad hoc networks and WMNs.
Anomaly based designs’ large false
positive rates and the transient populations of ad hoc networks make these ineﬀective combinations.
None have applied speciﬁcation based designs to
WLANs, WPANs, mobile telephony or CPSs while only
a few have applied them to WSNs and ad hoc networks. WLANs, WPANs and mobile telephony networks
lack a single encompassing concept of operation which
make speciﬁcation based designs ineﬀective. Researchers
should pursue speciﬁcation based designs for CPSs because
they are particularly applicable to CPSs which have welldeﬁned operations.
Signature based approaches are not
workable because of maintenance diﬃculty, and reputation
management based approaches are not workable because
of federation. The false alarm rates for speciﬁcation based
designs are better than anomaly based designs, and the
well deﬁned use cases for CPSs yield a rich set of phenomena to specify.
None have applied reputation management based designs to WLANs, WPANs, mobile telephony, WMNs or
CPSs. Because their tightly speciﬁed communication infrastructure may not be able to handle the associated gossip, reputation management based designs are not suitable
for mobile telephony or CPSs. Because their populations
are relatively static, the overhead of computing trust will
not trade favorably with the beneﬁt of using historical audit data. Nevertheless, researchers should pursue reputation management based designs for WLANs, WPANs and
Table 11: Most and Least Studied IDS Techniques (cyan: no research, grey: little research, red: signiﬁcant research, ×: deserving more
signature based
anomaly based
speciﬁcation based
reputation based
behavior based
traﬃc based
multitrust
There are research gaps for behavior based approaches
applied to WLANs, WPANs and WMNs, and researchers
should pursue behavior based approaches for them.
Summarizing above, we mark × in Table 11 for IDS
techniques which are relatively unexplored in the literature but deserve further research attention, as they have
been identiﬁed as suitable as well as potentially impactful
for the respective wireless systems identiﬁed. When considering the application domain in particular, Table 11 reveals that WLANs, WPANs, WMNs and CPSs suﬀer from
a lack of research on applied IDS with three unrepresented
categories.
In addition to the research gaps identiﬁed by Table
11, the literature needs studies which provide results in
the form of externally valid metrics. Many do not provide
numerical results in any form .
Furthermore, researchers should gather these measurements for diﬀerent attack types. For example, one IDS’s
blackhole attacker detection rate cannot be compared
against another IDS’s replay attacker detection rate.
When numerical results are reported at all, only detection rate, false positive rate and false negative rate are
given usually. For example, detection latency is a critical
metric that researchers rarely report on. A 100% detection
rate is a great achievement, but if this IDS takes an hour
to detect intruders, the adversary may still have enough
time to damage the target system.
6. Future Research Areas
Based on our surevy and lessons learned, below we
identify several future research areas with suggestions for
ways to conduct research in these areas.
1. Repurpose Existing Work: A potential research
area is to investigate applicability of IDS techniques
that, based on our survey, have not been applied to
certain systems. These IDS techniques are marked
with × in Table 11 for the corresponding wireless
systems identiﬁed. A possible research direction is to
adapt an existing research product to a new target
system. As an example, we may apply a response selection algorithm from to WMNs,
WSNs, ad hoc networks, WLANs or WPANs. Also,
another area is to investigate new IDS techniques
that improve upon performance of existing ones.
Only contemporary studies that provide clear numerical results enable this line of pursuit.
new IDS techniques may require new detection techniques or a new classiﬁcation dimension.
2. Multitrust: Utilizing multitrust for intrusion detection is relatively unexplored in wireless IDS research but deserves more attention because it increases the dataset available to an IDS. Our survey
results indicate that multitust-based intrusion detection for WLANs and WMNs especially deserves more
research attention. Multitrust is the concept of using
reported information (data from witnesses or third
parties). Hearsay or gossip may also be used to refer
to reported data.
The key problem is guaranteeing the larger data set yields a net gain in key metrics despite the presence of bad-mouthing and ballot
stuﬃng attacks. A preliminary work reported in 
may shed some light on how to apply multitrust to
intrusion detection.
3. Speciﬁcation Based Design for CPSs: Another
potential research area is an IDS with a speciﬁcation based design applied to CPSs. Our survey results conﬁrm speciﬁcation based designs in general
and CPS applications in particular are unexplored.
The critical challenge in speciﬁcation-based designs
is to transform a sophisticated system into a formal model. With their well deﬁned actors and functions, CPSs provide an ideal starting point for serious investigation of speciﬁcation-based designs. Two
possible research directions are to create a tool or
methodology to transform a system into a formal
model and to establish a language or schema for expressing the formal model. These results could feed
a CPS analytical model for performance and sur-
vivability analysis. Growing cyber warfare concerns
 and escalation of cyber warfare rhetoric at the
state level make intrusion detection for CPSs
an immediately important research area.
4. Intrusion Response and Repair: Intrusion response and repair strategies are also relatively unexplored. Possible intrusion responses include evicting individual compromised nodes, isolating compromised segments (microgrid or larger scope) and adjusting detection strength. For example, the IDS can
perform better if it adjusts the detection rate based
on the type and strength of adversary it faces. Possible repair strategies are to identify compromised
segments and for each one: stop operating, revert all
nodes to certiﬁed software loads and conﬁgurations,
rekey/reset passwords and progressively resume operation from the production side of the network towards the consumers. Analysis techniques that provide early warning of attacks are another potential
research area. These techniques would serve as an
enabler by providing a trigger for pre-detection responses. Another research direction is to distinguish
early warnings from detections by using the conﬁdence level that accompanies existing analysis techniques.
5. Metrics: More research is needed to deﬁne wireless IDS performance metrics. When numerical results are reported at all, only detection rate, false
negative rate and false positive rate are given usually. However, detection latency is a critical metric
that researchers rarely report on. A 100% detection
rate is a great achievement, but if this IDS takes
an hour to detect intruders, the adversary may still
have enough time to damage the target system. We
have not found detection latency being studied in the
literature, but it is clearly a critical metric. Therefore, researchers should develop detection latency as
a key IDS metric. Another new metric could be mitigation latency, which represents the delay between
detection and attack repulsion.
6. Application Layer Data Auditing: Another research area is to focus on application layer data auditing. The audit of lower layer data that is common
to any application has been well-studied, so adversaries expect these defensive measures. A cunning
adversary will craft his attack to appear normal in
every way possible to avoid widely deployed IDSs.
IDSs that audit application layer data focus on detecting the adversary where he must reveal himself
to attack the system.
A preliminary work can be
found in with respect to application layer
data auditing for unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) and
smart grid cyber physical systems.
More eﬀort is
needed to investigate the use of threshold monitoring techniques coupled with intrusion detection. Existing works use a binary failure threshold
to classify a node as malicious or normal, i.e., a node
is considered compromised if it deviates from good
behavior once. Other failure threshold criteria based
on fuzzy failure criteria may prove to
be more eﬀective against environment noises and/or
smart attackers.
7. Modeling and Analysis Methodology: Modelbased analysis techniques such as need to be developed and validated to analyze performance of wireless IDS protocols, identify optimal wireless IDS protocol settings
to maximize wireless IDS performance based on performance metrics deﬁned, evaluate further innovation in IDS design and analyze the impact of intrusion detection on system performance and survivability. Conﬁguration items (e.g., number of intrusion detectors, audit interval and detection threshold) impact the detection and false positive rates of
the IDS and longevity of the wireless system as a
whole. Researchers should identify parameters that
have a local maximum and parameters that are covariant. They should establish heuristics for ﬁnding
the optimal value for the former set and equations
that characterize the tradeoﬀfor the latter set.
8. Adversary
Countermeasure
Design: Not all adversaries behave the same, so researchers should deepen the complexity of attacker
models. The literature is thin on adversary modeling. A preliminary investigation can be found in 
which characterizes attacker behaviors by reckless,
random, and insidious, as well as in which classifes attacker behaviors and devises responses toward
these attacker behaviors to maximize the system lifetime. This is not a complete set. The identiﬁcation
of current attacker behavior and/or capture strength
is still an unsolved problem and is itself challenging.
For example, an oracle attacker could adjust the attacker strength depending on the detection strength
to maximize security failure. For countering adversary behavior, more work is called for to apply control theory to design a general control function such
that the system can dynamically adjust detection
strength in response to attacker strength detected
at runtime.
9. Biology, Immunology and Self-awareness: A
potential research area is to pursue IDS approaches
inspired by biology, immunology and self-awareness
like .
We included nine current references to these techniques
in this survey, but many more exist.
In particular, they aid detection of unknown attacks; ﬁnding
zero-day attacks is a hard problem with great potential for technology transfer. Self-aware detection
systems include their own state in deciding whether a suspect is normal or an intruder. One
way they may distinguish themselves from classical
approaches is by identifying situations where an at-
tacker is provoking them into a DoS scenario with
an otherwise benign circumstance. Also, self-aware
detection systems may identify situations where the
cost of the damage the adversary threatens is greater
than stopping the hosted business functions and disconnecting the system. While biology, immunology
and self-aware-inspired approaches are extensions of
existing detection techniques that do not require a
separate IDS technique category, These approaches
are valuable in opening lines of investigation in the
research area.