The complete genome of an individual by massively
parallel DNA sequencing
David A. Wheeler1*, Maithreyan Srinivasan2*, Michael Egholm2*, Yufeng Shen1*, Lei Chen1, Amy McGuire3,
Wen He2, Yi-Ju Chen2, Vinod Makhijani2, G. Thomas Roth2, Xavier Gomes2, Karrie Tartaro2{, Faheem Niazi2,
Cynthia L. Turcotte2, Gerard P. Irzyk2, James R. Lupski4,5,6, Craig Chinault4, Xing-zhi Song1, Yue Liu1, Ye Yuan1,
Lynne Nazareth1, Xiang Qin1, Donna M. Muzny1, Marcel Margulies2, George M. Weinstock1,4, Richard A. Gibbs1,4
& Jonathan M. Rothberg2{
The association of genetic variation with disease and drug response, and improvements in nucleic acid technologies, have given
great optimism for the impact of ‘genomic medicine’. However,
the formidable size of the diploid human genome1, approximately
6 gigabases, has prevented the routine application of sequencing
methods to deciphering complete individual human genomes.
To realize the full potential of genomics for human health, this
limitation must be overcome. Here we report the DNA sequence of
a diploid genome of a single individual, James D. Watson,
sequenced to 7.4-fold redundancy in two months using massively
sequencing
picolitre-size
sequence was completed in two months at approximately onehundredth of the cost of traditional capillary electrophoresis
methods. Comparison of the sequence to the reference genome
led to the identification of 3.3 million single nucleotide polymorphisms, of which 10,654 cause amino-acid substitution within
the coding sequence. In addition, we accurately identified smallscale (2–40,000 base pair (bp)) insertion and deletion polymorphism as well as copy number variation resulting in the large-scale
gain and loss of chromosomal segments ranging from 26,000 to
1.5 million base pairs. Overall, these results agree well with recent
results of sequencing of a single individual2 by traditional methods. However, in addition to being faster and significantly less
expensive, this sequencing technology avoids the arbitrary loss
of genomic sequences inherent in random shotgun sequencing
by bacterial cloning because it amplifies DNA in a cell-free system.
As a result, we further demonstrate the acquisition of novel human
sequence, including novel genes not previously identified by traditional genomic sequencing. This is the first genome sequenced
by next-generation technologies. Therefore it is a pilot for the
future challenges of ‘personalized genome sequencing’.
To catalogue the genomic diversity within a single individual, a
total of 106.5 million high-quality reads were generated by 454sequencing3, representing approximately 24.5 billion DNA bases.
Reads that aligned to the genome were further filtered using stringent
criteria to ensure the accuracy of mapping, resulting in 93.2 million
reads aligned to reference genome sequence. The reference genome
sequence was thus covered to an average depth of 7.4-fold (Fig. 1a).
The alignments between the uniquely mapped reads and the
reference genome were used to catalogue genetic variation in the
subject’s DNA, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
small insertions and deletions (indels), and copy number variation
The 454 base-calling software provides error estimates (Q values)
for each base. We developed a three-step filtering process using the
patterns of error and associated Q values from the 454 base-calling
software to improve the accuracy of SNP discovery. An initial 14 million variant positions were filtered to 3.32 million putative SNPs
(Table 1).
Comparison of these putative SNPs in the subject’s genome
with those in the dbSNP (dbSNP: 
projects/SNP/) revealed 2.72 million in common (‘known SNPs’).
Approximately 99% of SNPs in dbSNP are bi-allelic. At only
10,425 positions did the subject’s variant not match the variant found
in dbSNP. Although some of these could represent a third allele in the
population, or an error in the dbSNP polymorphism record, we
conservatively estimated the false discovery rate in the known SNPs
to be approximately 0.38% based on the mismatches with dbSNP.
The remaining 0.61 million SNPs were at positions not previously
identified as polymorphic in dbSNP (‘novel SNPs’). The known
SNPs were divided almost equally between homozygous (50.2%)
and heterozygous (49.8%) SNPs, whereas within the novel SNPs
heterozygotes predominate (83.3%) compared with homozygotes
(16.7%). Because most common alleles in human populations are
already captured in dbSNP, novel variants are expected to be rare,
and therefore much more likely to be found as heterozygotes.
We assessed the accuracy of the known SNPs derived from DNA
sequencing by comparison with the experimental genotyping of the
subject’s DNA using an Affymetrix 500K microarray. Compared with
a haploid reference sequence, there are four possible outcomes of
SNP array genotyping: homozygous for the reference allele; homozygous for the variant (non-reference) allele; heterozygous; and assay
failure. Table 2 shows the results for 494,713 markers that were successfully genotyped. The subject’s DNA sequence exhibited only the
reference allele at 99.4% of the markers homozygous for the reference
and at 95.1% of markers homozygous for the variant. Genotyping
identified 135,413 heterozygous markers of which 75.8% exhibited
two alleles in the 454-reads. The lower sensitivity of detection of
heterozygotes is predicted by a Poisson process of sampling DNA
fragments modelled on a diploid genome (Methods). Consistent
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
1Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 2454 Life Sciences, Roche Diagnostics, 20 Commercial Street,
Bradford, Connecticut 06405, USA. 3Center for Ethics and Health Policy, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston Texas 77030, USA. 4Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston Texas 77030, USA. 5Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston Texas
77030, USA. 6Texas Children’s Hospital, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. {Present addresses: Molecular Imaging Systems, Carestream Health, Inc., 4 Science
Park, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA (K.T.); Rothberg Institute for Childhood Diseases, 530 Whitfield Street, Guilford, Connecticut 06437, USA (J.M.R.).
Vol 452 |17 April 2008 |doi:10.1038/nature06884
Publishing Group
with this model, the coverage was lower at the 24.2% of heterozygous
positions where DNA sequencing represented only one of the correct
alleles (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 2). The Poisson model
further shows that 13-fold average coverage would be required to
detect 99% of all heterozygous SNPs (Supplementary Fig. 4).
The DNA sequencing genotypes disagree with the SNP array genotyping in 4,948 cases, or 1.0% of the time; another 3,499 markers
(0.30%) had no coverage, consistent with the genome-wide redundancy of the sequence. Assuming the sensitivity and specificity of the
markers on the microarray is representative of those found throughout the human genome, we estimate the total number of SNPs in the
subject’s genome to be approximately 3.7 million (see ‘Sensitivity and
specificity of SNP discovery’ in Supplementary Information).
We identified 222,718 indels ranging from 2 to 38,896 bp, with
113,539 in common with indels in dbSNP; 85,418 indels are found
as homozygotes, and 137,300 were heterozygotes. Insertions account
for 65,677 events, and deletions 157,041. A portion of the deletion
size distribution from 2 to 1000 bp is shown in Fig. 1c. The distribution of deletions shows the relative enrichment for events in the
range 300–350 bases in length, as expected from the known polymorphism of Alu SINE elements4,5. The size range over which insertions are detected is limited by the length of the reads; in the analysis
of our 250 base-pair 454-sequencing reads, the largest observed was
A total of 345 indels were observed to overlap coding sequence and
had the potential to alter protein function. We designed primers to
amplify and validate by Sanger sequencing 111 of these events with a
size range of 3–50 bases. A total of 78 indels were successfully validated of which 66 were observed to be in length multiples of 3,
ranging from 3 to 33 bp, and hence not expected to cause protein
translation frame shifts. Sixty-five of these indels were found as
heterozygotes. Surprisingly, a 4-bp deletion in exon 11 of SGEF
was found to be homozygous; however, this gene is highly conserved
in vertebrate species from rhesus macaque to stickleback, and all
manifest the same 4-bp deletion in their genome (Supplementary
Fig. 5). Furthermore, two other independent human messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) harbour the deletion as well, suggesting the
subject’s allele was the wild type and that the reference harbours a
rare insertion.
CNVs are local gains or losses of regions in the genome owing to
duplication or deletion that can be associated with genetic disease6
and which should be detectable by variation in the average DNA
sequence coverage of the region. A comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) microarray analysis of the subject’s DNA revealed 23
apparent CNV regions ranging in size from 26 kb to 1.6 Mb: 9 with
DNA gains and 14 with a loss. The sequence coverage data exhibited a
gain or loss congruent with the CGH result at 18 of the 23 regions
(Supplementary Table 4). Regions of CNV are polymorphic in populations, segregating as alleles with varying frequency7,8. Consequently,
the interpretation of a CGH microarray depends on the reference
genome with which the subject is compared. This difference in
reference standard is unavoidable when comparing CGH with
DNA sequencing results using National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) build 36 as the reference, which is not based
on a single individual and for which no physical DNA sample exists.
We experimentally demonstrated variation in CGH results by repeating the CGH array using a second reference genome and two different
array platforms, demonstrating the effect the reference DNA has on
the outcome of a CGH experiment (Supplementary Table 4).
An individual region of homozygous loss was characterized further
using CGH results and DNA sequencing (Supplementary Fig. 6c).
Sequence alignment of the subject’s reads spanning the breakpoint of
Deletion length (bp)
Log10 frequency
Frequency × 10–4
Frequency × 10–3
Frequency × 10–3
Figure 1 | 454-Sequencing of individual genome generated even coverage
enabling genome-wide detection of variation. a, Distribution of sequence
coverage of reference genome by 454-reads is random. Coverage, calculated
in consecutive 5-kb windows, exhibited a Poisson distribution with a mean
of 7.4-fold across all chromosomes except the X. Shoulder at 3.7X represents
coverage of the X chromosome. b, Coverage is a key factor in detection of
both alleles at heterozygous positions. For 31,709 markers heterozygous by
microarray, but which exhibited only a single allele by DNA sequencing, the
coverage was lower (red line, mean 5.7X) than the overall coverage for all
SNPs (blue line, mean 7.8X). c, Size distribution of deletions. Deletions were
readily observed in alignments of 454-reads to the reference genome. Note
the peak in the size range at 300–350 bases owing to polymorphic Alu
transposon insertion sites.
Table 1 | Single nucleotide variation in 454 reads
Total variation
14,829,087
11,545,814
* Filters:raw,all basesubstitutionfromcross_match alignments; 1,Sv . 28(seeMethods); 2,filter
1 plus ratio of variant to total coverage .0.2; 3, filter 2 plus eliminate SNPs close to homopolymer
runs .5 bp; 4, (Venter) Phred (ref. 20) Q . 15, ratio of variant to total coverage .0.2.
{ Variants found in build 126 of dbSNP ( 
{ SNPs found in genome of Venter: see ref. 2 and supplementary material therein.
Table 2 | Microarray validation of 454 SNPs
Affymetrix genotype*
Affymetrix SNP array
454 Sequence{
Agreement (%)
* Homo ref., homozygous for reference allele; homo var., homozygous for the variant allele;
hetero, heterozygous.
{ The genotype based on the alleles observed in 454 reads at each position of an Affymetrix
NATURE |Vol 452 |17 April 2008
Publishing Group
a homozygous deletion region reveals a 2-bp addition at the breakpoint junction, suggesting non-homologous end joining6 was the
mechanism involved in generating the deletion, and demonstrating
the feasibility of using 454 sequence reads for identifying CNV breakpoints (Supplementary Fig. 6c). Several other CNV regions were
flanked by repeats and segmental duplications, and likely occur by
non-allelic homologous recombination, as was reported recently
for the CNV loss at 22q13.1 (ref. 9) (see CNV 23 in Supplementary
None of the CNV regions we defined are currently known to be
involved in a recognizable phenotype; however, either trait or disease
susceptibility correlations could occur in the future10. Thirty-four
genes are predicted to be affected by these gains and losses, including
two separate olfactory receptor groups, several genes with possible
roles in cancers of the prostate, breast and colon, a gene from the
HLA-D locus, and two proteins thought to be involved in RNA
editing (Supplementary Table 4).
Among the 3.3 million SNPs found in the subject’s genome were
8,996 non-synonymous changes in known SNPs and 1,573 in novel
SNPs. We compared the non-synonymous known SNPs with the
Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), the largest current
compendium of human disease alleles11. Thirty-two alleles exactly
matched mutations reported in the HGMD whereas an additional
310 of these were in HGMD genes but were either alleles or aminoacid positions not previously characterized as disease-causing. In 12
cases the specific alterations and loci consisted of genes where homozygous recessive alleles can give rise to disease or other recognizable
phenotype (Table 3); and 20 cases are reported to be associations with
increased disease risk (Supplementary Table 5).
Ten of the 12 alleles in Table 3 are thought to be highly penetrant,
Mendelian recessive disease-causing alleles. Seven of ten were heterozygous in the subject’s genome sequence; the other three only exhibited one allele but have an average sequence coverage less than
fivefold. Because the subject does not have these three diseases, and
we expect not to recover the second allele for 24% of heterozygous
positions, it is likely that he is not homozygous for these disease allele
positions. We note that there are not yet any systematic studies of the
population frequencies of these alleles. Nevertheless, the subject is a
carrier for ten highly penetrant genetic disease loci found in the
HGMD data set consisting of 900 genes. It has been estimated there
are fewer than ten lethal equivalents in each person12–14. Because we
have drawn ten from an HGMD subset of the genome, we would
predict the subject harbours a much greater number of deleterious
Mendelian mutant alleles than is commonly estimated.
In addition, a sampling of 3,898 of the non-synonymous SNPs
were tested for their possible functional impact on the protein
sequence using the software Polyphen15. Polyphen classified 7.3%
as ‘probably damaging’, suggesting these changes will be of functional
consequence to the protein. The remainder were classified as either
‘possibly damaging’ (13%) or ‘benign’ (74%).
The genome sequence of another individual (C. Venter) was
recently reported2. That study reported a 7.5-fold genome coverage
using Sanger reads. The Venter genome harboured approximately
2.8 million known SNPs and about 0.74 million novel SNPs, in close
agreement with the results from 454-reads of the Watson genome
at a similar fold coverage. The two individuals shared 1.68 million
of the SNPs, of which 5,230 were non-synonymous, accounting for
58% of the subject’s non-synonymous SNPs. Watson and Venter
are each distinguished from the reference by 3,766 and 3,882 nonsynonymous SNPs, respectively, and therefore are different from
each other by 7,648 protein coding changes. This is the most comprehensive comparison of the non-synonymous difference between
two diploid genomes yet undertaken.
The subject’s data also contained 1.5 million reads of novel
sequence that did not map to build-36, corresponding to about
1.4% of the total sequence data. Approximately 65% of the
unmapped sequences matched to known human repeats enriched
for satellite DNA and other repeat elements characteristic of heterochromatin (Supplementary Fig. 7). The novel reads were assembled
into approximately 170,000 contigs spanning 48 Mb. After removing
contigs with fewer than 100 bp of contiguous unique sequence,
110,000 contigs spanning 29 Mb remained, which is close to the
25 Mb of euchromatic sequence predicted to be absent from the
reference genome1. These non-repeat contigs closely match to 33
human complementary DNA (cDNA) sequences from a variety of
tissues and predicted functions (Supplementary Table 6) having no
known map location on the human reference genome (see Methods).
To assess further the gene-coding potential of these novel DNA
sequences, we compared conceptual translations of the contigs
greater than 1,000 bp (1,279 in all) with the GenBank non-redundant
(NR) protein database. This search yielded 60 significant, but not
identical, matches to 49 different proteins in humans and other vertebrates (Supplementary Table 7). The annotations of several of these
transcripts are consistent with transcription factor or signalling
molecules. Therefore it is possible this diploid genome sequence will
contribute important new genes to the human genome.
The sequencing method used in this study has many advantages
over traditional capillary sequencing. It is inherently scalable, which
means that sequencing costs in the miniature continue to decrease
and throughput increases as the density of the sequencing reactions
on the chip increases, and read lengths get longer3. In this study we
sequenced the genome of Dr Watson for less than US$1 million,
Table 3 | SNPs matching HGMD mutations causing disease or other phenotypes
HGMD accession
Chromosome Coordinate
HUGO symbol
Cytogenetic
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency
Heterozygous
Duffy blood-group antigen
Duffy blood group antigen,
Homozygous*
Phosphodiesterase 6B, cGMP-specific,
Retinitis pigmentosa 40
Heterozygous
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase 9p
Myopathy, distal, with rimmed
Heterozygous
Excision repair cross-complementing
rodent repair deficiency,
complementation group 6 protein (CSB)
Cockayne syndrome
Homozygous{
Myosin VIIA
Usher syndrome 1b
Homozygous{
Phosphofructokinase, muscle
Glycogen storage disease 7
Homozygous*
Retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator
interacting protein 1
Cone–rod dystrophy
Heterozygous
Interleukin-12 receptor, beta 1
Mycobacterial infection
Heterozygous
Nephrosis-1, congenital, Finnish type
Congenital nephrotic syndrome,
Finnish type
Heterozygous
Arylsulphatase A
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Heterozygous
* Coverage at these SNP positions is less than 5. However, both produce benign phenotypes.
{ Coverage at these SNP positions is greater than 5. Both would produce severe phenotypes if they were truly homozygous.
NATURE |Vol 452 |17 April 2008
Publishing Group
Protection of human subjects
Is institutional review board approval required for this project?
Considerations. Approval by an institutional review board (IRB) is
required for all research involving human subjects. Federal regulation
defines research as ‘a systematic investigation, including research,
development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop or
contribute to generalizable knowledge.’ A human subject is defined
according to the regulations as ‘a living individual about whom an
investigator … conducting research obtains (1) data through
intervention or interaction with the individual, or (2) identifiable private
information.’ (45 CFR 46.102). Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, requires that all proposed activities at the college be reviewed to
determine if they meet the regulatory definitions for research involving
human subjects . The research team and the Baylor College of
Medicine IRB agreed that the activities associated with this project
constitute research involving human subjects. IRB review helps to
ensure ethical research conduct and appropriate subject protection. It
also sets an important standard for future research in the field of
personalized genomics.
Management. The research protocol was written in consultation with
an ethicist and reviewed by the Baylor College of Medicine IRB. The
research participant’s identity was not revealed to the IRB, to ensure
objectivity. Although the practical management of many of the ethical
issues depended on the unique expertise of the research participant,
this did not affect review or approval of the research protocol.
Returning research results to research participants
Should the research participant be able to receive information about their
individual genome sequence?
Considerations. Dr Watson requested that he receive information
about all data generated from this research project. Generally, patients
have a right to receive medical information, but this right does not
typically extend to individual research results. Concerns include
validity of genetic tests not performed in a Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-approved laboratory, the
unknown clinical significance of much of the generated data, and
protecting subjects from potentially harmful information, such as
information about genetic risk of uncertain penetrance. These
considerations have to be weighed against the ethical principles of
respect for autonomy and the right to receive relevant information
about oneself, as well as the principle of reciprocity, which suggests a
right to receive information in exchange for research participation.
Management. The research team felt that because of Dr Watson’s
unique expertise he would be able to understand adequately the
significance and limitations of these data. Therefore, out of respect for
his autonomous decision to receive the information, Dr Watson was
given his entire genome sequence on a miniature hard drive. Genetic
counselling was provided to help with interpretation and to ensure
adequate understanding of the information given and the limitations of
its clinical significance. It remains controversial whether other research
participants who do not share Dr Watson’s expertise ought to be
informed of individual results of genetic research. Certainly for many,
whole-genome data will be meaningless. A more analysed form of the
data may therefore be required.
Should the research participant be able to request that certain information
be redacted before individual and/or public disclosure?
Considerations. Although patients generally have a right to receive
certain medical information, they can waive that right and request that
information be withheld from them. The right not to know of a genetic
risk is legally sanctioned but remains ethically controversial. Even if this
right is recognized, however, decisions about redactions must be made
a priori to preserve the right not to know a particular finding. In the
context of whole-genome sequencing research, because genomic
information is stable over time but our understanding of the clinical
significance of that information continues to grow at a very fast pace,
we cannot anticipate future findings that may reveal genetic risk
information that the participant may not have wanted to know. We
also cannot entirely eliminate the risk that inferences could be made
about the missing information from downstream and/or upstream
Management. Because Dr Watson is knowledgeable about and
familiar enough with the current literature in genetics to assess
research findings and to make an informed decision about what risk
information he does and does not want to receive, his right to redact
information was respected. Decisions about redactions were made a
priori and the problems associated with future findings, as well as
general concerns about receiving specific genetic information, were
discussed with a genetic counsellor. Dr Watson requested that all gene
information about apolipoprotein E be redacted, citing concerns about
the association that has been shown with Alzheimer’s disease. These
data were redacted and were not analysed by the research team.
Again, this approach is not generalizable and may not be appropriate
for other research participants.
Data release and data flow
Should the participant’s genome sequence be publicly released?
Considerations. There is great scientific interest in accessing and
studying the data generated from this project. To maximize scientific
and clinical use, public data release is strongly encouraged in genomic
research. Dr Watson is personally committed to a policy of open
access to DNA data. However, because DNA is a unique identifier,
there are privacy risks associated with data sharing. Because this
project was publicly announced and Dr Watson was individually
identified, there was concern about his privacy interests and the
potential harm that could result from the misuse of his genetic
information.
Management. An individual can waive their right to privacy and share
personal information with others. Dr Watson decided to share his
personal genome by releasing it into a publicly accessible scientific
database. The privacy risks associated with public data broadcast were
explained.
What, if any, obligations are owed to third-party relatives?
Considerations. Because genetic information is familial by nature, Dr
Watson’s participation in this research raised concerns about what
obligations, if any, were owed to his close biological relatives. Dr
Watson’s autonomy-based rights had to be weighed against the rights
and welfare of his biological relatives. There are three research-related
activities that raise concerns about obligations to third-party relatives:
consent for research participation; returning research-related results;
and data release.
1. Third-party relatives are not typically considered research
participants and their consent is not generally required for research
participation. The participant’s autonomous decision to participation
in research typically outweighs any objections raised by third-party
relatives.
2. In the clinical context, the physician’s duty to warnbiological relatives
of genetic risk remains controversial. In the research context, because
the data are not validated in an approved laboratory, the obligation to
warn at-risk relatives is even more tenuous. As in the clinic, all research
participants should be informed of the risks to relatives and encouraged
todiscussresearchresultswiththem.Inthisproject,geneticcounselling
was offered for family members, free of charge.
3. There are privacy risks associated with the public release of genomic
data for the individual research participant. There are also risks, though
ofa more uncertain nature, ofpublicrelease for close biological relatives,
especially when the participant is clearly identified and the release of his
data is publicized. What obligation, if any, does an investigator have to
protect third-party relatives from these privacy risks?
Management. Risks to relatives were disclosed and thoroughly
discussed with the research participant. He was strongly encouraged
to discuss these issues with biological relatives and to make a family
decision about research participation and data release. The issue of
whether investigators should publicly release Dr Watson’s data
without familial consent was avoided by presenting the edited genome
sequence to Dr Watson who then released it himself directly into
publicly accessible databases. This did not alleviate any moral
obligation Dr Watson may have to protect his biological relatives from
the uncertain privacy risks associated with public data release. It is also
unlikely that future research participants will be able to facilitate their
own data release, making the question of obligations to third-party
relatives a policy priority.
NATURE |Vol 452 |17 April 2008
Publishing Group
whereas the genome of Venter by Sanger sequence reportedly cost
approximately US$100 million. Although not used in this study, this
sequencing technology allows the production of mate-paired reads.
The use of mate-pair reads will enable assessment of a wider range of
indels and other structural rearrangements, and facilitate the incorporation of new sequence into the reference genome16. The principal
weakness of the method is that it currently does not allow efficient
detection of single-base indels in homopolymers. Future developments in chemistry and software will improve the ability to identify
single-base indels.
A key aim of personal genome sequencing is to identify genome
sequences that may be associated with disease, or are predictive of
response to medication. The need to make genotype–phenotype
correlations before having predictive value is at the heart of both
the excitement and the dilemma of the new era of genomic medicine17. Thus the ability to sequence individuals readily using highthroughput, scaleable, low-cost, completely in vitro technology, as
demonstrated here, is an important milestone in our ability to connect ‘personalized genomes’ to ‘personalized medicine’ and enable
these critical correlations to be made.
METHODS SUMMARY
Mapping and alignment to the genome. DNA sequencing on the Genome
Sequencer FLX instrument (454, Inc.) is described in detail in Methods.
Reads, averaging approximately 250 bases, were mapped on to the human
reference genome, NCBI build 36, by sequence alignment using Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)-like alignment tool (BLAT). Reads were
removed from subsequent analysis that failed to meet minimum criteria (see
Methods). Reads that passed the alignment quality criteria were realigned to
local reference genome fragments using Cross_match software; the refined alignments were parsed for sequence variation between the subject and the reference.
An error model was developed to separate sequencing error from true genomic
variation, and the location and type of each putative true variant was tabulated
(see Methods).
Assembly of non-matching reads. One and a half million reads that failed to
find a match in the reference genome sequence (‘no-hit’ reads) and another
2.2 million reads with low-quality alignments to the reference were pooled for
sequence assembly. All reads were trimmed to remove the last 50 bases in which
most of the sequencing error lies. Reads less than 50 bases after trimming were
discarded. The assembly of the remaining 2.6 million trimmed reads followed the
standard ATLAS-WGS procedure18,19.
Laboratory analysis of genomic DNA. A DNA sample from the subject was
labelled and annealed to the Affymetrix 500K GeneChip array to provide independent laboratory analysis of the subject’s SNPs and conformation of the DNA
sequencing coverage. To compare local fluctuation in DNA sequencing coverage
with copy number variation in the subject’s genome, three additional DNA
samples were labelled and mixed each in a 1:1 ratio with separately labelled
control DNAs. The mixtures were annealed to each of two Agilent 244K array
CGH chips and one Nimblegen HD2 chip.
Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of
the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Received 3 December 2007; accepted 4 March 2008.
The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Finishing the
euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature 431, 931–945 .
Levy, S. et al. The diploid genome sequence of a single individual. PLoS Biol. 5,
e254–e286 .
Margulies, M. et al. Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre
reactors. Nature 437, 376–380 .
Bennett, E. A., Coleman, L. E., Tsui, C., Pittard, W. S. & Devine, S. E. Natural genetic
variation caused by transposable elements in humans. Genetics 168, 933–951
The Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium. Initial sequence of the
chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome. Nature 437,
69–87 .
Lupski, J. R. & Stankiewicz, P. Genomic disorders: molecular mechanisms for
rearrangements and conveyed phenotypes. PLoS Genetics 1, 627–633 .
Weber, J. L. et al. Human diallelic insertion/deletion polymorphisms. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 71, 854–862 .
Redon, R. et al. Global variation in copy number in the human genome. Nature 444,
444–454 .
Kidd, J. M., Newman, T. L., Tuzun, E., Kaul, R. & Eichler, E. E. Population
stratification of a common APOBEC gene deletion polymorphism. PLOS Genetics
3, 584–592 .
10. Lupski, J. R. Structural variation in the human genome. N. Engl. J. Med. 356,
1169–1171 .
Stenson, P. D. et al. Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD): 2003 update.
Hum. Mutat. 21, 577–581 .
Halligan, D. L. & Keightley, P. D. How many lethal alleles? Trends Genet. 19, 57–59
Bittles, A. H. & Neel, J. V. The costs of human inbreeding and their implications for
variations at the DNA level. Nature Genet. 8, 117–121 .
14. Vogel, F. & Motulsky, A. G. Human Genetics: Problems and Approaches 2nd edn
487–502 .
Ramensky, V., Bork, P. & Sunyaev, S. Human non-synonymous SNPs: server and
survey. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 3894–3900 .
Korbel, J. O. et al. Paired-end mapping reveals extensive structural variation in the
human genome. Science 318, 420–426 .
McGuire, A. L., Caulfield, T. & Cho, M. K. Research ethics and the challenge of
whole genome sequencing. Nature Rev. Genet. 9, 152–156 .
Havlak, P. et al. The Atlas genome assembly system. Genome Res. 14, 721–732
Richards, S. et al. Comparative genome sequencing of Drosophila pseudoobscura:
chromosomal, gene, and cis-element evolution. Genome Res. 15, 1–18 .
20. Ewing, B. & Green, P. Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using phred. II.
Error probabilities. Genome Res. 8, 186–194 .
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank J. D. Watson for his participation, encouragement
and engagement. We thank J. Belmont for discussion of HGMD data. We also
thank the following individuals for their technical support: S. Attiya, M. Braverman,
J. Brunelle, C. Celone, Z. Chen, A. Sancher, W. Song, and personnel from 454
Sequencing Center and R&D.
Author Information The CEL files for the Affymetrix 500K Genome array and GPR
files for the Agilent_1 and Agilent_2 CGH arrays are deposited in Gene Expression
Omnibus under series accession number GSE10668. All SNPs and insertion/
deletions from 454-reads are deposited in dbSNP under handle bcmhgsc_jdw;
contigs from the assembly of 454-reads not matching the reference genome are
deposited in Genbank under accession number ABKV01000000. All 454-reads
are deposited in the Trace Archive of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information under Center_name 5 ‘CSHL’ and Center_project 5 ‘Project JIM’.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
This paper is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Non-Commercial-Share Alike licence, and is freely available to all
readers at www.nature.com/nature. The authors declare competing financial
interests: details accompany the paper at www.nature.com/nature. M.E., W.E.,
Y.-J.C., V.M., G.T.R., X.G., F.N., C.L.T., G.P.I. and M.M. are current employees of 454
Life Sciences, which is owned by Roche Diagnostics, receive a salary for their work
and are eligible for bonuses administered by 454 Life Sciences and Roche
Diagnostics. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
J.M.R. ( ) or R.A.G. ( ).
NATURE |Vol 452 |17 April 2008
Publishing Group
DNA sequencing. Genomic DNA was purified from white blood cells from Dr
Watson by using the Flexigene DNA kit (Qiagen). Five micrograms of DNA were
sheared by nebulization and fractionated on agarose gel to isolate 450–550 base
fragments. These were used to construct a single-stranded library that was used as
template for single-molecule PCR on 28-mm diameter beads in emulsions3. The
amplified template beads were recovered after emulsion breaking and selective
enrichment. Sequencing primer was annealed to the template and the beads were
incubatedwithBstDNApolymerase,apyraseandsingle-strandedbindingprotein.A
slurry of the template beads, enzyme beads (required for signal transduction) and
packing beads (for Bst DNA polymerase retention) was loaded into the wells of a
70 mm375mm picotiter plate. Thepicotiter plate was inserted in the flow cell and
subjectedtopyro-sequencingontheGenomeSequencerFLXinstrument(454,Inc.).
TheGenomeSequencerFLXflows100cyclesoffoursolutionscontainingeither
dTTP, aSdATP, dCTP and dGTP reagents, in that order, over the cell. For each
dNTP flow, a single 38-s image was captured by a CCD (charge-coupled device)
camera on the sequencer. The images were processed in real time to identify
template-containing wells and to compute associated signal intensities. The
images were further processed for chemical and optical cross-talk, phase errors
and read quality before base calling was performed for each template bead.
Mapping 454-reads to reference genome. We generated sequence with 234 runs
on Genome Sequencer FLX instruments (454 Inc.), which produced over
105 million bases per run. Reads were aligned to the human reference
genome, NCBI build 36 ( 
bigZips/), using BLAT. All but 1.5 million reads found one or more match
locations in the reference genome. The best match in the genome was used as
the location for the reads with multiple matches. Poor-quality alignments were
defined as those reads aligning over less than 90% of their length, or with more
than four substitutions or insertions/deletions with respect to the reference, or
reads that matched two locations with nearly equal match score. Ninety-three
million reads comprising 7.4-fold coverage (Fig. 1a, see also Supplementary
Fig. 2) passed the filtering criteria and were realigned to local genome segments
(41 kb each) using Cross_match software. The limitation of a 41-kb genomic
fragment placed an upper limit on the sizes of indels that could be detected.
Filtering criteria for SNPs. Mismatch base positions found among the 454reads were scored using a scaling of the associated error probabilities (Q, see
‘Scoring system for mismatch base positions’ in Supplementary Information).
The variant score, Sv, was the sum of scaled 454 Q values. Only variant positions
with scores Sv $ 28 were considered. In addition, the ratio of variant bases to
total coverage was required to be not less than 0.2.
Known SNPs were associated with homopolymer runs of more than 5 bp less
than 3% of the time, whereas novel SNPs were associated 33% of the time.
Therefore novel variants were removed if they were associated with a homopolymer run of more than 5 bp within 13 bases of the SNP; a novel variant was also
removed if it was associated with a 5-bp homopolymer run and Sv # 54 (see
‘Filtering, criteria for SNPs’ in Supplementary Information).
Genotyping with sequence data. The sensitivity of detecting heterozygous SNPs
by whole-genome shotgun sequencing is limited by the depth-coverage. If the
average depth-coverage is C, the coverage k for each base of the genome approximately follows the Poisson distribution21:
f (kjC)~ Ck.e{C
For each heterozygous SNP site of the diploid genome, covered by K reads, the
number of reads i representing one of the two alleles follows the binomial
distribution:
f (ijK,0:5)~
i!.(K{i)! .0:5K
Given that a heterozygous SNP call required observation of at least two reads
from both alleles at the SNP site, the sensitivity of detecting heterozygous SNPs
was computed based on the two statistical distributions described above
(Supplementary Fig. 4).
Filtering criteria for insertions and deletions. Indels were often associated with
short tandem repeats sequences, which caused ambiguity in sequence alignments. Among separately aligned reads, indels in close proximity to one another
may represent the same event. Based on our analysis of the spacing between
indels, a given deletion or insertion is grouped with the previous one if: (1) the
two events are the same type (insertion or deletion); (2) the ratio of the smaller to
the larger is greater than or equal to 0.8; (3) the distance between the start
coordinates is less than 15 bp for indels larger than 6 bp, or seven times the indel
size for indels less than or equal to 6 bp. Furthermore, we required valid indels to
be supported by at least two reads and have a ratio of variant to reference greater
than 0.25. Errors in measurement of homopolymer length were a source of
systematic error for indels one base in length, so they were ignored for this study.
Analysis of ‘no-hit’ reads. A total of 169,643 contigs were assembled with a total
size of 48 Mb and an N50 size (the size at which 50% of the genome is contained
within contiguous sequences of this size or greater) of 296 bp. Human repeats in
the contigs were masked using RepeatMasker, and contigs containing fewer than
100 contiguous bases of unique sequence were set aside. The remaining110,353
contigs spanned 29 Mb, with an N50 size of 267 bp; 1,294 contigs were longer
than 1,000 bp, and the longest was 10,724 bp.
We used Mega BLAST ( 
with the ‘expect’ parameter set to 10230 to compare these contigs to a human
mRNA sequence database of over 40,000 sequences ( 
edu/goldenPath/hg18/bigZips/mrna.fa.gz). Significant matches were found to 417
mRNAsequences,whichhadnomapcoordinatesonbuild36.Weselectedfromthis
set 104 mRNA that matched 886 contigs with greater than 96% identity, and which
were covered across more than 40% of the mRNA length. The contigs matching
these mRNA sequences ranged in size from 296 to 5121bp. The 104 mRNA
sequences were compared with the reference genome using BLAT to confirm they
did not have a matching gene on the reference genome. Forty-four were eliminated
by this test; 27 hada partialhit, but the genomic match and thecontigmatch didnot
overlap on the mRNA sequence; 33 of the mRNA sequences had no hit.
Comparative genome hybridization. For the Agilent 244K array, the Human
Genome CGH 244K Array (Agilent Technologies, Inc.) contains 238,459 formatted 60-base oligonucleotides, representing a compiled view of the human
genome at an average resolution of 9 kb. DNA digestion, labelling and hybridization were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with minor
modifications. Two separate experiments differed in the reference DNA used for
comparison: ‘Agilent_1’ used a standard reference caucasian male (Kleberg
Cytogenetics Laboratory, Baylor College of Medicine); ‘Agilent_2’ used a caucasian male, NA10851, Coriell Institute for Medical Research. For the Nimblegen
HD2 array, we tested a second sample of experimental DNA co-annealed with
reference DNA, Coriell Institute for Medical Research number NA10851, to a
NimbleChip HD2 Array (NimbleGen Systems, Inc.) in collaboration with
NimbleGen Systems. The HD2 array has 2.1 million oligonucleotides, each
between 50 and 75 bases, with a reported resolution of about 5 kb. Log2
ratios were analysed for variation in copy number using NimbleGen
SignalMap software.
Affymetrix Gene Chip 500. Duplicate genomic DNA samples from lymphocytes, 250 ng each, were annealed to the Affymetrix 250K NspI and 250K StyI
arrays according to the manufacturer’s protocol (see ‘Affymetrix Gene Chip 500’
in Supplementary Information for further details).
Lander, E. S. & Waterman, M. S. Genomic mapping by fingerprinting random
clones: a mathematical analysis. Genomics 2, 231–239 .
doi:10.1038/nature06884
Publishing Group