A Reinforced Topic-Aware Convolutional Sequence-to-Sequence
Model for Abstractive Text Summarization
Li Wang1, Junlin Yao2, Yunzhe Tao3, Li Zhong1, Wei Liu4, Qiang Du3
1 Tencent Data Center of SNG
2 ETH Z¨urich
3 Columbia University
4 Tencent AI Lab
 , , ,
 , , 
In this paper, we propose a deep learning approach
to tackle the automatic summarization tasks by
incorporating topic information into the convolutional sequence-to-sequence (ConvS2S) model and
using self-critical sequence training (SCST) for optimization. Through jointly attending to topics and
word-level alignment, our approach can improve
coherence, diversity, and informativeness of generated summaries via a biased probability generation mechanism. On the other hand, reinforcement
training, like SCST, directly optimizes the proposed model with respect to the non-differentiable
metric ROUGE, which also avoids the exposure
bias during inference. We carry out the experimental evaluation with state-of-the-art methods over the
Gigaword, DUC-2004, and LCSTS datasets. The
empirical results demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed method in the abstractive summarization.
Introduction
Automatic text summarization has played an important role in
a variety of natural language processing (NLP) applications,
such as news headlines generation [Kraaij et al., 2002] and
feeds stream digests [Barzilay and McKeown, 2005]. It is
of interest to generate informative and representative natural
language summaries which are capable of retaining the main
ideas of source articles. The key challenges in automatic text
summarization are correctly evaluating and selecting important information, efﬁciently ﬁltering redundant contents, and
properly aggregating related segments and making humanreadable summaries. Compared to other NLP tasks, the automatic summarization has its own difﬁculties. For example,
unlike machine translation tasks where input and output sequences often share similar lengths, summarization tasks are
more likely to have input and output sequences greatly imbalanced. Besides, machine translation tasks usually have
some direct word-level alignment between input and output
sequences, which is less obvious in summarization.
There are two genres of automatic summarization techniques, namely, extraction and abstraction. The goal of extractive summarization [Neto et al., 2002] is to produce a
summary by selecting important pieces of the source document and concatenating them verbatim, while abstractive
summarization [Chopra et al., 2016] generates summaries
based on the core ideas of the document, therefore the summaries could be paraphrased in more general terms. Other
than extraction, abstractive methods should be able to properly rewrite the core ideas of the source document and assure
that the generated summaries are grammatically correct and
human readable, which is close to the way how humans do
summarization and thus is of interest to us in this paper.
Recently, deep neural network models have been widely
used for NLP tasks.
In particular, the attention based
sequence-to-sequence framework [Bahdanau et al., 2014]
with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [Sutskever et al.,
2014] prevails in the NLP tasks. However, RNN-based models are more prone to gradient vanishing due to their chain
structure of non-linearities compared to the hierarchical structure of CNN-based models [Dauphin et al., 2016]. In addition, the temporal dependence among the hidden states
of RNNs prevents parallelization over the elements of a sequence, which makes the training inefﬁcient.
In this paper, we propose a new approach based on the convolutional
sequence-to-sequence (ConvS2S) framework [Gehring et al.,
2017] jointly with a topic-aware attention mechanism. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work for automatic abstractive summarization that incorporates the topic
information, which can provide themed and contextual alignment information into deep learning architectures. In addition, we also optimize our proposed model by employing the
reinforcement training [Paulus et al., 2017]. The main contributions of this paper include:
• We propose a joint attention and biased probability generation mechanism to incorporate the topic information
into an automatic summarization model, which introduces contextual information to help the model generate
more coherent summaries with increased diversity.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
• We employ the self-critical sequence training technique
in ConvS2S to directly optimize the model with respect
to the non-differentiable summarization metric ROUGE,
which also remedies the exposure bias issue.
• Extensive experimental results on three datasets demonstrate that by fully exploiting the power of the ConvS2S
architecture enhanced by topic embedding and SCST,
our proposed model yields high accuracy for abstractive
summarization, advancing the state-of-the-art methods.
Related Work
Automatic text summarization has been widely investigated.
Various methods [Neto et al., 2002] focus on the extractive
summarization, which select important contents of text and
combine them verbatim to produce a summary. On the other
hand, abstractive summarization models are able to produce
a grammatical summary with a novel expression, most of
which [Rush et al., 2015; Chopra et al., 2016; Nallapati et al.,
2016a] are built upon the neural attention-based sequence-tosequence framework [Sutskever et al., 2014].
The predominant models are based on RNNs [Nallapati et
al., 2016b; Shen et al., 2016; Paulus et al., 2017], where the
encoder and decoder are constructed using either Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997]
or Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [Cho et al., 2014]. However,
very few methods have explored the performance of convolutional structure on summarization tasks. Compared to RNNs,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) enjoy several advantages, including efﬁcient training by leveraging parallel computing, and mitigating the gradient vanishing problem due to
fewer non-linearities [Dauphin et al., 2016]. Notably, the recently proposed gated convolutional network [Dauphin et al.,
2016; Gehring et al., 2017] outperforms RNN-based models
in the language modeling and machine translation tasks.
While the ConvS2S model is also evaluated on the abstractive summarization [Gehring et al., 2017], there are several limitations. First, the model is trained by minimizing
a maximum-likelihood loss which is sometimes inconsistent
with the metric that is evaluated on the sentence level, e.g.,
ROUGE [Lin, 2004]. In addition, the exposure bias [Ranzato et al., 2015] occurs due to only exposing the model to
the training data distribution instead of its own predictions.
More importantly, the ConvS2S model utilizes only wordlevel alignment which may be insufﬁcient for summarization and prone to incoherent generated summaries. Therefore, the higher level alignment could be a potential assist.
For example, the topic information has been introduced to a
RNN-based sequence-to-sequence model [Xing et al., 2017]
for chatbots to generate more informative responses.
Reinforced Topic-Aware Convolutional
Sequence-to-Sequence Model
In this section, we propose the Reinforced Topic-Aware Convolutional Sequence-to-Sequence model, which consists of a
convolutional architecture with both input words and topics,
a joint multi-step attention mechanism, a biased generation
Figure 1: A graphical illustration of the topic-aware convolutional
architecture. Word and topic embeddings of the source sequence are
encoded by the associated convolutional blocks (bottom left and bottom right). Then we jointly attend to words and topics by computing dot products of decoder representations (top left) and word/topic
encoder representations. Finally, we produce the target sequence
through a biased probability generation mechanism.
structure, and a reinforcement learning procedure. The graphical illustration of the topic-aware convolutional architecture
can be found in Figure 1.
ConvS2S Architecture
We exploit the ConvS2S architecture [Gehring et al., 2017]
as the basic infrastructure of our model. In this paper, two
convolutional blocks are employed, associated with the wordlevel and topic-level embeddings, respectively. We introduce
the former in this section and the latter in next, along with the
new joint attention and the biased generation mechanism.
Position Embeddings
Let x = (x1, . . . , xm) denote the input sentence. We ﬁrst
embed the input elements (words) in a distributional space
as w = (w1, . . . , wm), where wi ∈Rd are rows of a
randomly initialized matrix Dword ∈RV ×d with V being
the size of vocabulary.
We also add a positional embedding, p = (p1, . . . , pm) with pi ∈Rd, to retain the order information. Thus, the ﬁnal embedding for the input is
e = (w1+p1, . . . , wm +pm). Similarly, let q = (q1, . . . , qn)
denote the embedding for output elements that were already
generated by the decoder and being fed back to the next step.
Convolutional Layer
Both encoder and decoder networks are built by stacking several convolutional layers. Suppose that the kernel has width
of k and the input embedding dimension is d. The convolution takes a concatenation of k input elements X ∈Rkd and
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
maps it to an output element Y ∈R2d, namely,
Y = fconv(X) .= WY X + bY ,
where the kernel matrix WY ∈R2d×kd and the bias term
bY ∈R2d are the parameters to be learned.
Rewrite the output as Y = [A; B], where A, B ∈Rd. Then
the gated linear unit (GLU) [Dauphin et al., 2016] is given by
g([A; B]) = A ⊗σ(B) ,
where σ is the sigmoid function, ⊗is the point-wise multiplication, and the output of GLU is in Rd.
We denote the outputs of the l-th layer as hl
1, . . . , hl
n) for the decoder, and zl = (zl
1, . . . , zl
m) for the
encoder. Take the decoder for illustration. The convolution
unit i on the l-th layer is computed by residual connections as
i = g ◦fconv
i−k/2; · · · ; hl−1
i ∈Rd and ◦is the function composition operator.
Multi-step Attention
The attention mechanism is introduced to make the model
access historical information. To compute the attention, we
ﬁrst embed the current decoder state hl
where qi ∈Rd is the embedding of the previous decoded
element. Weight matrix W l
d ∈Rd×d and bias bl
the parameters to be learned.
The attention weights αl
ij of state i and source input element j is computed as a dot product between dl
i and the output zuo
of the last encoder block uo, namely,
The conditional input cl
i ∈Rd for the current decoder layer
is computed as
where ej is the input element embedding that can provide
point information about a speciﬁc input element. Once cl
been computed, it is added to the output of the corresponding
decoder layer hl
i and serves as a part of the input to hl+1
Topic-Aware Attention Mechanism
A topic model is a type of statistical model for discovering
the abstract ideas or hidden semantic structures that occur
in a collection of source articles. In this paper, we employ
the topic model to acquire latent knowledge of documents
and incorporate a topic-aware mechanism into the multi-step
attention-based ConvS2S model, which is expected to bring
prior knowledge for text summarization. Now we present the
novel approach on how to incorporate the topic model into the
basic ConvS2S framework via the joint attention mechanism
and biased probability generation process.
Topic Embeddings
The topic embeddings are obtained by classical topic models
such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [Blei et al., 2003].
During pre-training, we use LDA to assign topics to the input
texts. The top N non-universal words with the highest probabilities of each topic are chosen into the topic vocabulary K.
More details will be given in Section 4. While the vocabulary
of texts is denoted as V , we assume that K ⊂V . Given
an input sentence x = (x1, . . . , xm), if a word xi /∈K, we
embed it as before to attain wi. However, if a word xi ∈K,
we can embed this topic word as ti ∈Rd, which is a row in
the topic embedding matrix Dtopic ∈RK×d, where K is the
size of topic vocabulary. The embedding matrix Dtopic is normalized from the corresponding pre-trained topic distribution
matrix, whose row is proportional to the number of times that
each word is assigned to each topic. In this case, the positional embedding vectors are also added to the encoder and
decoder elements, respectively, to obtain the ﬁnal topic embeddings r = (r1, . . . , rm) and s = (s1, . . . , sn).
Joint Attention
Again we take the decoder for illustration. Following the convolutional layer introduced before, we can obtain the convolution unit i on the l-th layer in the decoder of topic level as
i ∈Rd. Similar to (4), we have
We then incorporate the topic information into the model
through a joint attention mechanism. During decoding, the
joint attention weight βl
ij is given by
is the output of the last topic-level encoder block
ut. Then the conditional input ˜cl
i ∈Rd is computed as
In the joint attention mechanism, both ˜cl
i are added to
the output of the corresponding decoder layer ˜hl
i and are a
part of the input to ˜hl+1
Biased Probability Generation
Finally, we compute a distribution over all possible next target
elements yi+1 ∈RT , namely
pθ(yi+1) := p(yi+1|y1, . . . , yi, x) ∈RT ,
by transforming the top word-level decoder outputs hLo and
topic-level decoder outputs ˜hLt via a linear layer Ψ(·), which
is computed by
Ψ(h) = Woh + bo ,
where Wo ∈RT ×d and bo ∈RT are the parameters to be
learned. Then the biased generation distribution is given as
pθ(yi+1) = 1
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
where Z is the normalizer, hLo
denote the i-th top
decoder outputs of word and topic, respectively, and I is the
one-hot indicator vector of each candidate word w in yi+1.
When the candidate word w is a topic word, we bias the generation distribution by the topic information. Otherwise, we
ignore the topic part. To some extent, the complexity of the
search space is reduced by introducing the topic bias since
important words are more likely to be generated directly.
Reinforcement Learning
The teacher forcing algorithm [Williams and Zipser, 1989]
aims to minimize the maximum-likelihood loss at each decoding step, namely,
2, . . . , y∗
where x refers to an input sequence and y∗= (y∗
2,. . . ,y∗
is the corresponding ground-truth output sequence.
Minimizing the objective in Eq. (13) often produces suboptimal results with respect to the evaluation metrics, such
as ROUGE which measures the sentence-level accuracy of
the generated summaries. The sub-optimality is related to the
problem called exposure bias [Ranzato et al., 2015], which is
caused by only exposing a model to the distribution of training data instead of its own distribution. During the training
process, models are fed by ground-truth output sequences to
predict the next word, whereas during inference they generate
the next word given the predicted words as inputs. Therefore,
in the test process, the error of each step accumulates and
leads to the deterioration of performance.
The second reason for sub-optimality comes from the ﬂexibility of summaries. The maximum-likelihood objective rewards models that can predict exactly the same summaries as
references while penalizing those that produce different texts
even though they are semantically similar. Providing multiple reference summaries is helpful yet insufﬁcient since there
are alternatives to rephrase a given summary. Therefore, minimizing the objective in Eq. (13) neglects the intrinsic property of summarization. ROUGE, on the other hand, provides
more ﬂexible evaluation, encouraging models to focus more
on semantic meanings than on word-level correspondences.
In order to address such issues, we utilize self-critical sequence training (SCST) [Rennie et al., 2016], a policy gradient algorithm for reinforcement learning, to directly maximize the non-differentiable ROUGE metric. During reinforcement learning, we generate two output sequences given
the input sequence x. The ﬁrst sequence ˆy is obtained by
greedily selecting words that maximize the output probability distribution, and the other output sequence ys is generated
by sampling from the distribution. After obtaining ROUGE
scores of both sequences as our rewards, i.e., r(ys) and r(ˆy),
we minimize the reinforcement loss
Lrl = −(r(ys) −r(ˆy)) log pθ(ys),
and update model parameters by gradient descent techniques.
With SCST, we can directly optimize the discrete evaluation metric. In addition, the “self-critical” test-time estimate
of the reward r(ˆy) provides a simple yet effective baseline
Topic Words
prime, minister, talks, leader, elections, visit
bird, ﬂu, ofﬁcials, opens, poultry, die
trade, free, EU, army, urges, ban
Bush, world, talks, foreign, investment, markets
world, Malaysia, Thailand, meet, Vietnam, U.S.
Table 1: Examples of topic words for the Gigaword corpus.
and improves training/test time consistency.
Since during
learning we set the baseline of the REINFORCE algorithm
as the reward obtained by the current model in the test-time
inference, the SCST exposes the model to its own distribution and encourages it to produce the sequence output ˆy with
a high ROUGE score, avoiding the exposure bias issue and
thus improving the test performance.
Experimental Setup
In this paper, we consider three datasets to evaluate the performance of different methods in the abstractive text summarization task. First, we consider the annotated Gigaword
corpus [Graff and Cieri, 2003] preprocessed identically to
[Rush et al., 2015], which leads to around 3.8M training
samples, 190K validation samples and 1951 test samples for
evaluation. The input summary pairs consist of the headline and the ﬁrst sentence of the source articles. We also
evaluate various models on the DUC-2004 test set1 [Over et
al., 2007]. The dataset is a standard summarization evaluation set, which consists of 500 news articles. Unlike the
Gigaword corpus, each article in DUC-2004 is paired with
four human-generated reference summaries, which makes the
evaluation more objective. The last dataset for evaluation is
a large corpus of Chinese short text summarization (LCSTS)
dataset [Hu et al., 2015] collected and constructed from the
Chinese microblogging website Sina Weibo. Following the
setting in the original paper, we use the ﬁrst part of LCSTS
dataset for training, which contains 2.4M text-summary pairs,
and choose 725 pairs from the last part with high annotation
scores as our test set.
Topic Information
The classical LDA with Gibbs Sampling technique is used
to pre-train the corpus for topic embedding initialization and
provide candidates for the biased probability generation process. The topic embedding values are normalized to a distribution with mean zero and variance of 0.1 for adaption to the
neural network structure. In this paper, we pick top N = 200
words with the highest probabilities in each topic to obtain
the topic word set. Note that the universal words are ﬁltered
out during pre-training. Randomly selected examples of topic
words of the Gigaword corpus are presented in Table 1.
Model Parameters and Optimization
We employ six convolutional layers for both the encoder and
decoder. All embeddings, including the initialized embed-
1 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
ABS [Rush et al., 2015]
ABS+ [Rush et al., 2015]
RAS-Elman [Chopra et al., 2016]
words-lvt5k-1sent [Nallapati et al., 2016b]
RNN+MLE [Shen et al., 2016]
RNN+MRT [Shen et al., 2016]
SEASS(beam) [Zhou et al., 2017]
ConvS2S [Gehring et al., 2017]
Topic-ConvS2S
Reinforced-ConvS2S
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S
Table 2: Accuracy on the Gigaword corpus in terms of the fulllength ROUGE-1 (RG-1), ROUGE-2 (RG-2), and ROUGE-L (RG-
L). Best performance on each score is displayed in boldface.
ABS (beam) [Rush et al., 2015]
s2s+att (greedy) [Zhou et al., 2017]
s2s+att (beam) [Zhou et al., 2017]
SEASS (greedy) [Zhou et al., 2017]
SEASS (beam) [Zhou et al., 2017]
Topic-ConvS2S
Reinforced-ConvS2S
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S
Table 3: Accuracy on the internal test set of Gigaword corpus in
terms of the full-length RG-1, RG-2, and RG-L. Best performance
on each score is displayed in boldface.
ding and the output produced by the decoder before the ﬁnal
linear layer, have a dimensionality of 256. We also adopt the
same dimensionality for the size of linear layer mapping between hidden and embedding states. We use a learning rate
of 0.25 and reduce it by a decay rate of 0.1 once the validation ROUGE score stops increasing after each epoch until the learning rate falls below 10−5. We ﬁrst train the basic topic-aware convolutional model with respect to a standard maximum likelihood objective, and then switch to further minimize a mixed training objective [Paulus et al., 2017],
incorporating the reinforcement learning objective Lrl and the
original maximum likelihood Lml, which is given as
Lmixed = λLrl + (1 −λ)Lml,
where the scaling factor λ is set to be 0.99 in our experiments. Moreover, we choose the ROUGE-L metric as the
reinforcement reward function. Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method [Sutskever et al., 2013] is used for training, with
the mini-batch size of 32 and the learning rate of 0.0001. All
models are implemented in PyTorch [Paszke et al., 2017] and
trained on a single Tesla M40 GPU.
Results and Analysis
We follow the existing work and adopt the ROUGE metric
[Lin, 2004] for evaluation.
Gigaword Corpus
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model via a
step-by-step justiﬁcation. First, the basic ConvS2S structure
with topic-aware model or reinforcement learning is tested,
respectively. Then we combine the two to show the performance of our Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S model. We report
Examples of summaries
D: the sri lankan government on wednesday announced the closure
of government schools with immediate effect as a military campaign
against tamil separatists escalated in the north of the country.
R: sri lanka closes schools as war escalates
OR: sri lanka closes schools with immediate effect
OT: sri lanka closes schools in wake of military attacks
D: a us citizen who spied for communist east germany was given a
suspended jail sentence of ## months here friday.
R: us citizen who spied for east germans given suspended sentence
OR: us man gets suspended jail term for communist spying
OT: us man jailed for espionage
D: malaysian prime minister mahathir mohamad indicated he would
soon relinquish control of the ruling party to his deputy anwar ibrahim.
R: mahathir wants leadership change to be smooth
OR: malaysia’s mahathir to relinquish control of ruling party
OT: malaysia’s mahathir to submit control of ruling party
D: a french crocodile farm said it had stepped up efforts to breed one of
the world’s most endangered species, the indian UNK, with the hope of
ultimately returning animals to their habitat in south asia.
R: french farm offers hope for endangered asian crocs UNK picture
OR: french crocodile farm steps up efforts to breed endangered species
OT: french crocodile farm says steps up efforts to save endangered
Table 4: Examples of generated summaries on the Gigaword corpus. D: source document, R: reference summary, OR: output of the
Reinforced-ConvS2S model, OT: output of the Reinforced-Topic-
ConvS2S model. The words marked in blue are topic words not in
the reference summaries. The words marked in red are topic words
neither in the reference summaries nor in the source documents.
the full-length F-1 scores of the ROUGE-1 (RG-1), ROUGE-
2 (RG-2), and ROUGE-L (RG-L) metrics and compare the
results with various neural abstractive summarization methods, which are presented in Table 2. The ABS and ABS+
models are attention-based neural models for text summarization.
The RAS-Elman model introduces a conditional
RNN, in which the conditioner is provided by a convolutional
attention-based encoder. The words-lvt5k-1sent model is also
a RNN-based attention model which implements a largevocabulary trick.
Besides, RNN+MRT employs the minimum risk training strategy which directly optimizes model
parameters in sentence level with respect to the evaluation
metrics. SEASS (beam) extends the sequence-to-sequence
framework with a selective encoding model. The results have
demonstrated that both the topic-aware module and the reinforcement learning process can improve the accuracy on text
summarization. Moreover, our proposed model exhibits best
scores of RG-1, RG-2 and RG-L.
In addition, [Zhou et al., 2017] further selects 2000 pairs
of summaries as an internal test set of Gigaword. We also
evaluate our proposed model on this set and present the results in Table 3. Again, our proposed model achieves the best
performance in terms of all the three ROUGE scores.
To further demonstrate the improvement of readability and
diversity by the topic information, we also present some qualitative results by randomly extracting several summaries from
test. We compare the reference summaries to the summaries
generated by our proposed model with or without topic-aware
mechanism. The examples are presented in Table 4. We can
observe that when the topic model is adopted, it can generate some accurately delivered topic words which are not in
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
ABS [Rush et al., 2015]
ABS+ [Rush et al., 2015]
RAS-Elman [Chopra et al., 2016]
words-lvt5k-1sent [Nallapati et al., 2016b]
RNN+MLE [Shen et al., 2016]
RNN+MRT [Shen et al., 2016]
SEASS (beam) [Zhou et al., 2017]
ConvS2S [Gehring et al., 2017]
Topic-ConvS2S
Reinforced-ConvS2S
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S
Table 5: Accuracy on the DUC-2004 dataset in terms of the recallonly RG-1, RG-2, and RG-L. Best performance on each score is
displayed in boldface.
the reference summaries or the original texts. It is believed
that the joint learning with a pre-trained topic model can offer more insightful information and improve the diversity and
readability for the summarization.
DUC-2004 Dataset
Since the DUC-2004 dataset is an evaluation-only dataset,
we train the models on the Gigaword corpus ﬁrst and then
evaluate their performance on the DUC dataset. As the standard practice, we report the recall-based scores of the RG-1,
RG-2, and RG-L metrics in this experiment, which are given
in Table 5. From Table 5 we can observe that the proposed
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S model achieves best scores of the
RG-1 and RG-L metrics, and is comparable on the RG-2
score. Due to the similarity of the two datasets, we do not provide qualitative summarization examples in this experiment.
LCSTS Dataset
We now consider the abstractive summarization task on the
LCSTS dataset. Since this is a large-scale Chinese dataset,
suitable data preprocessing approaches should be proposed
ﬁrst. Basically, there are two approaches to preprocessing the
Chinese dataset: character-based and word-based. The former takes each Chinese character as the input, while the latter
splits an input sentence into Chinese words. [Hu et al., 2015]
provides a baseline result on both preprocessing approaches.
[Shen et al., 2016] also conducts experiments on the LCSTS
corpus based on character inputs. [Gu et al., 2016] proposes
a neural model, the COPYNET, with both character-based
and word-based preprocessing by incorporating the copying
mechanism into the sequence-to-sequence framework. In this
work, we adopt the word-based approach as we believe that in
the case of Chinese, words are more relevant to latent knowledge of documents than characters are.
Since the standard ROUGE package2 is usually used to
evaluate the English summaries, directly employing the package to evaluate Chinese summaries would yield underrated
results. In order to evaluate the summarization on the LC-
STS dataset, we follow the suggestion of [Hu et al., 2015]
by mapping Chinese words/characters to numerical IDs, on
which we then perform the ROUGE evaluation. Since not
all previous work explicitly mentioned whether word-based
2 
character-based preprocessing
RNN context [Hu et al., 2015]
COPYNET [Gu et al., 2016]
RNN+MLE [Shen et al., 2016]
RNN+MRT [Shen et al., 2016]
word-based preprocessing
RNN context [Hu et al., 2015]
COPYNET [Gu et al., 2016]
Topic-ConvS2S
38.94/44.42
21.05/32.65
37.03/42.09
Reinforced-ConvS2S
36.68/42.61
18.69/29.79
34.85/40.03
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S
39.93/45.12
21.58/33.08
37.92/42.68
Table 6: Accuracy on the LCSTS dataset in terms of the full-length
RG-1, RG-2, and RG-L. In last three rows, the word-level ROUGE
scores are presented on the left and the character-level on the right.
or character-based ROUGE metrics were reported, we evaluate our proposed model with both metrics in order to obtain a comprehensive comparison. The results of both scores
are presented in Table 6, which are displayed as word-based
score/character-based score.
From the results shown in Table 6, we see that one can
always achieve higher ROUGE scores in the character level
than that based on Chinese words by our proposed model.
We can also observe that the character-based results of our
Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S model outperforms every other
method. Regarding to word-based ROUGE scores, our model
obtains the best performance in terms of RG-1 and RG-L metrics. However, our best model does not achieve a good RG-2
score as its RG-1 and RG-L scores. We suspect that it may be
partly caused by the biased probability generation mechanism
that inﬂuences word order, which requires further studies.
In addition to ROUGE scores, we also present randomly
picked examples of generated summaries in Table 7. The
original examples (in Chinese) are shown and all the texts are
carefully translated for the convenience of reading. The examples demonstrate that the topic-aware mechanism can also
improve the diversity in Chinese summarization tasks.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose a topic-aware ConvS2S model
with reinforcement learning for abstractive text summarization. It is demonstrated that the new topic-aware attention
mechanism introduces some high-level contextual information for summarization. The performance of the proposed
model advances state-of-the-art methods on various benchmark datasets. In addition, our model can produce summaries
with better informativeness, coherence, and diversity.
Note that the experiments in this work are mainly based on
the sentence summarization. In the future, we aim to evaluate our model on the datasets where the source texts can be
long paragraphs or multi-documents. Moreover, we also note
that how to evaluate the performance on Chinese summaries
remains an open problem. It is also of great interest to study
on this subject in the future.
Acknowledgements
Qiang Du is supported in part by the US NSF TRIPODs
project through CCF-170483.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Examples of summaries
D: 根据#### 年# 月# 日国家发改委等部门联合发布的《关于进一步做好新能源汽车推广应用工作的通知》，#### 年的
补贴金额相比#### 年将降低##% 。（分享自@ 电动邦）
D: According to the notice On the further promotion and application of new energy vehicles, jointly released by the National
Development and Reform Commission and other departments on ##/##/#### (date), the compensation of #### (year) will be
reduced by ##% compared to #### (year). (reposted from @electric nation)
R: 补贴金额再缩水#### 年新能源车政策解读
R: The compensation has been reduced again: #### (year) policy analysis of new energy automobiles
OR: #### 年新能源汽车推广应用工作的通知
OR: #### (year) notice on the promotion and application of new energy vehicles
OT : 国家发改委发文进一步做好新能源汽车推广应用工作
OT : The National Development and Reform Commission issued a policy on further promotion and application of new energy
D: 成都市软件和信息技术服务业近年来一直保持快速增长势头，稳居中西部城市之首，已成为我国西部“ 硅谷” 。
《#### 年度成都市软件和信息技术服务产业发展报告》日前发布... ... 详情请见: @ 成都日报@ 成都发布
D: In recent years, the service industry of software and information technology in Chengdu has been growing rapidly, ranking
ﬁrst among the cities in Midwest China. Chengdu has become China’s western “Silicon Valley”. The #### (year) Annual Chengdu
Software and Information Technology Service Industry Development Report has been released recently ... ... see details: @
Chengdu Daily @ Chengdu release
R: 成都倾力打造西部“ 硅谷”
R: Chengdu makes every effort to build the western “Silicon Valley”
OR: 成都软件和信息技术服务业发展报告发布
OR: The report of Chengdu software and information technology service industry development has been released
OT : 成都软件和信息技术服务业跃居西部“ 硅谷”
OT : The service industry of software and information technology in Chengdu rockets to make it the western “Silicon Valley”
D: 新疆独特的区位优势，使其成为“ 一带一路” 战略重要一环。记者从新疆发改委获悉，库尔勒至格尔木铁路先期开工
段已进入招投标阶段，计划#### 年## 月中旬正式开工建设。#### 年计划完成投资## 亿元。
D: Xinjiang’s unique geographical advantages make it an important part of The Belt and Road strategy. The reporter learned from
the Xinjiang Development and Reform Commission that the initial railway construction project from Korla to Golmud had been on
tendering procedure. The project was scheduled to ofﬁcially launch in mid ## (month) of #### (year) and attract the investment of
## billion yuan by #### (year).
R: “ 一带一路” 战略惠及新疆<unk>, 铁路年底开建
R: The Belt and Road strategy beneﬁts Xinjiang <unk> and the railway construction starts by the end of #### (year)
OR: 新疆<unk> 至格尔木铁路计划#### 年开建
OR: The railway from <unk> to Golmud is scheduled to start construction in #### (year)
OT : 库尔勒至格尔木铁路拟## 月开工建设
OT : The railway construction project from Korla to Golmud is planned to launch in ## (month)
D: 昨日，商报记者从代表国内婚尚产业“ 风向标” 的上海国际婚纱摄影器材展览会上了解到，部分商家开始将婚庆布
置、婚礼流程、形式交给新人决定以迎合## 后新人的需求。此次展览会的规模超过# 万平方米，吸引参展企业超过###
D: The day before, the reporters of Commercial News learned from the Shanghai International Wedding Photographic Equipment
Exhibition, which has been leading and deﬁning the domestic wedding industry, that some companies began to cater for the
requirements of ##s-generation newly married couples by self-decided wedding decoration, wedding process and forms. The
venue of the exhibition is more than # tens of thousands square meters, attracting more than ### exhibitors.
R: 婚庆“ 私人定制” 受## 后新人追捧
R: The personalized wedding is admired by ##s-generation newly married couples
OR: 上海国际婚纱摄影器材展览会举行
OR: Shanghai International Wedding Photographic Equipment Exhibition was held
OT : 上海国际婚纱摄影器材展览会昨举行
OT : Shanghai International Wedding Photographic Equipment Exhibition was held yesterday
Table 7: Examples of generated summaries on the LCSTS dataset. D: source document, R: reference summary, OR: output of the Reinforced-
ConvS2S model, OT: output of the Reinforced-Topic-ConvS2S model. The words marked in blue are topic words not in the reference
summaries. The words marked in red are topic words neither in the reference summaries nor in the source documents. All the texts are
carefully translated from Chinese.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)