Hindawi Publishing Corporation
EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing
Volume 2008, Article ID 246309, 10 pages
doi:10.1155/2008/246309
Research Article
Evaluating Multiple Object Tracking Performance:
The CLEAR MOT Metrics
Keni Bernardin and Rainer Stiefelhagen
Interactive Systems Lab, Institut f¨ur Theoretische Informatik, Universit¨at Karlsruhe, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
Correspondence should be addressed to Keni Bernardin, 
Received 2 November 2007; Accepted 23 April 2008
Recommended by Carlo Regazzoni
Simultaneous tracking of multiple persons in real-world environments is an active research ﬁeld and several approaches have
been proposed, based on a variety of features and algorithms. Recently, there has been a growing interest in organizing systematic
evaluations to compare the various techniques. Unfortunately, the lack of common metrics for measuring the performance of
multiple object trackers still makes it hard to compare their results. In this work, we introduce two intuitive and general metrics to
allow for objective comparison of tracker characteristics, focusing on their precision in estimating object locations, their accuracy
in recognizing object conﬁgurations and their ability to consistently label objects over time. These metrics have been extensively
used in two large-scale international evaluations, the 2006 and 2007 CLEAR evaluations, to measure and compare the performance
of multiple object trackers for a wide variety of tracking tasks. Selected performance results are presented and the advantages and
drawbacks of the presented metrics are discussed based on the experience gained during the evaluations.
Copyright © 2008 K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
INTRODUCTION
The audio-visual tracking of multiple persons is a very active
research ﬁeld with applications in many domains. These
range from video surveillance, over automatic indexing, to
intelligent interactive environments. Especially in the last
case, a robust person tracking module can serve as a powerful
building block to support other techniques, such as gesture
recognizers, face or speaker identiﬁers, head pose estimators
 , and scene analysis tools. In the last few years, more and
more approaches have been presented to tackle the problems
posed by unconstrained, natural environments and bring
person trackers out of the laboratory environment and into
real-world scenarios.
In recent years, there has also been a growing interest in performing systematic evaluations of such tracking
approaches with common databases and metrics. Examples
are the CHIL and AMI projects, funded by the
EU, the U.S. VACE project , the French ETISEO 
project, the U.K. Home Oﬃce iLIDS project , the CAVIAR
 and CREDS projects, and a growing number of
workshops (e.g., PETS , EEMCV , and more recently
CLEAR ). However, although benchmarking is rather
straightforward for single object trackers, there is still no
general agreement on a principled evaluation procedure
using a common set of objective and intuitive metrics for
measuring the performance of multiple object trackers.
Li et al. in investigate the problem of evaluating
systems for the tracking of football players from multiple
camera images. Annotated ground truth for a set of visible
players is compared to the tracker output and 3 measures
are introduced to evaluate the spatial and temporal accuracy
of the result. Two of the measures, however, are rather
speciﬁc to the football tracking problem, and the more
general measure, the “identity tracking performance,” does
not consider some of the basic types of errors made by
multiple target trackers, such as false positive tracks or
localization errors in terms of distance or overlap. This limits
the application of the presented metric to speciﬁc types of
trackers or scenarios.
Nghiem et al. in present a more general framework
for evaluation, which covers the requirements of a broad
range of visual tracking tasks. The presented metrics aim
at allowing systematic performance analysis using large
First published in:
EVA-STAR (Elektronisches Volltextarchiv – Scientific Articles Repository)
 
EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing
amounts of benchmark data. However, a high number
of diﬀerent metrics (8 in total) are presented to evaluate
object detection, localization and tracking performance, with
many dependencies between separate metrics, such that
one metric can often only be interpreted in combination
with one or more others. This is for example the case for
the “tracking time” and “object ID persistence/confusion”
metrics. Further, many of the proposed metrics are still
designed with purely visual tracking tasks in mind.
Because of the lack of commonly agreed on and generally
applicable metrics, it is not uncommon to ﬁnd tracking
approaches presented without quantitative evaluation, while
many others are evaluated using varying sets of more or
less custom measures (e.g., ). To remedy this, this
paper proposes a thorough procedure to detect the basic
types of errors produced by multiple object trackers and
introduces two novel metrics, the multiple object tracking
precision (MOTP), and the multiple object tracking accuracy
(MOTA), that intuitively express a tracker’s overall strengths
and are suitable for use in general performance evaluations.
Perhaps the work that most closely relates to ours is
that of Smith et al. in , which also attempts to deﬁne
an objective procedure to measure multiple object tracker
performance. However, key diﬀerences to our contribution
exist: again, a large number of metrics are introduced: 5 for
measuring object conﬁguration errors, and 4 for measuring
inconsistencies in object labeling over time. Some of the measures are deﬁned in a dual way for trackers and for objects
(e.g., MT/MO, FIT/FIO, TP/OP). This makes it diﬃcult to
gain a clear and direct understanding of the tracker’s overall
performance. Moreover, under certain conditions, some of
these measures can behave in a nonintuitive fashion (such
as the CD, as the authors state, or the FP and FN, as we
will demonstrate later). In comparison, we introduce just 2
overall performance measures that allow a clear and intuitive
insight into the main tracker characteristics: its precision
in estimating object positions, its ability to determine the
number of objects and their conﬁguration, and its skill at
keeping consistent tracks over time.
In addition to the theoretical framework, we present
actual results obtained in two international evaluation
workshops, which can be seen as ﬁeld tests of the proposed
metrics. These evaluation workshops, the classiﬁcation of
events, activities, and relationships (CLEAR) workshops,
were held in spring 2006 and 2007 and featured a variety
of tracking tasks, including visual 3D person tracking using
multiple camera views, 2D face tracking, 2D person and
vehicle tracking, acoustic speaker tracking using microphone
arrays, and even audio-visual person tracking. For all these
tracking tasks, each with its own speciﬁcities and requirements, the here-introduced MOTP and MOTA metrics,
or slight variants thereof, were employed. The experiences
made during the course of the CLEAR evaluations are
presented and discussed as a means to better understand the
expressiveness and usefulness, but also the weaknesses of the
MOT metrics.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents the new metrics, the MOTP and the
MOTA and a detailed procedure for their computation.
Section 3 brieﬂy introduces the CLEAR tracking tasks and
their various requirements. In Section 4, sample results are
shown and the usefulness of the metrics is discussed. Finally,
Section 5 gives a summary and a conclusion.
PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR MULTIPLE
OBJECT TRACKING
To allow a better understanding of the proposed metrics, we
ﬁrst explain what qualities we expect from an ideal multiple
object tracker. It should at all points in time ﬁnd the correct
number of objects present; and estimate the position of each
object as precisely as possible (note that properties such as
the contour, orientation, or speed of objects are not explicitly
considered here). It should also keep consistent track of each
object over time: each object should be assigned a unique
track ID which stays constant throughout the sequence (even
after temporary occlusion, etc.). This leads to the following
design criteria for performance metrics.
(i) They should allow to judge a tracker’s precision in
determining exact object locations.
(ii) They should reﬂect its ability to consistently track
object conﬁgurations through time, that is, to correctly trace object trajectories, producing exactly one
trajectory per object.
Additionally, we expect useful metrics
(i) to have as few free parameters, adjustable thresholds,
and so forth, as possible to help making evaluations
straightforward and keeping results comparable;
(ii) to be clear, easily understandable, and behave according to human intuition, especially in the occurrence
of multiple errors of diﬀerent types or of uneven
repartition of errors throughout the sequence;
(iii) to be general enough to allow comparison of most
types of trackers (2D, 3D trackers, object centroid
trackers, or object area trackers, etc.);
(iv) to be few in number and yet expressive, so they may
be used, for example, in large evaluations where many
systems are being compared.
Based on the above criteria, we propose a procedure for
the systematic and objective evaluation of a tracker’s characteristics. Assuming that for every time frame t, a multiple
object tracker outputs a set of hypotheses {h1,..., hm} for a
set of visible objects {o1,...,on}, the evaluation procedure
comprises the following steps.
For each time frame t,
(i) establish the best possible correspondence between
hypotheses hj and objects oi,
(ii) for each found correspondence, compute the error in
the object’s position estimation,
(iii) accumulate all correspondence errors:
(a) count all objects for which no hypothesis was
output as misses,
K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen
Figure 1: Mapping tracker hypotheses to objects. In the easiest case,
matching the closest object-hypothesis pairs for each time frame t
is suﬃcient.
(b) count all tracker hypotheses for which no real
object exists as false positives,
(c) count all occurrences where the tracking
hypothesis for an object changed compared to
previous frames as mismatch errors. This could
happen, for example, when two or more objects
are swapped as they pass close to each other,
or when an object track is reinitialized with a
diﬀerent track ID, after it was previously lost
because of occlusion.
Then, the tracking performance can be intuitively expressed
in two numbers: the “tracking precision” which expresses
how well exact positions of persons are estimated, and the
“tracking accuracy” which shows how many mistakes the
tracker made in terms of misses, false positives, mismatches,
failures to recover tracks, and so forth. These measures will
be explained in detail in the latter part of this section.
Establishing correspondences between objects
and tracker hypotheses
As explained above, the ﬁrst step in evaluating the performance of a multiple object tracker is ﬁnding a continuous mapping between the sequence of object hypotheses
{h1, ..., hm} output by the tracker in each frame and the real
objects {o1, ..., on}. This is illustrated in Figure 1. Naively,
one would match the closest object-hypothesis pairs and
treat all remaining objects as misses and all remaining
hypotheses as false positives. A few important points need
to be considered, though, which make the procedure less
straightforward.
Valid correspondences
First of all, the correspondence between an object oi and
a hypothesis hj should not be made if their distance disti,j
exceeds a certain threshold T. There is a certain conceptual
boundary beyond which we can no longer speak of an error
in position estimation, but should rather argue that the
tracker has missed the object and is tracking something else.
This is illustrated in Figure 2(a). For object area trackers
(i.e., trackers that also estimate the size of objects or the
area occupied by them), distance could be expressed in
terms of the overlap between object and hypothesis, for
example, as in , and the threshold T could be set to zero
overlap. For object centroid trackers, one could simply use
the Euclidian distance, in 2D image coordinates or in real 3D
world coordinates, between object centers and hypotheses,
and the threshold could be, for example, the average width
of a person in pixels or cm. The optimal setting for T
therefore depends on the application task, the size of objects
involved, and the distance measure used, and cannot be
deﬁned for the general case (while a task-speciﬁc, data-driven
computation of T may be possible in some cases, this was
not further investigated here. For the evaluations presented
in Sections 3 and 4, empirical determination based on task
knowledge proved suﬃcient). In the following, we refer to
correspondences as valid if disti,j < T.
Consistent tracking over time
Second, to measure the tracker’s ability to label objects
consistently, one has to detect when conﬂicting correspondences have been made for an object over time. Figure 2(b)
illustrates the problem. Here, one track was mistakenly
assigned to 3 diﬀerent objects over the course of time.
A mismatch can occur when objects come close to each
other and the tracker wrongfully swaps their identities.
It can also occur when a track was lost and reinitialized
with a diﬀerent identity. One way to measure such errors
could be to decide on a “best” mapping (oi,hj) for every
object oi and hypothesis hj, for example, based on the
initial correspondence made for oi, or the correspondence
(oi,hj) most frequently made in the whole sequence. One
would then count all correspondences where this mapping
is violated as errors. In some cases, this kind of measure can
however become nonintuitive. As shown in Figure 2(c), if,
for example, the identity of object oi is swapped just once in
the course of the tracking sequence, the time frame at which
the swap occurs drastically inﬂuences the value output by
such an error measure.
This is why we follow a diﬀerent approach: only count
mismatch errors once at the time frames where a change in
object-hypothesis mappings is made; and consider the correspondences in intermediate segments as correct. Especially in
cases where many objects are being tracked and mismatches
are frequent, this gives us a more intuitive and expressive
error measure. To detect when a mismatch error occurs, a
list of object-hypothesis mappings is constructed. Let Mt =
{(oi,hj)} be the set of mappings made up to time t and let
M0 = {·}. Then, if a new correspondence is made at time
t + 1 between oi and hk which contradicts a mapping (oi,hj)
in Mt, a mismatch error is counted and (oi,hj) is replaced by
(oi,hk) in Mt+1.
The so constructed mapping list Mt can now help
to establish optimal correspondences between objects and
hypotheses at time t + 1, when multiple valid choices exist.
Figure 2(d) shows such a case. When it is not clear, which
EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing
t + 1 t + 2 t + 3 t + 4
t + 2 t + 3
t + 4 t + 5 t + 6 t + 7 t + 8
t + 2 t + 3
t + 4 t + 5 t + 6 t + 7 t + 8
Figure 2: Optimal correspondences and error measures. (a) When the distance between o1 and h1 exceeds a certain threshold T, one can
no longer make a correspondence. Instead, o1 is considered missed and h1 becomes a false positive. (b): Mismatched tracks. Here, h2 is ﬁrst
mapped to o2. After a few frames, though, o1 and o2 cross paths and h2 follows the wrong object. Later, it wrongfully swaps again to o3. (c):
Problems when using a sequence-level “best” object-hypothesis mapping based on most frequently made correspondences. In the ﬁrst case,
o1 is tracked just 2 frames by h1, before the track is taken over by h2. In the second case, h1 tracks o1 for almost half the sequence. In both
cases, a “best” mapping would pair h2 and o1. This however leads to counting 2 mismatch errors for case 1; and 4 errors for case 2, although
in both cases only one error of the same kind was made. (d): Correct reinitialization of a track. At time t, o1 is tracked by h1. At t + 1, the
track is lost. At t + 2, two valid hypotheses exist. The correspondence is made with h1 although h2 is closer to o1, based on the knowledge of
previous mappings up to time t + 1.
hypothesis to match to an object oi, priority is given to
ho with (oi, ho) ∈Mt, as this is most likely the correct
track. Other hypotheses are considered false positives, and
could have occurred because the tracker outputs several
hypotheses for oi, or because a hypothesis that previously
tracked another object accidentally crossed over to oi.
Mapping procedure
Having clariﬁed all the design choices behind our strategy for
constructing object-hypothesis correspondences, we summarize the procedure as follows.
Let M0 = {·}. For every time frame t, consider the
following.
(1) For every mapping (oi,hj) in Mt−1, verify if it is still
valid. If object oi is still visible and tracker hypothesis
hj still exists at time t, and if their distance does
not exceed the threshold T, make the correspondence
between oi and hj for frame t.
(2) For all objects for which no correspondence was
made yet, try to ﬁnd a matching hypothesis. Allow
only one-to-one matches, and pairs for which the
distance does not exceed T. The matching should
be made in a way that minimizes the total objecthypothesis distance error for the concerned objects.
This is a minimum weight assignment problem,
and is solved using Munkres’ algorithm with
polynomial runtime complexity. If a correspondence
(oi,hk) is made that contradicts a mapping (oi,hj) in
Mt−1, replace (oi,hj) with (oi,hk) in Mt. Count this
as a mismatch error and let mmet be the number of
mismatch errors for frame t.
(3) After the ﬁrst two steps, a complete set of matching
pairs for the current time frame is known. Let ct be
K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen
the number of matches found for time t. For each of
theses matches, calculate the distance di
t between the
object oi and its corresponding hypothesis.
(4) All remaining hypotheses are considered false positives. Similarly, all remaining objects are considered
misses. Let f pt and mt be the number of false
positives and misses, respectively, for frame t. Let also
gt be the number of objects present at time t.
(5) Repeat the procedure from step 1 for the next time
frame. Note that since for the initial frame, the set of
mappings M0 is empty, all correspondences made are
initial and no mismatch errors occur.
In this way, a continuous mapping between objects and
tracker hypotheses is deﬁned and all tracking errors are
accounted for.
Performance metrics
Based on the matching strategy described above, two very
intuitive metrics can be deﬁned.
(1) The multiple object tracking precision (MOPT):
It is the total error in estimated position for matched
object-hypothesis pairs over all frames, averaged
by the total number of matches made. It shows
the ability of the tracker to estimate precise object
positions, independent of its skill at recognizing
object conﬁgurations, keeping consistent trajectories,
and so forth.
(2) The multiple object tracking accuracy (MOTA):
MOTA = 1 −
t(mt + f pt + mmet)
where mt, f pt, and mmet are the number of misses,
of false positives, and of mismatches, respectively, for
time t. The MOTA can be seen as derived from 3 error
the ratio of misses in the sequence, computed over
the total number of objects present in all frames,
the ratio of false positives, and
the ratio of mismatches.
t + 1 t + 2 t + 3 t + 4 t + 5 t + 6 t + 7
Figure 3: Computing error ratios. Assume a sequence length of 8
frames. For frames t1 to t4, 4 objects o1,...,o4 are visible, but none
is being tracked. For frames t5 to t8, only o4 remains visible, and is
being consistently tracked by h1. In each frame t1,... ,t4, 4 objects
are missed, resulting in 100% miss rate. In each frame t5, ... ,t8,
the miss rate is 0%. Averaging these frame level error rates yields a
global result of (1/8)(4.100 + 4.0) = 50% miss rate. On the other
hand, summing up all errors ﬁrst, and computing a global ratio
yield a far more intuitive result of 16 misses/20 objects = 80%.
Summing up over the diﬀerent error ratios gives us the total
error rate Etot, and 1 −Etot is the resulting tracking accuracy.
The MOTA accounts for all object conﬁguration errors made
by the tracker, false positives, misses, mismatches, over all
frames. It is similar to metrics widely used in other domains
(such as the word error rate (WER), commonly used in
speech recognition) and gives a very intuitive measure of
the tracker’s performance at detecting objects and keeping
their trajectories, independent of the precision with which
the object locations are estimated.
Remark on computing averages: note that for both MOTP
and MOTA, it is important to ﬁrst sum up all errors across
frames before a ﬁnal average or ratio can be computed.
The reason is that computing ratios rt for each frame t
independently before calculating a global average (1/n)
for all n frames (such as, e.g., for the FP and FN measures
in ) can lead to nonintuitive results. This is illustrated
in Figure 3. Although the tracker consistently missed most
objects in the sequence, computing ratios independently per
frame and then averaging would still yield only 50% miss
rate. Summing up all misses ﬁrst and computing a single
global ratio, on the other hand, produces a more intuitive
result of 80% miss rate.
TRACKING EVALUATIONS IN CLEAR
The theoretical framework presented here for the evaluation of multiple object trackers was applied in two large
evaluation workshops. The classiﬁcation of events, activities,
and relationships (CLEARs) workshops as organized
in a collaboration between the European CHIL project, the
U.S. VACE project, and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) , and were held in the springs of 2006 and 2007. They
EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing
represent the ﬁrst international evaluations of their kind,
using large databases of annotated multimodal data, and
aimed to provide a platform for researchers to benchmark
systems for acoustic and visual tracking, identiﬁcation,
activity analysis, event recognition, and so forth, using
common task deﬁnitions, datasets, tools, and metrics. They
featured a variety of tasks related to the tracking of humans
or other objects in natural, unconstrained indoor and
outdoor scenarios, and presented new challenges to systems
for the fusion of multimodal and multisensory data. A
complete description of the CLEAR evaluation workshops,
the participating systems, and the achieved results can be
found in .
The authors wish to make the point here, that these
evaluations represent a systematic, large-scale eﬀort using
hours of annotated data, and with a substantial amount
of participating systems, and can therefore be seen as a
true practical test of the usefulness of the MOT metrics.
The experience from these workshops was that the MOT
metrics were indeed applicable to a wide range of tracking
tasks, made it easy to gain insights into tracker strengths
and weaknesses, to compare overall system performances,
and helped researchers publish and convey performance
results that are objective, intuitive, and easy to interpret.
In the following, the various CLEAR tracking tasks are
brieﬂy presented, highlighting the diﬀerences and speciﬁcities that make them interesting from the point of view
of the requirements posed to evaluation metrics. While
in 2006, there were still some exceptions, in 2007 all
tasks related to tracking, for single or multiple objects,
and for all modalities, were evaluated using the MOT
3D visual person tracking
The CLEAR 2006 and 2007 evaluations featured a 3D person
tracking task, in which the objective was to determine the
location on the ground plane of persons in a scene. The
scenario was that of small meetings or seminars, and several
camera views were available to help determine 3D locations.
Both the tracking of single persons (the lecturer in front of an
audience) and of multiple persons (all seminar participants)
were attempted. The speciﬁcations of this task posed quite a
challenge for the design of appropriate performance metrics:
measures such as track merges and splits, usually found in
the ﬁeld of 2D image-based tracking, had little meaning
in the 3D multicamera tracking scenario. On the other
hand, errors in location estimation had to be carefully distinguished from false positives and false track associations.
Tracker performances were to be intuitively comparable for
sequences with large diﬀerences in the number of ground
truth objects, and thus varying levels of diﬃculty. In the end,
the requirements of the 3D person tracking task drove much
of the design choices behind the MOT metrics. For this task,
error calculations were made using the Euclidian distance
between hypothesized and labeled person positions on the
ground plane, and the correspondence threshold was set to
Figure 4 shows examples for the scenes from the seminar
database used for 3D person tracking.
2D face tracking
The face tracking task was to be evaluated on two diﬀerent
databases: one featuring single views of the scene and one
featuring multiple views to help better resolve problems of
detection and track veriﬁcation. In both cases, the objective
was to detect and track faces in each separate view, estimating
not only their position in the image, but also their extension,
that is, the exact area covered by them. Although in the 2006
evaluation, a variety of separate measures were used, in the
2007 evaluation, the same MOT metrics as in the 3D person
tracking task, with only slight variations, were successfully
applied. In this case, the overlap between hypothesized and
labeled face bounding boxes in the image was used as
distance measure, and the distance error threshold was set
to zero overlap.
Figure 5 shows examples for face tracker outputs on the
CLEAR seminar database.
2D person and vehicle tracking
Just as in the face tracking task, the 2D view-based tracking
of persons and vehicles was also evaluated on diﬀerent sets
of databases representing outdoor traﬃc scenes, using only
slight variants of the MOT metrics. Here also, bounding box
overlap was used as the distance measure.
Figure 6 shows a scene from the CLEAR vehicle tracking
3D acoustic and multimodal person tracking
The task of 3D person tracking in seminar or meeting
scenarios also featured an acoustic subtask, where tracking
was to be achieved using the information from distributed
microphone networks, and a multimodal subtask, where the
combination of multiple camera and multiple microphone
inputs was available. It is noteworthy here, that the MOT
measures could be applied with success to the domain of
acoustic source localization, where overall performance is
traditionally measured using rather diﬀerent error metrics,
and is decomposed into speech segmentation performance
and localization performance. Here, the miss and false
positive errors in the MOTA measure accounted for segmentation errors, whereas the MOTP expressed localization
precision. As a diﬀerence to visual tracking, mismatches were
not considered in the MOTA calculation, as acoustic trackers
were not expected to distinguish the identities of speakers,
and the resulting variant, the A −MOTA, was used for
system comparisons. In both, the acoustic and multimodal
subtasks, systems were expected to pinpoint the 3D location
of active speakers and the distance measure used was the
Euclidian distance on the ground plane, with the threshold
set to 50 cm.
K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen
Figure 4: Scenes from the CLEAR seminar database used in 3D person tracking.
Figure 5: Scenes from the CLEAR seminar database used for face detection and tracking.
Figure 6: Sample from the CLEAR vehicle tracking database (i-
LIDS dataset ).
EVALUATION RESULTS
This section gives a brief overview of the evaluation results
from select CLEAR tracking tasks. The results serve to
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed MOT metrics
and act as a basis for discussion of inherent advantages,
drawbacks, and lessons learned during the workshops. For a
more detailed presentation, the reader is referred to .
Figure 7 shows the results for the CLEAR 2007 Visual 3D
person tracking task. A total of seven tracking systems with
varying characteristics participated. Looking at the ﬁrst column, the MOTP scores, one ﬁnds that all systems performed
fairly well, with average localization errors under 20 cm. This
can be seen as quite low, considering the area occupied on
average by a person and the fact that the ground truth itself,
representing the projections to the ground plane of head
centroids, was only labeled to 5–8 cm accuracy. However, one
must keep in mind that the ﬁxed threshold of 50 cm, beyond
which an object is considered as missed completely by the
tracker, prevents the MOTP from rising too high. Even in
the case of uniform distribution of localization errors, the
MOTP value would be 25 cm. This shows us that, considering
the predeﬁned threshold, System E is actually not very precise
at estimating person coordinates, and that System B, on the
other hand, is extremely precise, when compared to ground
Site/system MOTP Miss rate
False pos.
Mismatches MOTA
Figure 7: Results for the CLEAR’07 3D multiple person tracking
visual subtask.
truth uncertainties. More importantly still, it shows us
that the correspondence threshold T strongly inﬂuences the
behavior of the MOTP and MOTA measures. Theoretically,
a threshold of T
∞means that all correspondences
stay valid once made, no matter how large the distance
between object and track hypothesis becomes.This reduces
the impact of the MOTA to measuring the correct detection
of the number of objects, and disregards all track swaps,
stray track errors, and so forth, resulting in an also unusable
MOTP measure. On the other hand, if T approximates 0,
all tracked objects will eventually be considered as missed,
and the MOTP and MOTA measures lose their meaning. As
a consequence, the single correspondence threshold T must
be carefully chosen based on the application and evaluation
goals at hand. For the CLEAR 3D person tracking task,
the margin was intuitively set to 50 cm, which produced
reasonable results, but the question of determining the
optimal threshold, perhaps automatically in a data driven
way, is still left unanswered.
The rightmost column in Figure 7, the MOTA measure,
proved somewhat more interesting for overall performance
comparisons, at least in the case of 3D person tracking, as
it was not bounded to a reasonable range, as the MOTP
was. There was far more room for errors in accuracy in
the complex multitarget scenarios under evaluation. The
EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing
best and worst overall systems, G and F reached 78% and
30% accuracy, respectively. Systems A, B, C, and E, on the
other hand, produced very similar numbers, although they
used quite diﬀerent features and algorithms. While the
MOTA measure is useful to make such broad high-level
comparisons, it was felt that the intermediate miss, false
positive and mismatch errors measures, which contribute to
the overall score, helped to gain a better understanding of
tracker failure modes, and it was decided to publish them
alongside the MOTP and MOTA measures. This was useful,
for example, for comparing the strengths of systems B and C,
which had a similar overall score.
Notice that in contrast to misses and false positives,
for the 2007 CLEAR 3D person tracking task, mismatches
were presented as absolute numbers as the total number of
errors made in all test sequences.This is due to an imbalance,
which was already noted during the 2006 evaluations, and
for which no deﬁnite solution has been found as of yet: for
a fairly reasonable tracking system and the scenarios under
consideration, the number of mismatch errors made in a
sequence of several minutes labeled at 1 second intervals is
in no proportion to the number of ground truth objects,
or, for example, to the number of miss errors incurring if
only one of many objects is missed for a portion of the
sequence.This typically resulted in mismatch error ratios of
often less than 2%, in contrast to 20–40% for misses or
false positives, which considerably reduced the impact of
faulty track labeling on the overall MOTA score. Of course,
one could argue that this is an intuitive result because
track labeling is a lesser problem compared to the correct
detection and tracking of multiple objects, but in the end
the relative importance of separate error measures is purely
dependent on the application. To keep the presentation of
results as objective as possible, absolute mismatch errors
were presented here, but the consensus from the evaluation
workshops was that according more weight to track labeling
errors was desirable, for example, in the form of trajectorybased error measures, which could help move away from
frame-based miss and false positive errors, and thus reduce
the imbalance.
Figure 8 shows the results for the visual 3D single person
tracking task, evaluated in 2006. As the tracking of a single
object can be seen as a special case of multiple object
tracking, the MOT metrics could be applied in the same
way. Again, one can ﬁnd at a glance the best performing
system in terms of tracking accuracy, System D with 91%
accuracy, by looking at the MOTA values. One can also
quickly discern that, overall, systems performed better on the
less challenging single person scenario. The MOTP column
tells us that System B was remarkable, among all others, in
that it estimated target locations down to 8.8 cm precision.
Just as in the previous case, more detailed components of
the tracking error were presented in addition to the MOTA.
In contrast to multiple person tracking, mismatch errors
play no role (or should not play any) in the single person
case. Also, as a lecturer was always present and visible in the
considered scenarios, false positives could only come from
gross localization errors, which is why only a detailed analysis
of the miss errors was given. For better understanding,
Site/system MOTP
(dist > T)
Figure 8: Results for the CLEAR’06 3D Single Person Tracking
visual subtask
they were broken down into misses resulting from failures
to detect the person of interest (miss rate (no hypo)), and
misses resulting from localization errors exceeding the 50 cm
threshold (miss rate (dist > T)). In the latter case, as a
consequence of the metric deﬁnition, every miss error was
automatically accompanied by a false positive error, although
these were not presented separately for conciseness.
This eﬀect, which is much more clearly observable in the
single object case, can be perceived as penalizing a tracker
twice for gross localization errors (one miss penalty, and one
false positive penalty). This eﬀect is however intentional and
desirable for the following reason: intelligent trackers that
use some mechanisms such as track conﬁdence measures,
to avoid outputting a track hypothesis when their location
estimation is poor, are rewarded compared to trackers which
continuously output erroneous hypotheses. It can be argued
that a tracker which fails to detect a lecturer for half of a
sequence performs better than a tracker which consistently
tracks the empty blackboard for the same duration of time.
This brings us to the noteworthy point: just as much as
the types of tracker errors (misses, false positives, distance
errors, etc.) that are used to derive performance measures,
precisely “how” these errors are counted, the procedure for
their computation when it comes to temporal sequences,
plays a major role in the behavior and expressiveness of the
resulting metric.
Figure 9 shows the results for the 2007 3D person
tracking acoustic subtask. According to the task deﬁnition,
mismatch errors played no role and just as in the visual
single person case, components of the MOTA score were
broken down into miss and false positive errors resulting
from faulty segmentation (true miss rate, true false pos. rate),
and those resulting from gross localization errors (loc. error
rate). One can easily make out System G as the overall best
performing system, both in terms of MOTP and MOTA, with
performance varying greatly from system to system. Figure 9
demonstrates the usefulness of having just one or two overall
performance measures when large numbers of systems are
involved, in order to gain a high-level overview before going
into a deeper analysis of their strengths and weaknesses.
Figure 10, ﬁnally, shows the results for the 2007 face
tracking task on the CLEAR seminar database. The main
diﬀerence to the previously presented tasks lies in the
fact that 2D image tracking of the face area is performed
and the distance error between ground truth objects and
tracker hypotheses is expressed in terms of overlap of the
K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen
Site/system MOTP
True false
Loc. error
Figure 9: Results for the CLEAR’07 3D person tracking acoustic
Site/system
(overlap) Miss rate
False pos.
Figure 10: Results for the CLEAR’07 face tracking task.
respective bounding boxes. This is reﬂected in the MOTP
column. As the task required the simultaneous tracking of
multiple faces, all types of errors, misses, false positives, and
mismatches were of relevance, and were presented along
with the overall MOTA score. From the numbers, one can
derive that although systems A and B were fairly equal in
estimating face extensions once they were found, System B
clearly outperformed System A when it comes to detecting
and keeping track of these faces in the ﬁrst place. This case
again serves to demonstrate how the MOT measures can be
applied, with slight modiﬁcations but using the same general
framework, for the evaluation of various types of trackers
with diﬀerent domain-speciﬁc requirements, and operating
in a wide range of scenarios.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
In order to systematically assess and compare the performance of diﬀerent systems for multiple object tracking,
metrics which reﬂect the quality and main characteristics of
such systems are needed. Unfortunately, no agreement on a
set of commonly applicable metrics has yet been reached.
In this paper, we have proposed two novel metrics for the
evaluation of multiple object tracking systems. The proposed
metrics—the multiple object tracking precision (MOTP)
and the multiple object tracking accuracy (MOTA)—are
applicable to a wide range of tracking tasks and allow for
objective comparison of the main characteristics of tracking
systems, such as their precision in localizing objects, their
accuracy in recognizing object conﬁgurations, and their
ability to consistently track objects over time.
We have tested the usefulness and expressiveness of the
proposed metrics experimentally, in a series of international
evaluation workshops. The 2006 and 2007 CLEAR workshops hosted a variety of tracking tasks for which a large
number of systems were benchmarked and compared. The
results of the evaluation show that the proposed metrics
indeed reﬂect the strengths and weaknesses of the various
used systems in an intuitive and meaningful way, allow for
easy comparison of overall performance, and are applicable
to a variety of scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work presented here was partly funded by the European
Union (EU) under the integrated project CHIL, Computers in
the Human Interaction Loop (Grant no. IST-506909).