ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 19 March 2020
doi: 10.3389/fdata.2020.00004
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Edited by:
Yanshan Wang,
Mayo Clinic, United States
Reviewed by:
Sunyang Fu,
Mayo Clinic, United States
Saman Muthukumarana,
University of Manitoba, Canada
David Chen,
Mayo Clinic, United States
*Correspondence:
Shruti Kaushik
 
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Medicine and Public Health,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Big Data
Received: 31 May 2019
Accepted: 24 January 2020
Published: 19 March 2020
Kaushik S, Choudhury A, Sheron PK,
Dasgupta N, Natarajan S, Pickett LA
and Dutt V AI in Healthcare:
Time-Series Forecasting Using
Statistical, Neural, and Ensemble
Architectures. Front. Big Data 3:4.
doi: 10.3389/fdata.2020.00004
AI in Healthcare: Time-Series
Forecasting Using Statistical, Neural,
and Ensemble Architectures
Shruti Kaushik 1*, Abhinav Choudhury 1, Pankaj Kumar Sheron 1, Nataraj Dasgupta 2,
Sayee Natarajan 2, Larry A. Pickett 2 and Varun Dutt 1
1 Applied Cognitive Science Laboratory, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, India, 2 RxDataScience, Inc., Durham,
NC, United States
Both statistical and neural methods have been proposed in the literature to predict
healthcare expenditures. However, less attention has been given to comparing
predictions from both these methods as well as ensemble approaches in the healthcare
domain. The primary objective of this paper was to evaluate different statistical,
neural, and ensemble techniques in their ability to predict patients’ weekly average
expenditures on certain pain medications. Two statistical models, persistence (baseline)
and autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
model, a long short-term memory (LSTM) model, and an ensemble model combining
predictions of the ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM models were calibrated to predict the
expenditures on two different pain medications. In the MLP and LSTM models, we
compared the inﬂuence of shufﬂing of training data and dropout of certain nodes in
MLPs and nodes and recurrent connections in LSTMs in layers during training. Results
revealed that the ensemble model outperformed the persistence, ARIMA, MLP, and
LSTM models across both pain medications. In general, not shufﬂing the training data
and adding the dropout helped the MLP models and shufﬂing the training data and not
adding the dropout helped the LSTM models across both medications. We highlight the
implications of using statistical, neural, and ensemble methods for time-series forecasting
of outcomes in the healthcare domain.
Keywords: time-series forecasting, persistence, autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), multilayer
perceptron (MLP), long short-term memory (LSTM), ensemble, medicine expenditures, neural networks
INTRODUCTION
Healthcare costs are rising, and patients need to manage their healthcare expenditures on
medications . Predicting medication cost in the future could help patients
better manage patient-related healthcare expenditures . To predict medication
costs, one needs data concerning patients’ medicine-purchase patterns. Currently, there exist
signiﬁcant amounts of digital healthcare data that can provide helpful insights into healthcare
expenditures, and these data could bring about positive changes in healthcare policymaking . Although there exist data, accessing these data is a major challenge due to privacy
concerns of patients, hospitals, insurance companies, and pharmaceutical companies. One way
of overcoming this challenge is via anonymizing healthcare records and medicine information so
that connections to speciﬁc individuals or entities are lost. Using anonymization, prior research
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
has attempted time-series forecasting of diﬀerent healthcare costs
 . Here,
most of the existing attempts have used statistical or machinelearning methods like regression , classiﬁcation trees , and clustering . Although prior
research has performed the time-series forecasting in healthcare
data, a major challenge is selection of the appropriate predictive
model to use for performing analyses (there are very few
suggestive forecasting algorithms for healthcare data due to the
newness of this domain and its datasets). A way of overcoming
the model selection challenge is by evaluating the predictions
from existing forecasting methods with other recent methods in
literature . For example, recently, certain
recurrent machine-learning methods (e.g., long short-term
models) have been proposed . These recurrent
methods have been used for supervised learning of features for
time-series forecasting . These
recurrent methods could provide improvements over existing
statistical time-series techniques [e.g., autoregressive integrated
moving average (ARIMA)], which are often dependent on the
hand-crafted features requiring expert knowledge in the ﬁeld.
A popular statistical time-series method is the ARIMA model
 . The ARIMA model is popular because of its
statistical properties (e.g., moving averages) to ﬁnd its parameters
 . ARIMA models generally use the historical
values of a univariate time series to predict the time series’ future
values. A special case of the ARIMA model is a persistence model,
where the future value in a time series is equal to its preceding
value (thus, a persistence model has only one autoregressive
term and no moving average terms). Given its simplicity, a
persistence model could serve as a good baseline to compare
other models. However, one challenge in persistence and ARIMA
models is their pre-assumption of linearity in the underlying time
series, which may be insuﬃcient in various practical scenarios
(e.g., healthcare datasets) that contain non-linear time-series data
 .
To overcome the challenge of linear statistical time-series
models, many non-linear machine-learning models like artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANNs) have been proposed in the literature
 . ANNs belong to the data-driven approach, where training
depends on the available data with a little prior rationalization
regarding relationships between variables . ANNs
do not make any assumptions about the statistical distributions
of the underlying time series and they can naturally perform
non-linear modeling . As a result, ANNs are
self-adaptive by nature .
Prior research has carried out comparative studies between
performing
time-series
forecasting of stock-market data . This research showed that ANNs are a
good alternative to the ARIMA approach, particularly in the
case of non-linear time series and for long-term forecasting
 . There are diﬀerent
ANN-based forecasting models in the literature, where the
most popular model is the multilayer perceptron (MLP) . MLP models are memory-less, and they use the
feed forward neural network architecture, which applies a
supervised learning technique called back propagation algorithm
for training the neural network . Among
these models, memory-based recurrent neural network (RNN)
architectures and its variants, namely, the
long short-term memory (LSTM) models and the gated recurrent unit (GRU)
models , have been studied for extracting
informative patterns from sequential healthcare data and in
classifying data on the basis of diagnostic categories . There are several applications
of RNN approaches in healthcare for performing predictions.
For example, Lipton et al. have used LSTMs to perform
diagnosis classiﬁcation from clinical measurements of patients
in pediatric intensive unit care. Pham et al. developed a
dynamic memory model using LSTMs to predict future medical
outcomes. Razavian et al. have used LSTM, RNN, and
two convolutional neural network (CNN) models to predict
disease onsets from longitudinal lab tests. Ma et al. 
have used bidirectional RNN architecture for predicting patients’
future health information. Kaushik et al. have used a
stacked LSTM for univariate time-series predictions of monthly
expenditures of patients for medication.
Furthermore, another way of addressing the model selection
challenge is by combining the predictions of various models
or ensembling . Here, a number of
ensembling mechanisms have been proposed .
The standard approach of ensembling is simple averaging that
assigns equal weights to all forecasting component models . However,
the simple averaging method may be sensitive to outlier values
and unreliable for skewed distributions . To correct for outliers, certain
weighted combination approaches have also been proposed in
the literature .
One approach is the least-square regression (LSR) approach
that attempts to ﬁnd the optimal weights by minimizing the
sum of squared errors (SSEs) .
Another approach is the average of in-sample weights (AIW)
scheme, where each weight is computed as the normalized
inverse absolute forecasting error of an individual model, as has
previously been proposed .
Another challenge for time-series forecasting in the healthcare
domain is ensuring that models reduce their overﬁtting in the
underlying data (i.e., to ensure that models do not perform well
during training and poorly during testing). One way of reducing
overﬁtting is by evaluating diﬀerent approaches like dropouts
and data shuﬄing as part of diﬀerent time-series forecasting
algorithms in the healthcare domain . Dropout is a regularization
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
technique that helps reduce the problem of overﬁtting in neural
networks by dropping the nodes in the networks . Similarly, recurrent dropout is another approach to
handle overﬁtting that drops the recurrent connections in RNNs.
Additionally, data shuﬄing is known to improve the general
learning of model during its training, where eﬀects of serial data
presentation are reduced .
In this research, we address several of the above challenges
by evaluating the performance of memory-less neural network
memory-based
models (e.g., LSTM) for performing time-series predictions
of longitudinal healthcare data. Due to the popularity of the
ARIMA model , we evaluate
the performance of this model against both memory-less and
memory-based approaches in anonymized healthcare data.
Moreover, motivated by the use of ensemble architectures, we
evaluate the potential of a weighted ensemble model , which combines the best predictions of
the individual ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM models via a dynamic
weight updation technique. Here, we compare the performance
of the ensemble model as well as the individual models (ARIMA,
MLP, and LSTM) with a persistence model, which serves as a
baseline model.
Furthermore, to overcome the overﬁtting challenge, we
evaluate the shuﬄing of time-series data with and without
dropouts across diﬀerent neural network models. Thus, we
compare four diﬀerent variations: shuﬄe with dropout, shuﬄe
without dropout, no shuﬄe with dropout, and no shuﬄe without
dropout. When shuﬄing is present (shuﬄe), smaller supervised
sets (mini-batches) containing attributes corresponding to the
chosen look-back period are created and shuﬄed across the time
series during network training. Shuﬄing is done to change the
order in which we present supervised sets to the models. It
helps the model to avoid the conditions of local minima while
training and thus it is helpful to reduce overﬁtting. However,
when shuﬄe is not present (no shuﬄe), the mini-batches are
created in the order they occur in data and inputted into the
network without shuﬄing. When dropout is present, we discard
certain number of nodes and recurrent connections (if present)
from the hidden layers. As the adverse eﬀects of node dropout
in RNNs are known , we tried both node
and recurrent connection dropouts in the LSTM model. When
dropout is absent, no nodes or recurrent connections (if present)
are discarded during training in the neural network. Overall,
introducing dropouts in neural network models may help reduce
the overﬁtting as dropouts reduce the total number of weights to
be trained in the model.
Overall, we expect the ensemble model to perform better in
predicting time-series healthcare data compared to its individual
constituting models as well as the baseline model. One likely
reason for this expectation is because the ensemble model’s
prediction is highly dependent on the individual models’ best
predictions (the ensemble is expected to give more weight to
those model predictions that are accurate compared to those
that are less accurate). Furthermore, we expect the neural
network models to perform better compared to statistical models
because of the presence of non-linearities in the time-series
data and the ability of neural networks to account for these
non-linearities. Also, we expect shuﬄing the training samples
and adding dropouts to help improve models’ performance.
The likely reason behind this expectation is that shuﬄing helps
models avoid getting trapped in local minima during training due
to an ordered presentation of training samples and dropouts help
reduce overﬁtting.
This research is novel in several ways. First, this research
addresses a number of challenges related to data anonymity,
model selection, overﬁtting, and ensembling of individual
models. In particular, this research compares statistical, neural,
and ensembling machine-learning architectures and proposes a
novel ensembling architecture that combines the best predictions
of several component models. Second, this research is ﬁrst
of its kind on these data that consider existing and newer
forecasting algorithms for predicting patient-related healthcare
expenditures on medicines. Third, this research considers novel
combinations of data shuﬄing and dropout mechanisms in a
systematic way across a number of neural architectures. As the
potential of the evaluated algorithms is still to be explored for
predicting patient-related healthcare expenditures on medicines,
this research is expected to provide suitable benchmarks for
future research on time-series healthcare datasets concerning
expenditures. Additionally, we have implemented the persistence
algorithm to obtain the baseline performance of the time-series
forecasting problem. The forecasting models developed are also
likely to be useful to a number of stakeholders like patients,
hospitals, pharmacies, and drug manufacturers.
In what follows, ﬁrst, we explain the datasets, evaluation
metrics, and experiment design. Then, we explain the working
of diﬀerent statistical, neural, and ensemble models that are
proposed for predicting patients’ expenditures on diﬀerent pain
medications. Furthermore, we present our experimental results,
where we compare persistence, ARIMA, MLP, LSTM, and
ensemble model predictions. We close the paper by discussing
the implication of using diﬀerent statistical, neural, and ensemble
methods for predicting healthcare outcomes.
In this research, we selected two pain medications (named “A”
and “B” as provided in the Supplementary Material) from the
Truven MarketScan dataset for our analyses, where Truven
provides real-world healthcare data to analyze patterns and
cost .1 The selected medications are among
the top 10 most prescribed pain medications in the US . Data for both medications range between 2nd January
2011 and 15th April 2015 (1,565 days). Every day, on average,
about 1,428 patients reﬁlled medicine A, and about 550 patients
reﬁlled medicine B. For both medicines, we prepared a univariate
time series containing the daily average expenditures by patients
on these medications, respectively. The average expenditure
1Due to a non-disclosure agreement, the actual names of the two pain medications
have not been disclosed. Also, by anonymizing medicine names, we ensure that
this research and its outcomes do not target speciﬁc drugs, drug manufacturers,
hospitals, pharmacies, or patients in the real world.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
per patient for medicine on a day t was deﬁned as per the
following equation:
Daily Average Expendituret = it/jt
where i is the total amount spent in a day t on the medicine
across all patients and j is the total number of patients who reﬁlled
the medicine in day t. This daily average expenditure was used
to compute the weekly average expenditure for both medicines,
where the weekly average expenditure was used to evaluate model
performance. For our analyses, across both pain medications, we
used the dataset between 2nd January 2011 and 30th July 2014
(1,306 days) for model training and the dataset between 31st July
2014 and 15th April 2015 (259 days) for model testing. Moreover,
standardization was required before training the models because
our time-series data had input values with diﬀerent scales . Therefore, we standardized/re-scaled the time
series for both medicines within range [−1, +1].
Evaluation Metrics
All models (ARIMA, MLP, LSTM, and ensemble) were ﬁt to
data at a weekly level using the following metrics: root mean
squared error (RMSE; error) and R-square (R2; trend) . As weekly average expenditure predictions were
of interest, the RMSE and R2 scores and visualizations for
weekly average expenditures were computed in weekly blocks of
7 days. Thus, the daily average expenditures per patient were
summed across 7 days in a block for both training and test
datasets. This resulted in the weekly average expenditure across
186 blocks of training data and 37 blocks of test data. We
used the training data to train diﬀerent models to perform their
parameter calibration. After ﬁnishing the training, we used the
test data to verify the performance of trained models, where,
during test, model parameters were kept at the values found
during training.
Figure 1A shows the time-series data for medicine A.
Figures 1B,C show the time-series data for medicine B before
and after diﬀerencing, respectively. The x-axis shows the weekly
blocks, and the y-axis shows the weekly average expenditure (in
USD per patient). In Figure 1, the ﬁrst 186 blocks correspond
to training data and the last 37 blocks correspond to the test
data. We performed the augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) test
 to determine the stationarity of a
time series and conﬁrm the value of d parameter. As shown in
Figure 1A, the time series for medicine A was stationary (ADF
statistics = −10.10, p < 0.05). However, as shown in Figure 1B,
medicine B was non-stationary (ADF statistics = −2.20, ns).
Thus, while training models for medicine B, we ﬁrst made the
time series stationary using ﬁrst-order diﬀerencing (d = 1)
(ADF statistics after one time diﬀerencing = −13.07, p < 0.05)
(see Figure 1C). We used stationary data across both medicines
to train the models. The predictions obtained from models for
medicine B were ﬁrst transformed to the non-stationary data
before calculating the value of the objective function, i.e., RMSE
and R2. We followed this procedure to train all the models for
medicine B.
We calibrated all models to reduce error and capture trend in
data. Thus, all models were calibrated using an objective function
that was deﬁned as the following: [RMSE/10 + (1–R2)]. The
RMSE accounts for the error between the actual and predicted
data. The smaller the RMSE, the smaller the error between
model’s predictions and the actual data. In addition, the R2
(between 0 and 1) accounts for whether the model’s predictions
follow the same trend as that present in the actual data. The
larger the R2 (closer to 1), the larger the ability of the model to
predict the trend in actual data. In our analyses, we found that
the variation in RMSE term for both medicines was 10 times the
variation in the 1–R2 term in the standardized data. Therefore, we
divided the RMSE value by 10 to bring the RMSE value for both
medicines in the range 0 to 1 (which is the range of 1–R2). In our
parameter calibrations, the magnitude of the RMSE/10 term and
the 1–R2 term was comparable across all models and medications.
Hence, we used [RMSE/10 + (1–R2)] as the objective function
because variation in both terms was similar and in . Overall,
the objective function ensured that the obtained parameters
minimized the error (RMSE) and maximized the trend (R2)
on the weekly average expenditure per patient between model
and actual data. Through model calibrations, diﬀerent model
parameters were varied across diﬀerent ranges to ﬁnd a set of
parameters for which the model produced the least value of
objective function on training data.
Experiment Design
All models forecasted one-step ahead with walk-forward
validation . In one-step-ahead walkforward validation, a model uses training data to make a
prediction for the next time step. This prediction is then
evaluated against the actual value. Next, the actual value
corresponding to the prediction is added to the training data
and the process is repeated by predicting the value for the next
time step.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this section, we explain the working of diﬀerent models
persistence
(baseline),
ensemble models.
Persistence
The persistence model uses the value at the previous time
step to predict the value at the next time step. This model is
implemented to obtain the baseline performance in the timeseries forecasting problem.
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
In an ARIMA model , the future value of a
variable is assumed to be a linear function of several previous
observations and random errors. An ARIMA model is deﬁned
as ARIMA (p, d, q):
p: order of the autoregressive part (AR);
d: degree of ﬁrst diﬀerencing involved;
q: order of the moving average part (MA).
AR stands for “autoregressive,” and it is a stochastic process
whose output values are linearly dependent on the weighted sum
of its previous values and a white noise error .
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 1 | The weekly average expenditure (in USD per patient) for medicine A without differencing (A), for medicine B before differencing (B), and for medicine B
after differencing (C).
MA stands for “moving average,” and it describes a stochastic
process whose output value is linearly dependent on the weighted
sum of a white noise error and the error term from previous
periods . One of the tasks for building the
ARIMA model is to determine the value of (p, d, q). Classically,
the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation function plots
have been used in the literature to determine the approximate
range of p and q parameters, respectively . Next,
this range for p and q parameters can then be used in a grid
search procedure to decide the precise values of
these parameters. Following this methodology, we created the
autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation function plots ﬁrst
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
and, then using these plots, we set the lower and upper bound
values in the grid search for the p and q parameters.
The value of d indicates the number of times we need to
diﬀerence the time series to make it stationary. We performed the
ADF test to determine the stationarity
of a time series and ﬁnd the value of the d parameter.
The underlying time series has the following form in the
ARIMA model:
yt′ = c+81yt−1′+. . .+ 8pyp−1′+θ1et−1+. . .+θqet−q+et (2)
AR : 81yt−1′ + . . . + 8pyp−1′
MA : θ1et−1 + . . . + θqet−q + et
where c is a constant, yt′ is the diﬀerenced series of observations
(refer to Equation 2), et is the random error or white noise
at a time period t, 81, 82, ... 8p are the coeﬃcients of the
autoregressive part of the pth order, and θ1, θ2, ... θq are
the coeﬃcients of the moving-average part of the qth order
part, respectively.
Multilayer Perceptron
An MLP is a variant of the original perceptron model (see
Figure 2A) proposed by Rosenblatt .
A neuron (represented as P in Figure 2A) computes
a weighted sum of the inputs, followed by a non-linear
activation ϕ of the calculated sum, as shown in Equation 3.
FIGURE 2 | (A) Rosenblatt’s perceptron and (B) Architectural graph of an MLP with two hidden layers.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
Neural network architectures are considered as the universal
function approximators because of the presence of activation
functions. An activation function helps to generate mappings
from inputs to outputs, and it provides the neural network
model the ability to learn complex data representations . There are a number of activation functions
proposed in literature, which include the sigmoid, tanh,
and ReLU .
Krizhevsky et al. have shown that the sigmoid and
tanh activation functions suﬀer from the problem of vanishing
gradient, while the ReLU activation function overcomes the
vanishing gradient problem and provides faster convergence.
Also, the function is computationally eﬃcient to compute
 . Thus, based on the literature, we
used the ReLU activation function in the MLP model. The
output oi of a neuron in the MLP was deﬁned as per the
following equation:
(xjwij + bj))
where d is the length of the input vector, xi is a single instance of
the input vector, and bj and wij are the bias and weights associated
with each xj. Figure 2B shows the architecture of an MLP with
two hidden layers. A typical MLP is composed of multiple hidden
layers, with multiple neurons in each layer where every neuron in
a layer (say i) is fully connected to every other neuron in the next
layer (i.e., i + 1).
Long Short-Term Memory
An LSTM model is an RNN model with the capacity of
remembering (i.e., memory) the values from earlier stages in the
network. The architecture of an LSTM consists of units called
memory cells. Figure 3 shows an LSTM memory cell containing
self-connections and special multiplicative units called gates.
These connections remember the temporal state of the memory
cells and the gates control the ﬂow of information. Each memory
cell contains an input gate, an output gate, and a forget gate.
The ﬂow of input activations is controlled by the input gate,
while the ﬂow of cell activations into the remaining network is
controlled by the output gate. Furthermore, the internal state
of the cell is scaled by the forget gate and is added back to the
cell as input through a self-recurrent connection. In Figure 3,
ct−1 is the previous cell state, ht−1 is the previous cell output,
xt represents input to the memory cell, ct represents the new
cell state, and ht represents the output of the hidden layer at
In this research, we propose a novel ensemble architecture
that combines the best predictions from multiple models to
predict outcomes of interest. The ensembling is expected to
reduce the bias and variance in the individual prediction models
by using conventional ensembling techniques like mode or
average . In the case of a
mode or average ensembles, the most frequently occurring or
the average prediction from multiple models are used as the
ﬁnal prediction from the ensemble . To overcome the challenges of the mode or average
ensembling techniques, the ensembling approach in this research
uses a weighted average ensemble, where diﬀerent individual
model’s best predictions are dynamically weighted . In our ensemble model, the weights
associated with diﬀerent best model predictions from ARIMA,
MLP, and LSTM models are calibrated using a normalized
exponential weighting algorithm . More
details about this model’s calibration are presented ahead in
this paper.
FIGURE 3 | An illustration of an LSTM memory cell. Source: Gupta and Dinesh .
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
Models Training
Time-Series Forecasting Using ARIMA
As explained above, the ARIMA model possessed three
parameters p (order of autoregressive part), d (degree of
diﬀerencing), and q (order of moving average part) . The p term describes the previous time steps of a time
series used for predicting the future value. The q term describes
the previous error terms used to predict the future value . The autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation
function plots revealed the best range for the variation of q
and p to be integer values between . Thus, the grid
search was applied by passing the integer values in the range
 for both p and q to decide the precise values of these
parameters. Through grid search, we checked all the integer
combinations of p and q between 0 and 5 and chose the values
for which we obtained the least value of our objective function.
The parameter values for which we obtained the least value of
the objective function were termed as the optimum values of
these parameters.
The value of d indicates the number of times we need to
diﬀerence the time series to make it stationary. Based on the
ADF test , we found the time series
of medicine A to be already stationary (d = 0). However, the
time series for medicine B was non-stationary and required onetime diﬀerencing (d = 1) (the ADF test conﬁrmed that the
one-time diﬀerenced time series for medicine B was stationary).
As medicine A was stationary (see Figure 1A), the lag value was
calculated on the original time series. In the ARIMA model, we
obtained lag value of 2 time steps for medicine A. However,
in case of medicine B (non-stationary time series; Figure 1B),
the lag value was calculated after one-time diﬀerencing. Thus,
on the diﬀerenced series (Figure 1C), we obtained a lag value
of 2 time steps for medicine B [however, on the original (nondiﬀerenced) series, it was a lag of 3 time steps for medicine
B]. The time series for each medication was transformed into a
supervised learning problem before model training. For medicine
A, we used the two previous time steps (t – 2) and (t – 1) of
the original series as inputs to a model and the current time
step (t) as the output from the model. For medicine B, we
trained the models using the diﬀerenced series where the models
utilized past 3 time steps (t – 3), (t – 2), and (t – 1) of the
original series (i.e., lag = 2 for the diﬀerenced series) as inputs
to a model and the current time step (t) as the output from
the model.
Time-Series Forecasting Using MLP and LSTM
Both MLP and LSTM models were trained across each of the two
medications on the training dataset. On medicine A, MLP and
LSTM models were trained on original time series. On medicine
B, MLP and LSTM models were trained on the diﬀerenced
time series. We used the genetic algorithm with
20% mutation and 80% crossover rate to tune the following
hyper-parameters using training data: number of hidden layers,
number of neurons in a layer, batch size, and epochs. The hyperparameters were varied in the following ranges: hidden layers (1,
2, 3, and 4), number of neurons in a layer (4, 8, 16, 32, and 64),
batch size (5, 10, 15, and 20), and number of epochs (8, 16, 32,
64, 128, 256, and 512). First, we hand-tuned the abovementioned
parameters in MLP and LSTM models to obtain an idea about
the minimum and maximum value of parameter ranges. The
minimum and maximum values of a hyper-parameter were the
ones where we did not ﬁnd improvements in model’s ﬁt by
choosing a value lower than the minimum and higher than the
maximum. Next, we varied the hyper-parameters between the
minimum and maximum and we used genetic algorithm to tune
the hyper-parameters (layers, neurons, batch size, and epochs) of
the MLP and LSTM architectures. The genetic algorithm used
RMSE/10 + (1–R2) as the objective function, and it was run
for 100+ generations. We stopped the genetic algorithm when
the value of objective function did not change for the past 20
generations. Out of these generations, we obtained the set of
hyper-parameters for which we got the minimum value of the
objective function (we call these optimum parameters). After
training, all the models were validated on test datasets. During
training, we did not want to give advantage to the memory-based
LSTM model over the memory-less MLP model. Therefore, we
varied the same range of hyper-parameters for both the MLP and
LSTM models. The LSTM model is a memory-based model that
could beneﬁt by keeping larger lag values. However, we did not
ﬁnd improvements in RMSEs in the LSTM model for diﬀerent
lag values between 2 and 8. To ensure that the lag was kept the
same across all models, we chose a lag value of 2 time steps across
MLP and LSTM models for medicine A (using original series).
For medicine B, we trained the MLP and LSTM models using the
diﬀerenced series where the models utilized past 2 time steps of
the diﬀerenced series (i.e., lag = 3 of the original series). We used
these models to predict patients’ daily average expenditure on
medicines. After getting the predictions for 259 days (test data),
we summed these daily average expenditures on blocks of 7 days
to get the weekly average expenditures by patients on medicines.
In addition, in each MLP and LSTM model, we varied
shuﬄing of training data and dropout of nodes as per the
following combinations: shuﬄe with dropout, shuﬄe without
dropout, no shuﬄe with dropout, and no shuﬄe without
dropout. First, we converted the training time series for each
medicine into smaller supervised sets (mini-batches) containing
attributes corresponding to the chosen look-back period. When
shuﬄing was present, the mini-batches were shuﬄed randomly
across time series for each medicine. When shuﬄing was
absent, we did not shuﬄe the mini-batches and presented these
batches in sequential order to the neural network. Dropout is a
regularization technique, which is used to tackle overﬁtting in
neural networks . As per Srivastava et al.
 , dropout can be implemented on any or all hidden layers
in the network except the output layer. Based on this literature,
when dropout was present, 20% of the hidden-layer nodes in
the MLP model and 20% of the nodes or recurrent connections
in LSTMs were randomly dropped out during model training.
When dropout was absent, no nodes in the MLP model and no
nodes or recurrent connections in LSTMs were removed from
the hidden layers in the network.
Using the genetic algorithm, we obtained the best set of
hyper-parameters for each medication for diﬀerent combinations
of dropouts and shuﬄing on training data. Next, we
ran these best hyper-parameters 30 times for each of the four
dropout and shuﬄe combinations (the model was run 30 times
as there is a run-to-run variability in model’s output) on training
data. Among the 30 model runs, the run with the least objective
function value was treated as the ﬁnal prediction from the model
for a dropout and shuﬄe combination. These ﬁnal predictions
with the least objective function value were then used along with
the other models’ ﬁnal predictions to generate the predictions
for the ensemble approach. However, all the models were ﬁnally
compared based on their average performance across 30 runs. We
used the ReLU activation function while training the MLP and
LSTM models . These models were created in
Keras v2.2.2 using Tensorﬂow backend v1.10.0 .
We used the same procedure for training the MLP and LSTM
models for both the pain medications.
Time-Series Forecasting Using Ensemble
In order to train the ensemble model, we used the best predictions
from ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM models on training data. As
mentioned above, all these models were run 30 times. The best
predictions from one of these 30 runs (the one with the lowest
RMSE) in each model were used to generate the predictions from
the ensemble model. The ARIMA model, however, is diﬀerent
from the neural network models as it gives the same predictions
across the 30 runs. We used the predicted training data points
(1–1,306 points) from the best run of the ARIMA, MLP, and
LSTM models to compute the weights of the ensemble model.
In order to calibrate the weights of ensemble model, we used
the normalized exponential weighted algorithm (Adhikari et al.,
Normalized exponential weighted algorithm
The working of this algorithm is presented in the box below.
Given a set of N predictions from diﬀerent models on the training
data (line 1), this algorithm starts with assigning equal weight
to all predictions (i.e., 1
3 weight to the ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM
model predictions; line 2). The assumption of each weight to be
1/N ensures that the sum of all model weights equal 1 at each
step of the model training. Then, for each of the training samples
(from 1 to T, where T = 1,306 in our data), the squared error
between each model’s prediction and actual data is computed
(line 4). After each training sample, each model’s weights are
updated using the squared error for diﬀerent model predictions
(line 5), where the parameter η is a free learning-rate parameter.
Finally, we normalize the weights obtained for each model’s
predictions by dividing them with the total sum of the weights
across all models (line 6). We normalize these weights to bring
all weights between 0 and 1. This process continues until all
the 1,306 training samples are covered. To obtain the optimum
weights corresponding to each model, we need to try diﬀerent
values of the η parameter. In this algorithm, we calibrated the
value of the η parameter by varying its values from 0.0 to 1.0 in
steps of 0.1. Therefore, we tried 11 diﬀerent values of η parameter
and obtained diﬀerent weights for each model. We selected those
weights for which we obtained the minimum value of objective
function (i.e., minimum RMSE and maximum R2). We call these
weights optimum weights for ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM models.
Algorithm 1: Normalized Exponential Weighted Algorithm
1: Input: A model i predicting outcome f t
i for round t and a
free parameter η
N i = 1, ..., N models (set initial weights of each
model’s predictions to 1/N such that sum of the weights is
equal to 1
3: For training samples t = 1 to T and for each model
i = 1 to N do
(calculation of squared error
where yt is the actual value)
i = 1 wt+1
(normalization of weights)
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Persistence Model
In the persistence model, we obtained RMSE = 145.68 (medicine
A) and RMSE = 40.33 (medicine B) on test data. Similarly, we
obtained R2 = 0.76 (medicine A) and R2 = 0.91 (medicine B)
on test data. Figure 4 shows the persistence model’s performance
for medicine A (Figure 4A) and medicine B (Figure 4B) on the
average expenditure per patient in test data.
ARIMA Model
The ARIMA model for medicine A possessed the following
parameters: p = 2, d =
0, and q = 1. The ARIMA model
for medicine B possessed the following parameters:
2. Table 1 shows the ARIMA model’s
RMSE and R2 on training and test data for both medicines.
Figure 5 shows the ARIMA model’s performance for medicine
A (Figure 5A) and medicine B (Figure 5B) on the average
expenditure per patient in test data. As seen in Figure 5 and
Table 1, the model ﬁts were poor across both training and test
data for both medicines.
Table 2 shows the MLP model’s RMSE and R2 on training and test
data for diﬀerent shuﬄe and dropout combinations on medicines
A and B (shuﬄe with dropout, shuﬄe without dropout, no shuﬄe
with dropout, and no shuﬄe without dropout). As shown in
Table 2, the best RMSE (= 142.69) on test data was obtained
for the no shuﬄe with dropout combination for medicine A,
and this model contained 2 hidden layers, 4 neurons in each
hidden layer, 15 batch size, and 16 epochs. On medicine B, we
obtained the best RMSE (= 40.33) on test data for no shuﬄe
and dropout combination. The corresponding MLP model for
medicine B possessed 3 layers, 4 neurons in each layer, 5 batch
size, and 128 epochs. Figure 6 shows the MLP model ﬁts for
medicine A (Figure 6A) and medicine B (Figure 6B) in test
data for the best-performing model combinations. As shown
in Figure 6, the MLP model ﬁts were reasonably accurate for
both medicines.
LSTM Model
Table 3 shows the LSTM model’s RMSE and R2 on training
and test data for diﬀerent shuﬄe and dropout combinations on
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 4 | Average expenditure (in USD per patient) from the persistence model for medicine A (A) and for medicine B (B) in test data.
TABLE 1 | ARIMA results during training and test.
Medicine name
Train RMSE
medicines A and B (shuﬄe with node and recurrent connection
dropout, shuﬄe without dropout, no shuﬄe with node and
recurrent connection dropout, and no shuﬄe without dropout).
As shown in Table 3, the best RMSE (= 143.69) on test data
was obtained for the shuﬄe and no dropout combination for
medicine A, and this model contained 1 hidden layer, 4 neurons
per hidden layer, 20 batch size, and 8 epochs. On medicine B,
we obtained the best RMSE (= 40.30) on test data for shuﬄe
and no dropout combination. The corresponding LSTM model
possessed 1 layer, 4 neurons, 20 batch size, and 8 epochs. Figure 7
shows the LSTM model ﬁts for medicine A (Figure 7A) and
medicine B (Figure 7B) in test data for the best-performing
model combinations. As shown in Figure 7, the LSTM model ﬁts
were reasonably accurate for both medicines.
Ensemble Model
Table 4 shows the ensemble model’s RMSE and R2 on training
and test data on both the medicines. These results were
obtained using the best predictions out of 30 runs from each
of the ARIMA, MLP, and LSTM models. The ensemble results
on medicine A were obtained with the following weights:
0.333 for ARIMA, 0.329 for MLP, and 0.329 for LSTM,
0.2 as the learning rate parameter from the
normalized exponential weighted algorithm. On medicine B,
the ensemble results were obtained with the following weights:
0.000 for ARIMA, 0.231 for MLP, and 0.768 for LSTM. The
ensemble model weights for medicine B were obtained for
η = 0.9 using the normalized exponential weighted algorithm.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 5 | Average expenditure (in USD per patient) from the ARIMA model for medicine A (A) and for medicine B (B) in test data.
TABLE 2 | MLP results during training and test.
Combinations of
shufﬂe and dropout
Shufﬂe with dropout
Shufﬂe without dropout
No shufﬂe with
No shufﬂe without
Shufﬂe with dropout
Shufﬂe without dropout
No shufﬂe with
No shufﬂe without
The bold text highlights the variation with the lowest RMSE on test data.
Figure 8 shows the model ﬁts from the ensemble model for
medicine A (Figure 8A) and medicine B (Figure 8B). As shown
in Figure 8, the ensemble model’s ﬁts (RMSE and R2) on
test data were reasonably better compared to its individual
constituting models.
Model Comparison
Table 5 shows the best test RMSE and best test R2 obtained
over 30 runs from all the models for both the medicines. The
average RMSE and R2 were obtained by averaging the RMSE
and R2 across both medicines A and B. As seen in the table,
both the MLP and LSTM models outperformed the persistence
(baseline) as well as the ARIMA model. Also, the ensemble
model performed the best among all the models for both the
medicines on the test data. The overall trend across persistence,
LSTM, and MLP models was similar and better compared to the
ARIMA model.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 6 | Average expenditure (in USD per patient) from the MLP model for medicine A (A) and for medicine B (B) in test data.
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The primary objective of this research was to compare the
performance of existing statistical (persistence and ARIMA) and
neural (MLP and LSTM) models with a novel ensemble model
for forecasting patient-related expenditures on medications.
Another objective of this paper was to systematically evaluate
the advantages of shuﬄing of training data and adding of
dropouts while training the neural network models individually
or as a part of the ensemble model. Overall, we expected the
ensemble model to perform better compared to the statistical and
neural models. Also, we expected shuﬄing and dropouts to help
models improve their performance. Overall, our results have met
our expectations.
First, as per our expectation, the best performance in terms
of error was found from the ensemble model, followed by MLP,
LSTM, persistence, and ARIMA models. A likely reason for these
results is that the persistence and ARIMA models are perhaps
not able to capture the non-linearities present in the time-series
data. Thus, overall, these models tended to perform not as well
compared to other models. Also, overall, the neural network
models (MLP and LSTM) performed similarly and better than the
persistence and ARIMA models. That is likely because data for
both medicines were non-linear and neural network models, by
their design, could account for the non-linear trends in datasets.
However, another reason for this result could be simply because
the neural network models possess several weights (parameters),
whereas the ARIMA model possesses only three parameters.
These reasons for the MLP and LSTM models and the fact that
increasing the lag in the LSTM model did not help this model
improve its performance could also help explain the similarity
in performance for the MLP and LSTM models. Furthermore,
the novel ensemble model performed better compared to all the
individual models because this model gave more weight to the
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
TABLE 3 | LSTM results during training and test.
Combinations of
shufﬂe and dropout
Shufﬂe with node
Shufﬂe with recurrent
connection dropout
Shufﬂe without
No shufﬂe with node
No shufﬂe with
recurrent connection
No shufﬂe without
Shufﬂe with node
Shufﬂe with recurrent
connection dropout
Shufﬂe without
No shufﬂe with node
No shufﬂe with
recurrent connection
No shufﬂe without
The bold text highlights the variation with the lowest RMSE on test data.
accurate model predictions than the less accurate ones as well as
dynamically adjusted its weights.
In our results, the ensemble model outperformed other
statistical and neural models. This result may not be in agreement
with prior literature that shows that ensembling approaches
may only produce minor improvements . A
likely reason behind achieving substantial boost in performance
through our novel ensemble model is the design of its training
procedures. After getting the best model conﬁgurations (hyperparameters) from individual models, we trained all individual
models several times to obtain the best value of their objective
function. Additionally, MLP and LSTM were trained with shuﬄeand-dropout variations. Out of the several individual model
runs, the ensemble model chose the best predictions to train its
weight and learning-rate parameters. For calibrating the weights,
the ensemble model dynamically adjusted its weights using a
normalized exponential algorithm.
Third, we found that, in general, the MLP model performed
better on test data with no shuﬄe and dropout combination
across both medicines. A likely reason for this result could be
that adding the dropout helped the MLP to generalize better
with reduced overﬁtting (performance of MLP during test was
comparable or better compared to that during training). In
addition, MLP models do not possess memory to account for past
presentations of training data. Thus, in the absence of memory,
the sequential (non-shuﬄed) presentation of training data most
likely helped the MLP models to improve their performance.
Fourth, for LSTM models, the best results on test data were
obtained when input data were shuﬄed and dropouts were absent
in the network. A likely reason for this result could be that
the LSTM models contain memory, so they could save the past
presentation of training data when shuﬄed mini-batches were
passed to the network. Dropout did not reduce the overﬁtting
in the LSTM model for medicine A. Furthermore, the results of
medicine B were much better compared to those of medicine
A. In order to reduce overﬁtting in the recurrent network (i.e.,
LSTM), we also implemented recurrent dropout that drops the
recurrent connections in the network. With recurrent dropout,
the lowest RMSE obtained was 155.29 on test data for medicine
A. However, with the best shuﬄe-and-dropout condition, we
obtained 143.69 RMSE for medicine A. Similarly, on medicine
B, the RMSE increased from 40.30 to 52.02 by implementing
recurrent dropout. Thus, the overall utility of dropout (to
reduce overﬁtting) across the two medications was not found in
this model. Overall, from our ﬁndings, we may conclude that
shuﬄing the input training data may help the LSTM models
and adding the dropout may help the MLP-based time-series
forecasting models to perform better. Interestingly, the results of
ensemble model showed no overﬁtting for both medicines. Thus,
in contrast to using dropouts, the ensemble model’s use may help
reduce overﬁtting in data.
regularization techniques such as L1 and L2 regularization
for the problem of overﬁtting . These
regularization techniques add a regularization term to the cost
function to penalize the model for having several parameters.
The parameter reduction leads to simpler models that likely
reduce overﬁtting. In the future, we plan to apply the L1 and
L2 regularization to evaluate their ability to reduce overﬁtting
Additionally, the persistence (baseline) model performed
better compared to the ARIMA model. A likely reason
for this result could be the nature of datasets, where the
average per-patient expenditure changed little between two
adjacent blocks. Perhaps, due to these smaller changes in the
expenditure, the persistence model was able to gain advantage
over the ARIMA model. In fact, a smaller value of p and
q parameters in the ARIMA model agreed well with the
plausibility of the persistence model performing better across
both medications.
This research work has a number of implications for
healthcare data analytics. First, an implication from our results is
that neural network models could be used in healthcare datasets
to predict medicine expenditures. However, an ensemble of these
neural models may improve the overall results further. Although
we considered the weekly expenditure per patient on medications
in this paper, our results are likely to hold for other patientrelated healthcare expenditures. However, it may be prudent to
test these models on other per-patient healthcare expenditures
before using them in a production environment. Second,
another implication of our results is that it may be expensive
to train neural network and ensemble models; however, once
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 7 | Average expenditure (in USD per patient) from the LSTM model for medicine A (A) and for medicine B (B) in test data.
TABLE 4 | Ensemble model results during training and test.
Ensemble model for medicines Train RMSE Train R2 Test RMSE Test R2
these models are trained, they are easy and computationally
temporarily
inexpensive
Therefore, we believe that the neural and ensemble approaches
would be useful to caregivers, patients, pharmacies, and
pharmaceutical companies. For example, the proposed ensemble
and neural models could be bundled into a mobile or desktop
application that helps patients better manage their spending
on medicine purchases by forecasting their future spending.
Third, the proposed models may help pharmaceutical companies
optimize their manufacturing processes and determine an
attractive pricing for their medications. Furthermore, the
proposed models could also be beneﬁcial for medicine inventory
management and pricing across pharmacies and hospitals.
relatively better compared to other statistical and neural
approaches and is reproducible, it may require model retraining
at regular time intervals especially when newer data are generated
over time. Also, we believe that our results replicated on two pain
medications show a certain amount of generalizability. However,
it may be advisable to test the proposed ensembling approach
against other types of medications with similar or dissimilar
distribution to the current dataset as part of future research.
There are several possibilities for future research that
could extend this work. For example, beyond predicting
per-patient medicine expenditures, future research could use
CNN models and other RNN models to predict disease
risk and diagnose patient symptoms . Here, RNNs like the GRUs could be used and compared to regression-based
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
FIGURE 8 | Average expenditure (in USD per patient) from ensemble model for medicine A (A) and for medicine B (B) in test data.
TABLE 5 | Best results over 30 runs on test data from different models across
both medicines.
Persistence
The bold text highlights the model with the lowest RMSE on test data.
techniques, i.e., support vector regression ,
to predict healthcare outcomes. Also, as the focus of this paper
was on the applicability of statistical, neural, and ensemble
architectures on longitudinal healthcare data, one could extend
this comparison to other datasets with diﬀerent challenges such
as variability in data velocity, data missingness, and data types.
In addition to weighted ensembles, there exists bagging, or
bootstrap aggregating, which makes decisions based on the
aggregated results of the sampled decision trees. Along with
the weighted ensembles, one may use bootstrapped samples
of the training data, thereby creating a random forest of
models to create ensemble models. Still another possibility for
future research is to extend univariate time-series forecasting
to multi-variate time-series forecasting ,
where one uses other patient-related variables (both continuous
and discrete) alongside per-patient expenditures on diﬀerent
medications. Some of these ideas form the immediate next
steps in our research program on time-series forecasting of
healthcare datasets.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 4
Kaushik et al.
Forecasting of Healthcare Expenditures
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SK and VD contributed to the conception and design of the study.
SK wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. SK and VD improved
the ﬁnal version of the manuscript draft. ND, SN, and LP helped
in getting the data used in this paper. SK and AC organized the
database and trained ARIMA, LSTM, and ensemble models. PS
trained the MLP model. All authors contributed to manuscript
revision, read and approved the submitted version.
This research was supported by a research grant from
RxDataScience, Inc., USA, to the Indian Institute of Technology
Mandi, India. The research reported in this paper is meant
solely for societal beneﬁt, and authors may be contacted to
get models and data used in this research. The project was
supported by grants (awards: #IITM/CONS/PPLP/VD/03 and
IITM/CONS/RxDSI/VD/33) to VD.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
 
2020.00004/full#supplementary-material