LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly Detection
Pankaj Malhotra, Anusha Ramakrishnan, Gaurangi Anand, Lovekesh Vig, Puneet Agarwal, Gautam Shroff
{MALHOTRA.PANKAJ,
ANUSHA.RAMAKRISHNAN,
GAURANGI.ANAND,
LOVEKESH.VIG,
TAM.SHROFF}@TCS.COM
TCS Research, New Delhi, India
Mechanical devices such as engines, vehicles,
aircrafts, etc., are typically instrumented with
numerous sensors to capture the behavior and
health of the machine. However, there are often external factors or variables which are not
captured by sensors leading to time-series which
are inherently unpredictable. For instance, manual controls and/or unmonitored environmental
conditions or load may lead to inherently unpredictable time-series. Detecting anomalies in
such scenarios becomes challenging using standard approaches based on mathematical models
that rely on stationarity, or prediction models that
utilize prediction errors to detect anomalies. We
propose a Long Short Term Memory Networks
based Encoder-Decoder scheme for Anomaly
Detection (EncDec-AD) that learns to reconstruct ‘normal’ time-series behavior, and thereafter uses reconstruction error to detect anomalies. We experiment with three publicly available
quasi predictable time-series datasets: power demand, space shuttle, and ECG, and two realworld engine datasets with both predictive and
unpredictable behavior. We show that EncDec-
AD is robust and can detect anomalies from predictable, unpredictable, periodic, aperiodic, and
quasi-periodic time-series.
Further, we show
that EncDec-AD is able to detect anomalies from
short time-series (length as small as 30) as well
as long time-series (length as large as 500).
1. Introduction
In real-world sensor data from machines, there are scenarios when the behavior of a machine changes based on usage and external factors which are difﬁcult to capture. For
Presented at ICML 2016 Anomaly Detection Workshop, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. Copyright c⃝2016 Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.
(a) Predictable
(b) Unpredictable
Figure 1. Readings for a manual control sensor.
example, a laden machine behaves differently from an unladen machine. Further, the relevant information pertaining
to whether a machine is laden or unladen may not be available. The amount of load on a machine at a time may be
unknown or change very frequently/abruptly, for example,
in an earth digger. A machine may have multiple manual
controls some of which may not be captured in the sensor
data. Under such settings, it becomes difﬁcult to predict the
time-series, even for very near future (see Figure 1), rendering ineffective prediction-based time-series anomaly detection models, such as ones based on exponentially weighted
moving average (EWMA) ,
SVR , or Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) Networks .
LSTM networks are
recurrent models that have been used for many sequence
learning tasks like handwriting recognition, speech recognition, and sentiment analysis. LSTM Encoder-Decoder
models have been recently proposed for sequence-tosequence learning tasks like machine translation . An LSTM-based encoder is used to map an input sequence to a vector representation of ﬁxed dimensionality. The decoder is another
LSTM network which uses this vector representation to
produce the target sequence. Other variants have been proposed for natural language generation and reconstruction
 , parsing , image captioning .
We propose an LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder scheme for
Anomaly Detection in multi-sensor time-series (EncDec-
AD). An encoder learns a vector representation of the input time-series and the decoder uses this representation
to reconstruct the time-series. The LSTM-based encoderdecoder is trained to reconstruct instances of ‘normal’ timearXiv:1607.00148v2 [cs.AI] 11 Jul 2016
LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly Detection
series with the target time-series being the input time-series
itself. Then, the reconstruction error at any future timeinstance is used to compute the likelihood of anomaly at
that point. We show that such an encoder-decoder model
learnt using only the normal sequences can be used for detecting anomalies in multi-sensor time-series: The intuition
here is that the encoder-decoder pair would only have seen
normal instances during training and learnt to reconstruct
them. When given an anomalous sequence, it may not be
able to reconstruct it well, and hence would lead to higher
reconstruction errors compared to the reconstruction errors
for the normal sequences.
EncDec-AD uses only the normal sequences for training.
This is particularly useful in scenarios when anomalous
data is not available or is sparse, making it difﬁcult to
learn a classiﬁcation model over the normal and anomalous sequences. This is especially true of machines that
undergo periodic maintainance and therefore get serviced
before anomalies show up in the sensor readings.
2. EncDec-AD
Consider a time-series X = {x(1), x(2), ..., x(L)} of length
L, where each point x(i) ∈Rm is an m-dimensional vector of readings for m variables at time-instance ti. We consider the scenario where multiple such time-series are available or can be obtained by taking a window of length L
over a larger time-series. We ﬁrst train the LSTM Encoder-
Decoder model to reconstruct the normal time-series. The
reconstruction errors are then used to obtain the likelihood
of a point in a test time-series being anomalous s.t. for each
point x(i), an anomaly score a(i) of the point being anomalous is obtained. A higher anomaly score indicates a higher
likelihood of the point being anomalous.
2.1. LSTM Encoder-Decoder as reconstruction model
We train an LSTM encoder-decoder to reconstruct instances of normal time-series. The LSTM encoder learns
a ﬁxed length vector representation of the input time-series
and the LSTM decoder uses this representation to reconstruct the time-series using the current hidden state and
the value predicted at the previous time-step. Given X,
is the hidden state of encoder at time ti for each
i ∈{1, 2, ..., L}, where h(i)
∈Rc, c is the number of
LSTM units in the hidden layer of the encoder. The encoder
and decoder are jointly trained to reconstruct the timeseries in reverse order ),
i.e. the target time-series is {x(L), x(L−1), ..., x(1)}. The
ﬁnal state h(L)
of the encoder is used as the initial state for
the decoder. A linear layer on top of the LSTM decoder
layer is used to predict the target. During training, the decoder uses x(i) as input to obtain the state h(i−1)
, and then
Figure 2. LSTM Encoder-Decoder inference steps for input
{x(1), x(2), x(3)} to predict {x′(1), x′(2), x′(3)}
predict x′(i−1) corresponding to target x(i−1). During inference, the predicted value x′(i) is input to the decoder
to obtain h(i−1)
and predict x′(i−1). The model is trained
to minimize the objective P
i=1 ∥x(i) −x′(i)∥2,
where sN is set of normal training sequences.
Figure 2 depicts the inference steps in an LSTM Encoder-
Decoder reconstruction model for a sequence with L = 3.
The value x(i) at time instance ti and the hidden state
of the encoder at time ti −1 are used to obtain the
hidden state h(i)
E of the encoder at time ti. The hidden state
E of the encoder at the end of the input sequence is used
as the initial state h(3)
D of the decoder s.t. h(3)
linear layer with weight matrix w of size c × m and bias
vector b ∈Rm on top of the decoder is used to compute
x′(3) = wTh
D + b. The decoder uses h(i)
D and prediction
x′(i) to obtain the next hidden state h(i−1)
2.2. Computing likelihood of anomaly
Similar to , we divide the normal
time-series into four sets of time-series: sN, vN1, vN2, and
tN, and the anomalous time-series into two sets vA and
tA. The set of sequences sN is used to learn the LSTM
encoder-decoder reconstruction model.
The set vN1 is
used for early stopping while training the encoder-decoder
model. The reconstruction error vector for ti is given by
e(i) = |x(i) −x′(i)|. The error vectors for the points in the
sequences in set vN1 are used to estimate the parameters
µ and Σ of a Normal distribution N(µ, Σ) using Maximum Likelihood Estimation. Then, for any point x(i), the
anomaly score a(i) = (e(i) −µ)T Σ−1(e(i) −µ).
In a supervised setting, if a(i) > τ, a point in a sequence
can be predicted to be “anomalous”, otherwise “normal”.
When enough anomalous sequences are available, a threshold τ over the likelihood values is learnt to maximize
Fβ = (1 + β2) × P × R/(β2P + R), where P is precision,
R is recall, “anomalous” is the positive class and “normal”
is the negative class. If a window contains an anomalous
pattern, the entire window is labeled as “anomalous”. This
LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly Detection
Predictable
Dimensions
Periodicity
Power Demand
Space Shuttle
Quasi-periodic
Table 1. Nature of datasets. N, Nn and Na is no. of original sequences, normal subsequences and anomalous subsequences, respectively.
Power Demand
Space Shuttle
Table 2. Fβ-scores and positive likelihood ratios (TPR/FPR).
is helpful in many real-world applications where the exact
position of anomaly is not known. For example, for the
engine dataset (refer Section 3), the only information available is that the machine was repaired on a particular date.
The last few operational runs prior to repair are assumed to
be anomalous and the ﬁrst few operational runs after the repair are assumed to be normal. We assume β < 1 since the
fraction of actual anomalous points in a sequence labeled as
anomalous may not be high, and hence lower recall is expected. The parameters τ and c are chosen with maximum
Fβ score on the validation sequences in vN2 and vA.
3. Experiments
We consider four real-world datasets:
power demand,
space shuttle valve, ECG, and engine (see Table 1). The
ﬁrst three are taken from whereas
the engine dataset is a proprietary one encountered in a
real-life project. The engine dataset contains data for two
different applications: Engine-P where the time-series is
quasi-predictable, Engine-NP where the time-series is unpredictable, for reasons such as mentioned earlier.
In our experiments, we consider architectures where both
the encoder and decoder have single hidden layer with
c LSTM units each.
Mini-batch stochastic optimization
based on Adam Optimizer is used
for training the LSTM Encoder-Decoder. Table 2 shows
the performance of EncDec-AD on all the datasets.
3.1. Datasets
Power demand dataset contains one univariate time-series
with 35, 040 readings for power demand recorded over a
period of one year. The demand is normally high during
the weekdays and low over the weekend. Within a day,
the demand is high during working hours and low otherwise (see Figure 3(a), top-most subplot). A week when any
of the ﬁrst 5 days has low power demands (similar to the
demand over the weekend) is considered anomalous (see
(a) Power-N
(b) Power-A
(c) Space Shuttle-N
(d) Space Shuttle-A
(e) Engine-P-N
(f) Engine-P-A
(g) Engine-NP-N
(h) Engine-NP-A
Figure 3. Sample original normal (ﬁrst column) and anomalous
(second column) sequences (ﬁrst row, blue color) with corresponding reconstructed sequences (second row, green color) and
anomaly scores (third row, red color). The red regions in the original time-series for anomalous sequences correspond to the exact location of the anomaly in the sequence (whenever available).
Plots in same row have same y-axis scale. The anomaly scores
are on log-scale.
LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly Detection
Figure 3(b) where ﬁrst day has low power demand). We
downsample the original time-series by 8 to obtain nonoverlapping sequences with L = 84 such that each window
corresponds to one week.
Space shuttle dataset contains periodic sequences with
1000 points per cycle, and 15 such cycles. We delibrately
choose L = 1500 such that a subsequence covers more
than one cycle (1.5 cycles per subsequence) and consider
sliding windows with step size of 500. We downsample the
original time-series by 3. The normal and anomalous sequences in Figure 3(c)-3(d) belong to TEK17 and TEK14
time-series, respectively.
Engine dataset contains readings for 12 sensors such as
coolant temperature, torque, accelerator (control variable),
etc. We consider two differents applications of the engine:
Engine-P and Engine-NP. Engine-P has a discrete external control with two states: ‘high’ and ‘low’. The resulting time-series are predictable except at the time-instances
when the control variable changes.
On the other hand,
the external control for Engine-NP can assume any value
within a certain range and changes very frequently, and
hence the resulting time-series are unpredictable.
Sample sequences for the control variables from Engine-P and
Engine-NP are shown in Figure 1(a) and 1(b), respectively. We randomly choose L = 30 for both Engine-P
and Engine-NP. We reduce the multivariate time-series to
univariate by considering only the ﬁrst principal component after applying principal component analysis . The ﬁrst component captures 72% of the variance
for Engine-P and 61% for Engine-NP.
ECG dataset contains quasi-periodic time-series (duration
of a cycle varies from one instance to another). For our experiment, we use the ﬁrst channel from qtdb/sel102 dataset
where the time-series contains one anomaly corresponding
to a pre-ventricular contraction (see Figure 3(j)). We consider non-overlapping subsequences with L = 208 (each
subsequence corresponds to approximately 800ms). Since
only one anomaly is present in the dataset, sets vN2 and vA
are not created. The best model, i.e. c, is chosen based on
the minimum reconstruction error on set vN1. We choose
τ = µa + σa, where µa and σa are the mean and standard
deviation of the anomaly scores of the points from vN1.
3.2. Observations
The key observations from our experiments are as follows:
1) The positive likelihood ratio is signiﬁcantly higher than
1.0 for all the datasets (see Table 2). High positive likelihood ratio values suggest that EncDec-AD gives signiﬁcantly higher anomaly scores for anomalous points as compared to normal points.
2) For periodic time-series, we experiment with varying
window lengths: window length same as the length of one
cycle (power demand dataset) and window length greater
than the length of one cycle (space shuttle dataset). We
also consider a quasi-periodic time-series (ECG). EncDec-
AD is able to detect anomalies in all these scenarios.
3) A time-series prediction based anomaly detection model
LSTM-AD gives better results for
the predictable datasets: Space Shuttle, Power and Engine-
P ) with F0.1 scores of 0.84, 0.90 and 0.89, respectively. On the other hand, EncDec-AD gives better results
for Engine-NP where the sequences are not predictable.
The best LSTM-AD model gives P, R, F0.05 and TPR/FPR
of 0.03, 0.07, 0.03, 1.9, respectively (for a two hidden layer
architecture with 30 LSTM units in each layer and prediction length of 1) owing to the fact that the time-series is not
predictable and hence a good prediction model could not
be learnt, whereas EncDec-AD gives P, R, F0.1 score and
TPR/FPR of 0.96, 0.18, 0.93 and 7.6, respectively.
4. Related Work
Time-series prediction models have been shown to be effective for anomaly detection by using the prediction error
or a function of prediction error as a measure of the severity of anomaly . Recently, deep LSTMs have been used
as prediction models in LSTM-AD where a prediction
model learnt over the normal time-series using LSTM networks is used to predict future points, and likelihood of
prediction error is used as a measure of anomaly. EncDec-
AD learns a representation from the entire sequence which
is then used to reconstruct the sequence, and is therefore
different from prediction based anomaly detection models.
Non-temporal reconstruction models such as denoising autoencoders for anomaly detection 
and Deep Belief Nets have been proposed. For time-series data, LSTM based encoder-decoder
is a natural extension to such models.
5. Discussion
We show that LSTM Encoder-Decoder based reconstruction model learnt over normal time-series can be a viable
approach to detect anomalies in time-series. Our approach
works well for detecting anomalies from predictable as
well as unpredictable time-series. Whereas many existing
models for anomaly detection rely on the fact that the timeseries should be predictable, EncDec-AD is shown to detect
anomalies even from unpredictable time-series, and hence
may be more robust compared to such models. The fact that
EncDec-AD is able to detect anomalies from time-series
with length as large as 500 suggests the LSTM encoderdecoders are learning a robust model of normal behavior.
LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly Detection