Split-Brain Autoencoders:
Unsupervised Learning by Cross-Channel Prediction
Richard Zhang
Phillip Isola
Alexei A. Efros
Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) Laboratory
University of California, Berkeley
{rich.zhang,isola,efros}@eecs.berkeley.edu
We propose split-brain autoencoders, a straightforward
modiﬁcation of the traditional autoencoder architecture, for
unsupervised representation learning. The method adds a
split to the network, resulting in two disjoint sub-networks.
Each sub-network is trained to perform a difﬁcult task –
predicting one subset of the data channels from another.
Together, the sub-networks extract features from the entire input signal. By forcing the network to solve crosschannel prediction tasks, we induce a representation within
the network which transfers well to other, unseen tasks.
This method achieves state-of-the-art performance on several large-scale transfer learning benchmarks.
1. Introduction
A goal of unsupervised learning is to model raw data
without the use of labels, in a manner which produces a
useful representation.
By “useful” we mean a representation that should be easily adaptable for other tasks, unknown during training time. Unsupervised deep methods
typically induce representations by training a network to
solve an auxiliary or “pretext” task, such as the image reconstruction objective in a traditional autoencoder model,
as shown on Figure 1(top). We instead force the network to
solve complementary prediction tasks by adding a split in
the architecture, shown in Figure 1 (bottom), dramatically
improving transfer performance.
Despite their popularity, autoencoders have actually not
been shown to produce strong representations for transfer
tasks in practice . Why is this? One reason might
be the mechanism for forcing model abstraction. To prevent
a trivial identity mapping from being learned, a bottleneck
is typically built into the autoencoder representation. However, an inherent tension is at play: the smaller the bottleneck, the greater the forced abstraction, but the smaller the
information content that can be expressed.
Instead of forcing abstraction through compression, via
a bottleneck in the network architecture, recent work has
explored withholding parts of the input during training
Traditional Autoencoder
Reconstructed
Split-Brain Autoencoder
Predicted Data
Figure 1: Traditional vs Split-Brain Autoencoder architectures. (top) Autoencoders learn feature representation F by learning to reconstruct input data X. (bottom)
The proposed split-brain autoencoder is composed of two
disjoint sub-networks F1, F2, each trained to predict one
data subset from another, changing the problem from reconstruction to prediction. The split-brain representation
F is formed by concatenating the two sub-networks, and
achieves strong transfer learning performance. The model is
publicly available on 
io/splitbrainauto.
 .
For example, Vincent et al.
 propose
denoising autoencoders, trained to remove iid noise added
to the input. Pathak et al. propose context encoders,
which learn features by training to inpaint large, random
contiguous blocks of pixels. Rather than dropping data in
the spatial direction, several works have dropped data in
the channel direction, e.g. predicting color channels from
grayscale (the colorization task) .
Context encoders, while an improvement over autoencoders, demonstrate lower performance than competitors
on large-scale semantic representation learning benchmarks . This may be due to several reasons. First, im-
 
Autoencoder 
reconstruction
Denoising autoencoder 
reconstruction
Context Encoder 
prediction
Cross-Channel Encoder 
prediction
Split-Brain Autoencoder
prediction
Table 1: Qualitative Comparison We summarize various
qualitative aspects inherent in several representation learning techniques. Auxiliary task type: pretext task predicated on reconstruction or prediction. Domain gap: gap
between the input data during unsupervised pre-training and
testing time. Input handicap: input data is systematically
dropped out during test time.
age synthesis tasks are known to be notoriously difﬁcult to
evaluate and the loss function used in may not
properly capture inpainting quality. Second, the model is
trained on images with missing chunks, but applied, at test
time, to full images. This causes a “domain gap” between
training and deployment. Third, it could simply be that the
inpainting task in could be adequately solved without
high-level reasoning, instead mostly just copying low and
mid-level structure from the surround.
On the other hand, colorization turns out to be a surprisingly effective pretext task for inducing strong feature representations . Though colorization, like inpainting,
is a synthesis task, the spatial correspondence between the
input and output pairs may enable basic off-the-shelf loss
functions to be effective. In addition, the systematic, rather
than stochastic nature of the input corruption removes the
pre-training and testing domain gap. Finally, while inpainting may admit reasoning mainly about textural structure,
predicting accurate color, e.g., knowing to paint a schoolbus yellow, may more strictly require object-level reasoning and therefore induce stronger semantic representations.
Colorization is an example of what we refer to as a crosschannel encoding objective, a task which directly predicts
one subset of data channels from another.
In this work, we further explore the space of crosschannel encoders by systematically evaluating various
channel translation problems and training objectives.
Cross-channel encoders, however, face an inherent handicap: different channels of the input data are not treated
equally, as part of the data is used for feature extraction and
another as the prediction target. In the case of colorization,
the network can only extract features from the grayscale image and is blind to color, leaving the color information unused. A qualitative comparison of the different methods,
along with their inherent strengths and weaknesses, is summarized in Table 1.
Might there be a way to take advantage of the underlying principle of cross-channel encoders, while being able to
extract features from the entire input signal? We propose
an architectural modiﬁcation to the autoencoder paradigm:
adding a single split in the network, resulting in two disjoint, concatenated, sub-networks.
Each sub-network is
trained as a cross-channel encoder, predicting one subset
of channels of the input from the other. A variety of auxiliary cross-channel prediction tasks may be used, such as
colorization and depth prediction. For example, on RGB
images, one sub-network can solve the problem of colorization (predicting a and b channels from the L channel in Lab
colorspace), and the other can perform the opposite (synthesizing L from a, b channels). In the RGB-D domain,
one sub-network may predict depth from images, while the
other predicts images from depth. The architectural change
induces the same forced abstraction as observed in crosschannel encoders, but is able to extract features from the
full input tensor, leaving nothing on the table.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the split-brain autoencoder, which is composed of concatenated cross-channel encoders, trained
using raw data as its own supervisory signal.
• We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on several semantic representation learning benchmarks in
the RGB and RGB-D domains.
• To gain a better understanding, we perform extensive ablation studies by (i) investigating cross-channel
prediction problems and loss functions and (ii) researching alternative aggregation methods for combining cross-channel encoders.
2. Related Work
Many unsupervised learning methods have focused on
modeling raw data using a reconstruction objective. Autoencoders train a network to reconstruct an input
image, using a representation bottleneck to force abstraction. Denoising autoencoders train a network to undo
a random iid corruption.
Techniques for modeling the
probability distribution of images in deep frameworks have
also been explored. For example, variational autoencoders
(VAEs) employ a variational Bayesian approach to
modeling the data distribution. Other probabilistic models
include restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) , deep
Boltzmann machines (DBMs) , generative adversarial
networks (GANs) , autoregressive models (Pixel-RNN
 and Pixel-CNN ), bidirectional GANs (BiGANs)
 and Adversarially Learned Inference (ALI) , and
real NVP . Many of these methods 
have been evaluated for representation learning.
Another form of unsupervised learning, sometimes referred to as “self-supervised” learning , has recently
grown in popularity.
Rather than predicting labels annotated by humans, these methods predict pseudo-labels
computed from the raw data itself.
For example, image
colorization has been shown to be an effective
pretext task. Other methods generate pseudo-labels from
egomotion , video , inpainting , cooccurence , context , and sound . Concurrently, Pathak et al. use motion masks extracted
from video data.
Also in these proceedings, Larsson et
al. provide an in-depth analysis of colorization for selfsupervision. These methods generally focus on a single supervisory signal and involve some engineering effort. In
this work, we show that simply predicting raw data channels with standard loss functions is surprisingly effective,
often outperforming previously proposed methods.
The idea of learning representations from multisensory signals also shows up in structure learning , cotraining , and multi-view learning . Our method is
especially related to , which use bidirectional data
prediction to learn representations from two sensory modalities.
A large body of additional work in computer vision and
graphics focuses on image channel prediction as an end in
itself, such as colorization , depth prediction
 , and surface normal prediction . In contrast,
rather than focusing on the graphics problem, we explore
its utility for representation learning.
3. Methods
In Section 3.1, we deﬁne the paradigm of cross-channel
encoding. In Section 3.2, we propose the split-brain autoencoder and explore alternatives methods for aggregating
multiple cross-channel encoders into a single network.
3.1. Cross-Channel Encoders
We would like to learn a deep representation on input
data tensor X ∈RH×W ×C, with C channels. We split
the data into X1 ∈RH×W ×C1 and X2 ∈RH×W ×C2,
where C1, C2 ⊆C, and then train a deep representation
to solve the prediction problem c
X2 = F(X1). Function
F is learned with a CNN, which produces a layered representation of input X1, and we refer to each layer l as Fl.
By performing this pretext task of predicting X2 from X1,
we hope to achieve a representation F(X1) which contains
high-level abstractions or semantics.
This prediction task can be trained with various loss
functions, and we study whether the loss function affects
the quality of the learned representation. To begin, we explore the use of ℓ2 regression, as shown in Equation 1.
ℓ2(F(X1), X2) = 1
∥X2h,w −F(X1)h,w∥2
We also study the use of a classiﬁcation loss. Here, the
target output X2 ∈RH×W ×C2 is encoded with function
H into a distribution Y2 ∈∆H×W ×Q, where Q is the
number of elements in the quantized output space. Network F is then trained to predict a distribution, c
F(X1) ∈∆H×W ×Q. A standard cross-entropy loss between the predicted and ground truth distributions is used,
as shown Equation 2.
ℓcl(F(X1), X2) = −
H(X2)h,w,q log(F(X1)h,w,q)
In , the authors discover that classiﬁcation loss is
more effective for the graphics task of automatic colorization than regression. We hypothesize that for some tasks,
especially those with inherent uncertainty in the prediction,
the classiﬁcation loss may lead to better representations as
well, as the network will be incentivized to match the whole
distribution, and not only predict the ﬁrst moment.
Note that with input and output sets C1, C2 = C, and
an ℓ2 regression loss, the objective becomes identical to the
autoencoder objective.
3.2. Split-Brain Autoencoders as Aggregated Cross-
Channel Encoders
We can train multiple cross-channel encoders, F1,
F2, on opposite prediction problems, with loss functions
L1, L2, respectively, described in Equation 3.
1 = arg min
F1 L1(F1(X1), X2)
2 = arg min
F2 L2(F2(X2), X1)
By concatenating the representations layer-wise, Fl =
2}, we achieve a representation F which is pretrained on full input tensor X.
Example split-brain autoencoders in the image and RGB-D domains are shown in
Figures 2(a) and (b), respectively. If F is a CNN of a desired ﬁxed size, e.g., AlexNet , we can design the subnetworks F1, F2 by splitting each layer of the network F in
half, along the channel dimension. Concatenated representation F will then have the appropriate dimensionality, and
can be simply implemented by setting the group parameter to 2 in most deep learning libraries. As each channel
in the representation is only connected to half of the channels in the preceding layer, the number of parameters in the
network is actually halved, relative to a full network.
Note that the input and the output to the network F is the
full input X, the same as an autoencoder. However, due to
the split nature of the architecture, the network F is trained
to predict X = {X1, X2}, rather than simply reconstruct
it from the input. In essence, an architectural change in the
autoencoder framework induces the same forced abstraction
achieved by cross-channel encoding.
Alternative Aggregation Technique We found the
split-brain autoencoder, which aggregates cross-channel encoders through concatenation, to be more effective than several alternative strategies. As a baseline, we also explore
an alternative: the same representation F can be trained to
perform both mappings simultaneously. The loss function
is described in Equation 4, with a slight abuse of notation:
Input Image X
Predicted Image X"
L Grayscale Channel X#
ab Color Channels X$
Predicted Grayscale Channel X#
Predicted Color Channels X$
(a) Lab Images
RGB Channels
HHA Channels
Predicted HHA channels
Predicted RGB Channels
(b) RGB-D Images
Figure 2: Split-Brain Autoencoders applied to various domains (a) Lab images Input images are divided into the L
channel, which contains grayscale information, and the a and b channels, which contain color information. Network F1
performs automatic colorization, whereas network F2 performs grayscale prediction. (b) RGB-D images Input data X
contains registered RGB and depth images. Depth images are encoded using the HHA encoding . Image representation
F1 is trained by predicting HHA channels. Representation F2 on HHA images is learned by predicting images in Lab space.
Note that the goal of performing these synthesis tasks is to induce representations F1, F2 that transfer well to other tasks.
here, we redeﬁne X1 to be the same shape as original input X ∈RH×W ×C, with channels in set C\C1 zeroed out
(along with the analogous modiﬁcation to X2).
F∗= arg min
F L1(F(X1), X2) + L2(X1, F(X2))
The network only sees data subsets but never full input X.
To alleviate this problem, we mix in the autoencoder objective, as shown in Equation 5, with λ ∈[0, 1
F∗= arg min
λL1(F(X1), X2) + λL2(F(X2), X1)
+ (1 −2λ)L3(X, F(X))
Note that unlike the split-brain architecture, in these objectives, there is a domain gap between the distribution of pretraining data and the full input tensor X.
4. Experiments
In Section 4.1, we apply our proposed split-brain autoencoder architecture to learn unsupervised representations on
large-scale image data from ImageNet . We evaluate on
established representation learning benchmarks and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance relative to previous unsupervised methods . In Section 4.2,
we apply the proposed method on the NYU-D dataset ,
and show performance above baseline methods.
4.1. Split-Brain Autoencoders on Images
We work with image data X in the Lab color space, and
learn cross-channel encoders with X1 representing the L,
or lightness channel, and X2 containing the ab channels, or
color information. This is a natural choice as (i) networks
such as Alexnet, trained with grouping in their architecture, naturally separate into grayscale and color even
in a fully-supervised setting, and (ii) the individual crosschannel prediction problem of colorization, L to ab, has
produced strong representations . In preliminary
experiments, we have also explored different cross-channel
prediction problems in other color spaces, such as RGB and
YUV. We found the L and ab to be most effective data split.
To enable comparisons to previous unsupervised techniques, all of our trained networks use AlexNet architectures . Concurrent work from Larsson et al. shows
large performance improvements for the colorization task
when using deeper networks, such as VGG-16 and
ResNet . Because we are training for a pixel-prediction
task, we run the network fully convolutionally . Using
the 1.3M ImageNet dataset (without labels), we train
the following aggregated cross-channel encoders:
• Split-Brain Autoencoder (cl,cl) (Our full method):
A split-brain autoencoder, with one half performing
colorization, and the other half performing grayscale
prediction. The top-level architecture is shown in Figure 2(a). Both sub-networks are trained for classiﬁcation (cl), with a cross-entropy objective. (In Figure
2(a), the predicted output is a per-pixel probability distribution, but is visualized with a point estimate using
the annealed-mean .)
• Split-Brain Autoencoder (reg,reg): Same as above,
with both sub-networks trained with an ℓ2 loss (reg).
• Ensembled L→ab: Two concatenated disjoint subnetworks, both performing colorization (predicting ab
from L). One subnetwork is trained with a classiﬁcation objective, and the other with regression.
• (L,ab)→(ab,L): A single network for both colorization and grayscale prediction, with regression loss, as
described in Equation 4. This explores an alternative
method for combining cross-channel encoders.
• (L,ab,Lab)→(ab,L,Lab): λ = 1
3 using Equation 5.
Task Generalization on ImageNet Classiﬁcation 
ImageNet-labels 
Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. 
1Noroozi & Favaro 
Doersch et al. 
Donahue et al. 
Pathak et al. 
Zhang et al. 
Lab(drop50)→Lab
(L,ab)→(ab,L)
(L,ab,Lab)→(ab,L,Lab)
Ensembled L→ab
Split-Brain Auto (reg,reg)
Split-Brain Auto (cl,cl)
Table 2: Task Generalization on ImageNet Classiﬁcation
To test unsupervised feature representations, we train linear
logistic regression classiﬁers on top of each layer to perform
1000-way ImageNet classiﬁcation, as proposed in . All
weights are frozen and feature maps spatially resized to be
∼9000 dimensions. All methods use AlexNet variants ,
and were pre-trained on ImageNet without labels, except
for ImageNet-labels. Note that the proposed split-brain autoencoder achieves the best performance on all layers across
unsupervised methods.
Single cross-channel encoders are ablations of our main
We systematically study combinations of loss
functions and cross-channel prediction problems.
• L→ab(reg): Automatic colorization using an ℓ2 loss.
• L→ab(cl): Automatic colorization using a classiﬁcation loss. We follow the quantization procedure proposed in : the output ab space is binned into grid
size 10×10, with a classiﬁcation loss over the 313 bins
that are within the ab gamut.
• ab→L(reg): Grayscale prediction using an ℓ2 loss.
• ab→L(cl): Grayscale prediction using a classiﬁcation
loss. The L channel, which has values between 0 and
100, is quantized into 50 bins of size 2 and encoded.
• Lab→Lab:
Autoencoder objective, reconstructing
Lab from itself using an ℓ2 regression loss, with the
same architecture as the cross-channel encoders.
• Lab(drop50)→Lab: Same as above, with 50% of the
input randomly dropped out during pre-training. This
is similar to denoising autoencoders .
We compare to the following methods, which all use
variants of Alexnet . For additional details, refer to Table 3 in . Note that one of these modiﬁcations resulted
in a large deviation in feature map size1.
1The method from uses stride 2 instead of 4 in the conv1 layer,
Dataset & Task Generalization on Places Classiﬁcation 
Places-labels 
ImageNet-labels 
Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. 
1Noroozi & Favaro 
Doersch et al. 
Wang & Gupta 
Owens et al. 
Donahue et al. 
Pathak et al. 
Zhang et al. 
Split-Brain Auto (cl,cl)
Table 3: Dataset & Task Generalization on Places Classiﬁcation We train logistic regression classiﬁers on top of
frozen pre-trained representations for 205-way Places classiﬁcation. Note that our split-brain autoencoder achieves
the best performance among unsupervised learning methods from conv2-5 layers.
• ImageNet-labels : Trained on ImageNet labels for
the classiﬁcation task in a fully supervised fashion.
• Gaussian: Random Gaussian initialization of weights.
• Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. : A stacked k-means initialization method.
• Doersch et al. , Noroozi & Favaro , Pathak et
al. , Donahue et al. , and Zhang et al. all
pre-train on the 1.3M ImageNet dataset .
• Wang & Gupta and Owens et al. pre-train
on other large-scale data.
Transfer Learning Tests
How well does the pre-text task of cross-channel prediction
generalize to unseen tasks and data? We run various established large-scale representation learning benchmarks.
ImageNet As proposed in , we test the task
generalization of the representation by freezing the weights
and training multinomial logistic regression classiﬁers on
top of each layer to perform 1000-way ImageNet classiﬁcation. Note that each classiﬁer is a single learned linear
layer, followed by a softmax. To reduce the effect of differences in feature map sizes, we spatially resize feature maps
through bilinear interpolation, so that the ﬂattened feature
maps have approximately equal dimensionality (9600 for
resulting in 4× denser feature maps throughout all convolutional layers.
While it is unclear how this change affects representational quality, experiments from Larsson et al. indicate that changes in architecture can
result in large changes in transfer performance, even given the same training task. The network uses the same number of parameters, but 5.6× the
memory and 7.4× the run-time.
Top-1 Accuracy
ImageNet-labels
Kraehenbuehl et al.
Doersch et al.
Pathak et al.
Donahue et al.
Zhang et al.
Split-Brain Auto(cl,cl)
(a) ImageNet Classiﬁcation
Top-1 Accuracy
Places-labels
ImageNet-labels
Kraehenbuehl et al.
Doersch et al.
Wang & Gupta
Pathak et al.
Zhang et al.
Owens et al.
Donahue et al.
Split-Brain Auto(cl,cl)
(b) Places Classiﬁcation
Figure 3: Comparison to Previous Unsupervised Methods We compare our proposed Split-Brain Autoencoder on the tasks
of (a) ImageNet classiﬁcation and (b) Places Classiﬁcation. Note that our method outperforms other large-scale unsupervised
methods on all layers in ImageNet and from conv2-5 on Places.
Top-1 Accuracy
Kraehenbuehl et al.
Lab(drop50) →Lab
Split-Brain Auto(reg,reg)
Split-Brain Auto(cl,cl)
(a) Autoencoder Objective
Top-1 Accuracy
Kraehenbuehl et al.
L →ab(reg)
ab →L(reg)
Split-Brain Auto(cl,cl)
(b) Cross-Channel Encoders
Top-1 Accuracy
Kraehenbuehl et al.
Ensembled L →ab
(L,ab) →(ab,L)
(L,ab,Lab) →(ab,L,Lab)
Split-Brain Auto(cl,cl)
(c) Aggregation Methods
Figure 4: Ablation Studies We conduct various ablation studies on our proposed method, using the ImageNet classiﬁcation
benchmark proposed in . Speciﬁcally, we compare (a) variations using an autoencoder objective (b) different crosschannel problems and loss functions (c) different methods for aggregating multiple cross-channel encoders.
conv1,3,4 and 9216 for conv2,5).
The results are
shown in Table 2 and Figures 3(a) and 4.
Places In the previous test, we evaluated the representation on the same input training data, the ImageNet
dataset, with a different task than the pretraining tasks. To
see how well the network generalizes to new input data as
well, we run the same linear classiﬁcation task on the largescale Places dataset . The dataset contains 2.4M images
for training and 20.5k for validation from 205 scene categories. The results are shown in Table 3 and Figure 3(b).
PASCAL To further test generalization, we ﬁnetune the learned representation on standard representation
learning benchmarks on the PASCAL dataset, as shown in
Table 4, using established testing frameworks in classiﬁcation , detection , and segmentation . Classiﬁcation involves 20 binary classiﬁcation decisions, regarding the presence or absence of 20 object classes. Detection involves drawing an accurately localized bounding box
around any objects in the image, and is performed using
the Fast R-CNN framework. Segmentation is pixel-
Task and Data Generalization on PASCAL VOC 
Classiﬁcation 
Detection 
frozen layers
conv5 none
ﬁne-tuned layers
ImageNet labels 
Autoencoder
Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. 
Jayaraman & Grauman 
Agrawal et al. 
Agrawal et al. †
Wang & Gupta 
Wang & Gupta †
Doersch et al. 
Doersch et al. †
Pathak et al. 
Donahue et al. †
Misra et al. 
Owens et al. 
Owens et al. †
Zhang et al. †
Larsson et al. ⋄
Pathak et al. ⋄
Split-Brain Auto (cl,cl)†
Table 4: Task and Dataset Generalization on PASCAL
VOC Classiﬁcation and detection on PASCAL VOC 2007
 and segmentation on PASCAL VOC 2012 , using
mean average precision (mAP) and mean intersection over
union (mIU) metrics for each task, with publicly available
testing frameworks from , , . Column Ref documents the source for a value obtained from a previous paper. Character ▷indicates that value originates from this
paper. †indicates that network weights have been rescaled
with before ﬁne-tuning, as is common practice. Character ⋄indicates concurrent work in these proceedings.
wise labeling of the object class, either one of the 20 objects
of interest or background. Here, the representation is ﬁnetuned through multiple layers of the network, rather than
frozen. Prior to ﬁne-tuning, we follow common practice
and use the rescaling method from , which rescales the
weights so that the layers learn at the same “rate”, using the
ratio of expected gradient magnitude over feature activation
magnitude as a heuristic.
Split-Brain Autoencoder Performance
Our primary result is that the proposed method, Split-Brain
Auto (cl,cl), achieves state-of-the-art performance on almost all established self-supervision benchmarks, as seen
in the last row on Tables 2, 3, 4, over previously proposed self-supervision methods, as well as our ablation
baselines. Figures 3(a) and (b) shows our split brain autoencoder method compared to previous self-supervised methods on the ImageNet and Places classi-
ﬁcation tests, respectively. We especially note the straightforward nature of our proposed method: the network simply
predicts raw data channels from other raw data channels, using a classiﬁcation loss with a basic 1-hot encoding scheme.
As seen in Figure 4(a) and Table 2, the autoencoder
objective by itself, Lab→Lab, does not lead to a strong
representation. Performance is near Gaussian initialization
through the initial layers, and actually falls below in the
conv5 layer. Dropping 50% of the data from the input
randomly during training, Lab(drop50)→Lab, in the style
of denoising autoencoders, adds a small performance boost
of approximately 1%. A large performance boost is observed by adding a split in the architecture, Split-Brain
Auto (reg,reg), even with the same regression objective.
This achieves 5% to 20% higher performance throughout
the network, state-of-the-art compared to previous unsupervised methods. A further boost of approximately 1-2%
throughout the network observed using a classiﬁcation loss,
Split-Brain Auto (cl,cl), instead of regression.
Cross-Channel Encoding Objectives
Figure 4(b) compares the performance of the different
cross-channel objectives we tested on the ImageNet classiﬁcation benchmark. As shown in and further conﬁrmed
here, colorization, L→ab(cl), leads to a strong representation on classiﬁcation transfer tasks, with higher performance than other unsupervised representations pre-trained
on ImageNet, using inpainting , relative context , and
adversarial feature networks from layers from conv2
to pool5. We found that the classiﬁcation loss produced
stronger representations than regression for colorization,
consistent with the ﬁndings from concurrent work from
Larsson et al. .
Interestingly, the task of predicting grayscale from color
can also learn representations. Though colorization lends
itself closely to a graphics problem, the application of
grayscale prediction from color channels is less obvious. As
seen in Tables 2 and 3 and Figure 4(b), grayscale prediction
objectives ab→L(cl) and ab→L(reg) can learn representations above the Gaussian baseline. Though the learned
representation by itself is weaker than other self-supervised
methods, the representation is learned on a and b channels,
which makes it complementary to the colorization network.
For grayscale prediction, regression results in higher performance than classiﬁcation. Choosing the appropriate loss
function for a given channel prediction problem is an open
problem. However, note that the performance difference is
typically small, indicating that the cross-channel prediction
problem is often times an effective method, even without
careful engineering of the objective.
4.2. Split-Brain Autoencoders on RGB-D
We also test the split-brain autoencoder method on registered images and depth scans from NYU-D . Because
RGB and depth images are registered spatially, RGB-D data
can be readily applied in our proposed framework. We split
the data by modality, predicting RGB from D and viceversa. Previous work in the video and audio domain 
Gupta et al. 
1M ImNet 
Gupta et al. 
1M ImNet 
Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. 
20 NYU-D 
Split-Brain Autoencoder
10k NYU-D 
Table 5: Split-Brain Autoencoder Results on RGB-D
images We perform unsupervised training on 10k RGB-D
keyframes from the NYU-D dataset, extracted by .
We pre-train representations on RGB images using ℓ2 loss
on depth images in HHA space. We pre-train HHA representations on L and ab channels using ℓ2 and classiﬁcation
loss, respectively. We show performance gains above Gaussian and Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. initialization baselines. The
methods proposed by Gupta et al. use 1.3M labeled
images for supervised pre-training. We use the test procedure from : Fast R-CNN networks are ﬁrst trained
individually in the RGB and D domains separately, and then
ensembled together by averaging (RGB-D).
suggest that separating modalities, rather than mixing them,
provides more effective splits. This choice also provides
easy comparison to the test procedure introduced by .
Dataset & Detection Testbed The NYUD dataset contains 1449 RGB-D labeled images and over 400k unlabeled RGB-D video frames. We use 10k of these unlabeled
frames to perform unsupervised pre-training, as extracted
from . We evaluate the representation on the 1449 labeled images for the detection task, using the framework
proposed in . The method ﬁrst trains individual detectors on the RGB and D domains, using the Fast R-CNN
framework on an AlexNet architecture, and then latefuses them together through ensembling.
Unsupervised Pre-training We represent depth images
using the HHA encoding, introduced in . To learn image representation FHHA, we train an Alexnet architecture
to regress from RGB channels to HHA channels, using an
ℓ2 regression loss.
To learn depth representations, we train an Alexnet on
HHA encodings, using ℓ2 loss on L and classiﬁcation loss
on ab color channels. We chose this combination, as these
objectives performed best for training individual crosschannel encoders in the image domain. The network extracts features up to the conv5 layer, using an Alexnet
architecture, and then splits off into speciﬁc branches for
the L and ab channels.
Each branch contains AlexNettype fc6-7 layers, but with 512 channels each, evaluated
fully convolutionally for pixel prediction. The loss on the
ab term was weighted 200× with respect to the L term,
so the gradient magnitude on the pool5 representation
from channel-speciﬁc branches were approximately equal
throughout training.
Across all methods, weights up to the conv5 layer are
copied over during ﬁne-tuning time, and fc6-7 layers are
randomly initialized, following .
Results The results are shown in Table 5 for detectors learned in RGB and D domains separately, as well
as the ensembled result. For a Gaussian initialization, the
RGB detector did not train using default settings, while the
depth detector achieved performance of 28.1%. Using the
stacked k-means initialization scheme from Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et
al. , individual detectors on RGB and D perform at
12.5% and 32.2%, while achieving 34.5% after ensembling.
Pre-training with our method reaches 18.9% and 33.2% on
the individual domains, above the baselines. Our RGB-D
ensembled performance was 38.1%, well above the Gaussian and Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. baselines. These results
suggest that split-brain autoencoding is effective not just on
Lab images, but also on RGB-D data.
5. Discussion
We present split-brain autoencoders, a method for unsupervised pre-training on large-scale data. The split-brain
autoencoder contains two disjoint sub-networks, which are
trained as cross-channel encoders.
Each sub-network is
trained to predict one subset of raw data from another. We
test the proposed method on Lab images, and achieve stateof-the-art performance relative to previous self-supervised
methods. We also demonstrate promising performance on
RGB-D images. The proposed method solves some of the
weaknesses of previous self-supervised methods. Speciﬁcally, the method (i) does not require a representational bottleneck for training, (ii) uses input dropout to help force
abstraction in the representation, and (iii) is pre-trained on
the full input data.
An interesting future direction of is exploring the concatenation of more than 2 cross-channel sub-networks.
Given a ﬁxed architecture size, e.g. AlexNet, dividing the
network into N disjoint sub-networks results in each subnetwork becoming smaller, less expressive, and worse at
its original task. To enable fair comparisons to previous
large-scale representation learning methods, we focused on
learning weights for a ﬁxed AlexNet architecture. It would
also be interesting to explore the regime of ﬁxing the subnetwork size and allowing the full network to grow with
additional cross-channel encoders.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Berkeley Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Lab (BAIR), in particular Andrew Owens,
for helpful discussions, as well as Saurabh Gupta for help
with RGB-D experiments. This research was supported, in
part, by Berkeley Deep Drive (BDD) sponsors, hardware
donations by NVIDIA Corp and Algorithmia, an Intel research grant, NGA NURI, and NSF SMA-1514512. Thanks
In Section A, we provide additional analysis. In Section B,
we provide implementation details.
A. Additional analysis
Cross-Channel Encoder Aggregation Analysis In Figure
4(c), we show variations on aggregated cross-channel encoders.
To begin, we hypothesize that the performance
improvement of split-brain autoencoders Split-Brain Auto
(cl,cl) over single cross-channel encoders L→ab is due to
the merging of complementary signals, as each sub-network
in Split-Brain Auto has been trained on different portions
of the input space. However, the improvement could be
simply due to an ensembling effect. To test this, we train
a split-brain autoencoder, comprising of two L→ab networks, Ensemble L→ab. As seen in Figure 4(c) and Table
2, the ensembled colorization network achieves lower performance than the split-brain autoencoder, suggesting that
concatenating signals learned on complementary information is beneﬁcial for representation learning.
We ﬁnd that combining cross-channel encoders through
concatenation is effective.
We also test alternative aggregation techniques.
As seen in Figure 4(c), training
a single network to perform multiple cross-channel tasks
(L,ab)→(ab,L) is not effective for representation learning
on full Lab images. Adding in the autoencoder objective
during training, (L,ab,Lab)→(ab,L,Lab), in fact lowers
performance in higher layers.
Our proposed methods outperform these alternatives,
which indicates that (i) our choice of aggregating complementary signals improves performance (ii) concatenation
is an appropriate choice of combining cross-channel encoders.
B. Implementation Details
Here, we describe the pre-training and feature evaluation
architectures. For pre-training, we use an AlexNet architecture , trained fully convolutionally . The network
is trained with 180×180 images, cropped from 256 × 256
resolution, and predicts values at a heavily downsampled
12×12 resolution. One can add upsampling-convolutional
layers or use a trous /dilated convolutions to predict
full resolution images at the expense of additional memory
and run-time, but we found predicting at a lower resolution to be sufﬁcient for representation learning. See Table
6 for feature map and parameter sizes during pre-training
time. We remove LRN layers and add BatchNorm layers after every convolution layer. After pre-training, we remove BatchNorm layers by absorbing the parameters into
the preceding conv layers. The pre-training network predicts a downsampled version of the desired output, which
we found to be adequate for feature learning.
During feature evaluation time (such as the ImageNet
 , Places , and PASCAL tests), the parameters are copied into an AlexNet classiﬁcation architecture,
shown in Table 7. During the linear classiﬁcation tests, we
downsample feature maps spatially, so that each layer has
approximately the same number of features.
Quantization procedure Zhang et al. use a class-
Fully Convolutional AlexNet Architecture
Table 6: Fully Convolutional AlexNet architecture used
for pre-training. X spatial resolution of layer, C number
of channels in layer; K conv or pool kernel size; S computation stride; D kernel dilation ; P padding; * ﬁrst
and last layer channel sizes are dependent on the pre-text
task, last layer is removed during transfer evaluation.
AlexNet Classiﬁcation Architecture
Table 7: AlexNet architecture used for feature evaluation. X spatial resolution of layer, Xd downsampled spatial
resolution for feature evaluation, C number of channels in
layer; Fd = X2
dC downsampled feature map size for feature evaluation (kept approximately constant throughout),
K conv or pool kernel size; S computation stride; D kernel dilation ; P padding; * ﬁrst layer channel size
is dependent on the pre-text task e.g., 3 for the split-brain
autoencoder or 1 for the L →ab(cl) cross-channel encoder
rebalancing term, to over-sample rare colors in the training set, and a soft-encoding scheme for H. These choices
were made from a graphics perspective, to produce more
vibrant colorizations. In our classiﬁcation colorization network, L→ab(cl), our objective is more straightforward, as
we do not use class-rebalancing.
In addition, we use a
1-hot encoding representation of classes, rather than softencoding.
The simpliﬁcation in the objective function
achieves higher performance on ImageNet and Places classiﬁcation, as shown on Tables 2 and 3.
C. Change Log
v1 Initial Release.
v2 Paper accepted to CVPR 2017. Updated Table 4 with
results for Misra et al. and Donahue et al. with
112 × 112 resolution model. Updated Table 2, rows L→ab
(cl) and Zhang et al. with corrected values. Supplemental material added.
v3 CVPR 2017 Camera Ready. Added references to concurrent work . Various changes to text.