To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
Artificial Intelligence-Defined 5G Radio Access
Miao Yao1, Munawwar Sohul1, Vuk Marojevic2, and Jeffrey H. Reed1
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060 USA
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS 39759 USA
Corresponding author: Jeffrey H. Reed (e-mail: ).
ABSTRACT Massive multiple-input multiple-output antenna systems, millimeter wave communications,
and ultra-dense networks have been widely perceived as the three key enablers that facilitate the development
and deployment of 5G systems. This article discusses the intelligent agent that combines sensing, learning,
and optimizing to facilitate these enablers. We present a flexible, rapidly deployable, and cross-layer artificial
intelligence (AI)-based framework to enable the imminent and future demands on 5G and beyond. We present
example AI-enabled 5G use cases that accommodate important 5G-specific capabilities and discuss the value
of AI for enabling network evolution.
I. Introduction
Does 5G cellular communications technology in the age of
intelligence really look like the Thomas W. Lawson
Schooner (the last of the large cargo sailing ships) of modern
times? 5G networks are anticipated to achieve system capacity improvements through aggressively increased spectral
efficiency, channel bandwidth and higher densification .
However, concerns are raised whether this is a revolutionary
leap from today’s wireless communications or a simple piling up of less innovative wireless functionalities. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) classifies 5G into
three categories of usage scenarios: enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), massive machine-type communication
(mMTC), and ultra-reliable and low latency communication
(URLLC) to account for more diverse services and resourcehungry applications. eMBB is a service category that addresses bandwidth-hungry applications, such as massive
video streaming and virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR).
mMTC is a service category enabling massive sensing, monitoring, and metering in support of the massive deployments
of the Internet of Things (IoT). URLLC is a service category
that supports latency sensitive services including autonomous driving, drones and the tactile Internet. Whereas 5G
seems to offer virtually any service, the importance of cognitive resource management cannot be underestimated and
artificial intelligence (AI)-defined 5G radio access networks
are proposed to support those unprecedented requirements
and leverage the emergence of mobile edge computing and
caching, smart cities, and context-aware networking.
Shaped by the Turing machine theory in the 1930s and
rekindled again by the advent of deep neural networks, AI
approaches have been extensively applied in a wide range of
research fields, including natural language processing, computer vision, and wireless communications . The artificial
neural network (ANN) is one of the oldest approaches to create AI. It mimics brain in its ability of massive parallelism,
distributed representation, and computation. Among various
types of neural networks, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
allow neurons to create and process memories of arbitrary
sequences of input patterns, where the connections between
layers form a loop . A deep neural network or deep belief
network (DBN) employs a hierarchical structure with multiple restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) and works
through a successive learning process, layer-by-layer. RBMs
form an undirected graphical model without visible-visible
and hidden-hidden connections. The advantages of DBN lie
in the ability of unsupervised learning, fast inference and
flexibility due to its multi-layer structure. A convolutional
neural network (CNN) is built on layers of convolving trainable filters that result in a hierarchy of increasingly complex
features . A CNN is fundamentally different from a DBN;
the DBN behaves as a generative model which describes the
joint distribution of data and the corresponding targets,
whereas a CNN is a discriminative model which describes
the distribution of targets conditioned on data. A special interest of various types of neural networks in wireless communications arises from the fact that they can perform nonlinear approximations and are intrinsically data-driven.
Recent breakthroughs in computing and AI have
encouraged
researchers
communications to leverage AI especially in the 5G context,
which is illustrated in Fig. 1. An AI-defined 5G network
provides the base stations (BSs)/Cloud with the capability to
create a cognitive and comprehensive data repository by
splitting, processing and interpreting the operational data.
(The BS is defined in this article as the remote radio head plus
the centralized and virtualized baseband unit pool of a single
mobile network operator.) Massive amounts of real-time data
are generated across a large number of users and ranges from
channel state information (CSI) to IoT device readings. The
received data and geolocation databases are fused to derive a
complete understanding of the environment. From the human-
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
centric communication perspective, the human behaviors are
learned and adapted by the reconfigurable AI-defined wireless
network to evolve the network functionalities and create
people-oriented
machine-centric
communication perspective, big data analytics are leveraged
to extract massive patterns, especially at the physical (PHY)
and medium access control (MAC) layers and enable selforganizing operations. Neural networks can be used to
redefine communication networks, solving a number of
nontrivial design problems at runtime and across layers for
cognitive link adaptation, resource scheduling, signal
classification, and carrier sensing/collision detection, among
others. An RNN has also the capability to capture and mitigate
the imperfections and nonlinearities of radio frequency (RF)
components, such as high-power amplifiers (HPAs), which
incur at the PHY and can affect the network performance.
DBN and CNN are better suited for resolving a range of upper
communication layer tasks such as network optimization and
resource management. This article briefly examines the key
5G enablers and use cases and what role AI may play. We
discuss some of the emerging PHY and MAC layer issues of
5G networks and propose two AI-based 5G radio access
technology (RAT) architectures and illustrate their potentials
through numerical results. We conclude the paper with
pointing out some limitations, open issues and research
challenges.
5G Services Type
Applications
Massive Streaming
Distributed
Mobile Cloud Computing
Smart Infrastructure
Omnipresent
Massive IoT
FIGURE 1. Application scenarios of AI-defined 5G networks.
II. Artificial Intelligence Supporting 5G Enablers
The complexity of 5G context and the power of AI allow
rethinking cellular communications. Figure 2 shows the
critical 5G use cases and the application of different types of
neural networks as key 5G enablers. Massively parallel
processing devices such as graphic processing units (GPUs)
and neural network processing units (NPUs), which can be
deployed in a 5G BS/Cloud, enable offloading the traditional
data processing and have shown to be highly energy-efficient
for neural network learning and inference . This section
discusses the benefits of an AI framework to satisfy the
technical challenges of 5G.
Massive MIMO
Massive MIMO is widely perceived as a leading candidate
technology for 5G. The high number of BS antennas requires
a large number of PAs, one per antenna. The primary problem in RF PAs is known as the design trade-off between linearity and efficiency: amplifiers can be designed to attain
good linearity at the cost of efficiency . While the highly
linear PAs are expensive and power-inefficient, the excessive number of BS antennas makes the use of inexpensive
components desirable to keep the overall capital expenditures (CAPEXs) and operational expenditures (OPEXs)
manageable . On the other hand, emerging energy- and
spectrum-efficient wideband wireless communication systems are vulnerable to nonlinear distortions that are attributed to the RF front ends, especially those of the HPAs,
which affect the performance of the intended receiver and
the entire network.
Furthermore, as next generation communication systems
will operate in more dynamic environments and in different
bands, the dynamic range requirements will likely become
more demanding. Therefore, the PAs need to meet stricter
linearity specifications while maintaining an acceptable efficiency. The highest PA efficiency is achieved when constantly feeding the PA, at the limit of its highest-power linear
region. This is not a feasible solution for high peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) signals and is not realistic for 5G
BSs. Instead, signal processing-based solutions are used to
provide a better cost-performance trade-off.
One of the main advantages of ANNs is their ability to
extract, predict, and characterize nonlinearities from massive
datasets. Since ANNs can capture many kinds of relationships
between a variety of time-varying inputs and outputs, such as
relationships
relationships, they are well suited to tackle nonlinearity
problems at the PHY, including PA nonlinearity tracking,
predistortion and impairment correction. A detail discussion
of AI-aided energy-efficient beamforming is provided later.
Extended RF Spectrum and Spectrum Management
The demand for higher end-user data rates and higher
traffic density drive 5G networks to provide a corresponding
capacity boost. Millimeter wave (mmWave) systems have
access to a huge amount of available bandwidth in extremely
high frequency bands, between 30 and 300 GHz, to enable
multi-gigabit-per-second
connectivity.
Previously,
mmWave at 60 GHz band has been adopted by local and
personal area communication standards such as IEEE
802.11ad and IEEE 802.15.3c, as well as for certain small cell
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
FIGURE 2. 5G use cases, key technology enablers and typically
applicable AI principles (CNN: convolutional neural network, RNN:
recurrent neural network, DBN: deep belief network).
backhaul deployments. mmWave communications are
facilitated by highly directional communication links, where
narrow beams can focus the energy to the intended receivers,
reduce PA requirements and suppress interference from other
transmitters. Whereas the mmWave spectrum may not be
scarce, it is also not very reliable due to its propagation
characteristics. At mmWave frequencies severe channel
variations occur due to blockage by cars, trees, solid building
material, and even human body parts.
As a result, a hybrid of spectrum landscape of low and
high frequencies necessary to maintain seamless network
connectivity and enable the 5G verticals . This hybrid
spectrum includes micro and mmWave bands and different
types of licensing (Fig. 3). AI allows smart scheduling and
cooperation of different spectrum portions since learning and
inferencing can be carried out based on user behaviors and
network conditions. Specifically, neural networks can provide
multi-RAT BSs with the capability for real-time resource
management. They also enable self-planning, self-organizing,
and self-healing, where a group of distributed and
autonomous AI agents are distributed among different BSs.
An example of an AI-enabled spectrum access system (SAS)
that manages multiple RATs in shared spectrum is discussed
in later sections.
Network Ultra-Densification
It is envisioned that the explosive data traffic requirement in
5G will be largely dependent on the deployment of ultra-dense
small cells . The technical challenges include finergranularity resource allocation and cross-tier interference
mitigation. In fact, the cell densification is redeemed as one of
the most aggressive ways to improve system capacity as long
as the interference can be efficiently managed.
Co-channel interference mitigation in 5G is naturally
enabled through massive MIMO beamforming and mmWave
transmission. When combined with a centralized AI-aided
learning, the envisioned 5G network will benefit from both AI
and small cell deployments, where complex radio resource
management at “pixel” level can be performed more
efficiently. For instance, the radio environment map (REM) is
FIGURE 3. Global snapshot of 5G spectrum (blue: Licensed, green:
unlicensed/shared, purple: existing bands) .
promising to provide a practical method for the realization of
AI-enabled
interference
mitigation
geolocation databases. It builds long-term knowledge by
collecting historical radio environment measurements and
radio scenes. The radio network prediction, evolution and
optimization can be made by active learning based on network
coverage, capacity and quality maps.
The AI agent in the baseband unit (BBU) pool assists with
the baseband processing functions, such as the radio resource
management, interference management, and handover
control. Such AI-driven self-organizing solutions provide
more opportunities for design optimization of self-organized
networking, increase the level of flexibility and achieve cost
reductions. Moreover, the centralized processing of CSI by
the AI agent allows additional insights into the channel that
perform closer to channel capacity and schedulers that provide
better fairness and end-user experience.
III. Artificial Intelligence for Diverse 5G Application Scenarios and Services
To further elaborate on the importance of the revolutionary
5G paradigms wherein AIs play critical roles, this section
discusses a few disruptive use cases of 5G. These applications
have stringent requirements on different communication
layers; here we focus on the 5G network implications.
Vehicular Networks
Vehicular networks leverage wireless technologies to improve traffic safety and transportation efficiency, which is
specifically useful for active driving assistance. It involves a
broad range of stakeholders such as vehicle manufacturer,
wireless policy regulators and transportation authorities. A
myriad of vehicle applications is envisaged, including automated toll collection systems, autonomous driving systems,
and information provisioning systems. Autonomous driving
systems are capable of detecting changes in the surrounding
by combining sensor data with signal and image processing
to inform the driving system of hazardous road conditions.
For example, the real-time wet road condition detection and
anti-collision detection are necessary to improve not only
vehicular safety, but also efficiency.
The recent advances in 5G networks and AI enhance the
vehicular networks by provisioning reliable, efficient, low-
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
latency, and cooperative communications. The autonomous
vehicles collect the vehicle-centric information (e.g. speed,
global positioning, device functionality, and performance),
road-centric information (e.g. road surface condition, routing,
collision) and passenger-centric information (e.g. drowsiness,
length of continuous driving) and send it to the AI-defined 5G
BS. The BS is capable of learning the behaviors of
autonomous vehicles on the road, predicting the speed of
vehicles, driving states, obstacles and lane-changing
behaviors to assist transportation systems with processed
information and improve road mechanics.
VR and AR over wireless are expected to become the 5G killer
applications. Information is perceived through audio, visual,
and touch in VR. Computer Generated (CG) content is
combined with real objects and visualized in AR. VR is a key
use case where both URLLC and eMBB play important roles
to (1) avoid motion sickness introduced by motion and visual
coordination latency and (2) facilitate the necessary capacity
increase that ultra-high-definition video streaming requires. In
particular, today’s VR systems experience both computing
and communication delay bottlenecks. Moreover, heavy
image processing tasks require high computing power which
is often not available locally. In emerging 5G networks,
computing resources at the BSs could serve as the VR control
center and connect to the VR devices over the wireless
network. Dense 5G network nodes offer the opportunity of
decoupling image recognition and rendering from devices,
where the major computing tasks can be done at the network
edge to relieve the computing and power burden on the users’
devices. However, this design approach introduces ratelatency-reliability tradeoffs. In addition, the BSs need to
collect sensor information from the VR devices to optimize its
processing and provide interactive and immersive user
experiences. Several users may be physically coupled to
perform collaborative tasks in a virtual or semi-virtual world.
Hence, massive user data, including sensor data, CSI, battery
life, geolocation, and user gestures need to be collected by the
network for AI-aided resource scheduling and big data
processing. AI-defined 5G networks enable balancing the in-
VR/AR vs. in-network computing and adaptively make use of
powerful GPUs at BSs or other edge nodes in an on-demand
fashion. This allows trading the rather scarce edge resources
against the abundant Cloud computing resources as a function
of scenario and application.
IV. AI-Defined 5G RAT: PHY and MAC
The ever-increasing demand for energy-efficient and richcontent applications, requires a paradigm shift in 5G. In
practice, a number of spectrum distorting effects such as inphase and quadrature (IQ) imbalance and nonlinear distortion
introduce out-of-band emission and energy efficiency losses.
Two critical components of AI-defined network
FIGURE 4. Zero-forcing beamforming in 5G BSs: followed by nonlinear PAs (recall that RNNs are composed by interconnected neurons followed by nonlinear activation functions).
enhancements are introduced in this section to facilitate
effective resource management.
RNN for the PHY: AI-aided energy-efficient massive
MIMO beamforming
AI techniques have been investigated for wireless
communication systems to efficiently mitigate nonlinearities
at the PHY . In particular, RNNs lend themselves well to
address RF nonlinearity issues because they allow historical
information to be stored through the loop-based structure.
These networks were originally applied to solve linear
programming problems and inspired various researches to
address nonlinear problems. RNNs are capable of
automatically extracting nonlinear system features that are
invariant to the environment and can outperform traditional
approaches in PHY signal processing .
As discussed earlier, energy efficiency of a BS significantly depends on the PA efficiency. The deployment of
massive MIMO systems, where BSs are equipped with a significantly larger number of antennas than the number of simultaneously served users, creates excessive degrees-of-freedom (DoFs) . The level of underdetermination of an underdetermined channel matrix increases with the number of
BS antennas when assuming the number of users is known.
The excessive DoFs enable selecting the transmit signals
from a larger solution space. The objective of energy-efficient beamforming in a massive MIMO system is then to
find the beamforming matrix which introduces minimum PA
nonlinearities within this solution space. This enables the use
of low-cost PAs and their operation at higher power levels
for increased energy efficiency.
Consider a downlink massive MIMO-OFDM system
with 𝑀௥ single antenna users, one BS equipped with 𝑁௧ antennas, and 𝑁௖ subcarriers . The number of BS antennas
is significantly larger than number of users, i.e. 𝑁௧≫𝑀௥.
Zero forcing (ZF) beamforming is applied and user information symbols at the BS are mapped to the appropriate
transmit antenna to ensure minimal interference. The excessive DoFs allow choosing a solution that maximizes energy
efficiency and minimizes the effects of PA nonlinearity.
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
FIGURE 5. Energy efficiency (in Mbit/Joule) with ZF beamforming
in RNN-aided massive MIMO system.
An RNN-based solution is inspired by the similarity between
beamforming-PA architecture in MU-MIMO systems and the
neuron-activation function architecture in RNNs, as illustrated
in Fig. 4. The intuition of the neuron weights training behind
this solution is as follows: The nonlinear activation function
in the RNN learns about the nonlinearities of the PAs
recursively and finds suitable neuron weights that satisfy two
requirements: 1) zero forcing beamforming, which means
minimal MU interference and 2) minimum overall nonlinear
distortion. The RNN models the nonlinearity of the PA array
and it is optimized to minimal transmitted power while
providing a ZF solution. The RNN then informs the 5G
system on how to set its weights of ZF beamforming.
The RNN-based scheme is simulated for a massive MU-
MIMO-OFDM downlink system with 128 subcarriers, up to
100 antennas at the BS and up to 100 single-antenna users.
The optimal transmitted signal and activation variable are
derived. The relationship between the antenna configuration
and energy efficiency is illustrated in Fig. 5. The result shows
that huge energy-efficiency improvements can be achieved
with this scheme as long as there is sufficient excess in the
DoFs . This also suggests that it is efficient to deploy more
(low-cost) antennas as their CAPEX will be quickly overcome
with a reduction of OPEX.
DBN for the MAC: AI-Aided Spectrum Access System
The spectrum access system (SAS) will be a component of 5G
networks that is expected for systems operating in the sub-6
GHz band, the 24-71 GHz mmWave bands, as well as in
unlicensed bands (Fig. 3). Distributed sensing nodes in the
mmWave band will likely be deployed to help gathering and
extracting meaningful information about the channel quality
and use while providing massive datasets to the SAS. These
sensing nodes, along with additional signaling and a-priori
information, provide enhanced capabilities to the SAS which
will further process the contextual information to infer and
learn how to best allocate spectrum.
Configurations
(Layers x Neurons)
Detection rates (High
SNR Regime, 15dB)
Detection rates (Low
SNR Regime, -5dB)
FIGURE 6. Proposed SAS architecture in 5G networks and performance comparisons (Detection accuracy of 20 MHz 802.11ac signal
and LTE signal which are translated to 3.5 GHz shared band).
Previously, we demonstrated our spectrum sharing contribution for next generation public safety networks . We
analyzed the feasibility of broadband public safety applications in the 3.5 GHz band using a cognitive repeater. The
proposed system architecture provides flexibility for storing
operational data, which reduces the reporting overhead. In
this article we enhance the SAS with an AI-aided framework
to facilitate intelligent spectrum regulation in 5G by training
it with previously generated operational data and REMs.
A reconfigurable deep learning framework based on our
proposed AI-aided 5G BS system is shown in Fig. 6 for interpreting the signaling environment. It includes an offline
training phase (including training and fine-tuning) and an
online spectrum access phase. This framework leverages the
fact that the trained model (especially the weights) can be
efficiently stored to facilitate online spectrum access decisions in real time. It aims to extract meaningful spectrum usage information from massive spectrum datasets and regulatory databases in different radio contexts and provide comprehensive baseline knowledge of efficient spectrum access
solutions. With the capability of distributed spectrum monitoring and awareness, the centralized SAS in the 5G BS can
improve the spectrum utilization. To demonstrate this framework, we use a stack of RBMs to train the DBN in a layerby-layer manner to reduce the training complexity. The network first models the input datasets of spectrum and regulation with the parameters of the first layer of RBM. It then
trains the subsequent layers of RBM with the samples from
the output of the previous layer. The contrastive divergence
of the 1-step iteration (CD-1) method is applied to update the
weights in each layer thus allowing to find the parameters
for all layers of the RBM. In the online spectrum access
phase, a spectrum decision is made to generate proper transmission schemes, that is, a suitable access method, carrier
frequency and bandwidth, modulation and coding scheme,
and transmission power.
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
The simulation results for the interference recognition in
the SAS are shown in Fig. 6, which demonstrate how DBN is
applied to detect the signals in the 3.5 GHz band in high and
low signal to noise ratio (SNR) regimes. DBNs are trained
with frequency domain data. The payload data of 802.11ac
and physical downlink shared channel (PDSCH) of LTE are
both QPSK modulated. The results show that the DBN-based
signal detection achieves a very high detection rate in the high
SNR regime with 4 layers and 400 neurons in each layer.
V. Limitations, Challenges and Open Research
The success of AI-defined 5G networks relies on solving a
number of research challenges across networks of
heterogeneous capabilities and different levels of contextawareness. Technical issues such as network function
virtualization,
environmental
challenges, among others, are expected to have a significant
impact on ongoing AI-defined 5G network research. Some of
the critical limitations, challenges and open research problems
are discussed in continuation.
AI at-the-edge or AI over-the-bridge?
The developments of mobile edge computing and caching
make it possible for mobile devices to satisfy the demands
of intelligence locally. Enormous types of xPUs which are
implementations of AI hardware accelerators have been introduced over the past few years. (The different types of xPUs
include the brain processing unit, the deep learning processing unit,
the intelligence processing unit, and the NPU.) Scalable and distributed AI agents that are distributed across a plethora of
devices along with appropriate training data. This approach
is referred to as on-device AI or AI at-the-edge. The AI-powered smartphones with limited application context such as
AI-assisted photography or Apple’s Memoji have been extensively adopted by smartphone manufacturers in recent
years and this concept is likely to be adopted for physical
and network layer problems. There are various advantages
for AI at-the-edge including the available features of geographical location services (GPS, cellular triangulation),
connectivity (4G/5G, Wi-Fi), and many types of non-standard sensors (gyroscope, barometer, accelerometer). However, the computational power, memory, and battery life present potential obstacles to intensive 5G services. As a result,
it may be difficult to implement large-scale, complex AI-defined 5G functionalities due to the limited resources that are
available in current generation smartphones, although this
may change in the future.
AI applied at the BS/Cloud, the so-called AI over-thebridge, has access to considerable computing resources,
memory bandwidth and power supply, which are all necessary for supporting 5G services with vastly heterogeneous
requirements through efficient resource scheduling and coordination. AI over-the-bridge overcomes the resource
shortcomings with massive resource availability. Models
that are trained on the device for later AI over-the-bridge deployment could reduce the uplink data traffic. As a result,
the AI-defined 5G networks should leverage the available
edge resources, learn and predict the user needs and environmental circumstances and periodically cache the pre-trained
models from edge users to the network for subsequent use.
Channel State Information
Accurate channel estimation is necessary at the receiver for
coherent detection and at the transmitter for beamforming
and power control. The CSI is one of the most important factors for inference, prediction, and big data analytics in AIdefined 5G systems. The rich context information and large
amount of CSI pose significant potential for facilitating
novel AI-enabled applications beyond immediate context
awareness. With massive CSI, AI enables 5G networks to
learn and adapt from the datasets generated by the users and
BSs in different environments.
The overhead of channel estimation pilots in the frequency
division duplex (FDD) mode scales linearly with the number
of transmit antennas, which limits the practical number of
antennas. When operating in time division duplex (TDD)
mode, the massive MIMO-equipped 5G BS obtains the uplink
CSI via uplink pilots, and downlink CSI is implicitly obtained
due to channel reciprocity. However, the AI models for
downlink usage which were trained by uplink CSI might be
misleading in some cases. One reason is that the RF
components and processing chains at the BS are generally not
reciprocal between the uplink and downlink, and the
inexpensive hardware components in the analog domain used
by massive MIMO systems can exacerbate this problem
further. Inaccuracies in channel estimation caused by pilot
contamination can also introduce AI model training errors. In
addition, the massive volumes of CSI inherent with largescale MIMO systems pose challenges to storage and real-time
processing. Redundancies of the CSI data need to be
eliminated to reduce processing latency and resource
overhead and imperfect CSI estimates need to be considered
in the decision-making process.
Security and Privacy
Security and privacy are critical in wireless networks and
especially for 5G networks, which will provide missioncritical services. First, AI agents themselves can be the target
of attack from a malicious adversary. For example, a selfish
user operating in the AI-defined SAS context could broadcast
fake signals to the BS and users to manipulate the AI training
so that spectrum is denied to other users, which enabling the
malicious party to gain access to a large portion of the shared
channels. In addition, attacks through the wireless channel,
such as denial-of-service, spoofing, and malicious data
injection, could also disrupt the AI agent and lead to
misbehaviors. Since massive amount of training datasets are
required for training AI, efficient and expeditious detection of
malicious training contents becomes challenging. Therefore,
To Appear in IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2019
collaborative efforts among various parties and stakeholders
are required to prevent security breaches and privacy leaks
and ensure the trustworthiness of data and decisions.
VI. Conclusions
In this article we introduced the concept of AI-defined 5G
networks and discussed how AI agents entail some of the key
5G enablers and critical application scenarios. We presented
AI-aided applications and examples for solving different
aspects of 5G network deployment and management and
discussed two architectures for the PHY and MAC layer
processing at the BS/Cloud. We also elaborated on some
limitations, challenges and open issues for researchers to
address. We encourage AI-defined 5G and beyond research
and collaborations between AI and wireless communications
scientists and practitioners, who need to share their insights
and data just like the envisaged network nodes do in the age
of contextual awareness and intelligence.
Acknowledgment
This work was in part supported by the National Science
Foundation through Award Number 1564148. The authors
would like to thanks Rod J. Walton for his inspirational advice
on this article.