Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2339–2352
July 5 - 10, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Syntactic Data Augmentation Increases
Robustness to Inference Heuristics
Junghyun Min1
R. Thomas McCoy1
Dipanjan Das2
Emily Pitler2
Tal Linzen1
1Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
2Google Research, New York, NY
{jmin10, tom.mccoy, tal.linzen}@jhu.edu
{dipanjand, epitler}@google.com
Pretrained neural models such as BERT, when
ﬁne-tuned to perform natural language inference (NLI), often show high accuracy on standard datasets, but display a surprising lack of
sensitivity to word order on controlled challenge sets. We hypothesize that this issue is
not primarily caused by the pretrained model’s
limitations, but rather by the paucity of crowdsourced NLI examples that might convey the
importance of syntactic structure at the ﬁnetuning stage. We explore several methods to
augment standard training sets with syntactically informative examples, generated by applying syntactic transformations to sentences
from the MNLI corpus. The best-performing
augmentation method, subject/object inversion, improved BERT’s accuracy on controlled
examples that diagnose sensitivity to word order from 0.28 to 0.73, without affecting performance on the MNLI test set. This improvement generalized beyond the particular construction used for data augmentation, suggesting that augmentation causes BERT to recruit
abstract syntactic representations.
Introduction
In the supervised learning paradigm common in
NLP, a large collection of labeled examples of a
particular classiﬁcation task is randomly split into
a training set and a test set. The system is trained
on this training set, and is then evaluated on the
test set. Neural networks—in particular systems
pretrained on a word prediction objective, such as
ELMo or BERT —excel in this paradigm: with large enough
pretraining corpora, these models match or even
exceed the accuracy of untrained human annotators
on many test sets .
At the same time, there is mounting evidence
that high accuracy on a test set drawn from the
same distribution as the training set does not indicate that the model has mastered the task. This discrepancy can manifest as a sharp drop in accuracy
when the model is applied to a different dataset that
illustrates the same task , or as excessive sensitivity
to linguistically irrelevant perturbations of the input
 .
One such discrepancy, where strong performance on a standard test set did not correspond
to mastery of the task as a human would deﬁne
it, was documented by McCoy et al. for
the Natural Language Inference (NLI) task. In
this task, the system is given two sentences, and is
expected to determine whether one (the premise)
entails the other (the hypothesis). Most if not all
humans would agree that NLI requires sensitivity
to syntactic structure; for example, the following
sentences do not entail each other, even though they
contain the same words:
The lawyer saw the actor.
The actor saw the lawyer.
McCoy et al. constructed the HANS challenge set,
which includes examples of a range of such constructions, and used it to show that, when BERT
is ﬁne-tuned on the MNLI corpus , the ﬁne-tuned model achieves high accuracy
on the test set drawn from that corpus, yet displays
little sensitivity to syntax; the model wrongly concluded, for example, that (1) entails (2).
We consider two explanations as to why BERT
ﬁne-tuned on MNLI fails on HANS. Under
the Representational Inadequacy Hypothesis,
BERT fails on HANS because its pretrained representations are missing some necessary syntactic information. Under the Missed Connection
Hypothesis, BERT extracts the relevant syntactic
information from the input , but it fails to use this information with HANS because there are few MNLI
training examples that indicate how syntax should
support NLI . It is possible
for both hypotheses to be correct: there may be
some aspects of syntax that BERT has not learned
at all, and other aspects that have been learned, but
are not applied to perform inference.
The Missed Connection Hypothesis predicts that
augmenting the training set with a small number
of examples from one syntactic construction would
teach BERT that the task requires it to use its syntactic representations. This would not only cause
improvements on the construction used for augmentation, but would also lead to generalization to other
constructions. In contrast, the Representational Inadequacy Hypothesis predicts that to perform better
on HANS, BERT must be taught how each syntactic construction affects NLI from scratch. This
predicts that larger augmentation sets will be required for adequate performance and that there will
be little generalization across constructions.
This paper aims to test these hypotheses. We
constructed augmentation sets by applying syntactic transformations to a small number of examples
from MNLI. Accuracy on syntactically challenging
cases improved dramatically as a result of augmenting MNLI with only about 400 examples in which
the subject and the object were swapped (about
0.1% of the size of the MNLI training set). Crucially, even though only a single transformation
was used in augmentation, accuracy increased on
a range of constructions. For example, BERT’s accuracy on examples involving relative clauses (e.g,
The actors called the banker who the tourists saw
↛The banker called the tourists) was 0.33 without
augmentation, and 0.83 with it. This suggests that
our method does not overﬁt to one construction, but
taps into BERT’s existing syntactic representations,
providing support for the Missed Connection Hypothesis. At the same time, we also observe limits
to generalization, supporting the Representational
Inadequacy Hypothesis in those cases.
Background
HANS is a template-generated challenge set designed to test whether NLI models have adopted
three syntactic heuristics. First, the lexical overlap
heuristic is the assumption that any time all of the
words in the hypothesis are also in the premise, the
label should be entailment. In the MNLI training
set, this heuristic often makes correct predictions,
and almost never makes incorrect predictions. This
may be due to the process by which MNLI was generated: crowdworkers were given a premise and
were asked to generate a sentence that contradicts
or entails the premise. To minimize effort, workers
may have overused lexical overlap as a shortcut
to generating entailed hypotheses. Of course, the
lexical overlap heuristic is not a generally valid
inference strategy, and it fails on many HANS examples; e.g., as discussed above, the lawyer saw
the actor does not entail the actor saw the lawyer.
HANS also includes cases that are diagnostic of
the subsequence heuristic (assume that a premise
entails any hypothesis which is a contiguous subsequence of it) and the constituent heuristic (assume that a premise entails all of its constituents).
While we focus on counteracting the lexical overlap
heuristic, we will also test for generalization to the
other heuristics, which can be seen as particularly
challenging cases of lexical overlap. Examples of
all constructions used to diagnose the three heuristics are given in Tables A.5, A.6 and A.7.
Data augmentation is often employed to increase
robustness in vision and
language , including in NLI . In many cases, augmentation with one kind of example improves accuracy
on that particular case, but does not generalize to
other cases, suggesting that models overﬁt to the
augmentation set . In
particular, McCoy et al. found that augmentation with HANS examples generalized to
a different word overlap challenge set , but only for examples similar in length
to HANS examples. We mitigate such overﬁtting to
superﬁcial properties by generating a diverse set of
corpus-based examples, which differ from the challenge set both lexically and syntactically. Finally,
Kim et al. used a similar augmentation approach to ours but did not study generalization to
types of examples not in the augmentation set.
Generating Augmentation Data
We generate augmentation examples from MNLI
using two syntactic transformations: INVERSION,
which swaps the subject and object of the source
sentence, and PASSIVIZATION. For each of these
transformations, we had two families of augmenta-
Original MNLI example:
There are 16 El Grecos in this small collection. →
This small collection contains 16 El Grecos.
Inversion (original premise):
There are 16 El Grecos in this small collection. ↛
16 El Grecos contain this small collection.
Inversion (transformed hypothesis):
This small collection contains 16 El Grecos. ↛
16 El Grecos contain this small collection.
Passivization (transformed hypothesis; non-entailment):
This small collection contains 16 El Grecos. ↛
This small collection is contained by 16 El Grecos.
Random shufﬂing with a random label:
16 collection small El contains Grecos This. ↛/→
collection This Grecos El small 16 contains.
Table 1: A sample of syntactic augmentation strategies,
with gold labels (→: entailment; ↛: non-entailment).
For the full list, see Table A.1 in the Appendix.
tion sets. The ORIGINAL PREMISE strategy keeps
the original MNLI premise and transforms the hypothesis; and TRANSFORMED HYPOTHESIS uses
the original MNLI hypothesis as the new premise,
and the transformed hypothesis as the new hypothesis (see Table 1 for examples, and §A.2 for details). We experimented with three augmentation
set sizes: small (101 examples), medium (405) and
large (1215). All augmentation sets were much
smaller than the MNLI training set (297k).1
We did not attempt to ensure the naturalness of
the generated examples; e.g., in the INVERSION
transformation, The carriage made a lot of noise
was transformed into A lot of noise made the carriage. In addition, the labels of the augmentation
dataset were somewhat noisy; e.g., we assumed
that INVERSION changed the correct label from entailment to neutral, but this is not necessarily the
case (if The buyer met the seller, it is likely that
The seller met the buyer). As we show below, this
noise did not hurt accuracy on MNLI.
Finally, we included a random shufﬂing condition, in which an MNLI premise and its hypothesis
were both randomly shufﬂed, with a random label.
We used this condition to test whether a syntactically uninformed method could teach the model
that, when word order is ignored, no reliable inferences can be made.
1The augmentation sets and the code used to generate them
are available at 
syntactic-augmentation-nli.
Experimental setup
We added each augmentation set separately to the
MNLI training set, and ﬁne-tuned BERT on each
resulting training set. Further ﬁne-tuning details
are in Appendix A.1. We repeated this process for
ﬁve random seeds for each combination of augmentation strategy and augmentation set size, except for
the most successful strategy (INVERSION + TRANS-
FORMED HYPOTHESIS), for which we had 15 runs
for each augmentation size. Following McCoy et al.
 , when evaluating on HANS, we merged
the neutral and contradiction labels produced by
the model into a single non-entailment label.
For both ORIGINAL
PREMISE and TRANS-
FORMED HYPOTHESIS, we experimented with using each of the transformations separately, and with
a combined dataset including both inversion and
passivization. We also ran separate experiments
with only the passivization examples with an entailment label, and with only the passivization examples with a non-entailment label. As a baseline,
we used 100 runs of BERT ﬁne-tuned on the unaugmented MNLI .
We report the models’ accuracy on HANS, as
well as on the MNLI development set (MNLI test
set labels are not publicly available). We did not
tune any parameters on this development set. All of
the comparisons we discuss below are signiﬁcant
at the p < 0.01 level (based on two-sided t-tests).
Accuracy on MNLI was very similar across augmentation strategies and matched that of the unaugmented baseline (0.84), suggesting that syntactic
augmentation with up to 1215 examples does not
harm overall performance on the dataset. By contrast, accuracy on HANS varied signiﬁcantly, with
most models performing worse than chance (which
is 0.50 on HANS) on non-entailment examples,
suggesting that they adopted the heuristics (Figure 1). The most effective augmentation strategy,
by a large margin, was inversion with a transformed
hypothesis. Accuracy on the HANS word overlap
cases for which the correct label is non-entailment—
e.g., the doctor saw the lawyer ↛the lawyer saw
the doctor—was 0.28 without augmentation, and
0.73 with the large version of this augmentation set.
Simultaneously, this strategy decreased BERT’s
accuracy on the cases where the heuristic makes the
correct prediction (The tourists by the actor called
the authors →The tourists called the authors); in
Original premise
Transformed hypothesis
Passivization
Number of augmentation examples
Accuracy on HANS (lexical overlap cases only)
The lexical overlap
heuristic makes...
A correct prediction
An incorrect prediction
Figure 1: Comparison of syntactic augmentation strategies. Dots represent accuracy on the HANS examples that
diagnose the lexical overlap heuristic, as produced by each of the runs of BERT ﬁne-tuned on MNLI combined
with each augmentation data set. Horizontal bars indicate median accuracy across runs. Chance accuracy is 0.5.
fact, the best model’s accuracy was similar across
cases where lexical overlap made correct and incorrect predictions, suggesting that this intervention
prevented the model from adopting the heuristic.
The random shufﬂing method did not improve
over the unaugmented baseline, suggesting that
syntactically-informed transformations are essential (Table A.2).
Passivization yielded a much
smaller beneﬁt than inversion, perhaps due to the
presence of overt markers such as the word by,
which may lead the model to attend to word order
only when those are present. Intriguingly, even
on the passive examples in HANS, inversion was
more effective than passivization (large inversion
augmentation: 0.13; large passivization augmentation: 0.01). Finally, inversion on its own was
more effective than the combination of inversion
and passivization.
We now analyze in more detail the most effective
strategy, inversion with a transformed hypothesis.
First, this strategy is similar on an abstract level
to the HANS subject/object swap category, but the
two differ in vocabulary and some syntactic properties; despite these differences, performance on this
HANS category was perfect (1.00) with medium
and large augmentation, indicating that BERT beneﬁted from the high-level syntactic structure of
the transformation. For the small augmentation
set, accuracy on this category was 0.53, suggesting
that 101 examples are insufﬁcient to teach BERT
that subjects and objects cannot be freely swapped.
Conversely, tripling the augmentation size from
medium to large had a moderate and inconsistent
effect across HANS subcases (see Appendix A.3
for case-by-case results); for clearer insight about
the role of augmentation size, it may be necessary
to sample this parameter more densely.
Although inversion was the only transformation in this augmentation set, performance also
improved dramatically on constructions other than
subject/object swap (Figure 2); for example, the
models handled examples involving a prepositional
phrase better, concluding, for instance, that The
judge behind the manager saw the doctors does not
entail The doctors saw the manager (unaugmented:
0.41; large augmentation: 0.89).
There was a
much more moderate, but still signiﬁcant, improvement on the cases targeting the subsequence heuristic; this smaller degree of improvement suggests
that contiguous subsequences are treated separately
from lexical overlap more generally. One exception was accuracy on “NP/S” inferences, such as
the managers heard the secretary resigned ↛The
managers heard the secretary, which improved dramatically from 0.02 (unaugmented) to 0.50 (large
augmentation). Further improvements for subsequence cases may therefore require augmentation
with examples involving subsequences.
A range of techniques have been proposed over
the past year for improving performance on HANS.
These include syntax-aware models , auxiliary models designed to capture pre-deﬁned shallow heuristics so
that the main model can focus on robust strategies
Lexical overlap heuristic
Subsequence heuristic
Constituent heuristic
Number of augmentation examples
Accuracy on HANS
The heuristic makes...
A correct prediction
An incorrect prediction
Figure 2: Augmentation using subject/object inversion with a transformed hypothesis. Dots represent the accuracy
on HANS examples diagnostic of each of the heuristics, as produced by each of the 15 runs of BERT ﬁne-tuned
on MNLI combined with each augmentation data set. Horizontal bars indicate median accuracy across runs.
 , and methods to up-weight difﬁcult training examples .
While some of these approaches yield higher accuracy on HANS than ours, including better generalization to the constituent and subsequence cases
(see Table A.4), they are not directly comparable:
our goal is to assess how the prevalence of syntactically challenging examples in the training set
affects BERT’s NLI performance, without modifying either the model or the training procedure.
Discussion
Our best-performing strategy involved augmenting
the MNLI training set with a small number of instances generated by applying the subject/object
inversion transformation to MNLI examples. This
yielded considerable generalization: both to another domain (the HANS challenge set), and, more
importantly, to additional constructions, such as relative clauses and prepositional phrases. This supports the Missed Connection Hypothesis: a small
amount of augmentation with one construction induced abstract syntactic sensitivity, instead of just
“inoculating” the model against failing on the challenge set by providing it with a sample of cases
from the same distribution .
At the same time, the inversion transformation
did not completely counteract the heuristic; in particular, the models showed poor performance on
passive sentences. For these constructions, then,
BERT’s pretraining may not yield strong syntactic representations that can be tapped into with a
small nudge from augmentation; in other words,
this may be a case where our Representational Inadequacy Hypothesis holds. This hypothesis predicts
that pretrained BERT, as a word prediction model,
struggles with passives, and may need to learn the
properties of this construction speciﬁcally for the
NLI task; this would likely require a much larger
number of augmentation examples.
The best-performing augmentation strategy involved generating premise/hypothesis pairs from
a single source sentence—meaning that this strategy does not rely on an NLI corpus. The fact that
we can generate augmentation examples from any
corpus makes it possible to test if very large augmentation sets are effective (with the caveat, of
course, that augmentation sentences from a different domain may hurt performance on MNLI itself).
Ultimately, it would be desirable to have a model
with a strong inductive bias for using syntax across
language understanding tasks, even when overlap
heuristics lead to high accuracy on the training set;
indeed, it is hard to imagine that a human would ignore syntax entirely when understanding a sentence.
An alternative would be to create training sets that
adequately represent a diverse range of linguistic
phenomena; crowdworkers’ (rational) preferences
for using the simplest generation strategies possible
could be counteracted by approaches such as adversarial ﬁltering . In the interim,
however, we conclude that data augmentation is
a simple and effective strategy to mitigate known
inference heuristics in models such as BERT.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a gift from Google,
NSF Graduate Research Fellowship No. 1746891,
and NSF Grant No. BCS-1920924. Our experiments were conducted using the Maryland Advanced Research Computing Center (MARCC).