Modelling functional integration: a comparison of structural equation
and dynamic causal models
W.D. Penny,* K.E. Stephan, A. Mechelli, and K.J. Friston
Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College London, London, United Kingdom
Available online 25 September 2004
The brain appears to adhere to two fundamental principles of functional
organisation, functional integration and functional specialisation, where
the integration within and among specialised areas is mediated by
effective connectivity. In this paper, we review two different approaches
to modelling effective connectivity from fMRI data, structural equation
models (SEMs) and dynamic causal models (DCMs). In common to both
approaches are model comparison frameworks in which inferences can
be made about effective connectivity per se and about how that
connectivity can be changed by perceptual or cognitive set. Underlying
the two approaches, however, are two very different generative models.
In DCM, a distinction is made between the dneuronal levelT and the
dhemodynamic levelT. Experimental inputs cause changes in effective
connectivity expressed at the level of neurodynamics, which in turn cause
changes in the observed hemodynamics. In SEM, changes in effective
connectivity lead directly to changes in the covariance structure of the
observed hemodynamics. Because changes in effective connectivity in the
brain occur at a neuronal level DCM is the preferred model for fMRI
data. This review focuses on the underlying assumptions and limitations
of each model and demonstrates their application to data from a study of
attention to visual motion.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Structural equation; Dynamic causal model; Functional
integration
Introduction
Human brain mapping has been used extensively to provide
functional maps showing which regions are specialised for specific
functions . A classic example is the study
by Zeki et al. who identified V4 and V5 as specialised for
the processing of colour and motion, respectively. More recently,
these analyses have been augmented by functional integration
studies, which describe how functionally specialised areas interact
and how these interactions depend on changes of context.
Early analyses of functional integration used principal
component analysis (PCA) to decompose neuroimaging data
into a set of modes that are mutually uncorrelated both spatially
and temporally. The modes are ordered according to the amount
of variance they explain. By comparing the temporal expression
of the first few modes with the variation in experimental factors,
a distributed functional system associated with various factors
can be identified . A more sophisticated use
of PCA occurs in the context of generalised eigenimage analysis
 , where the principal component is found
which is maximally expressed in one experimental condition or
population and minimally expressed in another (e.g., control
versus patient groups). If there are more than two experimental
factors, this approach can be extended using a canonical variates
analysis (CVA) or partial least squares (PLS) (MacIntosh et al.,
More recently, independent component analysis (ICA) has
been used to identify modes describing activity in a sparsely
distributed network . Such PCA/ICAbased methods are called analyses of functional connectivity as
they are data-driven transform methods, which make no
assumptions about the underlying biology. They are therefore
of greatest practical use when it is not clear which regions are
involved in a given task.
In contrast, analyses of deffective connectivityT (see the
following sections) are based on statistical models that make
anatomically motivated assumptions (e.g., knowledge of structural
connectivity) and restrict their inferences to networks comprising a
number of preselected regions. Effective connectivity analyses are
hypothesis driven rather than data driven and are most applicable
when one can specify the relevant functional areas (e.g., from
analyses of functional specialisation). The presence of connections,
in the model, can be inferred from data obtained by invasive
tracing procedures in primates, assuming homology between
certain areas in the human and monkey brain. New imaging
methodologies such as diffusion tensor imaging also hold the
promise of providing information about anatomical connections for
the human brain directly .
Detailed discussions of functional versus effective connectivity
approaches can be found in chapters 48–53 of . In this paper, we review the most widely used method for
making inferences about functional integration from fMRI, namely,
structural equation modelling (SEM). We also review dynamic
1053-8119/$ - see front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.041
* Corresponding author. Fax: +20 7813 1420.
E-mail address: (W.D. Penny).
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com.)
www.elsevier.com/locate/ynimg
NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
causal modelling (DCM), a new approach that has been designed
specifically for the analysis of fMRI time series.
The paper is structured as follows. The sections Structural
equation models and Dynamic causal models describe the
theoretical foundations of SEM and DCM, and the Attention to
visual motion section presents exemplar analyses on fMRI data.
We conclude with a discussion of the relative merits of the models
in the Discussion section.
We use uppercase letters to denote matrices and lowercase to
denote vectors. IK denotes the K  K identity matrix, 1K is a 1  K
vector of 1’s and 0K is a 1  K vector of zeros. If X is a matrix,
Tr(X) denotes its trace, |X| its determinant, Xij the i, jth element, XT
the matrix transpose, X 1 the matrix inverse, X T the transpose of
the matrix inverse, vec(X) returns a column vector comprising its
columns and  denotes the Kronecker product. The operator
diag(x) returns a diagonal matrix with leading diagonal elements
given by the vector x. log x denotes the natural logarithm. If p(x) =
N (x; l,R) then the d-dimensional random vector x is drawn from a
multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean l and covariance R.
This is given by
Þd=2jRj1=2exp  1
ÞTR1 x  l
Structural equation models
Structural equation models (SEMs) were developed in the field
of econometrics and first applied to imaging data by McIntosh and
Gonzalez-Lima . They
comprise a set of regions and a set of directed connections.
Importantly, a causal semantics is ascribed to these connections
where an arrow from A to B means that A causes B. Causal
relationships are thus not inferred from the data but are assumed a
priori .
An SEM with particular connection strengths implies a
particular set of instantaneous correlations among regions. One
can therefore set the connection strengths so as to minimise the
discrepancy between the observed and implied correlations and
thereby fit a model to data. If, for example, one partitions a
given fMRI data set into those scans obtained under two different
levels of an experimental factor, then one can attribute differences in the estimated connection strengths to that factor, and so
conclude that a pathway has been activated. To date, SEMs have
been the most widely used model for connectivity analyses in
neuroimaging .
Generative model
We consider networks comprising N regions in which the
activity at time t is given by the N  1 vector yt. If there are T time
points and Y is an N  T data matrix comprising t = 1. . .T, then the
likelihood of the data is given by
t ¼ 1 p ytjh
where h are the parameters of an SEM. This is the first SEM
equation and is important as it embodies the key assumption that
network activity is independent from sample to sample. This is
certainly valid for PET data but is, at best, questionable for fMRI
as samples are known to be temporally autocorrelated . There are however heuristics that allow one to overcome
this problem, as we shall see in the following section.
The second SEM equation specifies the generative model at
Þ ¼ N yt; 0; R h
which denotes that the activities are zero mean Gaussian variates
with a covariance, R(h), that is, a function of the connectivity
matrix h. The form of this function is specified implicitly by the
regression equation that describes how activity in one area is
related to activity in other areas via a set of path coefficients, M, as
yt ¼ Myt þ et
where et are zero mean Gaussian innovations or errors of
covariance R. Typically, R will be a diagonal matrix and we write
the error variance in region i as r2
i . Regions are connected together
via the N  N path coefficient matrix M where the Mij denotes a
connection from region j to region i. The parameters of an SEM, h,
are the unknown elements of M and R. The above equation is an
unusual regression equation as the dependent variable appears on
both sides of the equality. By subtracting Myt from both sides and
multiplying by (IN  M)1, where IN is the identity matrix, the
equation can be rearranged as follows
yt ¼ IN  M
This form is particularly useful as it shows us how to generate data
from the model. Firstly, we generate the Gaussian variates et and
then premultiply by (IN  M)1. This is repeated for each t. This
form also allows us to express the covariance of yt as a function of h
ð Þ ¼ IN  M
Þ1R IN  M
Estimation
Given a set of parameters h, we can compute the likelihood of
a data set from Eqs. 2, 3 and 6. Given a data set one can therefore
find the connectivity matrix that maximises the likelihood using
standard optimisation methods such as Pseudo-Newton algorithms
or simplex methods . However, optimisation of Eq. 2 would
soon run into numerical problems as the probabilities are so small.
It is therefore better to maximise the log-likelihood
ð Þ ¼ log p Yjh
log p ytjh
which, being monotically related to the likelihood, has the same
maximum. By plugging in the Gaussian density from Eqs. 1 and 3
2 log 2p  1
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
If we define the sample covariance as
then, by noting that the last term is a scalar and that the trace of a
scalar is that same scalar value and using the circularity property of
the trace operator [i.e., Tr (AB) = Tr (BA)], we can write
2 log jR h
2 log2p  T
If we use unbiased estimates of the sample covariance matrix
 then
we replace T’s in the above equation by T  1’s. If we now also
drop those terms that are not dependent on the model parameters
ð Þ ¼  T  1
ð Þj þ Tr SR h
Maximum likelihood estimates can therefore be obtained by
maximising the above function.
We close this section with some remarks about identifiability.
A model is identifiable if there is a unique parameter vector, hˆ,
that maximises the likelihood. SEMs without loops (e.g.,
reciprocal connections) are identifiable. They are however
biologically uninteresting and it is difficult to establish sufficient
conditions for the identifiability of SEMs with loops. Because of
this SEM modellers appeal to the concept of dlocal identifiabilityT. This is the condition that in the neighborhood of h,
there are no other parameter vectors with equivalent likelihood.
SEMs are locally identifiable if the Hessian (the matrix of second
order partial derivatives of the log-likelihood with respect to the
parameters) is nonsingular. This provides a practical test for local
identifiability.
One can then use a likelihood ratio (LR) test to assess the merits
of one model versus another (for a given specificity, no other test
has higher sensitivity). If p( Y|h,m = i) and p( Y|h,m = j) are the
likelihoods of the fitted models m = i and m = j, then the likelihood
ratio for comparing models i and j is
Rij ¼ p Yjh; m ¼ i
p Yjh; m ¼ j
If L(hi) and L(hj) are the corresponding log-likelihoods, then
the log of the likelihood ratio is
logRij ¼ L hi
ð Þ  L hj
Under the null hypothesis that the models are identical, and for
large T, 2 log Rij is distributed as a chi-squared variable having
degrees of freedom equal to the difference in number of parameters
between the models . This provides a
mechanism for model comparison. An important caveat is that the
models must be nested.
A special case of the above test arises when one wishes to
evaluate the goodness of fit of a single model. We will denote this
as dmodel 0T. This can be achieved by comparing the likelihood of
model 0 to the likelihood of the least restrictive (most complex)
model one could possibly adopt. This alternative model, denoted
dmodel 1T, obtains simply by setting the model covariance equal to
the sample covariance, that is, R(h) = S. The likelihood of this
extravagant model is
L1 ¼  T  1
logjSj þ Tr SS1
log jSj þ N
The corresponding (log) likelihood ratio is
log R01 ¼  T  1
ð Þj þ Tr SR h
 logjSj N
which in turn has a corresponding chi-squared value
v2 ¼ T  1
ð Þ ¼ logjR h
ð Þj þ Tr SR h
 logjSj  N:
The corresponding degrees of freedom are equal to the degrees of
freedom in model 1, k, minus the degrees of freedom in model 0, q.
For an N-dimensional covariance matrix, there are k = N(N + 1) / 2
degrees of freedom. For model 0, q equals the total number of
connectivity and variance parameters to be estimated. The associated v2 test provides one way of assessing if an SEM model is good
enough. We reject our model, model 0 (or the null model), if the
associated P value is less than, for example, 0.05. In simple terms,
we reject our model if its implicit covariance is significantly different
from the sample covariance.
We also note that it is possible to obtain maximum likelihood
estimates by minimising F(h). This is because ignoring terms that
are fixed for a given data set, F(h) = L(h). The quantity F(h) is
proportional to the Kullback–Liebler (KL) divergence between the
probability density of the samples and the probability density of the
model. Thus, maximising the likelihood is equivalent to minimising this KL divergence.
For more general model comparisons, the v2 statistic associated
with the LR test can be written as
v2 ¼ T  1
For this reason, the LR test is also known as the chi-square
difference test.
A caveat concerning these inferences is that they are based on
the assumption that the data points are independent samples.
However, as discussed in the previous section, fMRI data are
serially correlated. So rather than there being T-independent
samples, the deffectiveT number of independent samples is somewhat less, say v. This provides a rationale for the heuristic in which
the above tests are implemented using v in place of T, and v is
calculated based on an autoregressive model of the serial
correlation . The above tests can then be used
to make inferences about effective connectivity.
To make inferences about changes in effective connectivity, one
can also use the model comparison approach. This is sometimes
called the dstacked modelT approach. It involves partitioning or
splicing the original data, according to any experimental factor that
causes a putative change in connectivity. In this paper, for example,
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
we will look at the effect of dattentionT on connectivity. This factor
has two levels, dattentionT and dno attentionT, so two partitions are
created. One then constructs a dnull modelT in which path
coefficients are constrained to be equal between conditions (dno
attentionT and dattentionT) and an dalternative modelT in which
coefficients of interest can be different. The null and alternative
models are then compared using an LR test. The philosophy behind
this approach is identical to that used in analysis of variance
(ANOVA) in which two regression models are compared, one
having identical coefficients over the levels of a factor and one
having different coefficients.
One can also make inferences about changes in effective
connectivity via the use of moderator variables, as described in
 . This involves creating ddummy
regionsT whose activities are specified as follows. If one wishes
to test whether experimental factor X changes the connectivity
from region A to region B, one creates a dummy region C
containing the mean-corrected data in A multiplied by the meancorrected factor X. This represents the interaction between X and
the physiological variate from A. This is formally identical to the
explanatory variable in psychophysiological interactions (PPIs)
 and plays a similar role to bilinear effects in
DCMs that are discussed below. If, in the fitted SEM model
containing A, B and C, the path coefficient from C to B is
significantly nonzero, then there is a significant modulation.
One problem with the moderator variable approach, however, is
that the data in the dummy regions are highly non-Gaussian (due to
the multiplication with a discrete variable). This therefore violates
the assumptions of the model. One way around this is to modify
the generative model and so to maximise a different objective
function . A more
fundamental problem, however, is that we may not have enough
degrees of freedom to fit SEMs with a sufficiently rich structure
(e.g., models containing reciprocal connections). These richer
models may be specified in the stacked model approach because
the available degrees of freedom is larger by a factor K, where K is
the number of partitions. This is because the models must explain
K sample covariances. This issue will be revisited in the Attention
to visual motion section.
An alternative approach that enables more complex models to
be fitted is to set the variance parameters, ri
2, to arbitrary values
rather than estimating them. In McIntosh and Gonzalez-Lima
 , for example, it is suggested that they be set to between
35% and 50% of the total variance in that region. Alternatively, one
can employ more complex connectivity patterns but constrain sets
of connections to be identical. An example of this is the use of
reciprocally connected networks where the path coefficients are
constrained to be symmetric . The disadvantage
of these heuristics is that they may result in poorer model fits.
We have described SEM as implemented in the majority of
applications to functional brain imaging data. Further details of
these applications can be found in . In the
wider SEM world, however, SEMs vary in their generative
models, estimation procedures and styles of inference. It is
possible, for example, to define SEMs with exogenous variables.
Further, one school of SEM modelling employs a Bayesian
approach where priors are placed over model parameters and the
aim of estimation is to find the maximum posterior (rather than
maximum likelihood) parameters. This body of work ) is of particular interest because
the Bayesian framework is also used in DCM.
Dynamic causal models
Whereas SEM was developed in econometrics, dynamic causal
modelling (DCM) has been specifically
designed for the analysis of functional imaging time series. The
term dcausalT in DCM arises because the brain is treated as a
deterministic dynamical system ) in which external inputs cause changes in
neuronal activity, which in turn cause changes in the resulting
blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal that is measured
with fMRI. The term dcauseT is therefore used quite differently than
in SEM .
Generative model
Current DCMs for fMRI comprise a bilinear model for the
neurodynamics and an extended balloon model for the hemodynamics. The neurodynamics
are described by the following multivariate differential equation
where t indexes continuous time, the dot notation denotes a time
derivative, zt is neuronal activity, ut( j) is the jth of J inputs at
time t and A, Bj and C are connectivity matrices that will be
described below. This is known as a bilinear model because the
dependent variable, z˙ t, is linearly dependent on the product of zt
and ut. That ut and zt combine in a multiplicative fashion endows
the model with dnonlinearT dynamics that can be understood as a
nonstationary linear system that changes according to ut.
Importantly, because ut is known, parameter estimation is
tractable. The neuronal activity zt is an N  1 vector comprising
activity in each of the N regions and the input ut is a J  1 vector
comprising the scalar inputs ut( j) where j = 1. . .J. Exemplar
neuronal time series are shown for a simple two-region DCM in
The effective connectivity in DCM is characterised by a set of
dintrinsic connectionsT, A, that specify which regions are connected
and whether these connections are unidirectional or bidirectional.
These are analagous to the path coefficients, M, in SEM. Unlike
SEM (as used in fMRI to date), however, we also define a set of
input connections, C, that specify which inputs are connected to
which regions, and a set of modulatory connections, Bj, that
specify which intrinsic connections can be changed by which
inputs. The overall specification of input, intrinsic and modulatory
connectivity comprises our assumptions about model structure.
This in turn represents a scientific hypothesis about the structure of
the large-scale neuronal network mediating the underlying
sensorimotor or cognitive function.
The values in the connectivity matrices can be concatenated
into the connectivity vector
where, for example, vec(A) returns a column vector comprising the
columns of A. Model structure is defined by specifying which
entries in the above matrices are allowed to take on nonzero values,
that is, which inputs and regions are connected. A given model, say
model m, is then defined by its pattern of connectivity. Note that
only connections which are allowed to be nonzero will appear in
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
hc. For a network with Na intrinsic, Nb modulatory and Nc input
connections hc will have Nh = Na + Nb + Nc entries.
In DCM, neuronal activity gives rise to hemodynamic activity
by a dynamic process described by an extended balloon model.
This involves a set of hemodynamic state variables, state equations
and hemodynamic parameters hh ). Exemplar hemodynamic responses are shown in Fig. 2.
We can concatenate all neurodynamic and hemodynamic
parameters into the overall p-dimensional parameter vector
This vector contains all the parameters of a DCM model that we
need to estimate.
For given input u and DCM parameters h, model predictions,
h(h,u) can be produced by integrating the state equation as
described in . This numerical
integration is efficient because most fMRI experiments employ
input vectors that are highly sparse by experimental design. For a
data set with Ns scans, we can then create an NNs  1 vector of
model predictions h(h,u) covering all time points and all areas (in
the order all time points from region 1, region 2, etc.). The observed
data y, also formatted as an NNs  1 vector, is then modelled as
y ¼ h h; u
Þ þ Xb þ w
where w is an NNs  1 vector of Gaussian prediction errors with
mean zero and covariance matrix Ce, X contains effects of no
interest and b is the associated parameter vector. The matrix X
would include, for example, regressors to model scanner-related
low-frequency drifts in fMRI time series that are neurobiologically
irrelevant. The error covariance is given by Ce = INs  K where 
denotes the Kronecker product, K is an N  N diagonal matrix with
Kii denoting error variance in the ith region.
To generate data from a DCM, one integrates the neurodynamics
that are described by Eq. 22 together with the hemodynamics that
are described by Eqs. (3) and (4) in Friston et al. . Effects of
no interest are then added according to 25. Fig. 1 shows a neuronal
time series generated from a simple two-region DCM.
Priors are placed on the A and Bj matrices so as to encourage
parameter estimates that result in a stable dynamic system ). For each
connection in A and Bj, the prior is
Þ ¼ N Aik; 0; va
where the prior variance va is set to ensure stability with high
probability ). For each connection in C the prior is
¼ N Ci j; 0; vc
These priors are so-called dshrinkage-priorsT because the
posterior estimates shrink towards the prior mean, which is zero.
Fig. 1. DCM Neurodynamics. The top panel shows a dynamic causal model
comprising N = 2 regions and M = 2 inputs. The input variable u1 drives
neuronal activity z1. Informally, neuronal activity in this region then excites
neuronal activity z2, which then reactivates activity in region 1. Formally,
these interactions take place instantaneously according to Eq. 22. The time
constants are determined by the values of the intrinsic connections A11, A12,
A21 and A22. Input 2, typically a contextual input such as instructional set,
then acts to change the intrinsic dynamics via the modulatory connections B11
2. In this example, the effect is to reduce neuronal time constants in
each region as can be seen in the neuronal time series in the bottom panel. The
y-axis scale is in arbitrary units and the x-axis is in units of seconds.
Fig. 2. DCM Hemodynamics. These distributions characterise our expectations about what the hemodynamic responses, h, should look like as a
function of time (seconds). We first generated neuronal transients from a
single-region DCM according to Eq. 22. Then, for each transient we drew a
sample h h from the prior over h h (see Ref. ) and generated a
hemodynamic response. We repeated this 100 times to produce the 100
curves shown in the figure.
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
The size of the prior variance determines the amount of
shrinkage. The above information can be concatenated into the
overall prior
where the p subscripts denote priors and
p ¼ diag va1Na; vb1Nb; vc1Nc
In the above equations, 1K is a 1  K vector of 1’s and 0K is a
1  K vector of zeros. The choice of the prior mean, hp
covariance, Cp
h, is usually based on empirical estimates and
estimates from physiological studies as described in Friston et al.
 . Samples of hemodynamics responses from this prior are
shown in Fig. 2. Consequently, the overall prior mean and
covariance for a DCM are given by
The prior and likelihood distributions for a given DCM model,
say model m, are therefore
Þ ¼ N h; hp; Cp
Þ ¼ N y; h h; u
Þ þ Xb; Ce
These are used in Bayes rule to form the posterior distribution, as
described in the Estimation section.
Relation to SEM
If we assume that (i) the neurodynamics are directly observable,
that is,. yt = zt,, and (ii) that the direct inputs are stochastic, that is,.
et = Cut then the generative model for DCM becomes
˙yt ¼ Ayt þ et
In this context, the effect of modulatory inputs would be
accommodated by splitting the data into different partitions, each
partition having its own intrinsic connectivity matrix.
Further, if we decompose the intrinsic connectivity matrix into
A = H  IN where H is an off-diagonal matrix, then we have unit
self-inhibition within regions and arbitrary connections between
regions. This gives
˙yt ¼ H  IN
If we now assume that the dynamics have converged at the
point of observation, that is, y˙ t = 0, then the generative model
reduces to
yt ¼ Hyt þ et
which is identical to SEM (cf. Eq. 4). This could be implemented in
DCM by having very strong shrinkage priors (cf. Eq. (26)).
Therefore, a second perspective on SEMs is that they correspond
to DCMs with stochastic inputs where neuronal states can be directly
observed. But unfortunately for SEM, what we observe are
hemodynamics not neurodynamics. It is also assumed that these
dynamics have reached equilibrium at each point of observation. In
other words, the dynamics are assumed to occur over a time scale
that is short relative to the fMRI sampling interval. This is also not
the case as the time scale of hemodynamics is much longer than this.
Estimation
From Bayes’ rule the posterior distribution is equal to the
likelihood times the prior divided by the evidence (Gelman et al.,
Þ ¼ p yjh; m
Taking logs gives
log p hjy; m
Þ ¼ log p yjh; m
Þ þ log p hjm
Þ  log p yjm
The parameters that maximise this posterior probability, the
maximum posterior (MP) solution, can then be found using a
Gauss–Newton optimisation scheme, whereby parameter estimates
are updated in the direction of the gradient of the log-posterior by
an amount proportional to its curvature ). The model parameters are initialised to the mean of the
prior density. Because the posterior probability consists of two
terms, the likelihood and the prior, the maximum posterior solution
is the one which optimally satisfies the two constraints (i) that the
model prediction errors are minimised and (ii) that the parameters
are close to their prior values.
If the proportion of data points to model parameters is
sufficiently large, as is the case with DCM models of fMRI time
series, then the posterior is well approximated with a Gaussian.
The aim of optimisation is then to estimate the mean and
covariance of this density, which can be achieved using an
expectation–maximisation (EM) algorithm described in Section
3.1 of Friston . In the E-step, the posterior mean and the
posterior covariance are updated using a Gauss–Newton step, and
in the M-step the hyperparameters of the noise covariance matrix,
Ce, are updated. Both the E and M steps can be expressed in closed
form as shown in Friston . These steps are iterated until the
posterior distribution
Þ ¼ N hMP; RMP
is reached, where the subscripts MP denote maximum posterior
values. The posterior density can then be used to make inferences
about the size of connections. Fig. 8, for example, shows the
posterior distribution for a modulatory coefficient.
In statistics, approximation of a posterior density by a Gaussian
centred on the maximum posterior solution is known as a Laplace
approximation . The parameters of no
interest, b, can also be estimated by forming an augmented
parameter vector that includes h and b and an augmented
observation model, as described in Eq. (7) of Friston et al. .
We close this section with some remarks about identifiability.
As in SEM (see end of the Estimation section), it is difficult to
establish the identifiability of DCMs. We note, however, that EM
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
optimisation always produces positive definite estimates of the
posterior covariance matrix. If we define the Hessian as the matrix
of second order partial derivatives of the log-posterior (instead of
the log-likelihood, cf. SEM in the Estimation section) then because
the Hessian is the inverse of the covariance, EM optimisation
guarantees dlocal identifiabilityT. We also note that due to the
influence of the prior, the log-posterior is a smoother function than
the log-likelihood. It is therefore more likely that these local optima
correspond to global optima.
The structure of a DCM model is defined by specifying which
regions are connected to each other, via the intrinsic connectivity
matrix, and which inputs can alter which connections, via the
modulatory matrix. A given model, say model m, is then defined
by this pattern of connectivity. Different models can be compared
using the evidence for each model. This can be thought of as a
second-level of Bayesian inference. The model evidence is
computed from
Note that the model evidence is simply the normalisation term
from the first level of Bayesian inference, given in Eq. 35. In
Penny et al. , we show how the evidence can be estimated
using Akaike’s information criterion (AIC), Bayesian information
criterion (BIC) or the Laplace approximation.
Model comparison can then take place using evidence ratios.
Given models m = i and m = j, the dBayes factorT comparing model
i to model j is defined as ,
Bij ¼ p yjm ¼ i
where p( y|m = j) is the evidence for model j found by exponentiating AIC, BIC or Laplace approximations to the log-evidence. When
Bij N 1, the data favour model i over model j, and when Bij b 1 the
data favour model j. The Bayes factor is a summary of the evidence
provided by the data in favour of one scientific theory, represented
by a statistical model, as opposed to another. Just as a culture has
developed around the use of P values in classical statistics (e.g., P b
0.05), so one has developed around the use of Bayes factors. For
example, Bayes factors of 20 or more provide strong evidence in
favour of one model over another Penny et al. .
The use of Bayes factors or devidence ratiosT for DCM is
analagous to the use of likelihood ratio tests for SEM (cf. Eq. 14
and Eq. 39). The difference is that the likelihood ratio Rij depends
on estimated parameters. This means that Rij is a random variable
and so inference must be based on its distribution. With Bayes
factors, there is no dependence on parameters (they have been
integrated out using Eq. 38), and so they can be interpreted
directly, as described above.
Finally we note that, in the context of SEM, a statistical test
concerning the dabsoluteT fit of a model was derived by comparing
it to the most complex SEM one could imagine, that is, one where
the model covariance is set to the sample covariance. This suggests
a test concerning the dabsoluteT fit of a DCM that is based on
comparing the evidence for that DCM to the evidence of a DCM
having the most complex structure one can imagine, that is, full
intrinsic connectivity.
Attention to visual motion
In previous work, we have established that attention modulates
connectivity in a distributed system of cortical regions mediating
visual motion processing . These findings were based on data acquired using
the following experimental paradigm. Subjects viewed a computer
screen that displayed either a fixation point, stationary dots or dots
moving radially outward at a fixed velocity. In some epochs of
moving dots, they had to attend to changes in the speed of radial
motion (which were actually absent), in other epochs they were
instructed to simply watch the dots. For the purposes of our analyses
in this paper, we can consider three experimental variables. The
dphotic stimulationT variable indicates when dots were on the
screen, the dmotionT variable indicates that the dots were moving
and the dattentionT variable indicates that the subject was attending
to possible velocity changes. These are the three input variables that
are shown in Fig. 3. In this paper, we model the activity in three
regions V1, V5 and superior parietal cortex (SPC). The original
360-scan time series were extracted from the data set of a single
subject using a local eigendecomposition and are shown in Fig. 4.
As an example of the sort of modelling one can do, we look at
the effect attention has on effectivity connectivity. Specifically,
how attention affects the connection between V1 and V5 (Fig. 4).
We first apply SEM. The first step in this analysis is to partition
the data set into (i) periods in which the subject was attending to
moving stimuli and (ii) periods in which stimuli were moving but
the subject did not attend to that movement. SEM is therefore only
provided data for epochs when the stimulus is in motion. Note that
this subset of data still contains motion-related responses (not just
steady-state responses) because of the hemodynamic delay. There
are 80 fMRI samples in each data set and these compose the dno
attentionT and dattentionT conditions.
To make inferences about changes in effective connectivity, we
apply the model comparison approach. This involves creating a
dnull modelT in which path coefficients are fixed between
conditions (dno attentionT and dattentionT) and an dalternative
Fig. 3. Attention data: experimental variables. The plots bottom to top show
the dPhoticT, dMotionT and dAttentionT inputs, ui, used in the analysis of the
attention to visual motion data.
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
modelT in which coefficients of interest can vary. In both models,
we allow the variance parameters, ri
2, to vary between conditions.
In an N = 3 region network, there are k = N(N + 1) / 2 = 6
degrees of freedom per data set giving a total of k = 12 over both
conditions. As we are estimating the variance components and
allowing them to vary between conditions, this takes six degrees of
freedom leaving a maximum of six estimable path coefficients over
the two conditions. This provides a limit on the complexity of the
SEM one can fit.
With this in mind, we initially constructed an SEM with a
purely feedforward structure as shown in Fig. 5. In the null
model, the two path coefficients are common between conditions but in the alternative model the path coefficient from V1
to V5, MV1,V5, can vary. Testing this model against the null
model will allow us to infer whether or not dattentionT changes
In the alternative model, as applied to the two data sets, there
are six variance parameters to estimate and three path coefficients, giving q = 9. Fig. 5 shows the estimated values of the
path coefficients. The overall fit of the alternative model, which
captures discrepancies between the sample covariance and
implied model covariance matrix (also shown in Fig. 5), was
v2 = 24.6. This model has k  q = 3 degrees of freedom. In
contrast, the null model had v2 = 33.2 with four degrees of
freedom. This leads to the conclusion that attention does indeed
significantly change the value of this connection (v2 = 8.6, df =
1, P = 0.003).
If we look at the absolute fit of the alternative model, however,
then an LR test tells us that its implied covariance matrix is
significantly different from the sample covariance matrix (v2 =
24.6, df = 3, P = 2e5). This means that it is not a good model.
Indeed, one can see from the covariance matrices in Fig. 5 that the
covariance between V1 and SPC is not modelled accurately in
either the dattentionT or dno attentionT conditions.
We then set up an SEM with reciprocal connectivity between
regions as shown in Fig. 6. The assumption of reciprocal
connectivity is biologically more realistic. In the null model, the
four path coefficients are common between conditions but in the
alternative model MV1,V5 is allowed to vary. Again, testing this
model against the null model allows us to infer whether or not
dattentionT changes MV1,V5.
In the alternative model, as applied to the two conditions,
there are six variance parameters to estimate and five path
coefficients, giving q = 11. Fig. 6 shows the estimated values of
the path coefficients. The overall fit of the alternative model,
which captures discrepancies between the sample covariance and
implied model covariance matrix (also shown in Fig. 6), was v2 =
3.9. This model has k  q = 1 degrees of freedom. In contrast,
the null model had v2 = 23.6 with two degrees of freedom.
conclusion
significantly change the value of this connection (v2 = 19.7,
df = 1, P = 9e6).
If we look at the absolute fit of the alternative model, then an
LR test tells us that its implied covariance matrix is not
significantly different from the sample covariance matrix (v2 =
3.9, df = 1, P = 0.05). This means that it is a good model (although,
with P = 0.05 as a cutoff point, one could argue that its a borderline
case). Indeed, one can see from the covariance matrices in Fig. 6
that the covariance between V1 and SPC is now modelled much
more accurately than before.
Note that it would not be possible to fit the reciprocal model to
the data if we had used the dmoderator variableT approach (see
Inference section). This is because, without partitioning the data
into two subsets, there would only be k = 6 degrees of freedom
instead of k = 12.
Fig. 5. Feedforward SEM. The figures show null and alternative SEMs
fitted to the dno-attentionT and dattentionT periods of the data set. In the
alternative model, the V1 to V5 path coefficient was allowed to vary
between conditions. The entries in the covariance matrices are ordered V1,
V5 and SPC.
Fig. 4. Attention data: fMRI time series. The plots show fMRI time series
(rough solid lines) from regions V1, V5 and SPC and the corresponding
estimates from DCM model 2 (smooth solid lines).
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
We then applied DCM to this data set. With DCM, there is no
need to partition the time series into selected periods of interest as
inferences about changes in connectivity can be made based on the
strength of modulatory connections.
Three different DCMs were applied, each differing in their
intrinsic connectivity structure; model 1 has a feedforward
structure, model 2 a reciprocal structure and model 3 a fully
connected structure. The models and their estimated parameters are
shown in Fig. 7. All models assume that both motion and attention
modulate the connection from V1 to V5.
A Bayes factor, comparing model 2 against model 1, of the
order 1020 provides decisive evidence in favour of the network
with reciprocal connections. That the modulatory connection (due
to attention) within this model is significant can be seen by looking
at the posterior distribution shown in Fig. 8. This allows one to
make statements about our belief that this modulation is larger than
some threshold, c. For example, the probability that this effect is
larger than zero is 0.98 and the probability that it is larger than 0.17
is 0.78. This sort of inference can also be made via a model
comparison approach in which we compare model 2 to the same
model but without the modulatory connection.
A comparison of model 2 against model 3 resulted in no
consistent evidence either way. This suggests that the model with
reciprocal connections is a sufficiently good model of the data.
This is analagous to the LR test for SEM models that assesses the
dabsoluteT fit of a single model. Both SEM and DCM approaches
conclude that models with reciprocal connections are good models
per se and are superior to feedforward models. They also both
conclude that attention significantly modulates the connectivity
from V1 to V5.
Generative models
A final perspective on the different modelling approaches is
offered by revisiting the generative models associated with SEM
and DCM (see the Generative model section under the Structural
equation models and Dynamic causal models sections). Here, we
use SEM and DCM models that were fitted to the attention data.
Fig. 9a shows a new data set generated from the reciprocal SEM,
and Fig. 9b shows a new data set generated from the reciprocal
Firstly, we note that SEM only provides data for periods in
which the stimulus is in motion (hence the absences of data in Fig.
9a). Secondly, the dtime seriesT it produces are very spiky. This is
because, in SEM, samples are assumed to be statistically
independent. These time series bear little resemblance to the actual
fMRI traces in Fig. 4. We would therefore conclude from this
comparison that the generative model underlying SEM is poorly
suited to fMRI.
Fig. 7. DCM models. In all models, photic stimulation enters V1 and the
motion and attention variables modulate the connection from V1 to V5.
Models 1, 2 and 3 differ in their intrinsic connections, model 1 having
feedforward structure, model 2 having reciprocal and hierarchically
organised intrinsic connectivity and model 3 having full connectivity.
Fig. 6. Reciprocal SEM. The figures show null and alternative SEMs fitted
to the dno-attentionT and dattentionT periods of the data set. In the alternative
model, the V1 to V5 path coefficient was allowed to vary between
conditions. The entries in the covariance matrices are ordered V1, V5 and
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
In contrast, DCM models the entire time series, captures its
underlying regularities and produces very similar traces to the
actual fMRI data in Fig. 4. One attractive option is to use DCM
as a modelling laboratory in which one can investigate the
putative effects of experimental manipulations on changes in
effective connectivity. This can take place before any data are
collected and can provide an aid to experimental design.
Furthermore, prior to starting such a study, one can verify that
a given model, designed to test a particular hypothesis, is
sufficiently sensitive to detect the effects of interest given typical
signal to noise ratios .
Discussion
In this paper, we have compared the use of SEM and DCM for
making inferences about changes in effective connectivity from
fMRI time series. On our fMRI attention to visual motion data,
both SEM and DCM approaches led to the same conclusions (i)
that reciprocal models are superior to feedforward models, (ii) that
models with reciprocal connections provide a good fit to the data
and (iii) that attention significantly modulates the connectivity
from V1 to V5.
There are data sets, however, where DCM will be able to make
inferences that cannot be made with SEM. Such an example is
given in Friston et al. in which DCM was used to make
inferences about changes in connectivity in a three-region auditory
system network. Of key interest was whether the repeated
presentation of auditory stimuli reduced activity via neuronal
saturation in addition to hemodynamic saturation (it did). Such an
inference is clearly impossible, even in principle, in SEM as no
distinction is made between dneuronalT and dhemodynamicT levels.
More generally, as compared to SEM, DCM has the following
advantages. Firstly, DCM models interactions at the neuronal rather
than the hemodynamic level. As well as being biologically accurate,
this is important because neuronal interactions do not necessarily
lead to detectable hemodynamic interactions . DCMs are able to work at the neuronal level because they
employ a dforward modelT (with hemodynamic parameters) relating
neuronal activity to fMRI activity, and this model is inverted during
the model fitting process. Secondly, in DCM, one can postulate
arbitrarily complex connectivity patterns between regions. This
both results in better fitting models and is, again, biologically more
realistic. Thirdly, because DCM uses Bayesian model comparison,
one can compare nonnested network models .
Finally, DCM uses a sufficiently rich generative model that one can
use it as a modelling laboratory in which one can investigate the
putative effects of experimental manipulations on changes in
effective connectivity. This can take place before any data are
collected and provides an aid to experimental design. Because of
these advantages, DCM is the preferred method for making
inferences about changes in effective connectivity from fMRI data.
SEM is, however, appropriate for PET data.
A current limitation of DCM is that model fitting is computationally demanding. As implemented in SPM2 , one
is limited to modelling networks comprising approximately up to
eight regions. Parameter estimation in these models takes of the
Fig. 9. Data from generative models. The top plot shows data generated
from an SEM and the bottom plot data from a DCM. Both of these models
were fitted to the attention data set.
Fig. 8. DCM model: posterior distribution. The plot shows the posterior
probability distribution of the parameter B21
1. This is the connection from
region 1 (V1) to region 2 (V5) that is modulated by attention (the third
input). The mean value of this distribution is 0.23. This is also shown in
Fig. 7. We can use this distribution to compute our belief that this
connection is larger than some threshold c. If we choose, for example, c =
(log 2) / 4 = 0.17, then this corresponds to computing the probability that
this modulatory effect occurs within 4 s. In DCM, faster effects are
mediated by stronger connections (see, for example, Eq. 22). For our data,
we have p(B21
3 N c) = 0.78.
W.D. Penny et al. / NeuroImage 23 S264–S274
order of tens of minutes whereas estimation in comparable SEM
networks takes of the order of minutes.
A second current limitation of DCM is that neurodynamics in
each region are characterised by a single state variable (dneuronal
activityT). This prohibits inferences that can be meaningfully linked
to specific neurotransmitter systems as these would require
multiple state variables in each region that might, for example,
describe activity in excitatory and inhibitory subpopulations. The
parameters of such models would best be identified via DCMs that
use high temporal resolution data such as EEG. The development
of such models may therefore depend on integration of information
from fMRI (to find out where activity occurs) and from EEG (to
find out when it occurs). This is an exciting area for future research
that would significantly strengthen the bridge between modalities
in imaging neuroscience and our understanding of the neurobiology underlying cognitive processing.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the Wellcome Trust. A. Mechelli is
supported by grant MH64445 from the National Institutes of
Health (USA).