Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
with Sparse Image Representation
and Anatomical Priors
Jieqing Jiao1(B), Pawel Markiewicz1, Ninon Burgos1, David Atkinson2,
Brian Hutton3, Simon Arridge4, and Sebastien Ourselin1,5
1 Translational Imaging Group, CMIC, University College London, London, UK
 
2 Centre for Medical Imaging, University College London, London, UK
3 Institute of Nuclear Medicine, University College London, London, UK
4 Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, London, UK
5 Dementia Research Centre, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, London, UK
Abstract. Positron emission tomography (PET) reconstruction is an illposed inverse problem which typically involves ﬁtting a high-dimensional
forward model of the imaging process to noisy, and sometimes undersampled photon emission data. To improve the image quality, prior information derived from anatomical images of the same subject has been
previously used in the penalised maximum likelihood (PML) method to
regularise the model complexity and selectively smooth the image on a
voxel basis in PET reconstruction. In this work, we propose a novel perspective of incorporating the prior information by exploring the sparse
property of natural images. Instead of a regular voxel grid, the sparse
image representation jointly determined by the prior image and the PET
data is used in reconstruction to leverage between the image details and
smoothness, and this prior is integrated into the PET forward model and
has a closed-form expectation maximisation (EM) solution. Simulations
show that the proposed approach achieves improved bias versus variance
trade-oﬀand higher contrast recovery than the current state-of-the-art
methods, and preserves the image details better. Application to clinical
PET data shows promising results.
Keywords: PET · Image reconstruction · Image prior · Supervoxels ·
Introduction
Position Emission Tomography (PET) is a unique in vivo functional imaging technique which provides the most sensitive non-invasive molecular assay of human
body. The photons emitted from radioactively labelled molecules (tracer) in a
subject are collected by the PET detectors. With the photon data, the spatiotemporal distribution of the tracer can be estimated by image reconstruction.
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
S. Ourselin et al. (Eds.): IPMI 2015, LNCS 9123, pp. 540–551, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-19992-4 42
Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
The PET image reconstruction can be considered as a problem of ﬁtting a highdimensional model (in terms of the number of unknowns, for example the intensity values of millions of voxels in a modern PET scanner) to noisy projection data
where the photon emission is a random process greatly aﬀected by the amount of
tracer reached to the imaging target. The measured projection data can be highly
undersampled due to the detector conﬁguration when there are only a fraction of
counts collected by the scanner (which is the motivation for developing the ultrasensitive total-body PET scanner The ﬁtting of a
high-dimensional forward model to this undersampled and noisy data would result
in overﬁtting of the noise and unreliable image reconstruction.
Given this ill-posed problem of PET image reconstruction with low-count
projection data, in the maximum likelihood (ML) PET reconstruction framework, penalised likelihood (PL) reconstruction (or equivalently maximum a posteriori, MAP) has been extensively studied . Such methods involve adding
a regularisation (penalty) term to the log likelihood function, and thus the eﬀective forward model complexity can be controlled by changing the weight of this
regularisation. Ideally the eﬀective complexity should be reduced to match the
size of the measured data to avoid overﬁtting. However the appropriate model
complexity is usually unknown for a particular clinical task, and this is a general problem of using penalised likelihood framework. Two other problems are
how to formulate the penalty model and how to solve the corresponding MAP
problem. When there is no regularisation, the ML problem can be solved by the
expectation maximisation (EM) algorithm iteratively with a closed form update
equation . For some of the penalty models, the optimisation transfer technique
can be applied to derive a closed form update from the surrogate functions of
the original penalised likelihood function . However such penalty models are
usually not edge-preserving and would result in undesirable oversmooth on the
edges and ﬁne features in the image. When the closed-form solution does not
exist, a modiﬁed EM solution may be found for some of the penalty models. The
one-step-late (OSL) algorithm gives one such solution by using the gradient
of the penalty term evaluated at the previous image estimation, however OSL
does not guarantee convergence or non-negativity, depending on the penalty and
penalty weight. Realistic penalty models which preserve the image details are
usually non-smooth and non-convex, making the optimisation mathematically
and computationally challenging. Among the penalty models, anatomical images
acquired by high-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) or X-ray computed tomography (CT) from the same subject are considered useful, as they provide the prior
information on the underlying structures. Recent reviews on using anatomical
prior information for PET image reconstruction can be found in , and the
Bowsher method which encourages PET image smoothness over the neighbour voxels selected from the anatomical image, was found to achieve better
performance while being relatively eﬃcient computationally compared to other
methods . Apart from the penalised likelihood PET reconstruction frameworks, very recently an alternative perspective of using the image-derived prior
was proposed in , by incorporating the prior information into the image representation via kernel functions, and the regularisation was applied to the PET
J. Jiao et al.
forward model. This leads to a very elegant kernelised EM solution and achieves
better performance.
In this work, we propose a novel perspective on constraining the ill-posed
PET reconstruction with low-count projection data by exploring the sparsity in
natural images . Instead of using a regular voxel grid, the PET image
is represented by a reduced number of supervoxels of various sizes and shapes
so that the complexity of the PET forward model (in terms of the number of
unknowns) is reduced to match the low-count data. The sparse image representation is jointly derived from the anatomical prior image and the PET data,
preserving the edges and anatomical details without degradation of the structures only present in the PET image. This approach can be considered as a
segmentation-based reconstruction method which is potentially able to eliminate the partial volume eﬀect and it is more ﬂexible than the method proposed
in . The prior information is integrated in the image representation as in ,
and therefore the regularisation operates in the forward model instead of in the
additive penalty term, so the reconstruction is directly solved by the EM algorithm. Experiments using simulated and clinical data show promising results.
Sparse Image Representation Using Supervoxels
Supervoxels can be deﬁned as an over-segmentation of an image into perceptually meaningful regions that preserves the image details. Using such supervoxels
instead of the voxels deﬁned on a regular grid leads to a more compact and
sparse image representation which greatly reduces the image redundancy with
little loss of the details. A visual demonstration of this concept can be found
In this work the supervoxel clustering was conducted using the simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) method proposed in for its computational
eﬃciency and good performance to adhere to boundaries. The supervoxels were
generated by an adapted k-means clustering of the voxels (with limited search
region instead of the whole image) based on multi-dimensional Euclidean distance Di,j between two points i and j in the image domain, deﬁned by
(xi −xj)2 + (yi −yj)2 + (zi −zj)2,
(fi −fj)2,
where ds is the spatial Euclidean distance, df is the image intensity similarity, and these two diﬀerent measures are combined into a single one with
(N/K) (N the number of voxels and K the number of supervoxels)
being the mean spatial distance within a supervoxel as a normalisation factor,
Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
and m being a weight between the intensity similarity and spatial proximity. Note
that the intensity similarity df can be extended to include additional dimensions
when there are a group of images or multi-channel information for clustering.
It can be seen that SLIC does not explicitly enforce connectivity, therefore in
this work, connected-component labelling was performed after SLIC supervoxel clustering to assign the originally disconnected groups of voxels within
the same supervoxel to new supervoxels where all the voxels within the same
supervoxel are spatially connected. Also the supervoxels generated by SLIC of
extremely small size due to image noise were considered as “orphans” and were
merged into the nearest supervoxels.
The over-segmentation generated by the supervoxel clustering leads to a
sparse image representation when the number of supervoxels K is greatly smaller
than the number of voxels N. Let A denote the representation matrix in the
image domain, A is binary and sparse, which determines whether a voxel i
belongs to a given supervoxel j, that is
Then from the supervoxel intensity values s, the original image f on the
voxel grid can be established by f = As where f ∈RN×1 and s ∈RK×1. In
PET reconstruction, using the image representation f = As with a given A
(not a square matrix) transfers the reconstruction of the original image f to the
estimation of s with less number of the unknowns when K < N, without losing
the image details preserved in A. The joint determination of A from both the
anatomical prior images and the PET data will be discussed in Sect. 2.3. Notably,
in contrary to embedding the anatomical information within a Bayesian reconstruction framework based on solely the image intensity such as joint entropy or
mutual information, the proposed method avoids the potential bias by using the
image geometry instead.
PET Reconstruction with Sparse Image Representation
The sparse image representation can be directly integrated into the forward
model of PET reconstruction
¯g = PAs + r,
where ¯g is the expected projection data, P is the system information matrix of
the detection probabilities, and r is the expected scatter and random events.
Within the maximum likelihood (ML) reconstruction framework, the estimate of the image f (here f = As) is found by maximising the Poisson log
likelihood 
gi log ¯gi −¯gi
with observed projection data g
ˆs = arg max
s≥0 L(g|As).
J. Jiao et al.
The iterative update to ﬁnd the solution can be directly derived by the
expectation-maximisation (EM) algorithm 
AT PT 1AT PT
PAsn + r ,
where T denotes the matrix transpose and n denotes the iteration number.
With prior images, it is possible to have the sparse image representation
matrix A deﬁned on a denser voxel grid that does not match the PET imaging
system characterised by P. Instead of downsampling the prior images to match
the PET imaging resolution, in this work a resampling operator is introduced
into the forward model to maintain the image at higher spatial resolution to
avoid the loss of the edges and other image details. Let R denote the matrix
form of the resampling operator in the image domain, then the forward model
becomes ¯g = PRAs + r, and the iterative update becomes
AT RT PT 1AT RT PT
PRAsn + r .
So far it has been demonstrated the use of the sparse image representation
in reconstructing PET images. For dynamic PET data, directly reconstruct the
parametric images from the raw projection data can achieve improved accuracy
and robustness . The sparse image representation is directly applicable
to dynamic PET data as it is a linear operation in the image domain. For dynamic
PET data, the sparse representation matrix A is consistent for all time frames,
and in f = As, f and s are expanded so that f ∈RN×nt and s ∈RK×nt where
nt is the number of time frames. Using a linearised kinetic model , s can
be described as s = θB, where B ∈Rnk×nt are the temporal basis functions
and θ ∈RK×nk are the kinetic parameters for all supervoxels, with nk being
the number of kinetic parameters for each supervoxel. The direct estimation
of the kinetic parameters θ can be solved by applying the optimisation transfer
technique to obtain a closed-form update equation with improved convergence
performance.
Aggregation of Multi-layer Supervoxels and Joint Clustering
A single layer of supervoxels provides a sparse representation of the image
which is aﬀected by the algorithm and parameters used to generated the
over-segmentation. As suggested in , aggregation of multi-layer supervoxels
generated by diﬀerent algorithms with varying parameters can improve the performance of capturing the diverse and multi-scale visual features in a natural
image. For PET reconstruction, to eliminate the bias introduced by a speciﬁc
algorithm or parameter, the aggregation can be performed as an average of multiple PET images reconstructed from the same projection data and prior images
using diﬀerent over-segmentations generated by varying the supervoxel clustering
algorithm and/or the parameters. In this work the multi-layer supervoxels were
generated by varying the number of supervoxels N and the weight m between
the intensity similarity and spatial proximity in the SLIC algorithm.
Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
One contribution of this work is the joint determination of the sparse image
representation A from both the PET data and the prior image. It is widely
acknowledged that the use of an anatomical prior can introduce bias and artefacts in PET image reconstruction when there is signal mismatch between the
prior image and true PET image. In this work the over-segmentations derived
from the prior images and from the PET data are combined to avoid missing
the PET signal absent from the prior image. Also since the proposed sparse
image representation is an image geometry constraint rather than an image
intensity one, the structures shown in the prior images but not in the true PET
image will not explicitly bias the PET image reconstruction. The additional oversegmentation information from PET data is derived from the gradient of the log
likelihood in Eq. 3 with respect to the image f at f = f prior = Apriorsprior,
sprior = arg maxs≥0 L(g|Apriors), where f prior is the PET image determined
by only the sparse representation matrix Aprior derived from the prior image.
The gradient ∂L
∂f is derived as
and it is the back-projection of the mismatch of the measured projection data
g and the expected projection data ¯g generated by the forward model with
the current image estimation, so apart from the noise it indicates the diﬀerence
between the true image and the estimated image, and can be used to modify
the over-segmentation to account for the PET-only structures. In this work, the
supervoxel clustering method SLIC was used to create from this gradient image
new voxel clusters that were then separated from the clusters generated from the
prior images as new supervoxels to update the sparse representation matrix A.
Experiements
Simulation Study
Firstly the proposed approach was validated using simulated PET data and
compared with the several existing algorithms. [18F]FDG scans were simulated
using a 3D brain phantom from the BrainWeb database ( 
mni.mcgill.ca/brainweb/). The associated T1-weighted MR image was used as
the anatomical prior with no additional noise. Theoretical [18F]FDG uptake
value was used for the activity in white matter (8452.8 Bq/cc) and grey matter
(22986.2 Bq/cc). 6 lesions with various sizes and uptake values were added to
the PET phantom which were absent from the MR image, as shown in Fig. 1.
The activity image was deﬁned on a grid of 218 × 218 × 187 voxels and used
to generate PET projection data (5 mm FWHM resolution). A 20 % uniform
background was added as the mean scatter and randoms, and Poisson noise was
then introduced. Simulations were conducted at both low-count level (10 million)
and high-count level (100 million), with 10 noise realisations for each.
J. Jiao et al.
Fig. 1. Simulated brain phantom with lesions (voxel size 1 × 1 × 1 mm3). (a) the
BrainWeb brain phantom composed of grey matter, white matter and 6 lesions (various
sizes and uptake values); (b) the corresponding T1-weighted MR image used as the
anatomical prior.
PET reconstruction was performed with pre-reconstruction correction for
attenuation, and the estimated scatter and randoms were incorporated in the
forward model. The maximum likelihood-expectation maximisation method with
no prior (MLEM ), the bowsher method (Bowsher), the kernelised EM
method (KEM ) and the proposed reconstruction algorithm using sparse
image representation (SIR) were performed for reconstruction. All the methods
used the same resampling operator R in Eq. 6, and the same T1-weighted MR
image shown in Fig. 1(b) as the anatomical prior except MLEM. For KEM and
Bowsher, 50 nearest neighbours in a 5 × 5 × 5 local neighbourhood were used.
The reconstructed PET images are shown in Fig. 2.
For quantitative comparison of the reconstruction methods, the ensemble
mean squared bias Bias2 and variance V ar were calculated from the reconstructed images. In addition, the contrast recovery coeﬃcient (CRC) was calculated for the lesions. The deﬁnitions of Bias2, V ar and CRC in were used.
The bias and variance images are shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 4 compares the ensemble mean squared bias verse ensemble variance
trade-oﬀof the four PET reconstruction algorithms, achieved either by changing
the iteration number (MLEM, KEM and SIR) or by varying the penalty weight
(Bowsher).
Figure 5 compares the contrast recovery coeﬃcient (CRC) ratios versus the
background noise trade-oﬀfor the 6 lesions. The white matter was used to compute background noise standard deviation. The proposed SIR method achieved
higher CRCs with lower background noise.
Clinical Data
The proposed algorithm was also applied to reconstruct clinical [18F]Choline
data from a patient scanned with a Siemens Biograph mMR scanner. The T1weighted MR image (3T 3D GR/IR TR = 1800 ms TE = 2.67 ms FA = 9◦) shown
in Fig. 6(a) was used as the anatomical prior image after bias ﬁeld correction
using FreeSurfer ( and denoising with a non-local mean
ﬁlter . For PET reconstruction, the attenuation map was calculated from a
pseudo CT image synthesised from the subject’s T1-weighted MR image acquired
Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
Fig. 2. PET images reconstructed by MLEM (no prior), Bowsher, KEM and the proposed SIR at low-count level (1e7) with the same colour scale. Bowsher oversmooths
the lesions, whereas KEM and SIR reduce the noise while recovering the lesion contrast
and the proposed SIR shows improved edge preservation.
Fig. 3. Bias images (top, with the same colour scale) and variance images (bottom, with
the same colour scale) achieved by MLEM (no prior), Bowsher, KEM and the proposed
SIR at low-count level (1e7). SIR achieved reduced bias. Note that the mismatch
between the PET phantom and MR image, and the MR partial volume eﬀect also
contribute to the bias.
J. Jiao et al.
Ensemble Mean Variance (%)
Ensemble Mean Squared Bias (%)
SIR (proposed)
Fig. 4. Ensemble mean squared bias verse ensemble variance trade-oﬀachieved by
MLEM (no prior), Bowsher, KEM and the proposed SIR at low-count level (1e7).
Fig. 5. Contrast recovery coeﬃcient (CRC) ratios of the lesions verse background noise.
A CRC ratio is the CRC value normalised to the ground truth CRC, and 1 is the perfect
in the same imaging session using based
on the work in . [18F]Choline PET projection data of 27 s was used to evaluate
the reconstruction performance. The data started from 150 s after [18F]Choline
injection, and was corrected for dead-time, scatter (based on the synthesised
CT), randoms and normalised using the manufacturer’s software. Figure 6 shows
the PET images reconstructed by the MLEM, kernelised EM (KEM) and the
proposed sparsity-based method, along with the T1-weighted MR image used
as the anatomical prior image, and the gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR
image which supported the identiﬁcation of a lesion and it was not used as the
anatomical prior. It shows that the image reconstructed by MLEM is too noisy
Detail-Preserving PET Reconstruction
for lesion detection, and the KEM and the proposed methods reduced noise and
improved the lesion identiﬁcation from low-count PET projection data. Note
that for the proposed method, the image reconstructed using a single layer of
supervoxels is presented here to show its potential.
Fig. 6. Reconstruction of low-count clinical [18F]Choline data by (b) MLEM (no prior),
(c) KEM and (d) the proposed SIR method shown with the same colour scale. (a) the
T1w MR used as the image prior and (e) the gadolinium-enhanced T1w MR showing
the lesion (not used as the prior).
Conclusion and Discussion
In this work we have provided a novel perspective of solving the ill-posed problem in PET reconstruction, by exploring the sparse nature of images to reduce
the complexity of PET forward projection model to ﬁt noisy photon count data.
The PET image is reconstructed on the basis of supervoxels of various sizes
and shapes instead of the voxels deﬁned on a regular grid, using a sparse image
representation derived from an over-segmentation in the image domain which
provides a lower-dimensional representation with little loss of image details. The
supervoxel clustering is derived from the anatomical prior images and the log
likelihood gradient image computed from the PET data. Multiple layers of supervoxels are used to eliminate the bias introduced by the clustering algorithm and
parameters. Unlike in the MAP framework, this regularisation is directly integrated into the PET forward projection model and achieves a very eﬃcient
EM solution, and it is directly applicable to direct parametric reconstruction of
dynamic PET data. The results of experiments on simulated data show improved
bias versus variance trade-oﬀand higher contrast recovery over the current stateof-the-art methods. The application to clinical [18F]Choline data shows promising results of identifying a brain lesion from low-count projection data.
The proposed approach is readily applicable for incorporating multiple prior
images, such as MR images (for example T1-weighted, T2-weighted, FLAIR).
It can be seen that the over-segmentation is a key factor that aﬀects the ﬁnal
reconstructed PET image, in this work a state-of-the-art supervoxel clustering
algorithm was used, and the optimisation speciﬁc to a given clinical problem
and the strategy of aggregating multi-layer supervoxels will be explored to further improve the performance. Applications to whole-body imaging will also be
explored in the future.
J. Jiao et al.
Acknowledgement. EPSRC (EP/H046410/1, EP/J020990/1, EP/K005278), the
MRC (MR/J01107X/1), the NIHR Biomedical Research Unit (Dementia) at UCL and
the National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR BRC UCLH/UCL High Impact Initiative). Mattias
Heinrich, Benjamin Irving, Carole Sudre, Michael H¨utel, M. Jorge Cardoso, Pankaj
Daga and Matthias Ehrhardt for discussions.