V.W. Porto N. Saravanan
D. Waagen A.E. Eiben (Eds.)
Evolutionary
Programming VII
7th International Conference, EP98
San Diego, California, USA, March 25-27, 1998
Proceedings
In Cooperation with
IEEE Neural Networks Council
Volume Editors
V.W. Porto
Natural Selection Inc.
3333 North Torrey Pines Court, Suite 200, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
E-mail: bporto @ natural-selection.corn
N. Saravanan
Ford Motor Company, 230-1 A/MD 4, ECC Building
20600 Rotunda Drive, Dearborn, MI 48121, USA
E-mail: 
Lockheed Martin Tactical Defense Systems
1300 South Litchfield Road, Goodyear, AZ 85338, USA
E-mail: waagen @ cyberhighway.net
A.E. Eiben
Leiden University, Department of Computer Science
Niels Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA Leiden, The Netherlands
E-mail: gusz @ wi.leidenuniv.nl
CatalOging-in-Publication data applied for
Die Deutsche Bibliothek - CIP-Einheitsaufnahme
Evolutionary programming VII : 7th international conference ;
proceedings / EP98, San Diego, California, USA, March 25 - 27,
1998. V. W. Porto ... (ed.). - Berlin ; Heidelberg ; New York ;
Barcelona ; Budapest ; Hong Kong ; London ; Milan ; Paris ;
Singapore ; Tokyo : Springer, 1998
(Lecture notes in computer science ; Vol. 1447)
ISBN 3-540-64891-7
CR Subject Classification : D.1.3, El-2, C.1.2, 1.2.6, 1.2.8, 1.2.11, J.3
ISSN 0302-9743
ISBN 3-540-64891-7 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microfilms or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965,
in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer-Verlag. Violations are
liable for prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
9 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1998
Printed in Germany
Typesetting: Camera-ready by author
SPIN 10638114
06/3142 - 5 4 3 2 1 0
Printed on acid-free paper
These proceedings contain the record of papers presented at the Seventh Annual
Conference on Evolutionary Programming. Held March 25-27, 1998, EP98 was
sponsored by the Evolutionary Programming Society in cooperation with the IEEE
Neural Networks Council and the PPSN V Steering Committee. Since its inception,
the purpose of this conference has been to foster communication and stimulate
interactions between researchers investigating all aspects of evolutionary computation.
The conference has steadily evolved into an open forum for discussing the current
state of the art and future directions of evolutionary computation.
In addition to returning to San Diego, CA, for 1998, this year's conference enjoyed
the largest number of papers presented and highest attendance since its inception in
1992. As part of the egalitarian nature of this conference, the papers presented span
the full spectrum of evolutionary computation, including evolutionary programming,
evolution strategies, genetic algorithms, genetic programming, cultural algorithms,
and other variants. Special sessions on biological modeling and particle swarm
augmented more traditional sessions on theory, operators, and representation. The
number and wide range of applications papers presented is particularly notable. It is
an important indicator that these techniques are being used successfully in real-world
problem domains.
Creating a successful conference always takes a considerable effort and involves
many people. The Evolutionary Programming Society would like to express its
appreciation to the program committee for the!r diligent efforts to maintain the high
quality of the papers, the conference volunteers Jacquelyn, Verna, and Eva for their
cheerful, ever helpful presence, and to the team of Natural Selection, Inc., for their
gracious support. Finally, special thanks go to David Fogel and Peter Angeline,
whose hard work behind the scenes ensured the success of the conference.
V. William Porto
General Chairman
N. Saravanan
Don Waagen
A.E. Eiben
Technical Co-Chairs
Invited Lectures and Panel Session
Keynote Lecture:
The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain
Terrence W. Deacon, Boston University
Special Invited Lecture:
The Cumulative Consensus of Cognitive Agents in Scenarios:
A Framework for Evolutionary Processes in Semantic Memory
Don Dearholt, Mississippi State University
Banquet Lecture:
Virtual Expectations
Darrell Morgeson, Los Alamos National Labs
Special Invited Lecture:
Visualization of Evolutionary Algorithms in R n
Roman Galar, Technical University of Wroclaw
Panel Discussion:
Evolution and Economics
Panelists:
Steve Bankes, Evolving Logic Associates
Paul Harrald, G.E. Capital, U.K.
William Morrison, University of South Carolina
Leigh Tesfatsion, Iowa State University
Moderator: V. William Porto, Natural Selection, Inc.
Best Student Paper Awards
An Empirical Investigation of an Evolutionary Algorithm's Ability
to Maintain a Known Good Solution
Thomas Kammeyer, University of California, San Diego
On the Application of Cohort-Driven Operators to
Continuous Optimization Problems using Evolutionary Computation
Arnold Patton, Michigan State University
General Chairman
V. William Porto
Technical Co-Chairs
N. Saravanan
Don Waagen
A.E. Eiben
Publicity Chair
Peter J. Angeline
Financial Chair
V. William Porto
Program Committee
Lee Altenberg, Maui High Performance Computing Center
Russell W. Anderson, HNC, Inc.
Thomas B~ick, Informatik Centrum Dortmund
Joseph Breeden, Center for Adaptive Systems Applications, Inc.
Kumar Chellapilla, University of California, San Diego
Michael Conrad, Wayne State University
Marco Dorigo, Universite Libre de Bruxelles
Tom English, Texas Tech University
David Fogel, Natural Selection, Inc.
Gary Fogel, University of California, Los Angeles
Garry Greenwood, Western Michigan University
Paul Harrald, G.E. Capital, U.K.
Jong-Hwan Kim, KAIST
John Koza, Stanford University
John McDonnell, SPAWAR, RDT&E Division
Zbyszek Michalewicz, University of North Carolina
Robert Reynolds, Wayne State University
Mateen Rizki, Wright State University
Guenter Rudolph, Informatik Centrum Dortmund
Marc Schoenauer, Ecole Polytechnique
Anthony Sebald, University of California, San Diego
Leigh Tesfatsion, Iowa State University
Hans-Michael Voigt, Technical University Berlin
Xin Yao, Australian Defence Force Academy
Proceedings compiled by Bill Porto and David B. Fogel
Table of Contents
Special Invited Lecture
The Cumulative Consensus of Cognitive Agents in Scenarios:
A Framework for Evolutionary Processes in Semantic Memory
D. W. Dearholt
Economics, Emergence and Complex Systems
Preferential Partner Selection in Evolutionary Labor Markets:
A Study in Agent-Based Computational Economics
L. Tesfatsion
Subspace Pursuit for Exploratory Modeling
Complete Classes of Strategies for the Classical Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma
B. Beaufils, J.-P. Delahaye, and P. Mathieu
Evolutionary Computing in Multi-agent Environments: Operators
Evalution of a Simple Host-Parasite Genetic Algorithm
Testing Three Paradigms for Evolving Groups of Cooperative, Simple Agents
J.F. Walker
Issues and Innovations in Evolutionary Computation
Acquisition of General Adaptive Features by Evolution
D. Ashlock and J.E. Mayfield
Hybrid Interior-Lagrangian Penalty Based Evolutionary Optimization
H. Myung and J.-H. Kim
GA-Optimal Fitness Functions
J.L. Breeden
Scaling Up Evolutionary Programming Algorithms
X. Yao and Y. Liu
Short Notes on the Schema Theorem and the Building Block Hypothesis in
Genetic Algorithms
R. Salomon
Applications I
A Superior Evolutionary Algorithm for 3-SAT
T. Bdck, A.E. Eiben, and M.E. Vink
Evolvable Hardware Control for Dynamic Reconfigurable and
Adaptive Computing
P.M. Chau, G. Clark, and A.V. Sebald
Evolutionary Programming Strategies with Self-Adaptation Applied to
the Design of Rotorcraft Using Parallel Processing
J.E. Hirsh and D.K. Young
Optimization of Thinned Phased Arrays Using Evolutionary Programming
K. Chellapilla, R. Sathyanarayan, and A. Hoorfar
Evolutionary Domain Covering of an Inference System for
Function Approximation
W. Kosinski, M. Weigl, and Z. Michalewicz
Evolution-Based Approaches to Engineering Design
Learning to Re-engineer Semantic Networks Using Cultural Algorithms
N. Rychtyckyj and R.G. Reynolds
Integration of Slicing Methods into a Cultural Algorithm in Order to Assist in
Large-Scale Engineering Systems Design
D. Ostrowski and R.G. Reynolds
Genetic Search for Object Identification
S.J. Louis, G. Bebis, S. Uthiram, and Y. Varol
Fuzzy Cultural Algorithms with Evolutionary Programming
S. Zhu and R.G. Reynolds
Culturing Evolution Strategies to Support the Exploration of
Novel Environments by an Intelligent Robotic Agent
C.-J. Chung and R.G. Reynolds
Skeuomorphs and Cultural Algorithms
N. Gessler
Examining Representations and Operators I
Sphere Operators and Their Applicability for Constrained
Parameter Optimization Problems
M. Schoenauer and Z. Michalewicz
Numeric Mutation as an Improvement to Symbolic Regression in
Genetic Programming
T. Fernandez and M. Evett
Variable-Dimensional Optimization with Evolutionary Algorithms Using
Fixed-Length Representations
J. Sprave and S. Rolf
On Making Problems Evolutionarily Friendly
Part 1: Evolving the Most Convenient Representations
A. V. Sebald and K. Chellapilla
On Making Problems Evolutionarily Friendly
Part 2: Evolving the Most Convenient Coordinate Systems Within Which
to Pose (and Solve) the Given Problem
A. V. Sebald and K. Chellapilla
An Experimental Investigation of Self-Adaptation in
Evolutionary Programming
K.-H. Liang, X. Yao, Y. Liu, C. Newton, and D. Hoffman
Evolutionary Computation Theory
On the Application of Evolutionary Pattern Search Algorithms
The Schema Theorem and the Misallocation of Trials in the Presence of
Stochastic Effects
D.B. Fogel and A. Ghozeil
On the "Explorative Power" of ES/EP-Iike Algorithms
H.-G. Beyer
Resampling and its Avoidance in Genetic Algorithms
R. Salomon
Evolutionary Search for Minimal Elements in Partially Ordered Finite Sets
G. Rudolph
Tailoring Mutation to Landscape Properties
W.G. Macready
Applications II
A Genetic Programming Methodology for Missile Countermeasures
Optimization Under Uncertainty
F. W. Moore and O.N. Garcia
Evolutionary Algorithms for Vertex Cover
An Evolutionary Self-Learning Methodology: Some Preliminary Results from
a Case Study
S. Thacore
Evolving IIR Filters in Multipath Environments
S. Sundaralingam and K. Sharman
Fuzzy Partition and Input Selection by Genetic Algorithms for
Designing Fuzzy Rule-Based Classification Systems
T. Murata, H. lshibuchi, T. Nakashima, and M. Gen
Evolving Nonlinear Controllers for Backing up a Truck-and-Trailer
Using Evolutionary Programming
K. Chellapilla
Evolutionary Computation and Biological Modeling
Reconstruction of DNA Sequence Information from a Simulated DNA Chip
Using Evolutionary Programming
G.B. Fogel, K. Chellapilla, and D.B. Fogel
Using Programmatic Motifs and Genetic Programming to
Classify Protein Sequences as to Cellular Location
J.R. Koza, F.H. Bennett III, and D. Andre
Fully Automated and Rapid Flexible Docking of Inhibitors
Covalently Bound to Serine Proteases
D.K. Gehlhaar, D. Bouzida, and P.A. Rejto
Microtubule Networks as a Medium for Adaptive Information Processing
J.O. Pfaffmann and M. Conrad
Evolve IV: A Metabolically-Based Artificial Ecosystem Model
J. Brewster and M. Conrad
Sex, Mate Selection, and Evolution
Finding Low Energy Conformations of Atomic Clusters
Using Evolution Strategies
G. W. Greenwood and Y.-P. Liu
Estimating the Distribution of Neural Connections in the Saccadic System
Using a Biologically Plausible Learning rule - Preliminary Results
R. W. Anderson, J.B. Badler, and E.L. Keller
Issues and Innovations in Evolutionary Computation II
Evolutionary Algorithms Combined with Deterministic Search
G.B. Lamont, S.M. Brown, and G.H. Gates Jr.
Steady State Memetic Algorithm for Partial Shape Matching
E. Ozcan and C.K. Mohan
A Fully Characterized Test Suite for Genetic Programming
D. Ashlock and J.L Lathrop
Genetic Algorithms for Belief Network Inference:
The Role of Scaling and Niching
O.J. Mengshoel and D.C. Wilkins
Building Software Frameworks for Evolutionary Computation
M.A. Smith
Recorded Step Directional Mutation for Faster Convergence
T. Dunning
Particle Swarm
The Behavior of Particles
J. Kennedy
Parameter Selection in Particle Swarm Optimization
Y. Shi and R.C. Eberhart
Evolutionary Optimization Versus Particle Swarm Optimization:
Philosophy and Performance Differences
P.J. Angeline
Comparison between Genetic Algorithms and Particle Swarm Optimization
R.C. Eberhart and Y. Shi
Combinations of Evolutionary and Neural Computation
A Hybrid Evolutionary Learning System for Synthesizing Neural Network
Pattern Recognition Systems
D. Wicker, M.M. Rizki, and L.A. Tamburino
An Evolutionary Algorithm for Designing Feedforward Neural Networks
A.N. Skourikhine
Dual Network Representation Applied to the Evolution of Neural Controllers
J.C.Figueira Pujol and R. Poli
What does the Landscape of a Hopfield Associative Memory Look Like?
A. Imada and K. Araki
Special Invited Lecture
Visualization of Evolutionary Adaptation in R n
A. Chorazyczewski and R. Galar
Examining Representations and Operators II
On the Application of Cohort-Driven Operators to Continuous Optimization
Problems Using Evolutionary Computation
A.L. Patton, T. Dexter, E.D. Goodman, and W.F. Punch
Random Search versus Genetic Programming as Engines for
Collective Adaptation
Optimal Mutation and Crossover Rates for a Genetic Algorithm Operating
in a Dynamic Environment
S.A. Stanhope and J.M. Daida
Local Selection
F. Menczer and R.K. Belew
Asymmetric Mutations for Stochastic Search
J.R. McDonnell
Applications III
Automated Rule Extraction for Engine Health Monitoring
T. W. Brotherton and G. Chadderdon
Genetic Programming for Automatic Target Classification and Recognition
in Synthetic Aperture Radar Imagery
S.A. Stanhope and J.M. Daida
Evolving Heuristics for Planning
R. Aler, D. Borrajo, and P. Isasi
Solving Cutting Stock Problems by Evolutionary Programming
K.-H. Liang, X. Yao, C. Newton, and D. Hoffman
Issues and Innovations in Evolutionary Computation III
An Empirical Investigation of an Evolutionary Algorithm's Ability to
Maintain a Known Good Solution
T.E. Kammeyer and R.K. Belew
Evolving Integrated Low-Level Behaviors into Intelligently Interactive
Simulated Forces
V. W. Porto
Using Offset Invariant Crossover as a Tool for Discovering Cycle Lengths
of a Periodic Function
C. Davis and C.F. Eick
Evolving a Generalized Behaviour: Artificial Ant Problem Revisited
Co-evolving Functions in Genetic Programming:
Dynamic ADF Creation Using GLiB
M. Ahluwalia and L. Bull
Evolving Spatially-Localized Projection Filters for SAR
Automatic Target Recognition
D. Waagen, J. Pecina, and R. Pickens
Genetic Programming in the Overlapping Generations Model:
An Illustration with the Dynamics of the Inflation Rate
S.-H. Chen and C.-H. Yeh
Author Index