UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Previously Published Works
A Statistical Learning Framework for Materials Science: Application to Elastic Moduli of knary Inorganic Polycrystalline Compounds
 
Scientific Reports, 6(1)
de Jong, Maarten
Notestine, Randy
Publication Date
10.1038/srep34256
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
www.nature.com/scientificreports
A Statistical Learning Framework
for Materials Science: Application
to Elastic Moduli of k-nary Inorganic
Polycrystalline Compounds
Maarten de Jong1,*,†, Wei Chen2,*,‡, Randy Notestine3, Kristin Persson1,2, Gerbrand Ceder1,4,
Anubhav Jain2, Mark Asta1,4 & Anthony Gamst3
Materials scientists increasingly employ machine or statistical learning (SL) techniques to accelerate
materials discovery and design. Such pursuits benefit from pooling training data across, and thus
being able to generalize predictions over, k-nary compounds of diverse chemistries and structures.
This work presents a SL framework that addresses challenges in materials science applications, where
datasets are diverse but of modest size, and extreme values are often of interest. Our advances include
the application of power or Hölder means to construct descriptors that generalize over chemistry and
crystal structure, and the incorporation of multivariate local regression within a gradient boosting
framework. The approach is demonstrated by developing SL models to predict bulk and shear moduli
(K and G, respectively) for polycrystalline inorganic compounds, using 1,940 compounds from a growing
database of calculated elastic moduli for metals, semiconductors and insulators. The usefulness of the
models is illustrated by screening for superhard materials.
In recent years, first-principles methods for calculating properties of inorganic compounds have advanced to the
point that it is now possible, for a wide range of chemistries, to predict many properties of a material before it
is synthesized in the lab1. This achievement has spurred the use of high-throughput computing techniques2–5 as
an engine for the rapid development of extensive databases of calculated material properties6–12. Such databases
create new opportunities for computationally-assisted materials discovery and design, providing for a diverse
range of engineering applications with custom tailored solutions. But even with current and near-term computing
resources, high-throughput techniques can only analyze a fraction of all possible compositions and crystal structures. Thus, statistical learning (SL), or machine learning, offers an express lane to further accelerate materials
discovery and inverse design2,5,13–27. As statistical learning techniques advance, increasingly general models will
allow us to quickly screen materials over broader design spaces and intelligently prioritize the high-throughput
analysis of the most promising material candidates.
One encounters several challenges when applying SL to materials science problems. Although many elemental
properties are available, we typically do not know how to construct optimal descriptors for each property, over
a variable number of constituent elements. For instance, if one believes that some average of atomic radii is an
important descriptor, there are many different averages, let alone possible weighting schemes, that one might
investigate. This challenge may be reduced by placing restrictions on the number of constituent elements or types
of chemistries or structures considered, but such restrictions reduce the generalizability of the learned predictor.
Materials science datasets are often also smaller than those available in domains where SL has an established history. This requires that SL be applied with significant care in order to prevent over-fitting the model. Over-fitting
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
2Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 3Computational
and Applied Statistics Laboratory, San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA. 4Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
†Present address: Space Exploration Technologies, 1 Rocket Rd, Hawthorne, CA 90250, USA. ‡Present address:
Department of Mechanical, Materials and Aerospace Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL
60616, USA. *These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to M.d.J. (email: )
received: 27 June 2016
accepted: 08 September 2016
Published: 03 October 2016
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
leads to predictions that are less generalizable to new data than anticipated28, such that predictions are less accurate than expected. At the same time, smaller datasets challenge us to use the available data as wisely as possible.
This may include leveraging observations related to the smoothness of the underlying physical phenomenon, and
the use of an appropriate risk criterion, rather than partitioning the available data into distinct training and test
sets. For SL to have the greatest impact on materials discovery and design, we must pursue techniques that make
maximal use of the available data. This requires approaches that are capable of systematically pooling training
data across, and are thus capable of generalizing predictions over, k-nary compounds of diverse chemistries and
structures.
The successful application of SL requires the selection of an appropriate set of descriptor candidates. In materials science problems, the candidates must be capable of both “uniquely characterizing”22 a diverse range of
compounds, and sufficiently explaining the diversity of the phenomenon being learned. Thus, the selection of
descriptor candidates is a crucial and active field of investigation within materials science (e.g. refs 14, 22 and 23),
as the field endeavors to develop general models with high predictive accuracy. Previous work in materials science
has included both categorical descriptors (e.g. refs 23 and 24) and continuous descriptors (e.g. refs 22 and 23).
Although both types of descriptors may be legitimately used in SL, special care should be taken when using
categorical descriptors, as each such descriptor essentially (i.e., unless there is sufficient smoothing across cells)
partitions the space of compounds into disjoint cells, which quickly increases the degrees of freedom and thus the
risk of over-fitting the model.
SL applications should always include descriptor candidates suggested by known, scientifically relevant relationships22,23. But in order to construct models that accurately generalize across diverse datasets, such candidates will typically need to be augmented with additional descriptor candidates, capable of bridging across the
simplifying assumptions that divide less generalizable models. Without these additional candidates, attempts to
learn more general models will be stifled, as it will be impossible to discover new, unexpected relationships. Here
we introduce the use of Hölder means, also known as generalized or power means, as an ordered approach to
explicitly constructing descriptor candidates from variable length numeric lists. Hölder means describe a family
of means that range from the minimum to maximum functions, and include the harmonic, geometric, arithmetic, and quadratic means29. This paper advances previous work by constructing descriptor candidates as Hölder
means, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not previously been done in the field of materials science.
Having discussed the construction of descriptor candidates, we now introduce gradient boosting machine
local polynomial regression (GBM-Locfit), which is a SL technique that we developed to leverage the available
data as wisely as possible. Energy minimization problems often enforce smoothness in the functions mapping
useful descriptors to outcomes. Statistical learning techniques may exploit such smoothness, when present, in
order to produce models that are as accurate as possible for a fixed amount of training data; such considerations
are more important when working with smaller training datasets than with larger datasets. GBM-Locfit utilizes multivariate local polynomial regression, as implemented in Locfit30, within a gradient boosting machine
(GBM) framework31. Local polynomial regression performs a series of weighted regressions within a moving
window, with a weight function that gives greatest weight to observations near the center of the window, producing a smooth curve that runs through the middle of the observations32,33. GBM uses a gradient descent algorithm to iteratively assemble a predictor while minimizing an appropriate, typically squared error, loss function31.
Our approach enforces more smoothness in the functions mapping descriptors to outcomes than traditional
tree-based GBM methods, which we suggest is appropriate for this and many other materials science problems.
Additionally, the enforced smoothness helps minimize boundary bias (i.e., when the solution is flat over some
peripheral region of the space of descriptors), which can be problematic with tree-based techniques when the data
has sparsely populated tails. We believe GBM-Locfit will be advantageous for many materials science problems
where datasets are of modest size, the underlying physical phenomenon is reasonably smooth and sparse regions
have been carefully studied and are of particular interest.
To illustrate both our GBM-Locfit approach and the use of descriptor candidates constructed as Hölder
means, we predict the elastic bulk and shear moduli (K and G, respectively) of k-nary inorganic polycrystalline
compounds. These moduli govern the stress-strain relations of isotropic materials within the linear-elastic range
and are central to governing the mechanical behavior of materials in diverse contexts spanning geophysics to
structural engineering. In addition, elastic constants are known to correlate with a wide range of other materials
properties, including ductility and hardness34–37 and thermal conductivity38–40. Further, the single-crystal elastic constants are a direct measure of the bonding strength and directionality in a material, and are thus widely
employed in the development of theoretical models for interatomic forces. Due to the importance of these properties, extensive efforts have been devoted to developing theoretical models of elastic moduli, relating their magnitude to structural and electronic properties such as atomic density, coordination, cohesive energy and Fermi
energy27,41–46. But all of these models consider specific subsets of chemistries or structures, limiting their use for
predicting the elastic properties of a diverse range of materials. A recent investigation employing nonparametric
regression24 and categorical descriptors considered elastic constants for a diverse range of materials, but the results
fail to generalize to new data (see Supplementary Figures S6 and S7). In this paper, we demonstrate the application of the SL framework described above to develop broadly applicable models for K and G, expressed in terms
of a few descriptors that are either currently tabulated or easily computed. We demonstrate how such models can
be used to enable materials discovery, by screening the hardness of over 30,000 compounds to identify superhard inorganic compounds that are thermodynamically stable or weakly metastable at a temperature of 0 K. Our
training dataset consists of 1,940 inorganic compounds from the Materials Project’s growing database of elastic
constants constructed using first-principles, quantum mechanical calculations based on Density Functional
Theory (DFT)12.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In the methods section, we detail our SL framework, which includes
safeguards against over-fitting our models. Then the predictive models for the elastic moduli are described in the
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
results section, including an overview of the descriptors and the prediction accuracy. In addition, we present a
screening process for superhard materials and present a DFT validation. In the discussion section, we examine
known issues with the accuracy of the predictions and conclude with a summary of the main advances presented
in this work.
We begin our methods section with some background on local polynomial regression, which was introduced to
the statistics literature by Stone32 and Cleveland33. Loader30 provides a general, yet thorough discussion of local
regression, as well as implementation details of the Locfit software. Simply put, multivariate local regression produces a smooth surface that runs nominally through the middle of the observations. Thus, given response variables, y, and predictor variables, x, Locfit estimates a regression function, η, which relates these quantities, where
 is noise (assumed to be independent and identically distributed with zero mean and finite variance):
Globally, no strong assumptions are made concerning the form of η, the underlying function being estimated.
Locally, at each fitting point, the underlying function is assumed to be smooth, such that Taylor’s theorem allows
the behavior to be described with a low order polynomial. Specifically, a once-differentiable function can be
approximated locally by a linear function, and more generally, a k-times differentiable function can be approximated locally by a kth-order polynomial. In order to make local estimates of η, one must select a bandwidth, or
smoothing window, and an appropriate smoothing kernel or weight function. Appropriate weight functions, such
as Locfit’s default tricubic weight function, give greatest weight to observations near the center of the smoothing
window and zero weight to observations outside the window. The local estimate of η, at each fitting point, is the
intercept of the local regression centered at the fitting point, and these local estimates combine to produce a
smooth estimate of the underlying function. We are interested in estimating smooth functions, because energy
minimization problems often enforce smoothness in the functions mapping useful descriptors to outcomes.
In this paper, we distinguish between composition and structural descriptors. Composition descriptors, such
as average atomic radius and weight, are calculated from elemental properties and only require knowledge of a
compound’s composition. Structural descriptors, such as cohesive energy and volume per atom, require knowledge of a compound’s specific structure (in addition to composition), and may be determined experimentally or
calculated using DFT. We seek composition descriptors that generalize over k-nary compounds, but do not have
a priori knowledge of how to combine the various elemental properties to construct descriptors that are optimal
for our specific, yet very general problem. Thus we construct composition descriptors as a series of weighted
Hölder means, rely upon Locfit to capture any necessary non-linearities, and rely upon model selection techniques and our GBM framework to select which descriptors are most useful at each iteration, and for each specific
problem. Because GBM implements a version of the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)47,
our approach has similarities to the statistical learning approach advocated by Ghiringhelli et al.22, but is less reliant upon sufficient, a priori, scientific insight and may thus be applied to more general problems.
In equation (2), μp(x) represents the Hölder mean μ, to the power p, of the property x, taken over i values,
with associated weights wi
29. Equation (3) gives the Hölder mean when p equals zero. Hölder means describe a
family of generalized means that range from the minimum function (when p =​ −​∞​) to the maximum function
(p =​ ∞​). An example would be calculating the cubic mean (p =​ 3) of atomic radii over all constituent elements in
a particular composition, where the weights would be the molar quantities of each element.
In this work, we only consider the Hölder means with integer power values between negative and positive
four, which include the well known harmonic mean (p =​ −​1), geometric mean (p =​ 0), arithmetic mean (p =​ 1),
and quadratic or Euclidean mean (p =​ 2). We construct these Hölder based composition descriptors for each
of eight elemental properties listed in Table 1 (upper), using elemental properties from pymatgen48. We also
consider the structural descriptors listed in Table 1 (lower); most of these descriptors are obtained directly or
post-processed from a single density functional theory (DFT) calculation per compound. The cohesive energy
per atom, Ec , is estimated from DFT by subtracting the atom-in-a-box energies of the constituent elements, from
the formation energy of each compound. Following a Voronoi tessellation49 of each unit cell, atomic coordinations, nearest-neighbor bond lengths, and bond angles between adjacent neighbors are calculated for each site.
Additional structural descriptors are then constructed as Hölder means of these quantities over all sites; please see
Supplementary Table SI for a full list of all investigated descriptors.
Our GBM-Locfit implementation uses established model selection techniques, including 10-fold
cross-validation and a conservative risk criterion, to determine which descriptors are the most useful for predicting K and G, without over-fitting the training data. The GBM framework iteratively assembles a predictor, P, as a
sum of Locfit smoothed weak learners, ηi. At each iteration, GBM selects the smoothed weak learner candidate
that leads to the greatest reduction in the size of the residual, ∆i , but attenuates each weak learner by the
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
learning rate, λ, as shown in equation (4). Both of our final models use a learning rate of 5% and limit the level of
interaction to 3 descriptors, Dj, meaning that Locfit is only run with three descriptors at a time, to create each
smoothed weak learner candidate.
Although it is possible that the number of iterations required to achieve a given prediction error could be reduced
by tuning Locfit’s smoothing parameters, we have opted to use Locfit’s default smoothing parameters and rely on
the GBM method to provide an appropriate amount of flexibility to the fitted model. The one exception to this,
is that Locfit’s degree of local polynomial is set to linear for all models, rather than using the default setting of
quadratic.
Our GBM-Locfit implementation utilizes all of the available data for training and relies on a conservative risk
criterion to limit the number of iterations, rather than an explicitly partitioned test dataset, to avoid over-fitting
the model to the data. As summarized graphically in Fig. 1, we perform 10-fold cross-validation (CV), using 90%
of the data to select the weak learner that minimizes the squared error loss function and the remaining 10% of the
data to estimate the mean and standard deviation of the out-of-sample squared errors, for each iteration and fold.
After this process is completed for each fold and for a large number of iterations, the prediction errors are calculated as the mean (over folds) out-of-sample squared error for each iteration, and the standard errors of the prediction errors are estimated from the standard deviations of the out-of-sample squared errors for each iteration.
The risk criterion determines the iteration threshold as the first iteration for which the prediction mean squared
error (MSE) is less than the sum of the minimum prediction MSE (over all iterations) and the standard error of
the prediction MSE at that minimum50, which has been shown to be conservative51. Please see Supplementary
Fig. S1 for example performance curves. A more commonly used, but unconservative risk criterion is to simply
establish the iteration threshold as the minimum prediction MSE (without adding one standard error), but this
seems overly optimistic, particularly when the sample size is small (relative to the number of descriptor candidates) or the prediction MSE curve lacks a distinct minimum. After the iteration threshold is determined, a final
GBM-Locfit model is fit using 100% of the data, but limiting the number of iterations to the previously established
iteration threshold, to avoid over-fitting the model to the data. By limiting the number of GBM iterations, we
inherently limit the number of weak learners, since each iteration adds one weak learner term to the predictor,
as in equation (4).
We demonstrate GBM-Locfit by learning the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) averages52 of the elastic bulk and shear
moduli (K and G, respectively) which characterize polycrystalline compounds. More specifically, we learn log(K)
and log(G) to avoid having the squared error loss function severely overweight the higher moduli materials. We
present our predictions graphically for K and G in Fig. 2, by comparing the VRH moduli from our DFT training
set12 with those learned by our GBM-Locfit method.
Our best four descriptor models for log(K) and
log( ) are summarized in Table 2. None of our models with
more than four descriptors have significantly better predictive accuracy than these four descriptor models, based
Description
group number in periodic table
atomic mass
atomic radius (empirical)
row number in periodic table
boiling temperature
melting temperature
electronegativity
atomic number
cohesive energy per atom
formation energy per atom
energy above hull per atom
log of volume per atom
Voronoi based site coordination
Voronoi based site bond lengths
Voronoi based site bond angles
Table 1.  Overview of descriptor candidates. Descriptor candidates for both moduli include composition
descriptors constructed as Hölder means and geometric and arithmetic standard deviations of eight elemental
properties (upper) and structural descriptors from DFT and subsequent post-processing (lower).
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
10−Fold Cross−Validation Loop
GBM Loop (each with 90% of data)
GBM Loop (with 100% of data)
Step 1: Determine Iteration Threshold
Step 2: Construct Predictor
GBM−Locfit Implementation Overview
Add Best Weak Learner to Model
Weak Learner Evaluation Loop
Add Best Weak Learner to Model
Weak Learner Evaluation Loop
Save Predictor
Save (only) the Iteration Threshold: T
For Many Iterations
For T Iterations (only)
Evaluate Risk Criteria
Figure 1.  GBM-Locfit implementation consists of two distinct steps. First, the iteration threshold is
determined per the risk criterion, by running the GBM loop within a 10-fold cross-validation loop, in order
to estimate the prediction mean squared error and associated standard error for each iteration. Second, the
final GBM-Locfit model is fit with 100% of the data, while limiting the number of GBM iterations to the
iteration threshold. This approach utilizes all of the available data for training, gives equal consideration to each
compound, and avoids over-fitting the model to the data.
KDFT (GPa)
KGBM (GPa)
Quaternary
GDFT (GPa)
GGBM (GPa)
Quaternary
Figure 2.  Predictions. Comparison of DFT training data with GBM-Locfit predictions for K (a) and G (b).
Training set consists of 65 unary, 1091 binary, 776 ternary, and 8 quaternary compounds.
Descriptor
Underlying property
volume per atom
row number
cohesive energy
electronegativity
cohesive energy
volume per atom
row number
electronegativity
Table 2.  GBM-Locfit model summaries. Descriptor rank and relative influence (RI) for our best four
descriptor models for K and G. Composition descriptors are constructed as Hölder means to the power p, μp(x),
of property x.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
on comparisons of prediction mean squared error and their associated standard errors. And all of our models
with less than four descriptors have significantly less predictive accuracy.
For both K and G, the structural descriptors log(V), log of volume per atom, and Ec , cohesive energy per
atom, are very important, with a combined relative influence of 66.0% for K and 72.9% for G. Notably, these
two descriptors are more useful for predicting K and G than any of the Voronoi based structural descriptors,
which were constructed to capture individual attributes of the local environments. Yet the usefulness of these two
information-rich descriptors is not surprising, since log(V) and Ec incorporate information regarding the local
environments, including coordination, bond angles, and bond lengths.
For modulus X, relative error is defined as:
Relative Error
Over half of our predictions have a relative error of less than 10% for K, and less than 20% for G, as shown in
Figures 3 and 4 show marginal predictor, or partial dependence, plots for K and G, which provide a one
dimensional summary of the effect of each descriptor on the overall prediction. Marginal predictor summaries
account for the effects of the other descriptors28, so any correlation between descriptors reduces the predictive
influence of one or more of the correlated descriptors. The marginal predictor plots indicate an inverse, nearly
linear relationship between log(V) and log(K), and log(V) and log(G). This agrees with previous findings for
K53–56, but our results support that this relationship generalizes beyond the specific material classes previously
studied, and also applies approximately to G. Additionally, the marginal predictor plots indicate an inverse, gently
non-linear relationship between Ec and log(K), and Ec and log(G). Thus, our models indicate compounds with
high K and G are generally densely packed (low log(V)) and strongly bonded (high Ec), which agree with both
previous findings53–56 and physical intuition. Furthermore, the strong influence of log(V) and Ec on K and G,
combined with their similar marginal predictor plots, underscore the strong correlation between the two moduli.
Although Ec is an important predictor of K, the composition descriptor μ1(Rn), arithmetic mean of elemental
row number, ranks as the second most influential descriptor of K. The marginal predictor plot for μ1(Rn) indicates
a roughly quadratic relationship with log(K), indicating that compounds with a higher arithmetic average of row
number generally have a higher K. The final descriptor for K, with a comparatively small relative influence in our
model, is μ−4(X), the quartic-harmonic mean of elemental electronegativity, whose marginal predictor plot indicates that compounds with low average electronegativity generally have a lower K. Although this electronegativity
descriptor has a small relative influence and fairly weak partial dependence, these are both after accounting for
the influence of the other descriptors. The Spearman’s rank correlation between μ−4(X) and K is approximately
0.50, which is a moderately strong correlation, as evident in Fig. 3(d). Hölder means of Rn and X also complete the
set of top four descriptors for G, although for G the most useful Hölder means are μ−3(Rn), the cubic-harmonic
mean of elemental row number, and μ4(X), the quartic mean of elemental electronegativity.
The influence of log(V) suggests that it may be possible to develop higher moduli materials from existing compounds by filling interstitial sites (to decrease average volume per atom). But the influence of mean elemental row
number will at least partially offset the possible improvement, since elements that could be added to interstitial
sites (with minimal disruption of the structure) will generally be smaller than the neighboring elements.
Screening for superhard materials.
As an example illustration, we use the SL model to screen for superhard materials. More details and analyses resulting from this application will be presented in a forthcoming article.
Here we focus on the main results to illustrate the utility of such a SL model.
The SL predictors developed in this work allow the rapid estimation of K and G for thousands of compounds,
for which the required descriptors may be easily calculated. Additionally, with appropriate caution, these predictors may be plugged into other relationships, to estimate additional material properties that can be expressed
as functions of K and G. As an example, we estimate Vickers hardness, and then screen for superhard materials, defined as those having a hardness exceeding 40 GPa57. Vickers hardness is estimated using a recently published model, that has shown good agreement with experimental measurements for both cubic and non-cubic
materials35,58,59:
Prediction RMSE
(log(GPa))
Percent of Predictions within
Relative Error of
Table 3.  GBM-Locfit prediction accuracy. Iteration threshold as determined by cross validation, prediction
root mean squared error (RMSE), and percentage of predictions within 5, 10, 20, and 30 percent relative error
per equation (5) for our best four descriptor models for K and G.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
In general, one should exercise caution when plugging results from one or more statistical models into other
equations, without an understanding of the error associated with each model and the effect of such errors upon
the new outcome. In our case, because the residuals of our SL models for log(K) and log(G) are positively correlated, the plugin approach should be reasonably accurate when used to generate a relative ranking of hardness.
Additionally, we are only using this approach for screening, to identify compounds for more thorough investigation via our DFT workflow.
The screening process for superhard materials starts by considering approximately 30,000 compounds that
form a subset of the 66,000 compounds currently in the Materials Project. This subset contains only elements and
compounds for which DFT calculations based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) are expected
to be accurate. In particular, materials containing f-electrons or d-electrons that require beyond-DFT treatments
(such as DFT +​ U) are not considered in the screening process. This represents a realistic materials-discovery scenario in which screening is carried out on a large number of compounds for which the desired physical property
is unknown, either from experiments or calculations.
The SL model is used to estimate the hardness for the 30,000 compounds by employing equation (6). The
resulting distribution of hardness values is shown in Supplementary Fig. S8. To further refine the SL predictions of hardness, DFT calculations are performed on the most promising candidates, as identified by the SL
model. Consistent with experiments, our SL model identifies diamond as being the hardest compound (among
the 30,000 materials considered in the screening), followed by (cubic) boron nitride, a well-known superhard
compound57. Both of these findings were confirmed by subsequent DFT calculations. Some other compounds
that are predicted to be superhard or near-superhard according to the SL model and subsequent DFT calculations
are Be2C and the family of borides of the form X-B2, where X =​ Ti, Hf, Zr, Sc, Re, V, together with B4C. These compounds are all known (near-) superhard materials60,61. Some compounds have been identified from the SL model
V (A3 atom)
Ec (eV atom)
Figure 3.  Partial dependence plots for K. Partial dependence curves are shown as solid black lines for:
(a) volume per atom, (b) arithmetic mean of elemental row number, (c) cohesive energy, and (d) quarticharmonic mean of elemental electronegativity. Training data points are shown in the background, colored per
the descriptor indicated below each colorbar, to help illustrate the relationship between descriptors. The mean
of the outcome (K) is shown as a thin dashed black line for reference.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
(and confirmed by DFT) in this study as (near-) superhard, but are not listed (to the best of our knowledge) in
this context in the literature. Such compounds include: Mg(B6C)2, Sc2CrB6 and Mg2B24C, all of which are known
compounds that have been synthesized as part of previous investigations62–64. Such compounds might provide an
interesting starting point for future experimental investigations of superhardness. More details on our screening
approach, the DFT calculations and the results will be presented in a forthcoming article.
The hardness screening illustrates the power of using SL models to quickly identify potentially interesting
novel materials with target properties. However, the potential use of such SL models reaches far beyond the
screening of compounds. In particular, inverse design can be performed in which materials that meet a desired
requirement are designed computationally by combining a SL model with an optimization routine such as a
genetic algorithm. Such methods may be applied not only to search for superhard materials, but also novel thermoelectrics, auxetic materials, photovoltaics or materials with high elastic stiffness, for example. With regards to
identifying compounds with high elastic moduli, we note that in the screening process undertaken in this work,
several classes of compounds with high K, G and K/G are identified using SL and confirmed by DFT. The ratio
K/G is known as Pugh’s ratio and correlates with intrinsic ductility34. As with the hardness, DFT calculations are
performed on the compounds with the highest value for the property of interest as predicted by SL. The systems
that are subsequently investigated by DFT because of promisingly high elastic moduli or K/G ratio are shown in
Supplementary Table SIII. The top-performing candidates in terms of K, G and K/G are shown in Supplementary
Tables SIV, SV and SVI, respectively. The elastic moduli predicted by both the SL model and the subsequent DFT
calculations are tabulated. The calculated K and G for the systems in Supplementary Table SIII are shown graphically in Supplementary Figures S9 and S10, respectively.
Ec (eV atom)
V (A3 atom)
Figure 4.  Partial dependence plots for G. Partial dependence curves are shown as solid black lines for:
(a) cohesive energy, (b) volume per atom, (c) cubic-harmonic mean of elemental row number, and (d) quartic
mean of elemental electronegativity. Training data points are shown in the background, colored per the
descriptor indicated below each colorbar, to help illustrate the relationship between descriptors. The mean of the
outcome (G) is shown as a thin dashed black line for reference.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 6:34256 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34256
Discussion
Discrepancies between the DFT and GBM moduli may be caused by (i) shortcomings in our K and G predictors
or (ii) DFT methods-related errors and approximations, which add noise to the underlying physical phenomenon
that we are trying to learn. More specifically, predictor shortcomings may include having insufficient training
data in some important regions of the space of descriptors, having overlooked relevant descriptor candidates,
and any difficulties our GBM-Locfit regressions may have fully capturing the underlying physical behavior. The
inorganic polycrystalline compounds in our training set include metallic, ionic, and covalent bonds, but 81%
of the compounds qualify as metallic, based on having a DFT-calculated band gap of 0.2 eV or less. Although
DFT-calculated band gaps are not entirely reliable, it seems unlikely that a more detailed analysis would result
in a meaningfully different characterization of our training set. So while our goal is to predict K and G for a wide
variety of inorganic polycrystalline compounds, regardless of bond details, we acknowledge that our sample is
skewed towards metallic compounds. Additionally, we have excluded compounds with f-block elements from our
training set, since less than 60 such compounds with elastic moduli were available from the Materials Project, and
these were insufficient to capture the additional complexities associated with the bonding in such compounds. So
although our learned models may be used to predict K and G for any k-nary compound, the reported accuracies
may not generalize to compounds with f-block elements.
Our GBM prediction errors are larger for G than for K, particularly for compounds with elastically anisotropic
crystalline structures. For these compounds, the Voigt and Reuss bounds are further apart which leads to more
uncertainty in the VRH average, so a descriptor of crystal anisotropy would likely improve the model’s predictive
accuracy. Other cases where the prediction error is often larger include systems with local magnetic moments,
e.g., transition-metal oxides and intermetallic compounds containing Cr, Fe, Co, Mn and Ni. Calculating K and G
for such compounds using DFT is a challenge due to the degrees of freedom associated with magnetic ordering65.
On the other hand, the GBM-Locfit models lack (explicit) descriptors to include magnetism and might therefore
not be able to capture these features accurately. DFT is known to sometimes yield inaccurate cohesive energies,
volume per atom and bulk moduli for late transition metals such as Ag and Au but also various metals such as Hg,
Cd, Ga, Tl, Pb and Bi65. This has been attributed to problems with the description of d-electron correlation66–68,
dispersion69, relativistic effects70 and spin-orbit coupling in DFT. This is especially a problem in high throughput
DFT-calculations, where it is impractical to tune all parameters to yield optimum results for each compound.
Summary and Conclusions
We have demonstrated our novel GBM-Locfit SL technique and descriptor candidates constructed as Hölder
means by predicting the elastic bulk and shear moduli (K and G, respectively) of k-nary inorganic polycrystalline
compounds. Our SL framework combines GBM-Locfit (multivariate local regression within a gradient boosting
framework), 10-fold cross-validation with a conservative risk criterion, and a diverse set of composition and
structural descriptors, which generalize over k-nary compounds. Thus, following a single DFT run to determine
log(V) and Ec , predictions for K and G may be made for any inorganic polycrystalline k-nary compound. In fact,
the K and G predictors described here, are already available on the Materials Project website, for all materials for
which the full elastic tensors have not yet been calculated via the DFT elastic constants workflow12. Additionally,
the Materials Project continues to run the DFT workflow on more compounds, so as the available training set
grows, the predictive accuracy of subsequent SL models should improve and the reliable identification of additional predictive descriptors may be possible.
More generally, our SL framework dovetails with the extensive materials properties databases made possible
by high-throughput computing techniques. Such databases provide training data for new SL models, which facilitate efficient screening of broader design spaces, which then help focus subsequent high-throughput runs on the
most promising candidates.
We believe that our GBM-Locfit approach will be advantageous for many materials science problems, when
functions mapping descriptors to outcomes are smooth, as is common in problems governed by energy minimization. Although we have introduced descriptors constructed as Hölder means and GBM-Locfit together, they are
independent advancements; descriptors constructed as Hölder means may be used with any SL technique. Hölder
means provide an ordered approach to constructing a set of descriptor candidates from variable length numeric
lists, and should prove useful for a variety of SL problems.