Image Synthesis in Multi-Contrast MRI with
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Salman Ul Hassan Dar1,2, Mahmut Yurt1,2, Levent Karacan4, Aykut Erdem4, Erkut Erdem4,
Tolga Çukur1,2,3
1Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
2National Magnetic Resonance Research Center (UMRAM), Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
3Neuroscience Program, Sabuncu Brain Research Center, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
4Computer Engineering, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Running title: Image Synthesis in Multi-Contrast MRI with Conditional GANs.
Address correspondence to:
Tolga Çukur
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Room 304
Bilkent University
Ankara, TR-06800, Turkey
TEL: +90 (312) 290-1164
E-MAIL: 
This work was supported in part by a European Molecular Biology Organization Installation Grant (IG
3028), by a TUBA GEBIP fellowship, and by a BAGEP fellowship awarded to T. Çukur. We gratefully
acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan GPUs used in this
To be submitted to IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging
Acquiring images of the same anatomy with multiple different contrasts increases the diversity of
diagnostic information available in an MR exam. Yet, scan time limitations may prohibit acquisition
of certain contrasts, and images for some contrast may be corrupted by noise and artifacts. In such
cases, the ability to synthesize unacquired or corrupted contrasts from remaining contrasts can improve
diagnostic utility. For multi-contrast synthesis, current methods learn a nonlinear intensity
transformation between the source and target images, either via nonlinear regression or deterministic
neural networks. These methods can in turn suffer from loss of high-spatial-frequency information in
synthesized images. Here we propose a new approach for multi-contrast MRI synthesis based on
conditional generative adversarial networks. The proposed approach preserves high-frequency details
via an adversarial loss; and it offers enhanced synthesis performance via a pixel-wise loss for registered
multi-contrast images and a cycle-consistency loss for unregistered images. Information from
neighboring cross-sections are utilized to further improved synthesis quality. Demonstrations on T1-
and T2-weighted images from healthy subjects and patients clearly indicate the superior performance
of the proposed approach compared to previous state-of-the-art methods. Our synthesis approach can
help improve quality and versatility of multi-contrast MRI exams without the need for prolonged
examinations.
Keywords: multi-contrast MRI, image synthesis, generative adversarial network, cycle-consistency
loss, pixel-wise loss.
1 - Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is pervasively used in clinical applications due to the diversity of
contrasts it can capture in soft tissues. Tailored MRI pulse sequences enable the generation of distinct
contrasts while imaging the same anatomy. For instance, T1-weighted brain images clearly delineate
gray and white matter tissues, whereas T2-weighted images delineate fluid from cortical tissue. In turn,
multi-contrast images acquired in the same subject increase the diagnostic information available in
clinical and research studies. However, it may not be possible to collect a full array of contrasts given
considerations related to the cost of prolonged exams and uncooperative patients. In such cases,
acquisition of contrasts with relatively shorter scan times might be preferred. Moreover, in cohort
studies, a subset of the acquired contrasts is typically corrupted by excessive noise or artifacts in some
subjects that prohibit subsequent diagnostic use . Therefore, the ability to retrospectively synthesize
missing or corrupted contrasts from other successfully acquired contrasts has potential value for
enhancing multi-contrast MRI, and improve analysis tasks such as registration and segmentation .
Cross-domain synthesis of medical images have recently been gaining popularity in medical imaging.
Given a subject’s image b1 in M1 (source domain), the aim is to accurately estimate the respective
image of the same subject b2 in M2 (target domain). Depending on how they tackle this problem, there
are two main approaches: registration-based and intensity-transformation-based methods .
Registration-based methods start by generating an atlas based on a co-registered set of images, a1 and
a2, respectively acquired in M1 and M2 . These methods further make the assumption that withindomain images from separate subjects are related to each other through a geometric warp. For
synthesizing b2 from b1, the warp that transforms a1 to b1 is estimated, and this warp is then applied on
a2. Since they only rely on geometric transformations, registration-based methods suffer from acrosssubject differences in underlying morphology . For example, inconsistent pathology across a test
subject and the atlas can cause failure. Furthermore, within-domain registration accuracy might be
limited even in normal subjects.
An alternative is to use intensity-based methods that do not rely on a strict geometric relationship
among different subjects’ anatomies , – . One powerful approach for multi-contrast MRI is
based on the compressed sensing framework, where each patch in the source image b1 is expressed as
a sparse linear combination of patches in the atlas image a1 . The learned sparse combinations are
then applied to estimate patches in b2 from patches in a2. To improve matching of patches across
domains, generative models were also proposed that use multi-scale patches and tissue segmentation
labels , . Instead of focusing on linear models, recent studies aimed to learn more general nonlinear mappings that express individual voxels in a2 in terms of patches in a1, and then predict b2 from
b1 based on these mappings. Nonlinear mappings are learned on training data via techniques such as
nonlinear regression , , or location-sensitive neural networks . An important example is
Replica that performs random forest regression on multiresolution image patches . Replica
demonstrates great promise in multi-contrast MR image synthesis. However, patches at different spatial
scales are treated independently during dictionary construction, and the predictions from separate
random forest trees are averaged during synthesis. These may lead to loss of high spatial frequency
information and suboptimal synthesis performance.
Recently an end-to-end framework for MRI image synthesis has been proposed, Multimodal, based on
deep neural networks . Multimodal trains a neural network that receives as input images in several
different source contrasts, and predicts the image in the target contrast. This method performs
multiresolution dictionary construction and image synthesis in a unified framework, and it was
demonstrated to yield higher synthesis quality compared to non-network-based approaches even when
only a subset of the source contrasts is available. That said, Multimodal assumes the availability of
spatially-registered multi-contrast images. In addition, Multimodal uses mean squared or absolute error
loss functions that can perform poorly in capturing errors at high spatial frequencies – .
Here we propose a novel approach for image synthesis in multi-contrast MRI based on generative
adversarial network (GAN) architectures. Adversarial loss functions have recently been demonstrated
for image-to-image translation with reliable capture of high-frequency texture information , .
Inspired by this success, our proposed method employs conditional GANs to synthesize images in the
target contrast given input images in the source contrast. For improved accuracy, the proposed method
leverages correlated information across neighboring cross-sections within a volume during synthesis.
Distinct implementations are used for two different scenarios, where multi-contrast images are spatially
registered (pGAN) and where they are unregistered (cGAN). For the first scenario, we train pGAN
with pixel-wise loss between the synthesized and true images . For the second scenario, we train
cGAN after replacing the pixel-wise loss with a cycle loss that enforces the ability to reconstruct back
the source image from the synthesized target image . Extensive evaluations are presented on multicontrast MRI images (T1- and T2-weighted) from healthy normals and glioma patients. The proposed
approach yields visually and quantitatively enhanced accuracy in multi-contrast MRI synthesis
compared to state-of-the-art methods.
A summary of our main contributions in this study are listed below:
1. We demonstrate a novel end-to-end image synthesis approach for MRI that successfully estimated
the image in the target contrast given the image in the source contrast.
2. To our knowledge, this is the first method that utilizes conditional GANs with pixel-wise and cycleconsistency loss functions for multi-contrast MRI synthesis.
3. To our knowledge, this is the first method that can perform multi-contrast MRI synthesis based on
unregistered images.
4. We show that aggregating information across neighboring cross-sections within the source volume
enables enhanced synthesis of the target MR images.
2 - Methods
2.1 – Image synthesis via adversarial networks
Generative adversarial networks are neural-network architectures that consist of two sub-networks; ,
a generator and , a discriminator.  learns a mapping from a latent variable  (typically random noise)
to an image  in a target domain, and  learns to discriminate the generated image () from the real
image  . During training of a GAN, both  and  are learned simultaneously, with  aiming to
generate images that are indistinguishable from the real images, and  aiming to tell apart generated
and real images. To do this, the following adversarial loss function (ℒ
) can be used:
[()] +
[log(1 −(()))]
where  tries to minimize and  tries to maximize the adversarial loss. The adversarial loss helps the
generator in modeling high-spatial-frequency information . Both the generator and the
discriminator are trained simultaneously. The desired behavior upon convergence is that  is capable
of producing realistic counterfeit images that  cannot recognize .
Recent studies in computer vision have demonstrated that GANs are very effective in image-to-image
translation tasks , . Image-to-image translation concerns transformations between different
representations of the same underlying visual scene . These transformations can be used to convert
an image between separate domains, e.g., generating semantic segmentation maps from images,
colored images from sketches, or maps from aerial photos , , . Traditional GANs learn to
generate samples of images from noise. However, in image-to-image translation, the synthesized image
has statistical dependence on the source image. To better capture this dependency, conditional GANs
can be employed that receive the source image as an additional input . The resulting network can
then be trained based on the following adversarial loss function:
,[(!, )] +
,[log(1 −(!, (!, )))]
where ! denotes the source image.
An analogous problem image-to-image translation tasks in computer vision exists in MR imaging
where the same anatomy is acquired under multiple different tissue contrasts (e.g., T1- and T2-weighted
images). Inspired by the recent success of adversarial networks, here we employed conditional GANs
to synthesize MR images of a target contrast given as input an alternate contrast. For a comprehensive
solution, we considered two distinct scenarios for multi-contrast MR image synthesis. First, we
assumed that the images of the source and target contrasts are perfectly registered. For this scenario,
we propose pGAN that incorporates a pixel-wise loss into the objective function as inspired by the
pix2pix architecture :
,,[‖ −(!, )‖#]
where ℒ"# is the pixel-wise L1 loss function. Since the generator  was observed to ignore the latent
variable in pGAN, the following aggregate loss function was used for training:
(, ) + &ℒ"#()
is the complete loss function, and & is the parameter that controls the relative weighing
of the pixel-wise loss.
In the second scenario, we did not assume any explicit registration between the images of the source
and target contrasts. In this more realistic scenario, the pixel-wise loss cannot be leveraged since pixels
are not aligned between contrasts. To limit the number of potential solutions for the synthesized image,
here we proposed cGAN that incorporates a cycle-consistency loss as inspired by the cycleGAN
architecture . The cGAN method consists of two generators ( , ) and two discriminators
( , ).  tries to generate (!) that looks similar to  and  tries to distinguish (!) from the
images . On the other hand,  tries to generate  () that looks similar to ! and  tries to distinguish
 () from the images !. This architecture incorporates an additional loss to ensure that the input and
target images are consistent with each other, called as the cycle consistency loss ℒ
'() , * =
+,! − ((!)),#- +
 +, −( ()),#-
This loss function enforces that property that after projecting the source images onto the target domain,
the source image can be re-synthesized with minimal loss from the projection. Further replacing the
negative log-likelihood cost for adversarial loss in Eq. 1 by a squared loss :
[(() −1).] +
[ ((!)).]
yields the following aggregate loss function for training:
) ,  ,  , * = ℒ
( ,  ) + ℒ
), *+&ℒ
'() , *.
2.2 – MRI datasets
For registered images, we trained and test both pGAN and cGAN models. For unregistered images, we
only trained cGAN models. The experiments were performed on three separate datasets: the MIDAS
dataset , the IXI dataset ( and the BRATS dataset
( MIDAS and IXI datasets
primarily contained data from healthy subjects, whereas the BRATS datasets contained data from
patients with structural abnormality (i.e., brain tumor). Protocol information on images included in
each dataset are described below. Datasets were normalized to ensure comparable ranges of voxel
intensities across subjects. For each contrast, the mean intensity across the brain volume was
normalized to 1 within individual subjects. To attain an intensity scale in [0 1], three standard deviations
above the mean intensity of voxels pooled across subjects was then mapped to 1.
2.2.1 - MIDAS dataset
Data from 66 subjects were analyzed. A total of 4865 T1-weighted images were assembled, where 3774
were used for training and 1091 were reserved for testing. A total of 4865 T2-weighted images were
assembled, where 3774 were used for training and 1091 were reserved for testing. The T1- and T2weighted images analyzed here were acquired via the following parameters. T1-weighted images: 3D
gradient-echo sequence, TR=14ms, TE=7.7ms, flip angle=250, matrix size=256x176, 1 mm isotropic
resolution, axial orientation. T2-weighted images: 2D spin-echo sequence, TR=7730ms, TE=80ms, flip
angle=1800, matrix size=256x192, 1 mm isotropic resolution, axial orientation.
2.2.2 - IXI dataset
Data from 30 subjects were analyzed. A total of 3320 T1-weighted images were assembled, where 2780
were used for training and 540 were reserved for testing. A total of 2730 T2-weighted images were
assembled, where 2275 were used for training and 455 were reserved for testing. The T1- and T2weighted images analyzed here were acquired with the following parameters. T1-weighted images:
TR=9.813ms, TE=4.603ms, flip angle=80, volume size = 256 × 256 × 150, voxel dimensions = 0.94 ×
0.94 × 1.2 mm3, sagittal orientation. T2-weighted images: TR=8178ms, TE=100ms, flip angle=900,
volume size = 256 × 256 × 150, voxel dimensions = 0.94 × 0.94 × 1.2 mm3, axial orientation.
2.2.3 - BRATS dataset
Data from 28 subjects with visible lesions were analyzed. A total of 2828 T1-weighted images were
assembled, where 2424 were used for training and 404 were reserved for testing, and a total of 2828
T2-weighted images were assembled, where 2424 were used for training and 404 were reserved for
testing. The BRATS dataset compiles data acquired under different scanning protocols employed on
separate sites. Thus, a common protocol did not exist among T1-weighted or T2-weighted images
analyzed here.
2.3 – Image registration
For the first scenario, multi-contrast images from a given subject were assumed to be registered. Note
that the images contained in the MIDAS and IXI datasets are unregistered. Thus, the T1- and T2weighted images in these datasets were registered prior to network training. For the MIDAS dataset,
an affine transformation was used for registration based on a mutual-information cost. For the IXI
datasets, a rigid transformation based on a mutual-information costs performed better. No registration
was needed for the BRATS dataset. No registration was performed for the second scenario. All
registrations were performed using FSL package , .
2.4 – Network training
Since we consider two different scenarios for multi-contrast MR image synthesis, network training
procedures for these scenarios were distinct. In the first scenario, we assumed perfect alignment
between the source and target images, and we then used pGAN to learn the mapping from the source
to the target contrast. In a first variant of pGAN, the input image was a single cross-section of the
source contrast, and the target was the respective cross-section of the desired contrast. Note that
neighboring cross sections in MR images are expected to show significant correlation. Thus, we
reasoned that incorporating additional information from adjacent cross-sections in the source contrast
should improve synthesis. To do this, a second variant of pGAN was implemented where multiple
consecutive cross-sections of the source contrast were given as input, with the target corresponding to
desired contrast at the central cross-section. It was observed that using three cross-sections yielded
nearly optimal results, without substantially increasing the model complexity. Thus, implementations
of the second variant were based on three cross-sections thereafter.
The implementation of the pGAN network provided in was used based on 256x256 images. Thus all MR images were zero-padded in the imagedomain to this size prior to training. We adopted the generator architecture from , and the
discriminator architecture from . The training procedures lasted for 200 epochs, and the Adam
optimizer was used with a minibatch size of 1 . In the first 100 epochs, the learning rate for both
the generator and the discriminator was fixed at 0.0002. In the remaining 100 epochs, the learning rate
was linearly decayed from 0.0002 to 0. Decay rates for the first and second moments of gradient
estimates were set as β1= 0.5 and β2=0.999, respectively. Instance normalization was also applied .
All weights were initialized using normal distribution with 0 mean and 0.02 std.
In the second scenario, we did not assume any alignment between the source and target images, and so
we used cGAN to learn the mapping between unregistered source and target images. Similar to pGAN,
two variants of cGAN were considered that worked on a single cross-section and on three consecutive
cross-sections. The latter variant of cGAN was implemented where multiple consecutive cross-sections
of the source contrast were given as input, and an equal number of consecutive cross-sections of the
target contrast were taken as output. Although cGAN does not assume any alignment between the
source and target domains, we still wanted to quantitatively examine the effects of distinct loss
functions used in cGAN and pGAN. For comparison purposes, we also trained separate cGAN
networks on registered multi-contrast data (cGANreg). The training procedures were identical to those
2.5 – Competing methods
To comparatively demonstrate the proposed approach, two state-of-the-art methods for MRI image
synthesis were implemented. The first method was Replica that estimates a nonlinear mapping between
image patches from the source contrast onto individual voxels from the target contrast . Replica
extracts image features at different spatial scales, and then performs a multi-resolution analysis via
random forests. The learned nonlinear mapping is then applied on test images. Code posted by the
authors of the Replica method was used to train the models, based on the parameters described in .
The second method was Multimodal that uses an end-to-end neural network to estimate the target image
given the source image as input. A neural-network implementation implicitly performs multi-resolution
feature extraction and synthesis based on these features. Trained networks can then be applied on test
images. Code posted by the authors of the Multimodal method was used to train the networks, based
on the parameters described in .
For comparisons between the proposed approach and the competing methods, the same set of training
and test data were used. Since the proposed models were implemented for unimodal mapping between
two separate contrasts, Replica and Multimodal implementations were also performed with only two
contrasts.
2.6 - Experiments
Here we first questioned whether the direction of registration between multi-contrast images affects
the quality of synthesis. In particular, we generated multiple registered datasets from T1- and T2weighted images. In the first set, T2-weighted images were registered onto T1-weighted images
(yielding T2*). In the second set, T1-weighted images were registered onto T2-weighted images
(yielding T1*). In addition to the direction of registration, we also considered the two possible
directions of synthesis (T2 from T1; T1 from T2).
For originally unregistered datasets (i.e., MIDAS and IXI), the above-mentioned considerations led to
four distinct cases: a) T1→T2*, b) T1*→T2, c) T2→T1*, d) T2*→T1. Here, T1 and T2 are unregistered
images, T1* and T2* are registered images, and → corresponds to the direction of synthesis. For each
case, pGAN and cGAN networks were trained based on two variants, one receiving a single crosssection as input, the other receiving three consecutive cross-sections as input. This resulted in a total
of 8 pGAN and 4 cGAN models. Note that a single cGAN architecture contains generators for both
contrasts and trains a model that can synthesize in both directions. For readily registered datasets (i.e.,
BRATS), no registration was needed and this resulted in only two distinct cases for consideration: a)
T1→T2* and d) T2*→T1. Two variants of pGAN and cGAN were considered that work on a single
cross-section and three cross-sections.
To investigate how well the proposed models perform with respect to state-of-the-art approaches, we
compared the performance of pGAN and cGAN models with two previous the Replica and Multimodal
methods. Since the adversarial loss in the GAN architecture enforces synthesis of realistic images, we
predicted that pGAN and cGAN would outperform these competing methods.
Models under comparison were trained and tested on the same data. The synthesized images obtained
from each model were compared with the true target images as reference. Both the synthesized and the
reference images were normalized to a maximum intensity of 1. To assess the synthesis quality, we
measured the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index (SSIM) metrics between
the synthesized image and the reference. Neural network training and evaluation was performed on
NVIDIA Titan X Pascal and Xp GPUs. Implementation of pGAN and cGAN were carried out in Python
using the Pytorch framework . A MATLAB implementation of REPLICA, and a Keras
implementation of Multimodal with the Theano backend were used.
3 – Results
We first evaluated the proposed conditional GAN architectures on T1-and T2-weighted images from
the MIDAS dataset. For evaluation, we considered two cases for T2 synthesis (a. T1→T2*, b. T1*→T2,
where * denotes the registered image), and two cases for T1 synthesis (c. T2→T1*, d. T2*→T1). Table
I lists the PSNR and SSIM measurements across test images for all cases, based on pGAN, cGANreg
trained on registered data, and cGANunreg trained on unregistered data. We find that pGAN outperforms
both cGANunreg and cGANreg in all cases, except in T2*→T1 where cGANreg performs similarly. In
terms of PSNR, pGAN outperforms its closest competitor cGANreg by 2.72 dB in T2 synthesis, and by
0.55 dB in T1 synthesis (on average across two cases). These improvements can be attributed to the
benefits of the pixel-wise loss compared to the cycle-consistency loss on paired, registered images.
Representative results for T2 synthesis (T1→T2*) and T1 synthesis (T2*→T1) are displayed in Figs. 3a
and 4a, respectively. The pGAN method yields higher synthesis quality compared to cGANreg.
Although cGANunreg was trained on unregistered images, it can faithfully capture fine-grained structure
in the synthesized contrast. Overall, both pGAN and cGAN yield synthetic images of remarkable visual
similarity to the reference.
The source contrast images that are input to the networks can occasionally contain considerable levels
of noise. In such cases, synthesis quality might be improved by incorporating correlated structural
information across neighboring cross-sections. To examine this issue, we trained pGAN, cGANreg and
cGANunreg with three consecutive cross-sections in the source domain as input (see Methods). Table II
lists the PSNR and SSIM measurements across test images for T2 and T1 synthesis, considering the two
potential directions of registration in each synthesis task. Representative results for T2 synthesis
(T1→T2*) and T1 synthesis (T2*→T1) using multi cross-section models are as shown in Figs. 3b and
4b. As expected for pGAN, the multi cross-section model outperforms the single cross-section model
by 0.55 dB in T2, and by 0.99 dB in T1 synthesis in terms of PSNR. These quantitative measurements
are also affirmed by improvements in visual quality for the multi cross-section model in Figs. 3 and 4.
In contrast, the benefits are less clear for cGAN. Note that, unlike pGAN that works on paired images,
the discriminators in cGAN work on unpaired images from the source and target domains. In turn, this
can render incorporation of correlated information across cross sections less effective.
Next, we comparatively demonstrated the proposed methods against two state-of-the-art techniques for
multi-contrast MRI synthesis, namely Replica and Multimodal. For this purpose, we trained and tested
pGAN, cGANreg, Replica, and Multimodal on T1- and T2-weighted brain images from the IXI dataset.
Note that Replica performs ensemble averaging across random forest trees and Multimodal uses meansquared or absolute error measures that may lead to overemphasis of low frequency information. In
contrast, conditional GANs leverage loss functions that can more effectively capture details at high
spatial frequencies. Thus, we predicted that pGAN and cGAN would synthesize sharper and more
realistic images as compared to the competing methods. Table III lists the PSNR and SSIM
measurements across test images synthesized via pGAN, cGANreg, Replica and Multimodal. As
predicted, both pGAN and cGAN outperform the competing methods in terms of PSNR in all examined
cases, where pGAN is the top-performing method. On average, pGAN achieves 1.04 dB higher PSNR
than Multimodal in T2 synthesis, and 2.41 dB higher PSNR in T1 synthesis. Compared to Replica,
pGAN improves PSNR by 2.89 dB in T2 synthesis, and by 5.22 dB in T1 synthesis. These performance
differences are also visible in Figs. 5 and 6. The proposed pGAN method is superior in depiction high
spatial frequency information compared to Replica and Multimodal.
Lastly, we demonstrated the performance of the proposed methods on images acquired from patients
with clear pathology. To do this, we trained and tested pGAN, cGANreg, Replica, and Multimodal on
T1- and T2-weighted brain images from the BRATS dataset. Similar to the previous evaluations, here
we expected that the proposed method would synthesize more realistic images with improved
preservation of fine-grained tissue structure. Table IV lists the PSNR and SSIM measurements across
test images synthesized via pGAN, cGANreg, Replica and Multimodal. Again, the top-performing
method is pGAN, and both pGAN and cGAN outperform competing methods. On average, pGAN
achieves 2.34 dB higher PSNR than Multimodal in T2 synthesis, and 2.27 dB higher PSNR in T1
synthesis. Compared to Replica, pGAN increases PSNR by 1.65 dB in T2 synthesis, and by 2.53 dB in
T1 synthesis. Representative images for T2 and T1 synthesis are displayed in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively.
It is observed that pathologies present only in the source contrast can occasionally cause artefactual
synthesis in Replica and Multimodal (see Fig. 8). Meanwhile, the pGAN method enables reliable
synthesis with visibly improved depiction of high spatial frequency information.
4 – Discussion
A multi-contrast MRI synthesis approach based on conditional GANs was demonstrated against stateof-the-art methods in three publicly available brain MRI datasets (MIDAS, IXI, BRATS). The
proposed pGAN method uses adversarial loss functions and correlated structure across neighboring
cross-sections for improved synthesis, particularly at high spatial frequencies. While many previous
methods require registered multi-contrast images for training, a cGAN method was presented that uses
cycle-consistency loss for learning to synthesize from unregistered images. Comprehensive evaluations
were performed for two distinct scenarios where training images were registered or unregistered within
single subjects. In both scenarios, the proposed methods achieved higher synthesis quality both visually
and in terms of quantitative assessments based on PSNR and SSIM metrics. While our synthesis
approach was primarily demonstrated for multi-contrast brain MRI here, it may offer similar
performance benefits in synthesis across imaging modalities such as MRI, CT or PET .
The conventional approach to image synthesis is to first construct a dictionary from multi-resolution
image patches, then learn a sparse or nonlinear mapping between contrasts, and finally apply this
mapping for synthesis of the target contrast. While recent dictionary-based methods have produced
promising results , – , the feature extraction stage to form the dictionary and the nonlinear
mapping stage to learn the transformation between the source and target features are segregated. In
contrast, the conditional GAN methods proposed here perform feature extraction and mapping
simultaneously. Such end-to-end trained networks alleviate suboptimality due to independent
optimization of separate synthesis stages. Here we observed improved spatial acuity in display of high
spatial frequency information in synthesized brain images.
Several previous studies proposed the use of neural network architectures for multi-contrast MRI
synthesis tasks , , . A recent method, Multimodal, was demonstrated to yield higher quality
synthesis compared to conventional methods in brain MRI datasets . Unlike previous neuralnetwork-based methods, the GAN architectures proposed here are generative networks that learn the
conditional probability distribution of the target contrast given the source contrast. The incorporation
of adversarial loss as opposed to typical squared or absolute error loss leads to enhanced capture of
detailed texture information about the target contrast, thereby enabling higher synthesis quality.
The proposed synthesis approach might be further improved by considering several lines of technical
development. Here we presented multi-contrast MRI synthesis results while considering two potential
directions for image registration (e.g., T1→T2* and T1*→T2 for T2 synthesis). We observed that the
proposed methods yielded high-quality synthesis regardless of the registration direction. Note that
comparisons between the two directions based on reference-based metrics are not informative because
the references for the two directions are inevitably distinct (e.g., T2* versus T2), so determining the
optimal direction of registration is challenging. Still, we expect that in cases of substantial mismatch
between the voxel sizes in the source and target contrasts, the cGAN method will not only learn to
synthesize but it will also attempt to learn to interpolate from the spatial sampling grid of the source
onto that of the target. To alleviate potential performance loss, the spatial transformation between the
source and target images can first be estimated via multi-modal registration. This interpolation function
can then be cascaded to the output of the cGAN architecture.
Synthesis accuracy can also be improved by generalizing the current approach to predict the target
based on multiple source contrasts. In principle, both pGAN and cGAN methods can be modified to
receive as input multiple source contrasts in addition to multiple cross sections as demonstrated here.
In turn, this generalization can offer improved performance when a subset of the source contrast is
unavailable. The performance of conditional GAN architectures in the face of missing inputs warrants
further investigation. Alternatively, an initial fusion step could be incorporated that combines multicontrast source images in the form of a single fused image fed as input to the GAN .
An important concern regarding neural-network based methods is the availability of large datasets for
successful training of network parameters. The cGAN method facilitates network training by
permitting the use of unregistered and unpaired multi-contrast datasets. While here we performed
training on paired images for unbiased comparison, cGAN permits the use of unpaired images from
distinct sets of subjects. As such, it can facilitate compilation of large datasets that would be required
for improved performance via deeper networks. Yet, further performance improvements may be viable
by training networks based on a mixture of paired and unpaired training data .
5 – Conclusion
We proposed a new multi-contrast MRI synthesis method based on conditional generative adversarial
networks. Unlike most conventional methods, the proposed method performed end-to-end training of
GANs that synthesize the target contrast given images of the source contrast. The use of adversarial
loss functions improved accuracy in synthesis of high-spatial-frequency information in the target
contrast. Synthesis performance was further improved by incorporating a pixel-wise loss in the case of
registered images, and a cycle-consistency loss for unregistered images. Finally, the proposed method
leveraged information across neighboring cross-sections within each volume to increase accuracy of
synthesis. The proposed method outperformed two state-of-the-art synthesis methods in multi-contrast
brain MRI datasets from healthy subjects and glioma patients. Therefore, our GAN-based approach
holds great promise for multi-contrast synthesis in clinical practice.