Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2078–2088
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2078–2088
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Revisiting Recurrent Networks for Paraphrastic Sentence Embeddings
John Wieting
Kevin Gimpel
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA
{jwieting,kgimpel}@ttic.edu
learning general-purpose,
paraphrastic sentence embeddings, revisiting the setting
of Wieting et al. .
While they
found LSTM recurrent networks to underperform word averaging, we present
several developments that together produce the opposite conclusion. These include training on sentence pairs rather than
phrase pairs, averaging states to represent sequences, and regularizing aggressively.
These improve LSTMs in both
transfer learning and supervised settings.
We also introduce a new recurrent architecture, the GATED RECURRENT AVER-
AGING NETWORK, that is inspired by averaging and LSTMs while outperforming
them both. We analyze our learned models, ﬁnding evidence of preferences for
particular parts of speech and dependency
relations. 1
Introduction
Modeling sentential compositionality is a fundamental aspect of natural language semantics. Researchers have proposed a broad range of compositional functional architectures and evaluated them on a large variety of applications. Our goal is to learn a generalpurpose sentence embedding function that can be
used unmodiﬁed for measuring semantic textual
similarity (STS) and can also
serve as a useful initialization for downstream
tasks. We wish to learn this embedding function
1Trained models and code are available at http://
ttic.uchicago.edu/˜wieting.
such that sentences with high semantic similarity have high cosine similarity in the embedding
space. In particular, we focus on the setting of
Wieting et al. , in which models are trained
on noisy paraphrase pairs and evaluated on both
STS and supervised semantic tasks.
Surprisingly, Wieting et al. found that simple embedding functions—those based on averaging word vectors—outperform more powerful
architectures based on long short-term memory
(LSTM) . In
this paper, we revisit their experimental setting
and present several techniques that together improve the performance of the LSTM to be superior
to word averaging.
We ﬁrst change data sources:
rather than
train on noisy phrase pairs from the Paraphrase
Database , we
use noisy sentence pairs obtained automatically
by aligning Simple English to standard English
Wikipedia .
though this data was intended for use by text simpliﬁcation systems, we ﬁnd it to be efﬁcient and effective for learning sentence embeddings, outperforming much larger sets of examples from PPDB.
We then show how we can modify and regularize the LSTM to further improve its performance.
The main modiﬁcation is to simply average the
hidden states instead of using the ﬁnal one. For
regularization, we experiment with two kinds of
dropout and also with randomly scrambling the
words in each input sequence. We ﬁnd that these
techniques help in the transfer learning setting and
on two supervised semantic similarity datasets as
Further gains are obtained on the supervised tasks by initializing with our models from
the transfer setting.
Inspired by the strong performance of both averaging and LSTMs, we introduce a novel recurrent neural network architecture which we call
the GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING NETWORK
(GRAN). The GRAN outperforms averaging and
the LSTM in both the transfer and supervised
learning settings, forming a promising new recurrent architecture for semantic modeling.
Related Work
Modeling sentential compositionality has received
a great deal of attention in recent years. A comprehensive survey is beyond the scope of this paper, but we mention popular functional families:
neural bag-of-words models , deep averaging networks (DANs) , recursive neural networks using syntactic parses , convolutional neural networks , and recurrent neural networks using
long short-term memory . Simple operations
based on vector addition and multiplication typically serve as strong baselines .
Most work cited above uses a supervised learning framework, so the composition function is
learned discriminatively for a particular task. In
this paper, we are primarily interested in creating
general purpose, domain independent embeddings
for word sequences. Several others have pursued
this goal , though usually with the intent to extract
useful features for supervised sentence tasks rather
than to capture semantic similarity.
An exception is the work of Wieting et al.
We closely follow their experimental
setup and directly address some outstanding questions in their experimental results. Here we brieﬂy
summarize their main ﬁndings and their attempts
at explaining them. They made the surprising discovery that word averaging outperforms LSTMs
by a wide margin in the transfer learning setting.
They proposed several hypotheses for why this occurs. They ﬁrst considered that the LSTM was unable to adapt to the differences in sequence length
between phrases in training and sentences in test.
This was ruled out by showing that neither model
showed any strong correlation between sequence
length and performance on the test data.
They next examined whether the LSTM was
overﬁtting on the training data, but then showed
that both models achieve similar values of the
training objective and similar performance on indomain held-out test sets. Lastly, they considered
whether their hyperparameters were inadequately
tuned, but extensive hyperparameter tuning did not
change the story. Therefore, the reason for the performance gap, and how to correct it, was left as an
open problem. This paper takes steps toward addressing that problem.
Models and Training
Our goal is to embed a word sequence s into a
ﬁxed-length vector. We focus on three compositional models in this paper, all of which use words
as the smallest unit of compositionality. We denote the tth word in s as st, and we denote its word
embedding by xt.
Our ﬁrst two models have been well-studied in
prior work, so we describe them brieﬂy. The ﬁrst,
which we call AVG, simply averages the embeddings xt of all words in s. The only parameters
learned in this model are those in the word embeddings themselves, which are stored in the word
embedding matrix Ww. This model was found by
Wieting et al. to perform very strongly for
semantic similarity tasks.
Our second model uses a long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network to embed s. We use the
LSTM variant from Gers et al. including its
“peephole” connections. We consider two ways to
obtain a sentence embedding from the LSTM. The
ﬁrst uses the ﬁnal hidden vector, which we denote
h−1. The second, denoted LSTMAVG, averages
all hidden vectors of the LSTM. In both variants,
the learnable parameters include both the LSTM
parameters Wc and the word embeddings Ww.
Inspired by the success of the two models
above, we propose a third model, which we call
the GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING NETWORK
(GRAN). The GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING
NETWORK combines the beneﬁts of AVG and
LSTMs. In fact it reduces to AVG if the output
of the gate is all ones. We ﬁrst use an LSTM to
generate a hidden vector, ht, for each word st in
s. Then we use ht to compute a gate that will
be elementwise-multiplied with xt, resulting in a
new, gated hidden vector at for each step t:
at = xt ⊙σ(Wxxt + Whht + b)
where Wx and Wh are parameter matrices, b is a
parameter vector, and σ is the elementwise logistic sigmoid function. After all at have been generated for a sentence, they are averaged to produce
the embedding for that sentence. This model includes as learnable parameters those of the LSTM,
the word embeddings, and the additional parameters in Eq. (1). For both the LSTM and GRAN
models, we use Wc to denote the “compositional”
parameters, i.e., all parameters other than the word
embeddings.
The motivation for the GRAN is that we are
contextualizing the word embeddings prior to averaging. The gate can be seen as an attention, attending to the prior context of the sentence.2
We also experiment with four other variations of
this model, though they generally were more complex and showed inferior performance. In the ﬁrst,
GRAN-2, the gate is applied to ht (rather than xt)
to produce at, and then these at are averaged as
GRAN-3 and GRAN-4 use two gates: one applied to xt and one applied to at−1.
two different ways of computing these gates: for
each gate i, σ(Wxixt +Whiht +bi) (GRAN-3) or
σ(Wxixt + Whiht + Waiat−1 + bi) (GRAN-4).
The sum of these two terms comprised at. In this
model, the last average hidden state, a−1, was used
as the sentence embedding after dividing it by the
length of the sequence. In these models, we are
additionally keeping a running average of the embeddings that is being modiﬁed by the context at
every time step. In GRAN-4, this running average
is also considered when producing the contextualized word embedding.
Lastly, we experimented with a ﬁfth GRAN,
GRAN-5, in which we use two gates, calculated
by σ(Wxixt + Whiht + bi) for each gate i. The
ﬁrst is applied to xt and the second is applied to ht.
The output of these gates is then summed. Therefore GRAN-5 can be reduced to either wordaveraging or averaging LSTM states, depending
on the behavior of the gates.
If the ﬁrst gate
is all ones and the second all zeros throughout
the sequence, the model is equivalent to wordaveraging. Conversely, if the ﬁrst gate is all zeros and the second is all ones throughout the sequence, the model is equivalent to averaging the
2We tried a variant of this model without the gate. We obtain at from f(Wxxt +Whht +b), where f is a nonlinearity,
tuned over tanh and ReLU. The performance of the model is
signiﬁcantly worse than the GRAN in all experiments.
LSTM states. Further analysis of these models is
included in Section 4.
We follow the training procedure of Wieting et al.
 and Wieting et al. , described below. The training data consists of a set S of phrase
or sentence pairs ⟨s1, s2⟩from either the Paraphrase Database 
or the aligned Wikipedia sentences where s1 and s2 are assumed to
be paraphrases. We optimize a margin-based loss:
max(0, δ −cos(g(s1), g(s2))
+ cos(g(s1), g(t1))) + max(0, δ −cos(g(s1), g(s2))
+ cos(g(s2), g(t2)))
+ λc ∥Wc∥2 + λw ∥Wwinitial −Ww∥2
where g is the model in use (e.g., AVG or LSTM),
δ is the margin, λc and λw are regularization
parameters, Wwinitial is the initial word embedding matrix, and t1 and t2 are carefully-selected
negative examples taken from a mini-batch during optimization. The intuition is that we want
the two phrases to be more similar to each other
(cos(g(s1), g(s2))) than either is to their respective negative examples t1 and t2, by a margin of at
Selecting Negative Examples
To select t1 and t2 in Eq. (2), we simply choose the
most similar phrase in some set of phrases (other
than those in the given phrase pair). For simplicity
we use the mini-batch for this set, but it could be
a different set. That is, we choose t1 for a given
⟨s1, s2⟩as follows:
t:⟨t,·⟩∈Sb\{⟨s1,s2⟩}
cos(g(s1), g(t))
where Sb ⊆S is the current mini-batch. That is,
we want to choose a negative example ti that is
similar to si according to the current model. The
downside is that we may occasionally choose a
phrase ti that is actually a true paraphrase of si.
Experiments
Our experiments are designed to address the empirical question posed by Wieting et al. :
why do LSTMs underperform AVG for transfer
learning? In Sections 4.1.2-4.2, we make progress
on this question by presenting methods that bridge
the gap between the two models in the transfer setting. We then apply these same techniques to improve performance in the supervised setting, described in Section 4.3. In both settings we also
evaluate our novel GRAN architecture, ﬁnding
it to consistently outperform both AVG and the
Transfer Learning
Datasets and Tasks
We train on large sets of noisy paraphrase pairs
and evaluate on a diverse set of 22 textual similarity datasets, including all datasets from every
SemEval semantic textual similarity (STS) task
from 2012 to 2015. We also evaluate on the Sem-
Eval 2015 Twitter task and the
SemEval 2014 SICK Semantic Relatedness task
 . Given two sentences, the
aim of the STS tasks is to predict their similarity on a 0-5 scale, where 0 indicates the sentences
are on different topics and 5 indicates that they
are completely equivalent. We report the average
Pearson’s r over these 22 sentence similarity tasks.
Each STS task consists of 4-6 datasets covering
a wide variety of domains, including newswire,
tweets, glosses, machine translation outputs, web
forums, news headlines, image and video captions,
among others. Further details are provided in the
ofﬁcial task descriptions .
Experiments with Data Sources
We ﬁrst investigate how different sources of training data affect the results.
We try two data
sources. The ﬁrst is phrase pairs from the Paraphrase Database (PPDB). PPDB comes in different sizes (S, M, L, XL, XXL, and XXXL), where
each larger size subsumes all smaller ones. The
pairs in PPDB are sorted by a conﬁdence measure and so the smaller sets contain higher precision paraphrases. PPDB is derived automatically
from naturally-occurring bilingual text, and versions of PPDB have been released for many languages without the need for any manual annotation .
The second source of data is a set of sentence pairs automatically extracted from Simple
English Wikipedia and English Wikipedia articles by Coster and Kauchak .
was extracted for developing text simpliﬁcation
AVG LSTM LSTMAVG
SimpWiki 68.4
Table 1: Test results on SemEval semantic textual
similarity datasets (Pearson’s r ×100) when training on different sources of data: phrase pairs from
PPDB or simple-to-standard English Wikipedia
sentence pairs from Coster and Kauchak .
systems, where each instance pairs a simple and
complex sentence representing approximately the
same information. Though the data was obtained
for simpliﬁcation, we use it as a source of training data for learning paraphrastic sentence embeddings. The dataset, which we call SimpWiki, consists of 167,689 sentence pairs.
To ensure a fair comparison, we select a sample
of pairs from PPDB XL such that the number of
tokens is approximately the same as the number
of tokens in the SimpWiki sentences.3
PARAGRAM-SL999
embeddings to initialize the word
embedding matrix (Ww) for all models. For all experiments, we ﬁx the mini-batch size to 100, and
λc to 0. We tune the margin δ over {0.4, 0.6, 0.8}
and λw over {10−4, 10−5, 10−6, 10−7, 10−8, 0}.
We train AVG for 7 epochs, and the LSTM for
3, since it converges much faster and does not
beneﬁt from 7 epochs. For optimization we use
Adam with a learning rate
of 0.001. We use the 2016 STS tasks for model selection, where we average the
Pearson’s r over its 5 datasets. We refer to this
type of model selection as test.
For evaluation,
we report the average Pearson’s r over the 22
other sentence similarity tasks.
The results are shown in Table 1. We ﬁrst note
that, when training on PPDB, we ﬁnd the same
result as Wieting et al. : AVG outperforms
the LSTM by more than 13 points. However, when
training both on sentence pairs, the gap shrinks to
about 9 points. It appears that part of the inferior
performance for the LSTM in prior work was due
to training on phrase pairs rather than on sentence
pairs. The AVG model also beneﬁts from training on sentences, but not nearly as much as the
3The PPDB data consists of 1,341,188 phrase pairs and
contains 3 more tokens than the SimpWiki data.
4We experimented with adding EOS tags at the end of
training and test sentences, SOS tags at the start of train-
Our hypothesis explaining this result is that in
PPDB, the phrase pairs are short fragments of text
which are not necessarily constituents or phrases
in any syntactic sense. Therefore, the sentences
in the STS test sets are quite different from the
fragments seen during training. We hypothesize
that while word-averaging is relatively unaffected
by this difference, the recurrent models are much
more sensitive to overall characteristics of the
word sequences, and the difference between train
and test matters much more.
These results also suggest that the SimpWiki
data, even though it was developed for text simpli-
ﬁcation, may be useful for other researchers working on semantic textual similarity tasks.
Experiments with LSTM Variations
We next compare LSTM and LSTMAVG. The latter consists of averaging the hidden vectors of the
LSTM rather than using the ﬁnal hidden vector
as in prior work . We hypothesize that the LSTM may put more emphasis on the words at the end of the sentence than
those at the beginning. By averaging the hidden
states, the impact of all words in the sequence is
better taken into account. Averaging also makes
the LSTM more like AVG, which we know to perform strongly in this setting.
The results on AVG and the LSTM models are
shown in Table 1. When training on PPDB, moving from LSTM to LSTMAVG improves performance by 10 points, closing most of the gap with
AVG. We also ﬁnd that LSTMAVG improves by
moving from PPDB to SimpWiki, though in both
cases it still lags behind AVG.
Experiments with Regularization
We next experiment with various forms of regularization. Previous work 
only used L2 regularization. Wieting et al. 
also regularized the word embeddings back to
their initial values. Here we use L2 regularization
ing and test sentences, adding both, and adding neither. We
treated adding these tags as hyperparameters and tuned over
these four settings along with the other hyperparameters in
the original experiment. Interestingly, we found that adding
these tags, especially EOS, had a large effect on the LSTM
when training on SimpWiki, improving performance by 6
points. When training on PPDB, adding EOS tags only improved performance by 1.6 points.
The addition of the tags had a smaller effect on LSTMAVG.
Adding EOS tags improved performance by 0.3 points on
SimpWiki and adding SOS tags on PPDB improved performance by 0.9 points.
as well as several additional regularization methods we describe below.
We try two forms of dropout. The ﬁrst is just
standard dropout on the
word embeddings. The second is “word dropout”,
which drops out entire word embeddings with
some probability .
We also experiment with scrambling the inputs.
For a given mini-batch, we go through each sentence pair and, with some probability, we shuf-
ﬂe the words in each sentence in the pair. When
scrambling a sentence pair, we always shufﬂe both
sentences in the pair. We do this before selecting
negative examples for the mini-batch. The motivation for scrambling is to make it more difﬁcult
for the LSTM to memorize the sequences in the
training data, forcing it to focus more on the identities of the words and less on word order. Hence
it will be expected to behave more like the word
averaging model.5
We also experiment with combining scrambling
and dropout. In this setting, we tune over scrambling with either word dropout or dropout.
The settings for these experiments are largely
the same as those of the previous section with the
exception that we tune λw over a smaller set of
values: {10−5, 0}.
When using L2 regularization, we tune λc over {10−3, 10−4, 10−5, 10−6}.
When using dropout, we tune the dropout rate over
{0.2, 0.4, 0.6}. When using scrambling, we tune
the scrambling rate over {0.25, 0.5, 0.75}.
also include a bidirectional model (“Bi”) for both
LSTMAVG and the GATED RECURRENT AVERAG-
ING NETWORK. We tune over two ways to combine the forward and backward hidden states; the
ﬁrst simply adds them together and the second
uses a single feedforward layer with a tanh activation.
We try two approaches for model selection. The
ﬁrst, test , is the same as was done in Section 4.1.2,
where we use the average Pearson’s r on the 5
2016 STS datasets. The second tunes based on
the average Pearson’s r of all 22 datasets in our
evaluation. We refer to this as oracle.
The results are shown in Table 2. They show
that dropping entire word embeddings and scram-
5We also tried some variations on scrambling that did not
yield signiﬁcant improvements: scrambling after obtaining
the negative examples, partially scrambling by performing n
swaps where n comes from a Poisson distribution with a tunable λ, and scrambling individual sentences with some probability instead of always scrambling both in the pair.
Regularization
word dropout
word dropout
scrambling
dropout, scrambling
dropout, scrambling
dropout, scrambling
Results on SemEval textual similarity
datasets (Pearson’s r × 100) when experimenting
with different regularization techniques.
GRAN (no reg.)
Results on SemEval textual similarity
datasets (Pearson’s r × 100) for the GRAN architectures. The ﬁrst row, marked as (no reg.) is
the GRAN without any regularization. The other
rows show the result of the various GRAN models
using dropout and scrambling.
bling input sequences is very effective in improving the result of the LSTM, while neither type of
dropout improves AVG. Moreover, averaging the
hidden states of the LSTM is the most effective
modiﬁcation to the LSTM in improving performance. All of these modiﬁcations can be combined to signiﬁcantly improve the LSTM, ﬁnally
allowing it to overtake AVG.
In Table 3, we compare the various GRAN architectures. We ﬁnd that the GRAN provides a
small improvement over the best LSTM conﬁguration, possibly because of its similarity to AVG. It
also outperforms the other GRAN models, despite
being the simplest.
In Table 4, we show results on all individual
STS evaluation datasets after using STS 2016 for
model selection (unidirectional models only). The
LSTMAVG and GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING
NETWORK are more closely correlated in performance, in terms of Spearman’s ρ and Pearson’r
r, than either is to AVG. But they do differ signiﬁcantly in some datasets, most notably in those
comparing machine translation output with its ref-
STS 2012 Average
STS 2013 Average
deft forum
tweet news
STS 2014 Average
answers-forums
answers-students
STS 2015 Average
2015 Twitter
Results on SemEval textual similarity
datasets (Pearson’s r × 100). The highest score in
each row is in boldface.
Interestingly, both the LSTMAVG and
GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING NETWORK signiﬁcantly outperform AVG in the datasets focused
on comparing glosses like OnWN and FNWN.
Upon examination, we found that these datasets,
especially 2013 OnWN, contain examples of low
similarity with high word overlap.
For example, the pair ⟨the act of preserving or protecting something., the act of decreasing or reducing
something.⟩from 2013 OnWN has a gold similarity score of 0.4. It appears that AVG was fooled
by the high amount of word overlap in such pairs,
while the other two models were better able to recognize the semantic differences.
Supervised Text Similarity
We also investigate if these techniques can improve LSTM performance on supervised semantic
textual similarity tasks. We evaluate on two supervised datasets. For the ﬁrst, we start with the 20
SemEval STS datasets from 2012-2015 and then
use 40% of each dataset for training, 10% for validation, and the remaining 50% for testing. There
are 4,481 examples in training, 1,207 in validation,
and 6,060 in the test set. The second is the SICK
2014 dataset, using its standard training, validation, and test sets. There are 4,500 sentence pairs
in the training set, 500 in the development set, and
4,927 in the test set. The SICK task is an easier learning problem since the training examples
are all drawn from the same distribution, and they
are mostly shorter and use simpler language. As
these are supervised tasks, the sentence pairs in the
training set contain manually-annotated semantic
similarity scores.
We minimize the loss function6 from Tai et al.
 . Given a score for a sentence pair in the
range [1, K], where K is an integer, with sentence
representations hL and hR, and model parameters
θ, they ﬁrst compute:
h× = hL ⊙hR, h+ = |hL −hR|,
W (×)h× + W (+)h+ + b(h)
ˆpθ = softmax
W (p)hs + b(p)
ˆy = rT ˆpθ,
where rT = [1 2 . . . K]. They then deﬁne a
sparse target distribution p that satisﬁes y = rT p:
i = ⌊y⌋+ 1
⌊y⌋−y + 1,
for 1 ≤i ≤K. Then they use the following loss,
the regularized KL-divergence between p and ˆpθ:
where m is the number of training pairs.
We experiment with the LSTM, LSTMAVG,
and AVG models with dropout, word dropout, and
scrambling tuning over the same hyperparameter
as in Section 4.2. We again regularize the word
embeddings back to their initial state, tuning λw
over {10−5, 0}.
We used the validation set for
each respective dataset for model selection.
The results are shown in Table 5. The GATED
RECURRENT AVERAGING NETWORK has the best
performance on both datasets. Dropout helps the
word-averaging model in the STS task, unlike in
the transfer learning setting.
The LSTM bene-
ﬁts slightly from dropout, scrambling, and averaging on their own individually with the exception of word dropout on both datasets and averaging on the SICK dataset. However, when combined, these modiﬁcations are able to signiﬁcantly
6This objective function has been shown to perform very
strongly on text similarity tasks, signiﬁcantly better than
squared or absolute error.
Regularization
word dropout
word dropout
scrambling
dropout, scrambling
word dropout
scrambling
dropout, scrambling
word dropout
scrambling
dropout, scrambling
Results from supervised training on
the STS and SICK datasets (Pearson’s r × 100).
The last column is the average result on the two
Table 6: Results from supervised training on the
STS and SICK datasets (Pearson’s r × 100) for
the GRAN architectures. The last column is the
average result on the two datasets.
improve the performance of the LSTM, bringing
it much closer in performance to AVG. This experiment indicates that these modiﬁcations when
training LSTMs are beneﬁcial outside the transfer learning setting, and can potentially be used to
improve performance for the broad range of problems that use LSTMs to model sentences.
In Table 6 we compare the various GRAN architectures under the same settings as the previous
experiment. We ﬁnd that the GRAN still has the
best overall performance.
We also experiment with initializing the supervised models using our pretrained sentence model
parameters, for the AVG model (no regularization),
LSTMAVG (dropout, scrambling), and GATED
RECURRENT AVERAGING NETWORK (dropout,
scrambling) models from Table 2 and Table 3. We
both initialize and then regularize back to these
initial values, referring to this setting as “universal”.7
experiments,
{10, 1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 10−5, 10−6, 10−7, 10−8, 0}
Sentence 1
Sentence 2
the lamb is looking at the camera.
a cat looking at the camera.
he also said shockey is “living the dream
life of a new york athlete.
“jeremy’s a good guy,” barber said, adding:“jeremy is
living the dream life of the new york athlete.
bloomberg chips in a billion
bloomberg gives $1.1 b to university
in other regions, the sharia is imposed.
in other areas, sharia law is being introduced by force.
three men in suits sitting at a table.
two women in the kitchen looking at a object.
we never got out of it in the ﬁrst place!
where does the money come from in the ﬁrst place?
two birds interacting in the grass.
two dogs play with each other outdoors.
Illustrative sentence pairs from the STS datasets showing errors made by LSTMAVG and
AVG. The last three columns show the gold similarity score, the similarity score of LSTMAVG, and the
similarity score of AVG. Boldface indicates smaller error compared to gold scores.
Regularization
dropout, universal
dropout, scrambling
dropout, scrambling, universal
dropout, scrambling
dropout, scrambling, universal
Impact of initializing and regularizing
toward universal models (Pearson’s r×100) in supervised training.
The results are shown in Table 8.
Initializing and regularizing to the pretrained models signiﬁcantly improves the performance for all three
models, justifying our claim that these models
serve a dual purpose: they can be used a black box
semantic similarity function, and they possess rich
knowledge that can be used to improve the performance of downstream tasks.
Error Analysis
We analyze the predictions of AVG and the recurrent networks, represented by LSTMAVG, on the
20 STS datasets. We choose LSTMAVG as it correlates slightly less strongly with AVG than the
GRAN on the results over all SemEval datasets
used for evaluation. We scale the models’ cosine
similarities to lie within , then compare the
predicted similarities of LSTMAVG and AVG to the
gold similarities. We analyzed instances in which
each model would tend to overestimate or underestimate the gold similarity relative to the other.
These are illustrated in Table 7.
We ﬁnd that AVG tends to overestimate the semantic similarity of a sentence pair, relative to
LSTMAVG, when the two sentences have a lot of
and λc over {10, 1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 10−5, 10−6, 0}.
word or synonym overlap, but have either important differences in key semantic roles or where one
sentence has signiﬁcantly more content than the
other. These phenomena are shown in examples 1
and 2 in Table 7. Conversely, AVG tends to underestimate similarity when there are one-word-tomultiword paraphrases between the two sentences
as shown in examples 3 and 4.
LSTMAVG tends to overestimate similarity
when the two inputs have similar sequences of
syntactic categories, but the meanings of the sentences are different (examples 5, 6, and 7). Instances of LSTMAVG underestimating the similarity relative to AVG are relatively rare, and those
that we found did not have any systematic patterns.
GRAN Gate Analysis
We also investigate what is learned by the gating
function of the GATED RECURRENT AVERAGING
NETWORK. We are interested to see whether its
estimates of importance correlate with those of traditional syntactic and (shallow) semantic analysis.
We use the oracle trained GATED RECURRENT
AVERAGING NETWORK from Table 3 and calculate the L1 norm of the gate after embedding
10,000 sentences from English Wikipedia.8 We
also automatically tag and parse these sentences
using the Stanford dependency parser . We then compute the average gate
L1 norms for particular part-of-speech tags, dependency arc labels, and their conjunction.
Table 9 shows the highest/lowest average norm
tags and dependency labels. The network prefers
nouns, especially proper nouns, as well as cardinal
numbers, which is sensible as these are among the
most discriminative features of a sentence.
Analyzing the dependency relations, we ﬁnd
8We selected only sentences of less than or equal to 15
tokens to ensure more accurate parsing.
Dep. Label
possessive
POS tags and dependency labels with
highest and lowest average GATED RECURRENT
AVERAGING NETWORK gate L1 norms. The lists
are ordered from highest norm to lowest in the top
10 columns, and lowest to highest in the bottom
10 columns.
Dep. Label Weight
Average L1 norms for adjectives (JJ)
with selected dependency labels.
that nouns in the object position tend to have
higher weight than nouns in the subject position.
This may relate to topic and focus; the object may
be more likely to be the “new” information related
by the sentence, which would then make it more
likely to be matched by the other sentence in the
paraphrase pair.
We ﬁnd that the weights of adjectives depend
on their position in the sentence, as shown in Table 10. The highest norms appear when an adjective is an xcomp, acomp, or root; this typically
means it is residing in an object-like position in its
clause. Adjectives that modify a noun (amod) have
Dep. Label Weight
Average L1 norms for words with the
tag VBG with selected dependency labels.
medium weight, and those that modify another adjective or verb (advmod) have low weight.
Lastly, we analyze words tagged as VBG, a
highly ambiguous tag that can serve many syntactic roles in a sentence. As shown in Table 11,
we ﬁnd that when they are used to modify a
noun (amod) or in the object position of a clause
(xcomp, pcomp) they have high weight. Medium
weight appears when used in verb phrases (root,
vmod) and low weight when used as prepositions
or auxiliary verbs (prep, auxpass).
Conclusion
We showed how to modify and regularize LSTMs
to improve their performance for learning paraphrastic sentence embeddings in both transfer and
supervised settings. We also introduced a new recurrent network, the GATED RECURRENT AVER-
AGING NETWORK, that improves upon both AVG
and LSTMs for these tasks, and we release our
code and trained models.
Furthermore, we analyzed the different errors
produced by AVG and the recurrent methods and
found that the recurrent methods were learning
composition that wasn’t being captured by AVG.
We also investigated the GRAN in order to better
understand the compositional phenomena it was
learning by analyzing the L1 norm of its gate over
various inputs.
additional
sources, including from aligning different translations of novels ,
aligning new articles of the same topic , or even possibly using machine translation systems to translate bilingual text into paraphrastic sentence pairs. Our new techniques, combined with the promise of new data sources, offer a great deal of potential for improved universal
paraphrastic sentence embeddings.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.
This research used resources
of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility,
which is a DOE Ofﬁce of Science User Facility
supported under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
We thank the developers of Theano and NVIDIA Corporation
for donating GPUs used in this research.