Adversarial Training for Large Neural Language Models
Xiaodong Liu†, Hao Cheng†, Pengcheng He‡, Weizhu Chen‡, Yu Wang†, Hoifung Poon†,
Jianfeng Gao†
† Microsoft Research
‡ Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI
{xiaodl,chehao,penhe,wzchen,yuwan,hoifung,jfgao}@microsoft.com
Generalization and robustness are both key
desiderata for designing machine learning
Adversarial training can enhance
robustness, but past work often ﬁnds it hurts
generalization.
In natural language processing (NLP), pre-training large neural language
models such as BERT have demonstrated impressive gain in generalization for a variety
of tasks, with further improvement from adversarial ﬁne-tuning.
However, these models are still vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we show that adversarial pretraining can improve both generalization and
robustness. We propose a general algorithm
ALUM (Adversarial training for large neural LangUage Models), which regularizes the
training objective by applying perturbations in
the embedding space that maximizes the adversarial loss. We present the ﬁrst comprehensive study of adversarial training in all stages,
including pre-training from scratch, continual
pre-training on a well-trained model, and taskspeciﬁc ﬁne-tuning. ALUM obtains substantial gains over BERT on a wide range of
NLP tasks, in both regular and adversarial
scenarios.
Even for models that have been
well trained on extremely large text corpora,
such as RoBERTa, ALUM can still produce
signiﬁcant gains from continual pre-training,
whereas conventional non-adversarial methods can not. ALUM can be further combined
with task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning to attain additional gains. The ALUM code is publicly available at 
Introduction
Generalization and robustness are two fundamental
considerations in assessing machine learning methods. Ideally, a learned model should perform well
on unseen test examples and withstand adversarial
attacks. In natural language processing (NLP), pretraining neural language models on unlabeled text
has proven very effective to improve generalization performance for a variety of downstream tasks,
as exempliﬁed by BERT and
other transformer-based models . However, these models
may still suffer catastrophic failures in adversarial
scenarios . For
example, Jin et al. show that classiﬁcation
accuracy on a Yelp dataset drops from 95.6% on
standard test to 6.8% on robust test for a BERT
Adversarial training has been well studied in computer vision, but past work shows that it often hurts
generalization . In NLP, there is growing interest in adversarial training, but existing work typically focuses
on assessing the impact on generalization . Moreover, adversarial training
is generally limited to task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning1.
See Minaee et al. for a recent survey.
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst comprehensive
study on adversarial pre-training, and show that it
can improve both generalization and robustness for
a wide range of NLP tasks. We propose a unifying
algorithm ALUM (Adversarial training for large
neural LangUage Models), which augments the
standard training objective with an additional term
that maximizes the adversarial loss via applying
perturbation in the embedding space. ALUM is
generally applicable to pre-training and ﬁne-tuning,
on top of any Transformer-based language models.
We conduct a comprehensive evaluation on various NLP tasks across multiple benchmark datasets,
including GLUE, SQuAD v1.1/v2.0, SNLI, Sci-
Tail for assessing model generalization, and ANLI,
1A notable exception is Wang et al. , but it only
applied adversarial training to generative language modeling.
 
HELLSWAG, SWAG, Adversarial SQuAD for assessing model robustness. Experimental results
show that by conducting adversarial pre-training,
ALUM attains signiﬁcant improvements, often outperforming previous state of the art by a large margin. This is true even for the extremely well-trained
RoBERTa model, where continual pre-training
without adversarial training fails to attain any gain.
Remarkably, in addition to improving generalization, we ﬁnd that adversarial pre-training also substantially improves robustness, as exempliﬁed by
the resulting large gains in adversarial datasets such
as ANLI, Adversarial-SQuAD, HELLASWAG,
which signiﬁcantly reduces the gap between standard errors and robust errors for popular models
like BERT and RoBERTa. This suggests that adversarial training on unlabeled data can provide a
promising direction to reconcile the apparent con-
ﬂict between generalization and robustness as observed in prior work . We also show that adversarial
pre-training can be combined with adversarial ﬁnetuning, resulting in extra gains.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose ALUM, a general algorithm to incorporate adversarial training for pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning large neural language models.
• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation on a
wide range of NLP tasks and assess the impact
of adversarial training in pre-training from
scratch, continual pre-training, task-speciﬁc
ﬁne-tuning, and their combinations.
• We obtain signiﬁcant improvements over prior
state of the art, including extremely welltrained models such as RoBERTa, in both generalization and robustness.
• To facilitate research, we will release our code
and pre-trained models.
Preliminary
In this section, we give a quick overview of language model pre-training, using BERT as a running example for transformerbased neural language models.
Input Representation
We assume that the input consists of text spans
(typically sentences) separated by a special token [SEP]. To address the problem of out-ofvocabulary words, tokens are divided into subword
units, using Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) or its variants , which generates a ﬁxed-size subword vocabulary to compactly represent words in training
text corpora.
Model Architecture
Following recent pre-training methods , we use transformerbased models to leverage a multi-head attention mechanism, which
have demonstrated superiority in parallel computation and modeling long-range dependencies, compared to recurrent neural networks such as LSTM
 . The input is
ﬁrst passed to a lexical encoder, which combines
a token embedding, a (token) position embedding
and a segment embedding (i.e., which text span the
token belongs to) by element-wise summation. The
embedding layer is then passed to multiple layers
of transformer modules to generate the contextual
representation .
Self Supervision
A key innovation in BERT is
the use of Masked Language Model (MLM) for
self-supervised pre-training. Instead of predicting
the next token based on the preceding tokens, as
in traditional generative language models, MLM
randomly replaces a subset of tokens by a special
token (e.g., [MASK]), and asks the model to predict them. Essentially, it is a cloze task , where the training objective is the crossentropy loss between the original tokens and the
predicted ones. In BERT and RoBERTa, 15% of
the input tokens are chosen, among which a random 80% are replaced by [MASK], 10% are left
unchanged and 10% are randomly replaced by a
token from the vocabulary. In our experiments,
instead of using a ﬁxed masked rate of 15%, we
gradually increase it from 5% to 25% with 5% increment for every 20% of training epochs, as we
ﬁnd this makes pre-training more stable.
Additionally, BERT also uses Next Sentence
Prediction (NSP), which is a binary classiﬁcation task that for a given sentence pair determines
whether one sentence follows the other in the original text. There have debates on how much NSP
helps . But we include it in our
experiments for a fair comparison with BERT.
ALUM (Adversarial training for large
neural LangUage Models)
In this section, we ﬁrst present a unifying view of
standard training objectives and prior approaches
to adversarial training. We then present ALUM,
which is a general adversarial training algorithm
applicable to pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, on top
of any transformer-based neural language models.
Standard Training Objectives
Both pre-training and ﬁne-tuning can be viewed
as minimizing the standard error on training data,
with the training objectives derived from selfsupervision (MLM and NSP in pre-training) or direct supervision (labeled examples in task-speciﬁc
ﬁne-tuning), respectively.
Speciﬁcally, the training algorithms seek to learn
a function f(x; θ) : x →C, parametrized by θ. In
MLM, C is the vocabulary, and f(x; θ) tries to predict the masked token y. In ﬁne-tuning, C is the
task-speciﬁc label set, and f(x; θ) is the classiﬁer.
Given a training dataset D of input-output pairs
(x, y) and the loss function l(., .) (e.g., cross entropy), f(x; θ) is trained to minimize the empirical
E(x,y)∼D[l(f(x; θ), y)]
Adversarial Training
Pre-training a large neural language model such
as BERT has proven effective to improve generalization performance in task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning
 . However, such models can
still suffer catastrophic loss in adversarial scenarios , with attacks as simple
as replacing a few words in input sentences while
preserving the semantics.
To improve model robustness and withstand adversarial attacks, adversarial training has been proposed and studied extensively, predominantly in
computer vision literature . The key idea is to modify the
training objective by applying small perturbation
to input images that maximize the adversarial loss:
E(x,y)∼D[max
l(f(x + δ; θ), y)]
where the inner maximization can be solved by
running a number of projected gradient descent
steps .
While adversarial training has been successful
in mitigating adversarial attacks, past work often
encounters an apparent conﬂict between generalization and robustness , as adversarial training
could hurt generalization performance.
The ALUM Algorithm
In NLP, applying adversarial training is not straightforward, since the input are discrete elements (token or subword sequences), but there have been
some recent successes . However, aside from Wang et al.
 , there has not been any prior work on adversarial pre-training, and Wang et al. only
applied adversarial training to generative language
modeling using LSTM.
ALUM is applicable to both pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning. It builds on several key ideas that have
proven useful in prior work. First, instead of applying perturbation to the input text directly, one
would perturb the embedding space. Namely, x
is the sub-word embedding in f(x; θ) .
Second, instead of adopting the adversarial training objective of Eq. 2, as in Zhu et al. 
and most other approaches, we follow Jiang et al.
 to regularize the standard objective using
virtual adversarial training :
E(x,y)∼D[l(f(x; θ), y)+
l(f(x + δ; θ), f(x; θ))]
Effectively, the adversarial term favors label
smoothness in the embedding neighborhood, and
α is a hyperparameter that controls the trade-off
between standard errors and robust errors.
We found that virtual adversarial training is superior to conventional adversarial training, especially when labels might be noisy. E.g., BERT pretraining uses the masked words as self-supervised
labels, but in many cases, they could be replaced by
other words to form completely legitimate text. Empirically, we veriﬁed that this is indeed the case, as
pre-training beneﬁts from larger α. We set α = 10
for pre-training, and α = 1 for ﬁne-tuning in all
our experiments.
Compared to standard training, adversarial training is rather expensive due to the inner maximization. Zhu et al. adopted the free adversarial training idea in Shafahi et al. for acceleration, by reusing the backward pass for gradient computation to carry out the inner ascent step
Algorithm 1 ALUM
Input: T: the total number of iterations, X =
{(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}: the dataset, f(x; θ):
the machine learning model parametrized by θ,
σ2: the variance of the random initialization of
perturbation δ, ϵ: perturbation bound, K: the
number of iterations for perturbation estimation, η: the step size for updating perturbation,
τ: the global learning rate, α: the smoothing
proportion of adversarial training in the augmented learning objective, Π: the projection
operation.
1: for t = 1, .., T do
for (x, y) ∈X do
δ ∼N(0, σ2I)
for m = 1, .., K do
gadv ←∇δl(f(x; θ), f(x + δ; θ))
δ ←Π∥δ∥∞≤ϵ(δ + ηgadv)
gθ ←∇θl(f(x; θ), y)
+α∇θl(f(x; θ), f(x + δ; θ))
11: end for
and outer descent step simultaneously. Inspired
by ERNIE and other continual
pre-training approaches, we instead adopt a curriculum learning approach: ﬁrst train the model using
the standard objective (1); and then continue the
training with virtual adversarial training (3).
Jiang et al. also incorporated a momentum term using the Bregman proximate point
method, which can be quite costly in training time.
We found that our curriculum learning approach
largely rendered this unnecessary and simpliﬁed
our algorithm without using this term.
Algorithm 1 shows the details of ALUM. Line
4-6 run K projected gradient steps to ﬁnd the perturbation δ that maximizes the adversarial loss (violation of local smoothness). Note that a larger K
leads to better approximation , but it is more expensive. To attain
a good trade-off between speed and performance,
we set K = 1 in all our experiments.
Generalization vs. Robustness
Empirically, we found that by applying adversarial
pre-training using ALUM, we were able to improve
both generalization and robustness for a wide range
of NLP tasks, as seen in Section 4. This is very
interesting as prior work often ﬁnds that adversarial
training hurts generalization, even with theoretical
justiﬁcation .
We hypothesize that adversarial pre-training
might be the key for reconciling this apparent incongruence, as prior work on the conﬂict between
generalization and robustness generally focuses on
the supervised learning setting. Interestingly, some
nascent results in reconciling the two also leverage
unlabeled data, such as self-training . Additionally, we hypothesize that
by perturbing the embedding space rather than the
input space, adversarial training in NLP might inadvertently bias toward on-manifold perturbation
than regular perturbation, which helps generalization . We leave the theoretical
analysis of all these connections to future work.
Experiments
In this section, we present a comprehensive study
of adversarial training on large neural language
models. We show that ALUM substantially improves both generalization and robustness in a wide
range of NLP tasks, for both the standard BERT
model and the extremely well-trained RoBERTa
model. We also show that ALUM can be applied to
adversarial pre-training and ﬁne-tuning alike and
attain further gain by combining the two.
Pre-training:
For BERT pre-training, we use
Wikipedia (English Wikipedia dump2; 13GB).
For continual pre-training of RoBERTa, we use
Wikipedia (13GB), OPENWEBTEXT (public Reddit content (Gokaslan and Cohen); 38GB), STO-
RIES ; 31GB).
NLP application benchmarks:
To assess the
impact of adversarial training on generalization,
we use standard benchmarks such as GLUE and SQuAD (v1.1 and v2.0) , as well as three named
entity recognition (NER) tasks in the biomedical
To evaluate the impact of adversarial
training on robustness, we use ANLI , Adversarial SQuAD ,
and HELLASWAG . To assess
the combination of adversarial pre-training and
2 
ﬁne-tuning, we follow Jiang et al. and use
MNLI (from GLUE), ANLI,
SWAG , SNLI , SciTail . These benchmarks cover a wide range of NLP tasks such as
named entity recognition, textual entailment, and
machine reading comprehension, spanning classi-
ﬁcation, ranking, and regression. For details, see
Appendix A.
Implementation Details
We perform three types of adversarial training in
our experiments: pre-training from scratch, continual pre-training on a well-trained model, and
task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning.
We pre-train BERT models from scratch using Wikipedia3. The training code is based on
Megatron, implemented in PyTorch 4. We use ADAM for
the optimizer with a standard learning rate schedule
that increases linearly from zero to the peak rate
of 1 × 10−4 in ﬁrst one percent of steps, and then
decays linearly to zero in the remaining 99% of
steps. Following Devlin et al. , training is
done for one million steps with batch size of 256.
We set the perturbation size ϵ = 1 × 10−5, the step
size η = 1 × 10−3, and the variance for initializing perturbation σ = 1 × 10−5. We set α = 10
for heightened regularization in virtual adversarial
training, and set K = 1 for training efﬁciency (i.e.,
one projected gradient step). The training takes 10
days on one DGX-2 machine with 16 V100 GPUs.
For continual pre-training of RoBERTa , we use RoBERTa’s default training parameters, except a smaller learning rate
(4 × 10−5), and run for 100K training steps with a
batch size of 256 on the union of Wikipedia, OPEN-
WEBTEXT, and STORIES (total size 82GB). The
code is based on FairSeq5. The training takes 7
days on two DGX-2 machines.
For ﬁne-tuning with or without adversarial training, we use the MT-DNN open-sourced toolkit 6. We follow Jiang et al. 
for head-to-head comparison, which uses ADAM
 and RADAM as our optimizers, with peak learning rates
of {5 × 10−6, 8 × 10−6, 1 × 10−5, 2 × 10−5}, and
batch sizes of 16, 32 or 64, depending on the tasks.
3BookCorpus is no longer publicly available.
4 
5 
6 
The dropout rate is set to 0.1 for all the task-speciﬁc
layers, except 0.3 for MNLI and 0.05 for CoLA. To
avoid gradient exploding, the gradient is clipped to
keep the norm within 1. All the texts are tokenized
using WordPiece and chopped to spans up to 512
tokens. We conduct ﬁne-tuning for up to 10 epochs
and pick the best model using the dev set.
Improving Generalization
In this subsection, we study the impact of adversarial pre-training on generalization, by comparing
the performance of pre-trained models in various
downstream applications. First, we study the scenario of pre-training from scratch, by comparing
three BERT models:
• BERTBASE is the standard BERT base model
trained using the same setting as Devlin et al.
 (i.e., 1M steps with a batch size of
• BERT+BASE is similar to BERTBASE, except
that it is trained with 1.6M steps, which takes
roughly the same amount of time as that of adversarial pre-training (see ALUMBERT-BASE
• ALUMBERT-BASE is a BERT model trained
using the same setting as BERTBASE, except
that ALUM is used in the last 500K steps.
Each adversarial training step takes approximately 1.5 times longer than a step in standard
training7.
SQuAD v1.1/v2.0
88.5/81.0 76.5/72.9 84.5/84.4
89.6/82.4 77.8/74.0 85.0/84.8
ALUMBERT-BASE 90.8/83.7 80.2/76.6 85.8/86.1
Comparison of standard and adversarial pre-training on SQuAD (v1.1 and v2.0) and
MNLI (in-domain and out-domain).
BERTBASE and
ALUMBERT-BASE both use 1M pre-training steps, and
BERT+BASE use 1.6M steps.
Table 1 compares these pre-trained models on
three standard benchmarks and v2.0 , and MNLI from GLUE ),
using the same standard ﬁne-tuning setting (without adversarial training). The standard BERT models trained using only the Wikipedia data attain similar results as in Devlin et al. , thus provide
a good baseline for comparison. ALUMBERT-BASE
consistently outperforms the standard BERT models across all the datasets, even adjusting for the
slightly longer trainng time. E.g., on SQuAD v1.1,
ALUMBERT-BASE gains 2.3% points in F1 over
BERTBASE and 1.2% points over BERT+BASE. Figure 1 shows ALUM at work on the development
set of MNLI. Once adversarial training is applied
in the middle (after ﬁrst 500K steps), ALUM starts
outperforming BERT and the gap is widening.
We also assess the impact of adversarial pretraining in the biomedical domain, which is substantially different from the Wikipedia corpus used
in pre-training. Table 2 shows the results on standard biomedical name entity recognition (NER)
datasets: BC2GM , NCBI , JNLPBA .
Interestingly, ALUM still outperforms the standard
BERT model on all three tasks, even though the
application domain is substantially different from
the pre-training one.
Next, we assess the impact of adversarial training in the continual pre-training setting. We use our
pre-training dataset (Wikipedia, OPENWEBTEXT,
RoBERTaLARGE
RoBERTa+LARGE
Table 3: RoBERTa is an extremlly well-trained model:
standard continual pre-training without adversarial
training fails to improve generalization performance in
downstream tasks. (Scores are accuracy.)
STORIES; 82GB)8, and run 100K steps in all our
continual pre-training experiments. We choose the
RoBERTa models as the baseline, which use the
same neural model as BERT, but were pre-trained
on an order of magnitude more text (160GB vs
13GB). They are the state-of-the-art pre-trained language models, outperforming the standard BERT
models in many NLP tasks.
RoBERTa models are extremely well-trained.
Standard continual pre-training fails to attain
any gains in downstream applications such as
MNLI and SST from GLUE , as
shown in Table 3. On the other hand, ALUM
is able to attain further gain from continual pretraining of RoBERTa, as shown in Table 4. E.g.,
ALUMROBERTA-BASE outperforms RoBERTaBASE
by +0.5%, and ALUMROBERTA-LARGE outperforms
RoBERTaLARGE by +0.7% on the MNLI development set. This is rather remarkable, as by contrast
standard continual pre-training is unable to attain
Improving Robustness
In this subsection, we assess the impact of adversarial pre-training on the model’s robustness
against adversarial attacks, using three standard
adversarial NLP benchmarks: ANLI , HELLASWAG and adversarial SQuAD . On ANLI,
we follow the experimental setting of Nie et al.
 to enable a head-to-head comparison, which
combines four datasets ) for ﬁne-tuning.
Adversarial pre-training substantially improves
model robustness, as shown in Table 5 and Table 6. In all three adversarial datasets, ALUM
consistently outperformed the standard pre-training
counterparts, for BERT and RoBERTa alike. For
8This is a subset of the data (160GB) used in RoBERTa
pre-training.
MNLI-m SST-2 QNLI CoLA RTE MRPC QQP STS-B
RoBERTaBASE
ALUMROBERTA-BASE
RoBERTaLARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
Table 4: Comparison of standard and adversarial pre-training on the GLUE development set.
Results for
ALUMROBERTA-BASE and ALUMROBERTA-LARGE are averaged over ﬁve runs.
Results of RoBERTaBASE and
RoBERTaLARGE are taken from Liu et al. .
MNLI + SNLI + ANLI + FEVER
ALUMBERT-BASE
BERTLARGE 
XLNetLARGE 
RoBERTaLARGE 
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
Table 5: Comparison of standard and adversarial pre-training on the adversarial dataset ANLI. R1, R2 and R3 are
rounds with increasing difﬁculty. Note that Nie et al. did not represent results for individual rounds, as
signiﬁed by “-”.
Adversarial SQuAD
AddOneSent
ALUMBERT-BASE
RoBERTaLARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
Table 6: Comparison of standard and adversarial pre-training on adversarial datasets Adversarial SQuAD and HEL-
LASWAG. The test result on HELLASWAG is taken from the ofﬁcial leaderboard: rowanzellers.com/hellaswag;
we couldn’t get results for BERT base models as the organizers restrict the number of submissions.
example, on ANLI, ALUMROBERTA-LARGE gains
7.3% points in test accuracy over RoBERTaLARGE,
outperforms XLNet by 5.0%
points, creating a new state-of-the-art result. The
gains on Adversarial SQuAD and HELLASWAG
are equally signiﬁcant.
For example, for Adversarial SQuAD, ALUMBERT-BASE outperforms
BERTBASE by +6.4% F1 in the AddSent setting and +5.0% F1 in the AddOneSent setting.
Against RoBERTaLARGE, ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
gains +3.4% F1 in AddSent and +2.1% F1 in AddOneSent.
Combining Adversarial Pre-Training and
Fine-tuning
Adversarial training has been shown to be effective in task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning .
In this subsection,
we explore combining adversarial pre-training
with adversarial ﬁne-tuning. Speciﬁcally, we use
RoBERTaLARGE as the base model, and compare it
with ALUMROBERTA-LARGE, which uses adversarial continual pre-training but standard ﬁne-tuning,
and ALUMRoBERTA-LARGE-SMART, which uses adversarial training in both continual pre-training and
(a) Results on MNLI
(b) Results on ANLI
Figure 2: Combining adversarial pre-training and ﬁnetuning attaining the best results on the development sets
of MNLI and ANLI, two representative GLUE tasks.
SNLI Dataset (Accuracy%)
GPT 
MT-DNNLARGE 
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE-SMART
SciTail Dataset (Accuracy%)
GPT 
BERTLARGE 
MT-DNNLARGE 
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE-SMART
Table 7: Combining adversarial pre-training and ﬁnetuning attains the best results on SNLI and SciTail.
ﬁne-tuning.
Figure 2 shows the results on the
development sets of MNLI and ANLI, two rep-
SWAG Dataset (Accuracy%)
GPT 
BERTLARGE 
Human 
RoBERTaLARGE 
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE-SMART
HELLASWAG Dataset (Accuracy%)
GPT 
BERTLARGE 
RoBERTaLARGE 
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE-SMART
Table 8: Combining adversarial pre-training and ﬁnetuning attains the best results on SWAG and HEL-
resentative GLUE tasks. Combining adversarial
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning attains the best results,
and substantially outperforms RoBERTaLARGE.
E.g., on ANLI, ALUMRoBERTa-SMART outperforms
ALUMROBERTA-LARGE by +1.1% points in accuracy, and outperforms RoBERTaLARGE by +5.1%
On SNLI, SciTail, SWAG, and HEL-
LASWAG, we observe similar gains by combining
adversarial pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, attaining
new state-of-the-art results on these tasks. See table 7 and 8.
Conclusion
We propose ALUM, a general adversarial training algorithm, and present the ﬁrst comprehensive study of adversarial training in large neural
language models. We show that adversarial pretraining can signiﬁcantly improves both generalization and robustness, which provides a promising
direction for reconciling their conﬂicts as observed
in prior work. ALUM substantially improved accuracy for BERT and RoBERTa in a wide range of
NLP tasks, and can be combined with adversarial
ﬁne-tuning for further gain.
Future directions include: further study on the
role of adversarial pre-training in improving generalization and robustness; speed up adversarial
training; apply ALUM to other domains.
Acknowledgments
We thank Haoming Jiang, Tuo Zhao, Zhe Gan,
Keivn Duh, Yangfeng Ji, Greg Yang, Pengchuan
Zhang, Lei Zhang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Masayuki
Asahara, and Lis Pereira for valuable discussions
and comments, Microsoft Research Technology
Engineering team for setting up GPU machines.