Data Descriptor: The HAM10000
dataset, a large collection of
multi-source dermatoscopic images
of common pigmented skin lesions
Philipp Tschandl1, Cliff Rosendahl2 & Harald Kittler1
Training of neural networks for automated diagnosis of pigmented skin lesions is hampered by the small
size and lack of diversity of available datasets of dermatoscopic images. We tackle this problem by
releasing the HAM10000 (“Human Against Machine with 10000 training images”) dataset. We collected
dermatoscopic images from different populations acquired and stored by different modalities. Given this
diversity we had to apply different acquisition and cleaning methods and developed semi-automatic
workﬂows utilizing speciﬁcally trained neural networks. The ﬁnal dataset consists of 10015 dermatoscopic
images which are released as a training set for academic machine learning purposes and are publicly
available through the ISIC archive. This benchmark dataset can be used for machine learning and for
comparisons with human experts. Cases include a representative collection of all important diagnostic
categories in the realm of pigmented lesions. More than 50% of lesions have been conﬁrmed by pathology,
while the ground truth for the rest of the cases was either follow-up, expert consensus, or conﬁrmation by
in-vivo confocal microscopy.
Design Type(s)
database creation objective • data integration objective • image format
conversion objective
Measurement Type(s)
skin lesions
Technology Type(s)
digital curation
Factor Type(s)
diagnosis • Diagnostic Procedure • age • biological sex • animal
Sample Characteristic(s)
Homo sapiens • skin of body
1ViDIR Group, Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria. 2Faculty of
Medicine, University of Queensland, Herston 4006, Austria. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to P.T (email: ).
Received: 25 April 2018
Accepted: 26 June 2018
Published: 14 August 2018
www.nature.com/scientificdata
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
Background & Summary
Dermatoscopy is a widely used diagnostic technique that improves the diagnosis of benign and malignant
pigmented skin lesions in comparison to examination with the unaided eye1. Dermatoscopic images are
also a suitable source to train artiﬁcial neural networks to diagnose pigmented skin lesions automatically.
In 1994, Binder et al.2 already used dermatoscopic images successfully to train an artiﬁcial neural network
to differentiate melanomas, the deadliest type of skin cancer, from melanocytic nevi. Although the results
were promising, the study, like most earlier studies, suffered from a small sample size and the lack of
dermatoscopic images other than melanoma or nevi. Recent advances in graphics card capabilities and
machine learning techniques set new benchmarks with regard to the complexity of neural networks and
raised expectations that automated diagnostic systems will soon be available that diagnose all kinds of
pigmented skin lesions without the need of human expertise3.
Training of neural-network based diagnostic algorithms requires a large number of annotated images4
but the number of high quality dermatoscopic images with reliable diagnoses is limited or restricted to
only a few classes of diseases.
In 2013 Mendonça et al. made 200 dermatoscopic images available as the PH2 dataset including 160
nevi and 40 melanomas5. Pathology was the ground truth for melanomas but not available for most nevi.
Because the set is publicly available ( and includes comprehensive metadata it
served as a benchmark dataset for studies of the computer diagnosis of melanoma until now.
Accompanying the book Interactive Atlas of Dermoscopy6 a CD-ROM is commercially available with
digital versions of 1044 dermatoscopic images including 167 images of non-melanocytic lesions, and 20
images of diagnoses not covered in the HAM10000 dataset. Although this is one of the most diverse
available datasets in regard to covered diagnoses, its use is probably limited because of its constrained
accessibility.
The ISIC archive ( is a collection of multiple databases and currently includes
13786 dermatoscopic images . Because of permissive licensing (CC-0), wellstructured availability, and large size it is currently the standard source for dermatoscopic image analysis
research. It is, however, biased towards melanocytic lesions (12893 of 13786 images are nevi or
melanomas). Because this portal is the most comprehensive, technically advanced, and accessible resource
for digital dermatoscopy, we will provide our dataset through the ISIC archive.
Because of the limitations of available datasets, past research focused on melanocytic lesions (i.e the
differentiation between melanoma and nevus) and disregarded non-melanocytic pigmented lesions
although they are common in practice. The mismatch between the small diversity of available training
data and the variety of real life data resulted in a moderate performance of automated diagnostic systems
in the clinical setting despite excellent performance in experimental settings3,5,7,8. Building a classiﬁer for
multiple diseases is more challenging than binary classiﬁcation9. Currently, reliable multi-class
predictions are only available for clinical images of skin diseases but not for dermatoscopic images10,11.
To boost the research on automated diagnosis of dermatoscopic images we released the HAM10000
(“Human Against Machine with 10000 training images”) dataset. The dataset will be provided to the
participants of the ISIC 2018 classiﬁcation challenge hosted by the annual MICCAI conference in
Granada, Spain, but will also be available to research groups who do not participate in the challenge.
Because we will also use this dataset to collect and provide information on the performance of human
expert diagnosis, it could serve as benchmark set for the comparisons of humans and machines in the
future. In order to provide more information to machine-learning research groups who intend to use the
HAM10000 training set for research we describe the evolution and the speciﬁcs of the dataset (Fig. 1) in
The 10015 dermatoscopic images of the HAM10000 training set were collected over a period of 20 years
from two different sites, the Department of Dermatology at the Medical University of Vienna, Austria,
and the skin cancer practice of Cliff Rosendahl in Queensland, Australia. The Australian site stored
images and meta-data in PowerPoint ﬁles and Excel databases. The Austrian site started to collect images
before the era of digital cameras and stored images and metadata in different formats during different
time periods.
Extraction of images and meta-data from PowerPoint ﬁles
Each PowerPoint ﬁle contained consecutive clinical and dermatoscopic images of one calendar month of
clinical workup, where each slide contained a single image and a text-ﬁeld with a unique lesion identiﬁer.
Because of the large amount of data we applied an automated approach to extract and sort those images.
We used the Python package python-pptx to access the PowerPoint ﬁles and to obtain the content. We
iterated through each slide and automatically extracted and stored the source image, the corresponding
identiﬁer, and the year of documentation, which was part of the ﬁle name.
Digitization of diapositives
Before the introduction of digital cameras, dermatoscopic images at the Department of Dermatology in
Vienna, Austria were stored as diapositives. We digitized the diapositives with a Nikon Coolscan 5000 ED
scanner with a two-fold scan with Digital ICE and stored ﬁles as JPEG Images (8-bit color depth) in
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
highest quality (300DPI; 15 × 10 cm). We manually cropped the scanned images with the lesion centered
to 800x600px at 72DPI, and applied manual histogram corrections to enhance visual contrast and color
reproduction (Fig. 2).
Extraction of data from a digital dermatoscopy system
The Department of Dermatology at the University of Vienna is equipped with the digital dermatoscopy
system MoleMax HD (Derma Medical Systems, Vienna, Austria). We extracted cases from this system by
ﬁltering SQL-tables with a proprietary tool provided by the manufacturer. We selected only nonmelanocytic lesions with a consensus benign diagnosis, nevi with >1.5 years of digital dermatoscopic
follow-up, and excised lesions with a histopathologic report. Histopathologic reports were matched
manually to speciﬁc lesions. From a series of multiple sequential images of the same nevus we extracted
only the most recent one. Some melanomas of this set were also photographed with a DermLiteTM
Figure 1. Schematic ﬂow of dataset workup methods. Image and data content from different sources were
entered into a pipeline to organize and clean data, with ﬁnal images being standardized and stored in a
common format.
Figure 2. Manual correction of a scanned diapositive. Original scanned image (a) with remaining black
border on the lower left, lesion off center, yellow hue and reduced luminance. On the right (b), the ﬁnal image
after manual quality review.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
FOTO (3GenTM) camera. These additional images became also part of the ViDIR image series, where
different images of the same lesion were labeled with a common identiﬁer string. Original images of the
MoleMax HD system had a resolution of 1872x1053px (MoleMax HD) with non-quadratic pixels. We
manually cropped all MoleMax HD images to 800x600px (72DPI), centered the lesion if necessary, and
reverted the format to quadratic pixels.
Filtering of dermatoscopic images
The source image collections of both sites contained not only dermatoscopic images but also clinical
close-ups and overviews. Because there was no reliable annotation of the imaging type, we had to separate
the dermatoscopic images from the others. To deal with the large amount of data efﬁciently we developed
an automated method to screen and categorize >30000 images, similar to Han et al12: We hand-labeled
1501 image ﬁles of the Australian collection into the categories "overviews", "close-ups" and
"dermatoscopy". Using the hand-labeled images as a training set, we ﬁne-tuned an InceptionV3architecture13 (weights pre-trained on ImageNet4 data) to classify the images according to image type.
After training for 20 epochs with Stochastic Gradient Descent, with a learning rate initialized at 0.0003,
step-down (Gamma 0.1) at epochs 7 and 13, and a batch-size of 64, we obtained a top-1 accuracy of
98.68% on our hold-out test set. This accuracy was sufﬁcient to accelerate the selection process of
dermatoscopic images. The few remaining misclassiﬁed close-ups and overviews were removed by hand
in a second revision.
Unifying pathologic diagnoses
Histopathologic diagnoses showed high variability within and between sites including typos, different
dermatopathologic terminologies, multiple diagnoses per lesion or uncertain diagnoses. Cases with
uncertain diagnoses and collisions were excluded except for melanomas in association with a nevus.
We uniﬁed the diagnoses and formed seven generic classes, and speciﬁcally avoided ambiguous
classiﬁcations. The histopathologic expression "superﬁcial spreading melanoma in situ, arising in a
preexisting dermal nevus", for example, should only be allocated to the "melanoma" class and not to the
nevus class. The seven generic classes were chosen for simplicity and in regard of the intended use as a
benchmark dataset for the diagnosis of pigmented lesions by humans and machines. The seven classes
covered more than 95% of all pigmented lesions examined in daily clinical practice of the two study sites.
A more detailed description of the disease classes is given in the usage notes below.
Manual quality review
A ﬁnal manual screening and validation round was performed on all images to exclude cases with the
following attributes:
Type: Close-up and overview images that were not removed with automatic ﬁltering
Identiﬁability: Images with potentially identiﬁable content such as garment, jewelry or tattoos
Quality: Images that were out of focus or had disturbing artifacts like obstructing gel bubbles. We
speciﬁcally tolerated the presence of terminal hairs.
Content: Completely non-pigmented lesions and ocular, subungual or mucosal lesions
Remaining cases were reviewed for appropriate color reproduction and luminance and, if necessary,
corrected via manual histogram correction.
Code availability
Custom generated code for the described methods is available at 
HAM10000_dataset.
Data Records
All data records of the HAM10000 dataset are deposited at the Harvard Dataverse (Data Citation 1).
Table 1 shows a summary of the number of images in the HAM10000 training-set according to diagnosis
in comparison to existing databases.
Images and metadata are also accessible at the public ISIC-archive through the archive gallery as well
as through standardized API-calls ( 
Rosendahl image set (Australia)
Lesions of this part of the HAM10000 dataset originate from the ofﬁce of the skin cancer practice of
Cliff Rosendahl (CR, School of Medicine, University of Queensland). We extracted data from his
database after institutional ethics board approval (University of Queensland, Protocol-No. 2017001223).
Images were solely taken by author CR with either a DermLite Fluid (non-polarized) or DermLite DL3
(3Gen, San Juan Capistrano, CA, USA) with immersion ﬂuid (either 70% ethanol hand-wash gel, or
ultrasound gel). Digital images were stored within PowerPointTM presentations. Each slide contained a
dermatoscopic image and a text-ﬁeld with a consecutive unique lesion ID linking the image to a separate
Excel database with clinical metadata and histopathologic diagnoses. Images were documented in this
manner consecutively starting 2008 until May 2017. The Rosendahl series consists of 34.2GB of digital
slides (122 PowerPointTM-ﬁles) from which we extracted 36802 images with a matching histopathologic
report as described above. After removal of non-pigmented lesions, overviews, close-ups without
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
dermatoscopy, and cases without or with an inappropriate diagnosis that did not fall into one of the
predeﬁned generic classes we arrived at the ﬁnal dataset described in Table 1.
ViDIR image set (Austria)
From the ViDIR Group (Department of Dermatology at the Medical University of Vienna, Austria) datasources from different times were available and processed after ethics committee approval at the Medical
University of Vienna .
Legacy Diapositives.
The oldest resource of images of the ViDIR group dates back to the era before the
availablility of digital cameras when dermatoscopic images were taken with analog cameras and archived
as diapositives. They were originally photographed with the Heine Dermaphot system using immersion
ﬂuid, and produced for educational and archival purposes with the E-6 method14.
Current Database.
Since 2005 we documented digital dermatoscopic images with a DermLiteTM
FOTO (3GenTM) system (single cases also with Heine Delta 20) and stored images and meta-data in a
central database. This dataset includes triplets from the same lesion taken with different magniﬁcations to
enable visualization of local features and general patterns.
MoleMax Series.
The Department of Dermatology in Vienna offers digital dermatoscopic follow-up to
high risk patients to increase the the number of excisions of early melanoma while decreasing
unnecessary excisions of nevi15. The time interval between follow-up visits usually ranges from 6-12
months. Rinner et al.16 recently published a detailed description of this follow-up program. Since 2015
the MoleMax HD System (Derma Medical Systems, Vienna, Austria) is used for acquisition and storage
of dermatoscopic images.Most patients in the follow-up program have multiple nevi. Dermatologists of
the Department of Dermatology in Vienna usually monitor "atypical" nevi but also a small number of
randomly selected inconspicuous nevi, which are commonly underrepresented in datasets used for
machine-learning.
Technical Validation
If necessary, an expert dermatologist performed manual histogram correction to adjust images for visual
inspection by human readers. We restricted corrections to underexposed images and images with a visible
yellow or green hue and made no other adjustments. To illustrate changes, we conducted color illuminant
estimations after corrections according to the grey-world assumption17 as shown in Fig. 3. As desired,
corrections shifted yellow and green illuminants towards blue and red. We deﬁned four different types of
ground truth:
Histopathology
Histopathologic diagnoses of excised lesions have been performed by specialized dermatopathologists.
We scanned all available histopathologic slides of the current ViDIR image set for later review. We
manually reviewed all images with the corresponding histopathologic diagnosis and checked for
plausibility. If the histopathologic diagnosis was implausible we checked for sample mismatch and
reviewed the report and reexamined the slide if necessary. We excluded cases with ambiguous
histopathologic diagnoses (for example: "favor nevus but cannot rule out evolving melanoma in situ").
Reﬂectance confocal microscopy is an in-vivo imaging technique with a resolution at near-cellular level18,
and some facial benign keratoses were veriﬁed by this method. Most cases were included in a prospective
confocal study conducted at the Department of Dermatology at the Medical University of Vienna that
also included follow-up for one year19.
Total images
Pathologic veriﬁcation (%)
Research&Educationa
No license
ISIC 2017b
CC BY-NC 4.0
ViDIR Legacy
CC BY-NC 4.0
ViDIR Current
CC BY-NC 4.0
ViDIR MoleMax
CC BY-NC 4.0
CC BY-NC 4.0
Table 1. Summary of publicly available dermatoscopic image datasets in comparison to HAM10000.
aNot stated speciﬁcally on the providing website, we infer their given terms-of-use largely reﬂect CC BY-NC-
ND 3.0. bEight different datasets with CC-0 licensing combined as available on February 12th 2018.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
If nevi monitored by digital dermatoscopy did not show any changes during 3 follow-up visits or 1.5 years
we accepted this as evidence of biologic benignity. Only nevi, but no other benign diagnoses were labeled
with this type of ground-truth because dermatologists usually do not monitor dermatoﬁbromas,
seborrheic keratoses, or vascular lesions. The presence of change was assessed by author HK who has
more than 20 years of experience in digital dermatoscopic follow-up.
Consensus.
For typical benign cases without histopathology or follow-up we provide an expertconsensus rating of authors PT and HK. We applied the consensus label only if both authors
independently gave the same unequivocal benign diagnosis. Lesions with this type of ground-truth were
usually photographed for educational reasons and did not need further follow-up or biopsy for
conﬁrmation.
Usage Notes
The HAM10000 training set includes pigmented lesions from different populations. The Austrian image
set consists of lesions of patients referred to a tertiary European referral center specialized for early
detection of melanoma in high risk groups. This group of patients often have a high number of nevi and a
personal or family history of melanoma. The Australian image set includes lesions from patients of a
primary care facility in a high skin cancer incidence area. Australian patients are typiﬁed by severe
chronic sun damage. Chronic sun damaged skin is characterized by multiple solar lentigines and ectatic
vessels, which are often present in the periphery of the target lesion. Very rarely also small angiomas and
seborrheic keratoses may collide with the target lesion. We did not remove this "noise" and we also did
not remove terminal hairs because it reﬂects the situation in clinical practice. In most cases, albeit not
always, the target lesion is in the center of the image. Dermatoscopic images of both study sites were
taken by different devices using polarized and non-polarized dermatoscopy. The set includes
representative examples of pigmented skin lesions that are practically relevant. More than 95% of all
lesion encountered during clinical practice will fall into one of the seven diagnostic categories. In practice,
the task of the clinician is to differentiate between malignant and benign lesions, but also to make speciﬁc
diagnoses because different malignant lesions, for example melanoma and basal cell carcinoma, may be
treated in a different way and timeframe. With the exception of vascular lesions, which are pigmented by
hemoglobin and not by melanin, all lesions have variants that are completely devoid of pigment (for
example amelanotic melanoma). Non-pigmented lesions, which are more diverse and have a larger
number of possible differential diagnoses, are not part of this set.
The following description of diagnostic categories is meant for computer scientists who are not
familiar with the dermatology literature:
Actinic Keratoses (Solar Keratoses) and Intraepithelial Carcinoma (Bowen’s disease) are common noninvasive, variants of squamous cell carcinoma that can be treated locally without surgery. Some authors
regard them as precursors of squamous cell carcinomas and not as actual carcinomas. There is, however,
agreement that these lesions may progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma – which is usually not
pigmented. Both neoplasms commonly show surface scaling and commonly are devoid of pigment.
Figure 3. Illuminant color estimation of the dataset. Values estimated with a grey-world assumption of all
training-set images in Lab-color space before (left) and after (right) manual histogram changes.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
Actinic keratoses are more common on the face and Bowen’s disease is more common on other body
sites. Because both types are induced by UV-light the surrounding skin is usually typiﬁed by severe sun
damaged except in cases of Bowen’s disease that are caused by human papilloma virus infection and not
by UV. Pigmented variants exist for Bowen’s disease20 and for actinic keratoses21, and both are included
in this set.
The dermatoscopic criteria of pigmented actinic keratoses and Bowen’s disease are described in detail
by Zalaudek et al.22,23 and by Cameron et al.20.
Basal cell carcinoma is a common variant of epithelial skin cancer that rarely metastasizes but grows
destructively if untreated. It appears in different morphologic variants (ﬂat, nodular, pigmented, cystic),
which are described in more detail by Lallas et al.24.
"Benign keratosis" is a generic class that includes seborrheic keratoses ("senile wart"), solar lentigo - which
can be regarded a ﬂat variant of seborrheic keratosis - and lichen-planus like keratoses (LPLK), which
corresponds to a seborrheic keratosis or a solar lentigo with inﬂammation and regression25. The three
subgroups may look different dermatoscopically, but we grouped them together because they are similar
biologically and often reported under the same generic term histopathologically. From a dermatoscopic
view, lichen planus-like keratoses are especially challenging because they can show morphologic features
mimicking melanoma26 and are often biopsied or excised
for diagnostic reasons. The dermatoscopic appearance of seborrheic keratoses varies according to
anatomic site and type27.
Dermatoﬁbroma is a benign skin lesion regarded as either a benign proliferation or an inﬂammatory
reaction to minimal trauma. The most common dermatoscopic presentation is reticular lines at the
periphery with a central white patch denoting ﬁbrosis28.
Melanocytic nevi are benign neoplasms of melanocytes and appear in a myriad of variants, which all are
included in our series. The variants may differ signiﬁcantly from a dermatoscopic point of view. In
contrast to melanoma they are usually symmetric with regard to the distribution of color and structure29.
Melanoma is a malignant neoplasm derived from melanocytes that may appear in different variants. If
excised in an early stage it can be cured by simple surgical excision. Melanomas can be invasive or noninvasive (in situ). We included all variants of melanoma including melanoma in situ, but did exclude
non-pigmented, subungual, ocular or mucosal melanoma.
Melanomas are usually, albeit not always, chaotic, and some melanoma speciﬁc criteria depend on
anatomic site23,30.
Vascular skin lesions in the dataset range from cherry angiomas to angiokeratomas31 and pyogenic
granulomas32. Hemorrhage is also included in this category.
Angiomas are dermatoscopically characterized by red or purple color and solid, well circumscribed
structures known as red clods or lacunes.
The number of images in the datasets does not correspond to the number of unique lesions, because
we also provide images of the same lesion taken at different magniﬁcations or angles (Fig. 4), or with
Figure 4. Example triplet of the same lesion. Rather than cropped to different sizes of a large source image,
these were originally taken at different magniﬁcations and angles.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 5:180161 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.161
different cameras. This should serve as a natural data-augmentation as it shows random transformations
and visualizes both general and local features.
Images in the dataset may diverge from those an end-user, especially lay persons, would provide in a
real-world scenario. For example, insufﬁciently magniﬁed images of small lesions or out of focus images
were removed.
We used automated screening by neural networks, multiple manual reviews and cleared EXIF-data of
the images to remove any potentially identiﬁable information. Data can thus be regarded anonymized to
the best of our knowledge and the data collection was approved by the ethics review committee at the
Medical University of Vienna and the University of Queensland.