doi:10.1038/nature09534
A map of human genome variation from
population-scale sequencing
The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium*
The 1000 Genomes Project aims to provide a deep characterization of human genome sequence variation as a foundation
for investigating the relationship between genotype and phenotype. Here we present results of the pilot phase of the
project, designed to develop and compare different strategies for genome-wide sequencing with high-throughput
platforms. We undertook three projects: low-coverage whole-genome sequencing of 179 individuals from four
populations; high-coverage sequencing of two mother–father–child trios; and exon-targeted sequencing of 697
individuals from seven populations. We describe the location, allele frequency and local haplotype structure of
approximately 15 million single nucleotide polymorphisms, 1 million short insertions and deletions, and 20,000
structural variants, most of which were previously undescribed. We show that, because we have catalogued the vast
majority of common variation, over 95% of the currently accessible variants found in any individual are present in this
data set. On average, each person is found to carry approximately 250 to 300 loss-of-function variants in annotated
genes and 50 to 100 variants previously implicated in inherited disorders. We demonstrate how these results can be used
to inform association and functional studies. From the two trios, we directly estimate the rate of de novo germline base
substitution mutations to be approximately 1028 per base pair per generation. We explore the data with regard to
signatures of natural selection, and identify a marked reduction of genetic variation in the neighbourhood of genes,
due to selection at linked sites. These methods and public data will support the next phase of human genetic research.
Understanding the relationship between genotype and phenotype is
one of the central goals in biology and medicine. The reference human
genome sequence1 provides a foundation for the study of human
genetics, but systematic investigation of human variation requires full
knowledge of DNA sequence variation across the entire spectrum of
allele frequencies and types of DNA differences. Substantial progress
has already been made. By 2008 the public catalogue of variant sites
(dbSNP 129) contained approximately 11 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and 3 million short insertions and deletions
(indels)2–4. Databases of structural variants (for example, dbVAR)
indexed the locations of large genomic variants. The International
HapMap Project catalogued both allele frequencies and the correlation
patterns between nearby variants, a phenomenon known as linkage
disequilibrium (LD), across several populations for 3.5 million SNPs3,4.
These resources have driven disease gene discovery in the first
generation of genome-wide association studies (GWAS), wherein
genotypes at several hundred thousand variant sites, combined with
the knowledge of LD structure, allow the vast majority of common
variants (here, those with .5% minor allele frequency (MAF)) to be
tested for association4 with disease. Over the past 5 years association
studies have identified more than a thousand genomic regions associated with disease susceptibility and other common traits5. Genomewide collections of both common and rare structural variants have
similarly been tested for association with disease6.
Despite these successes, much work is still needed to achieve a deep
understanding of the genetic contribution to human phenotypes7.
Once a region has been identified as harbouring a risk locus, detailed
studyofallgeneticvariantsinthelocusisrequiredtodiscoverthecausal
variant(s),toquantifytheircontributiontodiseasesusceptibility,andto
elucidate their roles in functional pathways. Low-frequency and rare
variants (here defined as 0.5% to 5% MAF, and below 0.5% MAF,
respectively) vastly outnumber common variants and also contribute
significantlytothegeneticarchitectureofdisease,but ithasnotyetbeen
possible to study them systematically7–9. Meanwhile, advances in DNA
sequencing technology have enabled the sequencing of individual
genomes10–13, illuminating the gaps in the first generation of databases
that contain mostly common variant sites. A much more complete
catalogue of human DNA variation is a prerequisite to understand fully
the role of common and low-frequency variants in human phenotypic
variation.
The aim of the 1000 Genomes Project is to discover, genotype and
provide accurate haplotype information on all forms of human DNA
polymorphism in multiple human populations. Specifically, the goal
is to characterize over 95% of variants that are in genomic regions
accessible to current high-throughput sequencing technologies and
that have allele frequency of 1% or higher (the classical definition of
polymorphism) in each of five major population groups (populations
in or with ancestry from Europe, East Asia, South Asia, West Africa
and the Americas). Because functional alleles are often found in coding
regions and have reduced allele frequencies, lower frequency alleles
(down towards 0.1%) will also be catalogued in such regions.
Here we report the results of the pilot phase of the project, the aim of
which was to develop and compare differentstrategies for genome-wide
sequencing with high-throughput platforms. To this end we undertook
three projects: low-coverage sequencing of 179 individuals; deep
sequencing of six individuals in two trios; and exon sequencing of
8,140 exons in 697 individuals (Box 1). The results give us a much
deeper, more uniform picture of human genetic variation than was
previously available, providing newinsights into thelandscapes of functional variation, genetic association and natural selection in humans.
Data generation, alignment and variant discovery
A total of 4.9 terabases of DNA sequence was generated in nine
sequencing centres using three sequencing technologies, from DNA
*Lists of participants and their affiliations appear at the end of the paper.
O C T O B E R
| V O L 4 6 7
| N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
obtained from immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines (Table 1 and
Supplementary Table 1). All sequenced individuals provided informed
consent and explicitly agreed to public dissemination of their variation
data, as part of the HapMap Project (see Supplementary Information
for details of informed consent and data release). The heterogeneity of
the sequence data (read lengths from 25 to several hundred base pairs
(bp); single and paired end) reflects the diversity and rapid evolution of
the underlying technologies during the project. All primary sequence
data were confirmed to have come from the correct individual by
comparison to HapMap SNP genotype data.
Analysis to detect and genotype sequence variants differed among
variant types and the three projects, but all workflows shared the
following four features. (1) Discovery: alignment of sequence reads
to the reference genome and identification of candidate sites or
regions at which one or more samples differ from the reference
sequence; (2) filtering: use of quality control measures to remove
candidate sites that were probably false positives; (3) genotyping:
estimation of the alleles present in each individual at variant sites or
regions; (4) validation: assaying a subset of newly discovered variants
using an independent technology, enabling the estimation of the false
discovery rate (FDR). Independent data sources were used to estimate
the accuracy of inferred genotypes.
All primary sequence reads, mapped reads, variant calls, inferred
genotypes, estimated haplotypes and new independent validation
data are publicly available through the project website ( 
1000genomes.org); filtered sets of variants, allele frequencies and genotypes were also deposited in dbSNP ( 
Alignment and the ‘accessible genome’
Sequencing reads were aligned to the NCBI36 reference genome
(details in Supplementary Information) and made available in the
BAM file format14, an early innovation of the project for storing
and sharing high-throughput sequencing data. Accurate identification of genetic variation depends on alignment of the sequence data to
the correct genomic location. We restricted most variant calling to the
‘accessible genome’, defined as that portion of the reference sequence
that remains after excluding regions with many ambiguously placed
reads or unexpectedly high or low numbers of aligned reads (Supplementary Information). This approach balances the need to reduce
incorrect alignments and false-positive detection of variants against
maximizing the proportion of the genome that can be interrogated.
For the low-coverage analysis, the accessible genome contains
approximately 85% of the reference sequence and 93% of the coding
sequences. Over 99% of sites genotyped in the second generation
haplotype map (HapMap II)4 are included. Of inaccessible sites, over
97% are annotated as high-copy repeats or segmental duplications.
However, only one-quarter of previously discovered repeats and segmental duplications were inaccessible (Supplementary Table 2). Much
of the data for the trio project were collected before technical improvements in our ability to map sequence reads robustly to some of the
repeated regions of the genome (primarily longer, paired reads). For
these reasons, stringent alignment was more difficult and a smaller
portion of the genome was accessible in the trio project: 80% of the
reference,85%ofcodingsequenceand97%ofHapMapIIsites(Table1).
Calibration, local realignment and assembly
The quality of variant calls is influenced by many factors including the
quantification of base-calling error rates in sequence reads, the accuracy of local read alignment and the method by which individual
genotypes are defined. The project introduced key innovations in each
of these areas (see Supplementary Information). First, base quality
scores reported by the image processing software were empirically
recalibrated by tallying the proportion that mismatched the reference
sequence (at non-dbSNP sites) as a function of the reported quality
score, position in read and other characteristics. Second, at potential
variant sites, local realignmentof all reads was performed jointly across
all samples, allowing for alternative alleles that contained indels. This
realignment step substantially reduced errors, because local misalignment, particularly around indels, can be a major source of error in
The 1000 Genomes pilot projects
To develop and assess multiple strategies to detect and genotype
variants of various types and frequencies using high-throughput
sequencing, we carried out three projects, using samples from the
extended HapMap collection17.
Trio project: whole-genome shotgun sequencing at high coverage
(average 423) of two families (one Yoruba from Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI);
one of European ancestry in Utah (CEU)), each including two parents
and one daughter. Each of the offspring was sequenced using three
platforms and by multiple centres.
Low-coverage project: whole-genome shotgun sequencing at low
coverage (2–63) of 59 unrelated individuals from YRI, 60 unrelated
individuals from CEU, 30 unrelated Han Chinese individuals in Beijing
(CHB) and 30 unrelated Japanese individuals in Tokyo (JPT).
Exon project: targeted capture of 8,140 exons from 906 randomly
selected genes (total of 1.4Mb) followed by sequencing at high
coverage (average .503) in 697 individuals from 7 populations of
African (YRI, Luhya in Webuye, Kenya (LWK)), European (CEU, Toscani
in Italia (TSI)) and East Asian (CHB, JPT, Chinese in Denver, Colorado
(CHD)) ancestry.
The three experimental designs differ substantially both in their
abilityto obtain data for variants ofdifferenttypes and frequencies and
in the analytical methods we used to infer individual genotypes. Box 1
Figure shows a schematic representation of the projects and the type
of information obtained from each. Colours in the left region indicate
different haplotypes in individual genomes, and line width indicates
depthofcoverage(nottoscale).Theshadedregiontotherightgivesan
example of genotype data that could be generated for the same
sample under the three strategies (dots indicate missing data; dashes
indicate phase information, that is, whether heterozygous variants can
be assigned to the correct haplotype). Within a short region of the
genome, each individual carries two haplotypes, typically shared by
others in the population. In the trio design, high-sequence coverage
and the use of multiple platforms enable accurate discovery of
multiple variant types across most of the genome, with Mendelian
transmission aiding genotype estimation, inference of haplotypes and
quality control. The low-coverage project, in contrast, efficiently
identifiesshared variantsoncommonhaplotypes49,50(redorblue),but
has lower power to detect rare haplotypes (light green) and associated
variants (indicated by the missing alleles), and will give some
inaccurate genotypes (indicated by the red allele incorrectly assigned
G). The exon design enables accurate discovery of common, rare and
low-frequency variation in the targeted portion of the genome, but
lacks the ability to observe variants outside the targeted regions or
assign haplotype phase.
Individual haploid
A-C-T-G-C-A-C
A-G–G-A-A-T-C
Common haplotypes
A-.-T-G-C-A-C
A-.–G-G-A-T-C
Exon variants
. . T G . A .
. . G A . T .
transmission
Statistical
RESEARCH ARTICLE
N A T U R E
| V O L 4 6 7
| 2 8 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 0
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
variant calling. Finally, by initially analysing the data with multiple
genotype and variant calling algorithms and then generating a consensus of these results, the project reduced genotyping error rates by
30–50% compared to those currently achievable using any one of the
methods alone (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 12).
We also used local realignment to generate candidate alternative
haplotypes in the process of calling short (1–50-bp) indels15, as well as
local de novo assembly to resolve breakpoints for deletions greater
than 50 bp. The latter resulted in a doubling of the number of large
(.1 kb) structural variants delineated with base-pair resolution16. Full
genome de novo assembly was also performed (Supplementary
Information), resulting in the identification of 3.7 megabases (Mb)
of novel sequence not matching the reference at a high threshold for
assembly quality and novelty. All novel sequence matched other
human and great ape sequences in the public databases.
Rates of variant discovery
In the trio project, with an average mapped sequence coverage of 423
per individual acrosssix individualsand 2.3 gigabases (Gb)ofaccessible
genome, we identified 5.9 million SNPs, 650,000 short indels (of
1–50 bp in length), and over 14,000 larger structural variants. In the
low-coverage project, with average mapped coverage of 3.63 per individual across 179 individuals (Supplementary Fig. 2) and 2.4 Gb of
accessible genome, we identified 14.4 million SNPs, 1.3 million short
indels and over 20,000 larger structural variants. In the exon project,
with an average mapped sequence coverage of 563 per individual
across 697 individuals and a target of 1.4 Mb, we identified 12,758
SNPs and 96 indels.
Experimental validation was used to estimate and control the FDR
fornovelvariants(SupplementaryTable3).TheFDRforeachcomplete
call set was controlled to be less than 5% for SNPs and short indels,
and less than 10% for structural variants. Because in an initial test
almost all of the sites that we called that were already in dbSNP were
validated (285 out of 286), in most subsequent validation experiments
we tested only novel variants and extrapolated to obtain the overall
FDR. This process will underestimate the true FDR if more SNPs listed
in dbSNP are false positives for some call sets. The FDR for novel
variants was 2.6% for trio SNPs, 10.9% for low-coverage SNPs, and
1.7% for low-coverage indels (Supplementary Information and Supplementary Tables 3 and 4a, b).
Variation detected by the project is not evenly distributed across
the genome: certain regions, such as the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) and subtelomeric regions, show high rates of variation,
whereas others, for example a 5-Mb gene-dense and highly conserved
region around 3p21, show very low levels of variation (Supplementary
Fig. 3a). At the chromosomal scale we see strong correlation between
different forms of variation, particularly between SNPs and indels
(Supplementary Fig. 3b). However, we also find heterogeneity particular to types of structural variant, for example structural variants
resulting from non-allelic homologous recombination are apparently
enriched in the HLA and subtelomeric regions (Supplementary Fig.
Variant novelty
As expected, the vast majority of sites variant in any given individual
were already present in dbSNP; the proportion newly discovered differed substantially among populations, variant types and allele frequencies (Fig. 1). Novel SNPs had a strong tendency to be found
only in one analysis panel (set of related populations; Fig. 1a). For
SNPs also present in dbSNP version 129 (the last release before 1000
Genomes Project data), only 25% were specific to a single low-coverage
analysis panel and 56% were found in all panels. On the other hand,
84% of newly discovered SNPs were specific to a single analysis panel
whereas only 4% were found in all analysis panels. In the exon project,
Table 1 | Variants discovered by project, type, population and novelty
a Summary of project data including combined exon populations
Low coverage
Unionacross
Total raw bases (Gb)
Total mapped bases (Gb)
Mean mapped depth (3)
Bases accessed (% of genome)
No. of SNPs (% novel)
10,938,130
14,894,361
15,275,256
Mean variant SNP sites per individual
No. of indels (% novel)
Mean variant indel sites per individual
No. of deletions (% novel)
No. of genotyped deletions (% novel)
No. of duplications (% novel)
No. of mobile element insertions (% novel)
No. of novel sequence insertions (% novel)
b Exon populations separately
Total collected bases (Gb)
Mean mapped depth on target (3)
No. of SNPs (% novel)
3,489 (34%)
3,281 (34%)
5,459 (50%)
5,175 (46%)
3,415 (47%)
3,431 (50%)
2,900 (42%)
Variant SNP sites per individual
No. of indels (no. novel)
Variant indel sites per individual
NA, not applicable; ND, not determined.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
O C T O B E R
| N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
where increased depth of coverage and sample size resulted in a higher
fraction of low-frequency variants among discovered sites, 96% of
novel variants were restricted to samples from a single analysis panel.
In contrast, many novel structural variants were identified in all analysis panels, reflecting the lower degree of previous characterization
(Supplementary Fig. 4).
Populations with African ancestry contributed the largest number
of variants and contained the highest fraction of novel variants,
reflecting the greater diversity in African populations. For example,
63% of novel SNPs in the low-coverage project and 44% in the exon
project were discovered in the African populations, compared to 33%
and 22% in the European ancestry populations.
The larger sample sizes in the exon and low-coverage projects
allowed us to detect a large number of low-frequency variants
(MAF ,5%, Fig. 1b). Compared to the distribution expected from
population genetic theory (the neutral coalescent with constant population size), we saw an excess of lower frequency variants in the exon
project, reflecting purifying selection against weakly deleterious
mutations and recent population growth. There are signs of a similar
excess in the low-coverage project SNPs, truncated below 5% variant
allele frequency by reduction in power of our call set to discover
variants in this range, as discussed below.
As expected, nearly all of the high-frequency SNPs discovered here
were already present in dbSNP; this was particularly true in coding
regions (Fig. 1c). The public databases were much less complete for
SNPs at low frequencies, for short indels and for structural variants
(Fig. 1d). For example, in contrast to coding SNPs (91% of common
coding SNPs described here were already present in dbSNP), approximately 50% of common short indels observed in this project were
novel. These results are expected given the sample sizes used in the
sequencing efforts that discovered most of the SNPs previously in
dbSNP, and the more limited, and lower resolution, efforts to characterize indels and larger structural variation across the genome.
The number of structural variants that we observed declined rapidly
with increasing variant length (Fig. 1d), with notable peaks corresponding to Alus and long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs). The proportion of larger structural variants that was novel depended markedly
on allele size, with variants 10bp to 5 kb in size most likely to be novel
(Fig. 1d). This is expected, as large (.5 kb) deletions and duplications
were previously discovered using array-based approaches17,18, whereas
smallerstructuralvariants(apartfrompolymorphicAluinsertions)had
been less well ascertained before this study.
Mitochondrial and Y chromosome sequences
Deep coverage of the mitochondrial genome allowed us to manually
curate sequences for 163 samples (Supplementary Information).
Although variants that were fixed within an individual were consistent
mitochondrial
(Supplementary Fig. 5), we found a considerable amount of variation
within individuals (heteroplasmy). For example, length heteroplasmy
was detected in 79% of individuals compared with 52% using capillary
sequencing19, largely in the control region (Supplementary Fig. 6a).
Base-substitution heteroplasmy was observed in 45% of samples, seven
times higher than reported in the control region alone19, and was
spread throughout the molecule (Supplementary Fig. 6b). The extent
to which this heteroplasmy arose in cell culture remains unknown, but
appears low (Supplementary Information).
The Y chromosome was sequenced at an average depth of 1.83 in
the 77 males in the low-coverage project, and 15.23 depth in the two
trio fathers. Using customized analysis methods (Supplementary
Information), we identified 2,870 variable sites, 74% novel, with 55
out of 56 passing independent validation. The Y chromosome phylogeny derived from the new variants identified novel, well supported
clades within some of the 12 major haplogroups represented among
the samples (for example, O2b in China and Japan; Supplementary
Fig. 7). A striking pattern indicative of a recent rapid expansion
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Variant allele frequency
Observed theta per Mb
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Variant allele frequency
Fraction novel
Low coverage
(different scale)
Log10 (number of variants)
Proportion of variants that are novel
Log10 (size)
Insertions
LC large deletions
Figure 1 | Properties of the variants found. a, Venn diagrams showing the
numbers of SNPs identified in each pilot project in each population or analysis
panel, subdivided according to whether the SNP was present in dbSNP release
129 (Known) or not (Novel). Exon analysis panel AFR is YRI1LWK, ASN is
CHB1CHD1JPT, and EUR is CEU1TSI. Note that the scale for the exon
project column ismuchlarger thanforthe other pilots. b, The number of variants
per megabase (Mb) at different allele frequencies divided by the expectation
undertheneutralcoalescent(1/i,whereiisthevariantallelecount),thusgivingan
estimate of theta per megabase. Blue, low-coverage SNPs; red, low-coverage
indels; black, low-coverage genotyped large deletions; green, exon SNPs. The
spikes at the right ends of the lines correspond to excess variants for which all
samples differed from the reference (approximately 1 per 30kb), consistent with
errors in the reference sequence. c, Fraction of variants in each allele frequency
class that were novel. Novelty was determined by comparison to dbSNP release
129 for SNPs and small indels, dbVar for deletions, and two
published genomes10,11 for larger indels. LC, low coverage; EX, exon. d, Size
distribution and novelty of variants discovered in the low-coverage project. SNPs
are shown in blue, deletions with respect to the reference sequence in red, and
insertions or duplications with respect to the reference in green. The fraction of
variantsineachsizebinthatwerenovelis shown by thepurpleline, and isdefined
relative to dbSNP (SNPs and indels), dbVar (deletions, duplications, mobile
element insertions), dbRIP and other studies47 (mobile element insertions), J. C.
Venter and J. Watson genomes10,11 (short indels and large deletions), and short
indels from split capillary reads48. To account for ambiguous placement of many
indels, discovered indels were deemed to match known indels if they were within
25bp of a known indel of the same size. To account for imprecise knowledge of
the location of most deletions and duplications, discovered variants were deemed
to match known variants if they had .50% reciprocal overlap.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
O C T O B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
specific to haplogroup R1b was observed, consistent with the postulated Neolithic origin of this haplogroup in Europe20.
Power to detect variants
The ability of sequencing to detect a site that is segregating in the
population is dominated by two factors: whether the non-reference
allele is present among the individuals chosen for sequencing, and the
number of high-quality and well-mapped reads that overlap the variant site in individuals who carry it. Simple models show that for a
given total amount of sequencing, the number of variants discovered
is maximized by sequencing many samples at low coverage21,22. This is
because high coverage of a few genomes, although providing the highest sensitivity and accuracy in genotyping a single individual, involves
considerable redundancy and misses variation not represented by
those samples. The low-coverage project provides us with an empirical
view of the power of low-coverage sequencing to detect variants of
different types and frequencies.
Figure 2a shows the rate of discovery of variants in the CEU (see
Box 1 for definitions of this and other populations) samples of the
low-coverage project as assessed by comparison to external data
sources: HapMap and the exon project for SNPs and array CGH
data18 for large deletions. We estimate that although the low-coverage
project had only ,25% power to detect singleton SNPs, power to
detect SNPs present five times in the 120 sampled chromosomes
was ,90% (depending on the comparator), and power was essentially
complete for those present ten or more times. Similar results were
seen in the YRI and CHB1JPT analysis panels at high allele counts,
but slightly worse performance for variants present five times (,85%
and 75%, respectively, at HapMap II sites; Supplementary Fig. 8).
These results indicate that SNP discovery is less affected by the extent
of LD (which is lowest in the YRI) than by sequencing coverage
(which was lowest in the CHB and JPT panels).
For deletions larger than 500 bp, power was approximately 40% for
singletons and reached 90% for variants present ten times or more in
the sample set. Our use of several algorithms for structural variant
discovery ensured that all major mechanistic subclasses of deletions
were found in our analyses (Supplementary Fig. 9). The lack of appropriate comparator data sets for short indels and larger structural
variants other than deletions prevented a detailed assessment of the
power to detect these types of variants. However, power to detect short
indels was approximately 70% for variants present at least five times in
the sample, based on the rediscovery of indels in samples overlapping
with the SeattleSNPs project23. Extrapolating from comparisons to
Alu insertions discovered in the J. C. Venter genome24 indicated an
average sensitivity for common mobile element insertions of about
75%. Analysis of a set of duplications18 indicated that only 30–40% of
common duplications were discovered here, mostly as deletions with
respect to the reference. Methods capable of discovering inversions
and novel sequence insertions in low-coverage data with comparable
specificity remain to be developed.
In summary, low-coverage shotgun sequencing provided modest
power for singletons in each sample (,25–40%), and very good power
for variants seen five or more times in the samples sequenced. We
estimate that there was approximately 95% power to find SNPs with
5% allele frequency in the sequenced samples, and nearly 90% power
to find SNPs with 5% allele frequency in populations related by 1%
divergence (Fig. 2b). Thus, we believe that the projects found almost
all accessible common variation in the sequenced populations and the
vast majority of common variants in closely related populations.
Genotype accuracy
Genotypes, and, where possible, haplotypes, were inferred for most
variants in each project (see Supplementary Information and Table 1).
For the low-coverage data, statistically phased SNP genotypes were
derived by using LD structure in addition to sequence information at
each site, in part guided by the HapMap 3 phased haplotypes. SNP
genotype accuracy varied considerably between projects (trio, low
coverage and exon), and as a function of coverage and allele frequency. In the low-coverage project, the overall genotype error rate
(based on a consensus of multiple methods) was 1–3% (Fig. 2c and
Supplementary Fig. 10). The use of HapMap 3 data greatly assisted
phasing of the CEU and YRI samples, for which the HapMap 3 genotypes were phased by transmission, but had a more modest effect on
Detection power in LC
Variant allele count
Variant allele count
Genotype accuracy
Hom. reference
Heterozygote
Hom. variant
Error rate
Variant allele count
Genotype count (×105)
1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
Number of variant genotype calls
Number of incorrect
variant genotype calls
Exon project
Low-coverage project
Variant allele frequency (%)
Fraction discovered
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 >10
HapMap II SNPs
Exon project SNPs
Large deletions
Figure 2 | Variant discovery rates and genotype accuracy in the lowcoverageproject. a, Rates of low-coverage variant detection by allele frequency
in CEU. Lines show the fraction of variants seen in overlapping samples in
independent studies that were also found to be polymorphic in the lowcoverage project (in the same overlapping samples), as a function of allele count
in the 60 low-coverage samples. Note that we plot power against expected allele
count in 60 samples; for example, a variant present in, say, 2 copies in an
overlap of 30 samples is expected to be present 4 times in 60 samples. The
crosses on the right represent the average discovery fraction for all variants
having more than 10 copies in the sample. Red, HapMap II sites, excluding sites
also in HapMap 3 (43 overlapping samples); blue, exon project sites (57
overlapping samples); green, deletions from ref. 18 (60 overlapping samples;
deletions were classified as ‘found’ if there was any overlap). Error bars show
95% confidence interval. b, Estimated rates of discovery of variants at different
frequencies in the CEU (blue), a population related to the CEU with Fst 5 1%
(green), and across Europe as a whole (light blue). Inset: cartoon of the
statistical model for population history and thus allele frequencies in related
populations where an ancestral population gave rise to many equally related
populations, one of which (blue circle) has samples sequenced. c, SNP genotype
accuracy by allele frequency in the CEU low-coverage project, measured by
comparison to HapMap II genotypes at sites present in both call sets, excluding
sites that were also in HapMap 3. Lines represent the average accuracy of
homozygote reference (red), heterozygote (green) and homozygote alternative
calls (blue) as a function of the alternative allele count in the overlapping set of
43 samples, and the overall genotype error rate (grey, at bottom of plot). Inset:
number of each genotype class as a function of alternative allele count.
d, Coverage and accuracy for the low-coverage and exon projects as a function
of depth threshold. For 41 CEU samples sequenced in both the exon and lowcoverage projects, on the x axis is shown the number of non-reference SNP
genotype calls at HapMap II sites not in HapMap 3 that were called in the exon
project target region, and on the y axis is shown the number of these calls that
were not variant (that is, are reference homozygote and thus incorrectly were
called as variant) according to HapMap II. Each point plotted corresponds to a
minimum depth threshold for called sites. Grey lines show constant error rates.
The exon project calls (red) were made independently per sample, whereas the
low-coverage calls (blue), which were only slightly less accurate, were made
using LD information that combined partial information across samples and
sites in an imputation-based algorithm. The additional data added from point
‘1’ to point ‘0’ (upper right in the figure) for the low-coverage project were
completely imputed.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
O C T O B E R
| N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
genotype accuracy away from HapMap 3 sites (for further details see
Supplementary Information).
The accuracy at heterozygous sites, a more sensitive measure than
overall accuracy, was approximately 90% for the lowest frequency
variants, increased to over 95% for intermediate frequencies, and
dropped to 70–80% for the highest frequency variants (that is, those
where the reference allele is the rare allele). We note that these numbers are derived from sites that can be genotyped using array technology, and performance may be lower in harder to access regions of the
genome. We find only minor differences in genotype accuracy
between populations, reflecting differences in coverage as well as
haplotype diversity and extent of LD.
The accuracy of genotypes for large deletions was assessed against
previous array-based analyses18 (Supplementary Fig. 11). The genotype error rate across all allele frequencies and genotypes was ,1%,
with the accuracy of heterozygous genotypes at low (MAF ,3%),
intermediate (MAF ,50%) and high-frequency (MAF .97%) variants estimated at 86%, 97% and 83%, respectively. The greater apparent genotype accuracy of structural variants compared to SNPs in the
low-coverage project reflects the increased number of informative
reads per individual for variants of large size and a bias in the known
large deletion genotype set for larger, easier to genotype variants.
For calling genotypes in the low-coverage samples, the utility of
using LD information in addition to sequence data at each site was
demonstrated by comparison to genotypes of the exon project, which
were derived independently for each site using high-coverage data.
Figure 2d shows the SNP genotype error rate as a function of depth at
the genotyped sites in CEU. A similar number of variants was called,
and at comparable accuracy, using minimum 43 depth in the lowcoverage project as was obtained with minimum 153 depth in the
exon project. To genotype a high fraction of sites both projects needed
to make calls at sites with low coverage, and the LD-based calling
strategy for the low-coverage project used imputation to make calls
at nearly 15% more sites with only a modest increase in error rate.
The accuracy and completeness of the individual genome
sequences in the low-coverage project could be estimated from the
trio mothers, each of whom was sequenced to high coverage, and for
whom data subsampled to 43 were included in the low-coverage
analysis. Comparison of the SNP genotypes in the two projects
showed that where the CEU mother had at least one variant allele
according to the trio analysis, in 96.9% of cases the variant was also
identified in the low-coverage project and in 93.8% of cases the genotype was accurately inferred. For the YRI trio mother the equivalent
figures are 95.0% and 88.4%, respectively (note that false positives in
the trio calls will lead to underestimates of the accuracy).
Putative functional variants
An individual’s genome contains many variants of functional consequence, ranging from the beneficial to the highly deleterious. We
estimated that an individual typically differs from the reference
human genome sequence at 10,000–11,000 non-synonymous sites
(sequence differences that lead to differences in the protein sequence)
in addition to 10,000–12,000 synonymous sites (differences in coding
exons that do not lead to differences in the protein sequence; Table 2).
We found a much smaller number of variants likely to have greater
functional impact: 190–210 in-frame indels, 80–100 premature stop
codons, 40–50 splice-site-disrupting variants and 220–250 deletions
that shift reading frame, in each individual. We estimated that each
genome is heterozygous for 50–100 variants classified by the Human
Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) as causing inherited disorders
(HGMD-DM). Estimates from the different pilot projects were consistent with each other, taking into consideration differences in power
to detect low-frequency variants, fraction of the accessible genome
and population differences (Table 2), as well as with previous observations based on personal genome sequences10,11. Collectively, we
refer to the 340–400 premature stops, splice-site disruptions and
frame shifts, affecting 250–300 genes per individual, as putative
loss-of-function (LOF) variants.
In total, we found 68,300 non-synonymous SNPs, 34,161 of which
were novel (Table 2). In an early analysis, 21,657 non-synonymous
SNPs were validated as polymorphic in 620 samples using a custom
genotyping array (Supplementary Information). The mean minor
allele frequency in the array data was 2.2% for 4,573 novel variants,
and 26.2% for previously discovered variants.
Overall we rediscovered 671 (1.3%) of the 50,361 coding single
nucleotide variants in HGMD-DM (Supplementary Table 5). The
types of disease for which variants were identified were biased towards
certain categories (Supplementary Fig. 12), with diseases associated
with the eye and reproduction significantly over represented and
diseases of the nervous system significantly under represented.
These biases reflect multiple factors including differences in the fitness effects of the variants, the extent of medical genetics research and
differences in the false reporting rate among ‘disease causing’ variants.
As expected, and consistent with purifying selection, putative functional variants had an allele frequency spectrum depleted at higher allele
frequencies,withputativeLOFvariantsshowingthiseffectmorestrongly
(Supplementary Fig. 13). Of the low-coverage non-synonymous, stopintroducing, splice-disrupting and HGMD-DM variants, 67.3%, 77.3%,
82.2% and 84.7% were private to single populations, compared to 61.1%
for synonymous variants. Across these same functional classes, 15.8%,
25.9%, 21.6% and 19.9% of variants were found in only a single individual, compared to 11.8% of synonymous variants.
The tendency for deleterious functional variants to have lower allele
frequencies has consequences for the discovery and analysis of this
type of variation. In the deeply sequenced CEU trio father, who was
not included in the low-coverage project, 97.8% of all single base
variants had been found in the low-coverage project, but only 95%
of non-synonymous, 88% of stop-inducing and 85% of HGMD-DM
variants. The missed variants correspond to 389 non-synonymous, 11
stop-inducing and 13 HGMD-DM variants. As sample size increases,
the number of novel variants per sequenced individual will decrease,
but only slowly. Analyses based on the exon project data (Fig. 3)
Table 2 | Estimated numbers of potentially functional variants in genes
Low coverage
High-coverage trio
Exon capture
Interquartile*
Individual range
Interquartile*
GENCODE extrapolation
Synonymous SNPs
10,572–12,126
9,193–12,500
11,553–13,333
Non-synonymous SNPs
9,966–10,819
8,299–10,866
9,924–11,052
Small in-frame indels
Stop losses
Stop-introducing SNPs
Splice-site-disrupting SNPs
Small frameshift indels
Genes disrupted by large deletions
Total genes containing LOF variants
HGMD ‘damaging mutation’ SNPs
NA, not applicable; ND, not determined.
* Interquartile range of the number of variants of specified type per individual.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
O C T O B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
showed that, on average, 99% of the synonymous variants in an individual would be found in 100 deeply sequenced samples, whereas 250
samples would be required to find 99% of non-synonymous variants
and 320 samples would still find only 97.4% of the LOF variants
present in an individual. Using detection power data from Fig. 2a,
we estimated that 250 samples sequenced at low coverage would be
needed to find 99% of the synonymous variants in an individual, and
with 320 sequenced samples 98.5% of non-synonymous and 96.3% of
LOF variants would be found.
Application to association studies
Whole-genome sequencing enables all genetic variants present in a
sample set to be tested directly for association with a given disease or
trait.Toquantifythebenefit of having more complete ascertainmentof
genetic variation beyond that achievable with genotyping arrays, we
carried out expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) association tests
on the 142 low-coverage samples for which expression data are available in the cell lines25. When association analysis (Spearman rank
correlation, FDR ,5%, eQTLs within 50 kb of probe) was performed
using all sites discovered in the low-coverage project, a larger number
of significant eQTLs (increase of ,20% to 50%) was observed as
compared to association analysis restricted to sites present on the
Illumina 1M chip (Supplementary Table 6). The increase was lower
in the CHB1JPT and CEU samples, where greater LD exists between
previously examined and newly discovered variants, and higher in the
YRI samples, where there are more novel variants and less LD. These
results indicate that, while modern genotyping arrays capture most of
the common variation, there remain substantial additional contributionstophenotypic variationfromthe variantsnot wellcapturedbythe
Population sequencing of large phenotyped cohorts will allow
direct association tests for low-frequency variants, with a resolution
determined by the LD structure. An alternative that is less expensive,
albeit less accurate, is to impute variants from a sequenced reference
panel into previously genotyped samples26,27. We evaluated the accuracy of imputation that uses the current low-coverage project haplotypes as the reference panel. Specifically, we compared genotypes
derived by deep sequencing of one individual in each trio (the fathers)
with genotypes derived using the HapMap 3 genotype data (which
combined data from the Affymetrix 6.0 and Illumina 1M arrays) in
those same two individuals and imputation based on the low-coverage
project haplotypes to fill in their missing genotypes. At variant sites
(that is, where the father was not homozygous for the reference
sequence), imputation accuracy was highest for SNPs at which the
minor allele was observed at least six times in our low-coverage samples, with an error rate of ,4% in CEU and ,10% in YRI, and became
progressively worse for rarer SNPs, with error rates of 35% for sites
where the minor allele was observed only twice in the low-coverage
samples (Fig. 4a).
Althoughthe ability toimpute rare variantsaccuratelyfromthe 1000
Genomes Project resource is currently limited, the completeness of the
resource nevertheless increases power to detect association signals. To
demonstrate the utility of imputation in disease samples, we imputed
into an eQTL study of ,400 children of European ancestry28 using the
low-coverage pilot data and HapMap II as reference panels. By comparison to directly genotyped sites we estimated that the effective
sample size at variants imputed from the pilot CEU low-coverage data
set is 91% of the true sample size for variants with allele frequencies
above 10%, 76% in the allele frequency range 4–6%, and 54% in the
range 1–2%. Imputing over 6 million variants from the low-coverage
project data increased the number of detected cis-eQTLs by ,16%,
compared to a 9% increase with imputing from HapMap II (FDR 5%,
signal within 50 kb of transcript; for an example see Fig. 4b).
In addition to this modest increase in the number of discoveries,
testing almost all common variants allows identification of many
additional candidate variants that might underlie each association.
For example, we find that rs11078928, a variant in a splice site for
GSDMB, is in strong LD with SNPs near ORMDL3, previously associated with asthma, Crohn’s disease, type 1 diabetes and rheumatoid
arthritis, thus leading to the hypothesis that GSDMB could be the
causative gene in these associations. Although rs11078928 is not
newly discovered, it was not included in HapMap or on commercial
SNP arrays, and thus could not have been identified as associated with
Samples sequenced
Variants in single individual
not discovered (%)
Synon. full
Non-synon. full
Non-synon. LC
Figure 3 | The value of additional samples for variant discovery. The
fraction of variants present in an individual that would not have been found in a
sequenced reference panel, as a function of reference panel size and the
sequencing strategy. The lines represent predictions for synonymous (Synon.),
non-synonymous (Non-synon.) and loss-of-function (LOF) variant classes,
broken down by sequencing category: full sequencing as for exons (Full) and
low-coverage sequencing (LC). The values were calculated from observed
distributions of variants of each class in 321 East Asian samples (CHB, CHD
and JPT populations) in the exon data, and power to detect variants at low allele
counts in the reference panel from Fig. 2a.
Minor allele frequency
CEU HapMap II
YRI HapMap II
–log10(P-value)
1000 Genomes imputation
HapMap II imputation
Illumina 300K genotype
Position on Chr 17 (Mb)
Figure 4 | Imputation from the low-coverage data. a, Accuracy of imputing
variant genotypes using HapMap 3 sites to impute sites from the low-coverage
(LC) project into the trio fathers as a function of allele frequency. Accuracy of
imputing genotypes from the HapMap II reference panels4 is also shown.
Imputation accuracy for common variants was generally a few per cent worse
from the low-coverage project than from HapMap, although error rates
increase for less common variants. b, An example of imputation in a cis-eQTL
for TIMM22, for which the original Ilumina 300K genotype data gave a weak
signal28. Imputation using HapMap data made a small improvement, and
imputation using low-coverage haplotypes provided a much stronger signal.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
2 8 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 0
| V O L 4 6 7
N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
these diseases before this project. Similarly, a recent study29 used
project data to show that coding variants in APOL1 probably underlie
a major risk for kidney disease in African-Americans previously
attributed (at a lower effect size) to MYH9. These examples demonstrate the value of having much more complete information on LD,
the almost complete set of common variants, and putative functional
variants in known association intervals.
Testingalmostallcommonvariantsalsoallowsustoexaminegeneral
properties of genetic association signals. The NHGRI GWAS catalogue
 described
1,227 unique SNPs associated with one or more traits (P , 53 1028).
Of these, 1,185 (96.5%) are present in the low-coverage CEU data set.
Under 30% of these are either annotated as non-synonymous variants
(77, 6.5%) or in substantial LD (r2 . 0.5) with a non-synonymous
variant (272, 23%). In the latter group, only 93 (8.4%) are in strong
LD(r2 . 0.9)withanon-synonymous variant.Becausewetested,95%
ofcommonvariation,theseresults indicate thatnomorethan one-third
of complex trait association signals are likely to be caused by common
coding variation. Although it remains to be seen whether reported
associations are better explained through weak LD to coding variants
with strong effects, these results are consistent with the view that most
contributions of common variation to complex traits are regulatory in
Mutation, recombination and natural selection
Project sequence data allowed us to investigate fundamental processes
that shape human genetic variation including mutation, recombination and natural selection.
Detecting de novo mutations in trio samples
Deep sequencing of individuals within a pedigree offers the potential
to detect de novo germline mutation events. Our approach was to
allow a relatively high FDR in an initial screen to capture a large
fraction of true events and then use a second technology to rule out
false-positive mutations.
In the CEU and YRI trios, respectively, 3,236 and 2,750 candidate
de novo germline single-base mutations were selected for further
study, based on their presence in the child but not the parents. Of
these, 1,001 (CEU) and 669 (YRI) were validated by re-sequencing the
cell line DNA. When these were tested for segregation to offspring
(CEU) or in non-clonal DNA from whole blood (YRI), only 49 CEU
and 35 YRI candidates were confirmed as true germline mutations.
Correcting for the fraction of the genome accessible to this analysis
provided an estimate of the per generation base pair mutation rate of
1.2 3 1028 and 1.0 3 1028 in the CEU and YRI trios, respectively.
These values are similar to estimates obtained from indirect evolutionary comparisons30, direct studies based on pathogenic mutations31, and a recent analysis of a single family32.
We infer that the remaining vast majority (952 CEU and 634 YRI)
of the validated variants were somatic or cell line mutations. The
greater number of these validated non-germline mutations in the
CEU cell line perhaps reflects the greater age of the CEU cell culture.
Across the two trio offspring, we observed a single, synonymous,
coding germline mutation, and 17 coding non-germline mutations
of which 16 were non-synonymous, perhaps indicative of selection
during cell culture.
Although the number of non-germline variants found per individual is a very small fraction of the total number of variants per
individual (,0.03% for the CEU child and ,0.02% for the YRI child),
these variants will not be shared between samples. Assuming that the
number of non-germline mutations in these two trios is representative
of all cell line DNA we analysed, we estimate that non-germline mutations might constitute 0.36% and 2.4% of all variants, and 0.61% and
3.1% of functional variants, in the low-coverage and exon pilots,
respectively. In larger samples, of thousands, the overall false-positive
rates from cell line mutations would become significant, and confound
interpretation, indicating that large-scale studies should use DNA
from primary tissue, such as blood, where possible.
The effects of selection on local variation
Natural selection can affect levels of DNA variation around genes in
several ways: strongly deleterious mutations will be rapidly eliminated
by natural selection, weakly deleterious mutations may segregate in
populations but rarely become fixed, and selection at nearby sites
(both purifying and adaptive) reduces genetic variation through background selection33 and the hitch-hiking effect34. The effect of these
different forces on genetic variation can be disentangled by examining
patterns of diversity and divergence within and around known functional elements. The low-coverage data enables, for the first time,
genome-wide analysis of such patterns in multiple populations.
Figure 5a (top panel) shows the pattern of diversity relative to genic
regions measured by aggregating estimates of heterozygosity around
protein-coding genes. Within genes, exons harbour the least diversity
(about 50% of that of introns) and 59 and 39 UTRs harbour slightly less
diversity than immediate flanking regions and introns. However, this
variation in diversity is fully explained by the level of divergence
Absolute difference in allele frequency
Number of SNPs
CEU vs CHB+JPT
YRI vs CHB+JPT
CEU vs YRI
Non-coding
Non-synon.
Diversity/divergence
Diversity/divergence
200-bp upstream
1st intron
Middle exon
Other intron
200-bp downstream
–0.4 –0.2 0.0
cM from transcription start/stop
Genetic distance from site (cM)
Mean maximum frequency
difference in bin
CEU vs CHB+JPT
(17 sites)
CEU vs YRI
(47 sites)
CHB+JPT vs YRI
(115 sites)
Figure 5 | Variation around genes. a, Diversity in genes calculated from the
CEU low-coverage genotype calls (top) and diversity divided by divergence
between humans and rhesus macaque (bottom). Within each element averaged
diversity is shown for the first and last 25 bp, with the remaining 150 positions
sampled at fixed distances across the element (elements shorter than 150 bp
were not considered). Note that estimates of diversity will be reduced compared
to the true population value due to the reduced power for rare variants, but
relative values should be little affected. b, Average autosomal diversity divided
by divergence, as a function of genetic distance from coding transcripts,
calculated at putatively neutral sites, that is, excluding phastcons, conserved
non-coding sequences and all sites in coding exons but fourfold degenerate
sites. c, Numbers of SNPs showing increasingly high levels of differentiation in
allele frequency between the CEU and CHB1JPT (red), CEU and YRI (green)
and CHB1JPT and YRI (blue). Lines indicate synonymous variants (dashed),
non-synonymous variants (dotted) and other variants (solid lines). The most
highly differentiated genic SNPs were enriched for non-synonymous variants,
indicating local adaptation. d, The decay of population differentiation around
genic SNPs showing extreme allele frequency differences between populations
(difference in frequency of at least 0.8 between populations, thinned so there is
no more than one per gene considered; Supplementary Table 8). For all such
SNPs the highest allele frequency difference in bins of 0.01 cM away from the
variant was recorded and averaged.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
O C T O B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(Fig. 5a, bottom panel), consistent with the common part of the allele
frequency spectrum being dominated by effectively neutral variants,
and weakly deleterious variants contributing only to the rare end of
the frequency spectrum.
In contrast, diversity in the immediate vicinity of genes (scaled by
divergence) is reduced by approximately 10% relative to sites distant
from any gene (Fig. 5b). Although a similar reduction has been seen
previously in gene-dense regions35, project data enable the scale of the
effect to be determined. We find that the reduction extends up to
0.1 cM away from genes, typically 85 kb, indicating that selection at
linked sites restricts variation relative to neutral levels across the
majority of the human genome.
Population differentiation and positive selection
Previous inferences about demographic history and the role of local
adaptation in shaping human genetic variation made from genomewide genotype data4,36,37 have been limited by the partial and complex
ascertainment of SNPs on genotyping arrays. Although data from the
1000 Genomes Project pilots are neither fully comprehensive nor fully
free of ascertainment bias (issues include low power for rare variants,
noise in allele frequency estimates, some false positives, non-random
data collection across samples, platforms and populations, and the use
of imputedgenotypes),they canbe used to address key questions about
the extent of differentiation among populations, the presence of highly
differentiated variants and the ability to fine-map signals of local
adaptation.
Although the average level of population differentiation is low (at
sites genotyped inall populations themeanvalue ofWright’sFstis0.071
between CEU and YRI, 0.083 between YRI and CHB1JPT, and 0.052
between CHB1JPT andCEU),wefindseveralhundred thousandSNPs
with large allele frequency differences in each population comparison
(Fig. 5c). As seen in previous studies4,37, the most highly differentiated
sites were enriched for non-synonymous variants, indicative of the
action of local adaptation. The completeness of common variant discovery in the low-coverage resource enables new perspectives in the
search for local adaptation. First, it provides a more comprehensive
catalogue of fixed differences between populations, of which there are
very few: two between CEU and CHB1JPT (including the A111T
missense variant in SLC24A5 (ref. 38) contributing to light skin colour),
four between CEU and YRI (including the 246 GATA box null mutation upstream of DARC39, the Duffy O allele leading to Plasmodium
vivax malaria resistance) and 72 between CHB1JPT and YRI (including 24 around the exocyst complex component gene EXOC6B); see
Supplementary Table 7 for a complete list. Second, it provides new
candidates for selected variants, genes and pathways. For example, we
identified 139 non-synonymous variants showing large allele frequency
differences (at least 0.8) between populations (Supplementary Table 8),
including at least two genes involved in meiotic recombination—
FANCA (ninth most extreme non-synonymous SNP in CEU versus
CHB1JPT) and TEX15 (thirteenth most extreme non-synonymous
SNPinCEUversusYRI,andtwenty-sixthmostextremenon-synonymous SNP in CHB1JPT versus YRI). Because we are finding almost all
common variants in each population, these lists should contain the vast
majority of the near fixed differences among these populations. Finally,
it improves the fine mapping of selective sweeps (Supplementary Fig.
14) and analysis of the dynamics of location adaptation. For example,
we find that the signal of population differentiation around high Fst
genic SNPsdropsbyhalfwithin, onaverage, lessthan0.05cM(typically
30–50 kb; Fig. 5d). Furthermore, 51% of such variants are polymorphic
in both populations. These observations indicate that much local
adaptation has occurred by selection acting on existing variation rather
than new mutation.
The effect of recombination on local sequence evolution
We estimated a fine-scale genetic map from the phased low-coverage
genotypes. Recombination hotspots were narrower than previously
estimated4 (mean hotspot width of 2.3 kb compared to 5.5 kb in
HapMap II; Fig. 6a), although, unexpectedly, the estimated average
peak recombination rate in hotspots is lower in YRI (13 cM Mb21)
than in CEU and CHB1JPT (20cM Mb21). In addition, crossover
activity is less concentrated in the genome in YRI, with 70% of recombination occurring in 10% of the sequence rather than 80% of the
recombination for CEU and CHB1JPT (Fig. 6b). A possible biological
basis for these differences is that PRDM9, which binds a DNA motif
strongly enriched in hotspots and influences the activity of LD-defined
hotspots40–43, shows length variation in its DNA-binding zinc fingers
within populations, and substantial differentiation between African
and non-African populations, with a greater allelic diversity in
Africa43. This could mean greater diversity of hotspot locations within
Africa and therefore a less concentrated picture in this data set of
recombination and lower usage of LD-defined hotspots (which require
evidence in at least two populations and therefore will not reflect hotspots present only in Africa).
The low-coverage data also allowed us to address a long-standing
debate about whether recombination has any local mutagenic effect.
Direct examination of diversity around hotspots defined from LD
data are potentially biased (because the detection of hotspots requires
variation to be present), but we can, without bias, examine rates of
SNP variation and recombination around the PRDM9 binding motif
Proportion of recombination
Proportion of sequence
Distance from hotspot centre (bp)
Mean recombination rate
1000G CHB+JPT
SNP per base
Position relative to
motif centre (kb)
Recombination rate (cM Mb–1)
Figure 6 | Recombination. a, Improvedresolution of hotspot boundaries. The
average recombination rate estimated from low-coverage project data around
recombination hotspots detected in HapMap II. Recombination hotspots were
narrower, and in CEU (orange) and CHB1JPT (purple) more intense than
previously estimated. See panel b for key. b, The concentration of
recombination in a small fraction of the genome, one line per chromosome. If
recombination were uniformly distributed throughout the genome, then the
lines on this figure would appear along the diagonal. Instead, most
recombination occurs in a small fraction of thegenome. Recombination rates in
YRI (green) appeared to be less concentrated in recombination hotspots than
CEU (orange) or CHB1JPT (purple). HapMap II estimates are shown in black.
c, The relationship between genetic variation and recombination rates in the
YRI population. The top plot shows average levels of diversity, measured as
mean number of segregating sites per base, surrounding occurrences of the
previously described hotspot motif40 (CCTCCCTNNCCAC, red line) and a
closely related, but not recombinogenic, DNA sequence
(CTTCCCTNNCCAC, green line). The lighter red and green shaded areas give
95% confidence intervals on diversity levels. The bottom plot shows estimated
mean recombination rates surrounding motif occurrences, with colours
defined as in the top plot.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
O C T O B E R
N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
associated with hotspots. Figure 6c shows the local recombination rate
and pattern of SNP variation around the motif compared to the same
plots around a motif that is a single base difference away. Although the
motif is associated with a sharp peak in recombination rate, there is no
systematic effect on local rates of SNP variation. We infer that,
although recombination may influence the fate of new mutations,
for example through biased gene conversion, there is no evidence that
it influences the rate at which new variants appear.
Discussion
The 1000 Genomes Project launched in 2008 with the goal of creating
a public reference database for DNA polymorphism that is 95% complete at allele frequency 1%, and more complete for common variants
and exonic variants, in each of multiple human population groups.
The three pilot projects described here were designed to develop and
evaluate methods to use high-throughput sequencing to achieve these
goals. The results indicate (1) that robust protocols now exist for
generating both whole-genome shotgun and targeted sequence data;
(2) that algorithms to detect variants from each of these designs have
been validated; and (3) that low-coverage sequencing offers an efficient approach to detect variation genome wide, whereas targeted
sequencing offers an efficient approach to detect and accurately genotype rare variants in regions of functional interest (such as exons).
Data from the pilot projects are already informing medical genetic
studies. As shown in our analysis of previous eQTL data sets, a more
complete catalogue of genetic variation can identify signals previously
missed and markedly increase the number of identified candidate
functional alleles at each locus. Project data have been used to impute
over 6 million genetic variants into GWAS, for traits as diverse as
smoking44 and multiple sclerosis45, as an exclusionary filter in
Mendelian disease studies46 and tumour sequencing studies, and to
design the next generation of genotyping arrays.
Theresults fromthis studyalsoprovidea templatefor future genomewide sequencing studies on larger sample sets. Our plans for achieving
the 1000 Genomes Project goals are described in Box 2. Other studies
using phenotyped samples are already using components of the design
and analysis framework described above.
Measurement of human DNA variation is an essential prerequisite
for carrying out human genetics research. The 1000 Genomes Project
represents a step towards a complete description of human DNA
polymorphism. The larger data set provided by the full 1000
Genomes Project will allow more accurate imputation of variants in
GWAS and thus better localization of disease-associated variants. The
project will provide a template for studies using genome-wide
sequence data. Applications of these data, and the methods developed
to generate them, will contribute to a much more comprehensive
understanding of the role of inherited DNA variation in human history, evolution and disease.
METHODS SUMMARY
The Supplementary Information provides full details of samples, data generation
protocols, read mapping, SNP calling, short insertion and deletion calling, structural variation calling and de novo assembly. Details of methods used in the
analyses relating to imputation, mutation rate estimation, functional annotation,
population genetics and extrapolation to the full project are also presented.
Received 20 July; accepted 30 September 2010.
The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Finishing the
euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature 431, 931–945 .
Sachidanandam, R. et al. A map of human genome sequence variation containing
1.42 million single nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature 409, 928–933 .
The International HapMap Consortium. A haplotype map of the human genome.
Nature 437, 1299–1320 .
The International HapMap Consortium. A second generation human haplotype
map of over 3.1 million SNPs. Nature 449, 851–861 .
Hindorff, L. A., Junkins, H. A., Hall, P. N., Mehta, J. P. & Manolio, T. A. A catalog of
published genome-wide association studies. Æ 
gwastudiesæ .
Design of the full 1000 Genomes
The production phase of the full 1000 Genomes Project will combine
low-coverage whole-genome sequencing, array-based genotyping,
and deep targeted sequencing of all coding regions in 2,500
individuals from five large regions of the world (five population
samples of 100 in or with ancestry from each of Europe, East Asia,
South Asia and West Africa, and seven populations totalling 500 from
the Americas; Supplementary Table 9). We will increase the lowcoverage average depth to over 43 per individual, and use bloodderived DNA where possible to minimize somatic and cell-line false
positives.
A clustered sampling approach was chosen to improve lowfrequency variant detection in comparison to a design in which a
smaller number of populations was sampled to a greater depth. In a
region containing a cluster of related populations, genetic drift can
lead variants that are at low frequency overall to be more common
(hence, easily detectable) in one population but less common (hence,
likely to be undetectable) in another. We modelled this process using
project data (see Supplementary Information) assuming that five
sampled populations are equally closely related to each other
(Fst 51%). We found that the low-coverage sequencing in this design
would discover 95% of variants in the accessible genome at 1%
frequency across each broad geographic region, between 90% and
95% of variants at 1% frequency in any one of the sampled
populations, and about 85% of variants at 1% frequency in any
equally related but unsampled population. Box 2 Figure shows
predicted discovery curves for variants at different frequencies with
details as for Fig. 2b. The model is conservative, in that it ignores
migration and the contribution to discovery from more distantly
related populations, each of which will increase sensitivity for variants
in any given population. In exons, the full project should have 95%
power to detect variants at a frequency of 0.3% and approximately
60% power for variants at a frequency of 0.1%.
In additionto improved detection power,we expectthe fullprojectto
have increased genotype accuracy due to (1) advances in sequencing
technology that are reducing per base error rates and alignment
artefacts; (2) increased sample size, which improves imputationbased methods; (3) ongoing algorithmic improvements; and (4) the
designing by the project of genotyping assays that will directly
genotypeup to10million common and low-frequency variants (SNPs,
indels and structural variants) observed in the low-coverage data. In
addition, we expect the fraction of the genome that is accessible to
increase. Longer read lengths, improved protocols for generating
paired reads, and the use of more powerful assembly and alignment
methods are expected to increase accessibility from under 85% to
above 90% of the reference genome (Supplementary Fig. 15).
Variant frequency (%)
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
2 8 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 0
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Craddock, N. et al. Genome-wide association study of CNVs in 16,000 cases of
eight common diseases and 3,000 shared controls. Nature 464, 713–720 .
Manolio, T. A. et al. Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases. Nature
461, 747–753 .
Nejentsev,S.,Walker,N.,Riches,D.,Egholm,M.&Todd,J.A.RarevariantsofIFIH1,a
gene implicated in antiviral responses, protect against type 1 diabetes. Science
324, 387–389 .
Cohen, J. C., Boerwinkle, E., Mosley, T. H. Jr & Hobbs, H. H. Sequence variations in
PCSK9, low LDL, and protection against coronary heart disease. N. Engl. J. Med.
354, 1264–1272 .
10. Levy, S. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol. 5,
e254 .
11. Wheeler, D. A. et al. The complete genome of an individual by massively parallel
DNA sequencing. Nature 452, 872–876 .
12. Bentley, D. R. et al. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using reversible
terminator chemistry. Nature 456, 53–59 .
13. Wang, J. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an Asian individual. Nature 456,
60–65 .
14. Li, H. et al. The sequence alignment/map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25,
2078–2079 .
15. Albers, C. et al. Dindel: Accurate indel calls from short read data. Genome Res. (in
the press).
16. Lam, H. Y. et al. Nucleotide-resolution analysis of structural variants using
BreakSeq and a breakpoint library. Nature Biotechnol. 28, 47–55 .
17. The International HapMap 3 Consortium. Integrating common and rare genetic
variation in diverse human populations. Nature 467, 52–58 .
18. Conrad, D. F. et al. Origins and functional impact of copy number variation in the
human genome. Nature 464, 704–712 .
19. Irwin, J. A. et al. Investigation of heteroplasmy in the human mitochondrial DNA
controlregion:asynthesis ofobservationsfrommorethan5000 globalpopulation
samples. J. Mol. Evol. 68, 516–527 .
20. Balaresque, P. et al. A predominantly neolithic origin for European paternal
lineages. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000285 .
21. Wendl, M. C. & Wilson, R. K. The theory of discovering rare variants via DNA
sequencing. BMC Genomics 10, 485 .
22. Le, S. Q., Li, H. & Durbin, R. QCALL: SNP detection and genotyping from low
coverage sequence data on multiple diploid samples. Genome Res. (in the press).
23. NHLBI Program for Genomic Applications. SeattleSNPs. Æhttp://
pga.gs.washington.edu/æ .
24. Xing, J. et al. Mobile elements create structural variation: analysis of a complete
human genome. Genome Res. 19, 1516–1526 .
25. Stranger, B. E. et al.Population genomics of humangene expression. Nature Genet.
39, 1217–1224 .
26. Li, Y., Willer, C. J., Ding, J., Scheet, P. & Abecasis, G. R. MaCH: Using sequence and
genotype data to estimate haplotypes and unobserved genotypes. Genet. Epi. (in
the press).
27. Marchini, J. & Howie, B. Genotype imputation for genome-wide association
studies. Nature Rev. Genet. 11, 499–511 .
28. Dixon, A. L. et al. A genome-wide association study of global gene expression.
Nature Genet. 39, 1202–1207 .
29. Genovese,G.etal. Associationoftrypanolytic ApoL1 variantswith kidneydisease in
African Americans. Science 329, 841–845 .
30. Nachman, M. W. & Crowell, S. L. Estimate of the mutation rate per nucleotide in
humans. Genetics 156, 297–304 .
31. Kondrashov, A. S. Direct estimates of human per nucleotide mutation rates at 20
loci causing Mendelian diseases. Hum. Mutat. 21, 12–27 .
32. Roach, J. C. et al. Analysis of genetic inheritance in a family quartet by wholegenome sequencing. Science 328, 636–639 .
33. Charlesworth, B., Morgan, M. T. & Charlesworth, D. The effect of deleterious
mutations on neutral molecular variation. Genetics 134, 1289–1303 .
34. Maynard Smith, J. & Haigh, J. The hitch-hiking effect of a favourable gene. Genet.
Res. 23, 23–35 .
35. Cai, J. J., Macpherson, J. M., Sella, G. & Petrov, D. A. Pervasive hitchhiking at coding
and regulatory sites in humans. PLoS Genet. 5, e1000336 .
36. Voight, B. F., Kudaravalli, S., Wen, X. & Pritchard, J. K. A map of recent positive
selection in the human genome. PLoS Biol. 4, e72 .
37. Barreiro, L. B., Laval, G., Quach, H., Patin, E. & Quintana-Murci, L. Natural selection
has driven population differentiation in modern humans. Nature Genet. 40,
340–345 .
38. Lamason, R. L. et al. SLC24A5, a putative cation exchanger, affects pigmentation in
zebrafish and humans. Science 310, 1782–1786 .
39. Tournamille, C., Colin, Y., Cartron, J. P. & Le Van Kim, C. Disruption of a GATA motif
in the Duffy gene promoter abolishes erythroid gene expression in Duffy-negative
individuals. Nature Genet. 10, 224–228 .
40. Myers, S. etal. Drive against hotspotmotifsinprimates implicatesthe PRDM9gene
in meiotic recombination. Science 327, 876–879 .
41. Myers, S., Freeman, C., Auton, A., Donnelly, P. & McVean, G. A common sequence
motif associated with recombination hot spots and genome instability in humans.
Nature Genet. 40, 1124–1129 .
42. Baudat, F. et al. PRDM9 is a major determinant of meiotic recombination hotspots
in humans and mice. Science 327, 836–840 .
43. Parvanov, E. D., Petkov, P. M. & Paigen, K. Prdm9 controls activation of mammalian
recombination hotspots. Science 327, 835 .
44. Liu, J. Z. et al. Meta-analysis and imputation refines the association of 15q25 with
smoking quantity. Nature Genet. 42, 436–440 .
45. Sanna, S. et al. Variants within the immunoregulatory CBLB gene are associated
with multiple sclerosis. Nature Genet. 42, 495–497 .
46. Musunuru, K. et al. Exome sequencing, mutations in ANGPTL3, and familial
combined hypolipidemia. N. Engl. J. Med. (in the press).
47. Ewing, A. D. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr. High-throughput sequencing reveals extensive
variation in human-specific L1 content in individual human genomes. Genome
Res. 20, 1262–1270 .
48. Mills, R. E. et al. An initial map of insertion and deletion (INDEL) variation in the
human genome. Genome Res. 16, 1182–1190 .
49. Liti, G. et al. Population genomics of domestic and wild yeasts. Nature 458,
337–341 .
50. Li, Y., Willer, C., Sanna, S. & Abecasis, G. Genotype imputation. Annu. Rev. Genomics
Hum. Genet. 10, 387–406 .
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank many people who contributed to this project: K. Beal,
S. Fitzgerald, G. Cochrane, V. Silventoinen, P. Jokinen, E. Birney and J. Ahringer for
comments on the manuscript; T. Hunkapiller and Q. Doan for their advice and
coordination; N. Ka¨lin, F. Laplace, J. Wilde, S. Paturej, I. Ku¨hndahl, J. Knight, C. Kodira
and M. Boehnke for valuable discussions; Z. Cheng, S. Sajjadian and F. Hormozdiari for
assistance in managing data sets; and D. Leja for help with the figures. We thank the
Yoruba in Ibadan, Nigeria, the Han Chinese in Beijing, China, the Japanese in Tokyo,
Japan, the Utah CEPH community, the Luhya in Webuye, Kenya, the Toscani in Italia,
and the Chinese in Denver, Colorado, for contributing samples for research. This
research was supported in part by Wellcome Trust grants WT089088/Z/09/Z to
R.M.D.; WT085532AIA to P.F.; WT086084/Z/08/Z to G.A.M.; WT081407/Z/06/Z to
J.S.K.; WT075491/Z/04 to G.L.; WT077009 to C.T.-S.; Medical Research Council grant
G0801823 to J.L.M.; British Heart Foundation grant RG/09/012/28096 to C.A.; The
Leverhulme Trust and EPSRC studentships to L.M. and A.T.; the Louis-Jeantet
Foundation and Swiss National Science Foundation in support of E.T.D. and S.B.M.;
NGI/EBI fellowship 050-72-436 to K.Y.; a National Basic Research Program of China
(973 program no. 2011CB809200); the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(30725008, 30890032, 30811130531, 30221004); the Chinese 863 program
(2006AA02Z177, 2006AA02Z334, 2006AA02A302, 2009AA022707); the Shenzhen
Municipal Government of China (grants JC200903190767A, JC200903190772A,
ZYC200903240076A, CXB200903110066A, ZYC200903240077A,
ZYC200903240076A and ZYC200903240080A); the Ole Rømer grant from the
DanishNaturalScienceResearchCouncil; anEmmyNoether Fellowship ofthe German
Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) to J.O.K.; BMBF grant
01GS08201; BMBF grant PREDICT 0315428A to R.H.; BMBF NGFN PLUS and EU 6th
framework READNA to S.S.; EU 7th framework 242257 to A.V.S.; the Max Planck
Society; a grant from Genome Quebec and the Ministry of Economic Development,
Innovation and Trade, PSR-SIIRI-195 to P.A.; the Intramural Research Program of the
NIH; the National Library of Medicine; the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences; and NIH grants P41HG4221 and U01HG5209 to C.L.; P41HG4222 to J.S.;
R01GM59290 to L.B.J. and M.A.B.; R01GM72861 to M.P.; R01HG2651 and
R01MH84698 to G.R.A.; U01HG5214 to G.R.A. and A.C.; P01HG4120 to E.E.E.;
U54HG2750 to D.A.; U54HG2757 to A.C.; U01HG5210 to D.C.; U01HG5208 to M.J.D.;
U01HG5211 to R.A.G.; R01HG3698, R01HG4719 and RC2HG5552 to G.T.M.;
R01HG3229 to C.D.B. and A.G.C.; P50HG2357 to M.S.; R01HG4960 to B.L.B;
P41HG2371 and U41HG4568 to D.H.; R01HG4333 to A.M.L.; U54HG3273 to R.A.G.;
U54HG3067 to E.S.L.; U54HG3079 to R.K.W.; N01HG62088 to the Coriell Institute;
S10RR025056 to the Translational Genomics Research Institute; Al Williams
Professorship funds for M.B.G.; the BWF and Packard Foundation support for P.C.S.;
the Pew Charitable Trusts support for G.R.A.; and an NSF Minority Postdoctoral
Fellowship in support of R.D.H. E.E.E. is an HHMI investigator, M.P. is an HHMI Early
Career Scientist, and D.M.A. is Distinguished Clinical Scholar of the Doris Duke
Charitable Foundation.
Author Contributions Details of author contributions can be found in the author list.
Author Information Primary sequence reads, mapped reads, variant calls, inferred
genotypes, estimated haplotypes and new independent validation data are publicly
available through the project website ( filtered sets of
variants, allele frequencies and genotypes are also deposited in dbSNP (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp). Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints. This paper is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial-Share Alike licence, and is freely available to
all readers at www.nature.com/nature. The authors declare competing financial
interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of
this article at www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials
should be addressed to R.D. ( ).
The 1000 Genomes Consortium (Participants are arranged by project role, then by
institution alphabetically, and finally alphabetically within institutions except for
Principal Investigators and Project Leaders, as indicated.)
Corresponding author Richard M. Durbin1
Steering committee David Altshuler2,3,4 (Co-Chair), Richard M. Durbin1 (Co-Chair),
Gonçalo R. Abecasis5, David R. Bentley6, Aravinda Chakravarti7, Andrew G. Clark8,
Francis S. Collins9, Francisco M. De La Vega10, Peter Donnelly11, Michael Egholm12,
Paul Flicek13, Stacey B. Gabriel2, Richard A. Gibbs14, Bartha M. Knoppers15, Eric S.
Lander2, Hans Lehrach16, Elaine R. Mardis17, Gil A. McVean11,18, Deborah A.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
O C T O B E R
N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Nickerson19, Leena Peltonen{, Alan J. Schafer20, Stephen T. Sherry21, Jun Wang22,23,
Richard K. Wilson17
Production group: Baylor College of Medicine Richard A. Gibbs14 (Principal
Investigator), David Deiros14, Mike Metzker14, Donna Muzny14, Jeff Reid14, David
Wheeler14; BGI-Shenzhen Jun Wang22,23 (Principal Investigator), Jingxiang Li22, Min
Jian22, Guoqing Li22, Ruiqiang Li22,23, Huiqing Liang22, Geng Tian22, Bo Wang22, Jian
Wang22, Wei Wang22, Huanming Yang22, Xiuqing Zhang22, Huisong Zheng22; Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard Eric S. Lander2 (Principal Investigator), David
Altshuler2,3,4, Lauren Ambrogio2, Toby Bloom2, Kristian Cibulskis2, Tim J. Fennell2,
Stacey B. Gabriel2 (Co-Chair), David B. Jaffe2, Erica Shefler2, Carrie L. Sougnez2;
Illumina David R. Bentley6 (Principal Investigator), Niall Gormley6, Sean Humphray6,
Zoya Kingsbury6, Paula Kokko-Gonzales6, Jennifer Stone6; Life Technologies Kevin J.
McKernan24 (Principal Investigator), Gina L. Costa24, Jeffry K. Ichikawa24, Clarence C.
Lee24; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Ralf Sudbrak16 (Project Leader),
Hans Lehrach16 (Principal Investigator), Tatiana A. Borodina16, Andreas Dahl25, Alexey
N. Davydov16, Peter Marquardt16, Florian Mertes16, Wilfiried Nietfeld16, Philip
Rosenstiel26, Stefan Schreiber26, Aleksey V. Soldatov16, Bernd Timmermann16, Marius
Tolzmann16; Roche Applied Science Michael Egholm12 (Principal Investigator), Jason
Affourtit27, Dana Ashworth27, Said Attiya27, Melissa Bachorski27, Eli Buglione27, Adam
Burke27, Amanda Caprio27, Christopher Celone27, Shauna Clark27, David Conners27,
Brian Desany27, Lisa Gu27, Lorri Guccione27, Kalvin Kao27, Andrew Kebbel27, Jennifer
Knowlton27, Matthew Labrecque27, Louise McDade27, Craig Mealmaker27, Melissa
Minderman27, Anne Nawrocki27, Faheem Niazi27, Kristen Pareja27, Ravi Ramenani27,
David Riches27, Wanmin Song27, Cynthia Turcotte27, Shally Wang27; Washington
Universityin St Louis Elaine R. Mardis17 (Co-Chair) (Co-Principal Investigator), Richard
K. Wilson17 (Co-Principal Investigator), David Dooling17, Lucinda Fulton17, Robert
Fulton17, George Weinstock17; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Richard M. Durbin1
(Principal Investigator), John Burton1, David M. Carter1, Carol Churcher1, Alison
Coffey1, Anthony Cox1, Aarno Palotie1,28, Michael Quail1, Tom Skelly1, James Stalker1,
Harold P. Swerdlow1, Daniel Turner1
Analysis group: Agilent Technologies Anniek De Witte29, Shane Giles29; Baylor
College of Medicine Richard A. Gibbs14 (Principal Investigator), David Wheeler14,
Matthew Bainbridge14, Danny Challis14, Aniko Sabo14, Fuli Yu14, Jin Yu14;
BGI-Shenzhen Jun Wang22,23 (Principal Investigator), Xiaodong Fang22, Xiaosen
Guo22, Ruiqiang Li22,23, Yingrui Li22, Ruibang Luo22, Shuaishuai Tai22, Honglong Wu22,
HanchengZheng22, XiaoleZheng22, Yan Zhou22, Guoqing Li22, Jian Wang22, Huanming
Yang22; Boston College Gabor T. Marth30 (Principal Investigator), Erik P. Garrison30,
Weichun Huang31, Amit Indap30, Deniz Kural30, Wan-Ping Lee30, Wen Fung Leong30,
Aaron R. Quinlan32, Chip Stewart30, Michael P. Stromberg33, Alistair N. Ward30, Jiantao
Wu30; Brigham and Women’s Hospital Charles Lee34 (Principal Investigator), Ryan E.
Mills34, Xinghua Shi34; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard Mark J. Daly2 (Principal
Investigator), Mark A.DePristo2 (Project Leader), David Altshuler2,34, Aaron D.Ball2, Eric
Banks2, Toby Bloom2, Brian L. Browning35, Kristian Cibulskis2, Tim J. Fennell2, Kiran V.
Garimella2, Sharon R. Grossman2,36, Robert E. Handsaker2, Matt Hanna2, Chris Hartl2,
David B. Jaffe2, Andrew M. Kernytsky2, Joshua M. Korn2, Heng Li2, Jared R. Maguire2,
Steven A. McCarroll2,4, Aaron McKenna2, James C. Nemesh2, Anthony A. Philippakis2,
Ryan E. Poplin2, Alkes Price37, Manuel A. Rivas2, Pardis C. Sabeti2,36, Stephen F.
Schaffner2, Erica Shefler2, Ilya A. Shlyakhter2,36; Cardiff University, The Human Gene
Mutation Database David N. Cooper38 (Principal Investigator), Edward V. Ball38,
Matthew Mort38, Andrew D. Phillips38, Peter D. Stenson38; Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Jonathan Sebat39 (Principal Investigator), Vladimir Makarov40, Kenny Ye41,
Seungtai C. Yoon40; Cornell and Stanford Universities Carlos D. Bustamante43
(Co-Principal Investigator), Andrew G. Clark8 (Co-Principal Investigator), Adam
Boyko43, Jeremiah Degenhardt8, Simon Gravel43, Ryan N. Gutenkunst44, Mark
Kaganovich43, Alon Keinan8, Phil Lacroute43, Xin Ma8, Andy Reynolds8; European
Bioinformatics Institute Laura Clarke13 (Project Leader), Paul Flicek13 (Co-Chair, DCC)
(Principal Investigator), Fiona Cunningham13, Javier Herrero13, Stephen Keenen13,
Eugene Kulesha13, Rasko Leinonen13, William M. McLaren13, Rajesh Radhakrishnan13,
Richard E.Smith13, Vadim Zalunin13, XiangqunZheng-Bradley13; European Molecular
BiologyLaboratory JanO. Korbel45 (Principal Investigator), Adrian M. Stu¨tz45; Illumina
Sean Humphray6 (Project Leader), Markus Bauer6, R. Keira Cheetham6, Tony Cox6,
Michael Eberle6, Terena James6, Scott Kahn6, Lisa Murray6; Johns Hopkins University
Aravinda Chakravarti7; Leiden University Medical Center Kai Ye46; Life Technologies
Francisco M. De La Vega10 (Principal Investigator), Yutao Fu24, Fiona C. L. Hyland10,
Jonathan M. Manning24, Stephen F. McLaughlin24, Heather E. Peckham24, Onur
Sakarya10, Yongming A. Sun10, Eric F. Tsung24; Louisiana State University Mark A.
Batzer47 (Principal Investigator), Miriam K. Konkel47, Jerilyn A. Walker47; Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics Ralf Sudbrak16 (Project Leader), Marcus W.
Albrecht16,Vyacheslav S. Amstislavskiy16,RalfHerwig16,DimitriV.Parkhomchuk16; US
National Institutes of Health Stephen T. Sherry21 (Co-Chair, DCC) (Principal
Investigator), Richa Agarwala21, Hoda M. Khouri21, Aleksandr O. Morgulis21, Justin E.
Paschall21, Lon D. Phan21, Kirill E. Rotmistrovsky21, Robert D. Sanders21, Martin F.
Shumway21, Chunlin Xiao21; Oxford University Gil A. McVean11,18 (Co-Chair)
(Co-Chair, Population Genetics) (Principal Investigator), Adam Auton11, Zamin Iqbal11,
Gerton Lunter11, Jonathan L. Marchini11,18, Loukas Moutsianas18, Simon Myers11,18,
Afidalina Tumian18; Roche Applied Science Brian Desany27 (Project Leader), James
Knight27, Roger Winer27; The Translational Genomics Research Institute David W.
Craig48 (Principal Investigator), Steve M. Beckstrom-Sternberg48, Alexis
Christoforides48, Ahmet A. Kurdoglu48, John V. Pearson48, Shripad A. Sinari48, Waibhav
D. Tembe48; University of California, Santa Cruz David Haussler49 (Principal
Investigator), Angie S. Hinrichs49, Sol J. Katzman49, Andrew Kern49, Robert M. Kuhn49;
University of Chicago Molly Przeworski50 (Co-Chair, Population Genetics) (Principal
Investigator), Ryan D. Hernandez51, Bryan Howie52, Joanna L. Kelley52, S. Cord
Melton52; University of Michigan Gonçalo R. Abecasis5 (Co-Chair) (Principal
Investigator), Yun Li5 (Project Leader), Paul Anderson5, Tom Blackwell5, Wei Chen5,
William O. Cookson53, Jun Ding5, Hyun Min Kang5, Mark Lathrop54, Liming Liang55,
Miriam F. Moffatt53, Paul Scheet56, Carlo Sidore5, Matthew Snyder5, Xiaowei Zhan5,
Sebastian Zo¨llner5; University of Montreal Philip Awadalla57 (Principal Investigator),
Reed A. Cartwright79, FerranCasals58,YoussefIdaghdour58, JonathanKeebler58, EricA.
Stone58, Martine Zilversmit58; University of Utah Lynn Jorde59 (Principal Investigator),
Jinchuan Xing59; University of Washington Evan E. Eichler60 (Principal Investigator),
Gozde Aksay19, Can Alkan60, Iman Hajirasouliha61, Fereydoun Hormozdiari61, Jeffrey
M. Kidd19,43, S. Cenk Sahinalp61, Peter H. Sudmant19; Washington University in St
Louis Elaine R. Mardis17 (Co-Principal Investigator), Ken Chen17, Asif Chinwalla17, Li
Ding17, Daniel C. Koboldt17, Mike D. McLellan17, David Dooling17, George Weinstock17,
John W. Wallis17, Michael C. Wendl17, Qunyuan Zhang17; Wellcome Trust Sanger
InstituteRichard M.Durbin1 (PrincipalInvestigator),CornelisA.Albers62, Qasim Ayub1,
Senduran Balasubramaniam1, Jeffrey C. Barrett1, David M. Carter1, Yuan Chen1,
Donald F. Conrad1, Petr Danecek1, Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis63, Min Hu1, Ni Huang1,
Matt E. Hurles1, Hanjun Jin64, Luke Jostins1, Thomas M. Keane1, Si Quang Le1, Sarah
Lindsay1, Quan Long1, Daniel G. MacArthur1, Stephen B. Montgomery63, Leopold
Parts1, James Stalker1, Chris Tyler-Smith1, Klaudia Walter1, Yali Xue1, Yujun Zhang1;
Yale and Stanford Universities Mark B. Gerstein65,66 (Co-Principal Investigator),
Michael Snyder43 (Co-Principal Investigator), Alexej Abyzov65, Suganthi
Balasubramanian67, Robert Bjornson66, Jiang Du66, Fabian Grubert43, Lukas
Habegger65, Rajini Haraksingh65, Justin Jee65, Ekta Khurana67, Hugo Y. K. Lam43, Jing
Leng65, Xinmeng Jasmine Mu65, Alexander E. Urban43,68, Zhengdong Zhang67
Structural variation group: BGI-Shenzhen Yingrui Li22, Ruibang Luo22; Boston
College Gabor T. Marth30 (Principal Investigator), Erik P. Garrison30, Deniz Kural30,
Aaron R. Quinlan32, Chip Stewart30, Michael P. Stromberg33, Alistair N. Ward30, Jiantao
Wu30; Brigham and Women’s Hospital Charles Lee34 (Co-Chair) (Principal
Investigator), Ryan E. Mills34, Xinghua Shi34; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Steven A. McCarroll2,4 (Project Leader), Eric Banks2, Mark A. DePristo2, Robert E.
Handsaker2, Chris Hartl2, Joshua M. Korn2, Heng Li2, James C. Nemesh2; Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Jonathan Sebat39 (Principal Investigator), Vladimir Makarov40,
Kenny Ye41, Seungtai C. Yoon40; Cornell and Stanford Universities Jeremiah
Degenhardt8, Mark Kaganovich43; European Bioinformatics Institute Laura Clarke13
(Project Leader), Richard E. Smith13, Xiangqun Zheng-Bradley13; European Molecular
Biology Laboratory Jan O. Korbel45; Illumina Sean Humphray6 (Project Leader), R.
Keira Cheetham6, Michael Eberle6, Scott Kahn6, Lisa Murray6; Leiden University
Medical Center Kai Ye46; Life Technologies Francisco M. De La Vega10 (Principal
Invesigator), Yutao Fu24, Heather E. Peckham24, Yongming A. Sun10; Louisiana State
University Mark A. Batzer47 (Principal Investigator), Miriam K. Konkel47, Jerilyn A.
Walker47; US National Institutes of Health Chunlin Xiao21; Oxford University Zamin
Iqbal11; Roche Applied Science Brian Desany27; University of Michigan Tom
Blackwell5 (Project Leader), Matthew Snyder5; University of Utah Jinchuan Xing59;
University of Washington Evan E. Eichler60 (Co-Chair) (Principal Investigator), Gozde
Aksay19, Can Alkan60, Iman Hajirasouliha61, Fereydoun Hormozdiari61, Jeffrey M.
Kidd19,43; Washington University in St Louis Ken Chen17, Asif Chinwalla17, Li Ding17,
Mike D. McLellan17, John W. Wallis17; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Matt E. Hurles1
(Co-Chair) (Principal Investigator), Donald F. Conrad1, Klaudia Walter1, Yujun Zhang1;
Yale and Stanford Universities Mark B. Gerstein65,66 (Co-Principal Investigator),
Michael Snyder43 (Co-Principal Investigator), Alexej Abyzov65, Jiang Du66, Fabian
Grubert43, Rajini Haraksingh65, Justin Jee65, Ekta Khurana67, Hugo Y. K. Lam43, Jing
Leng65, Xinmeng Jasmine Mu65, Alexander E. Urban43,68, Zhengdong Zhang67
Exon pilot group: Baylor College of Medicine Richard A. Gibbs14 (Co-Chair) (Principal
Investigator), Matthew Bainbridge14, Danny Challis14, Cristian Coafra14, Huyen Dinh14,
Christie Kovar14, Sandy Lee14, Donna Muzny14, Lynne Nazareth14, Jeff Reid14, Aniko
Sabo14, Fuli Yu14, Jin Yu14; Boston College Gabor T. Marth30 (Co-Chair) (Principal
Investigator), Erik P. Garrison30, Amit Indap30, Wen Fung Leong30, Aaron R. Quinlan32,
Chip Stewart30, Alistair N. Ward30, Jiantao Wu30; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Kristian Cibulskis2, Tim J. Fennell2, Stacey B. Gabriel2, Kiran V. Garimella2, Chris Hartl2,
Erica Shefler2, Carrie L. Sougnez2, Jane Wilkinson2; Cornell and Stanford Universities
Andrew G. Clark8 (Co-Principal Investigator), Simon Gravel43, Fabian Grubert43;
European Bioinformatics Institute Laura Clarke13 (Project Leader), Paul Flicek13
(Principal Investigator), Richard E. Smith13, Xiangqun Zheng-Bradley13; US National
Institutes of Health Stephen T. Sherry21 (Principal Investigator), Hoda M. Khouri21,
Justin E. Paschall21, Martin F. Shumway21, Chunlin Xiao21; Oxford University Gil A.
McVean11,18; University of California, Santa Cruz Sol J. Katzman49; University of
Michigan Gonçalo R. Abecasis5 (Principal Investigator), Tom Blackwell5; Washington
University in St Louis Elaine R. Mardis17 (Principal Investigator), David Dooling17,
Lucinda Fulton17, Robert Fulton17, Daniel C. Koboldt17; Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute Richard M. Durbin1 (Principal Investigator), Senduran Balasubramaniam1,
Allison Coffey1, Thomas M. Keane1, Daniel G. MacArthur1, Aarno Palotie1,28, Carol
Scott1, James Stalker1, Chris Tyler-Smith1; Yale University Mark B. Gerstein65,66
(Principal Investigator), Suganthi Balasubramanian67
Samples and ELSI group Aravinda Chakravarti7 (Co-Chair), Bartha M. Knoppers15
(Co-Chair), Leena Peltonen{ (Co-Chair), Gonçalo R. Abecasis5, Carlos D. Bustamante43,
Neda Gharani69, Richard A. Gibbs14, Lynn Jorde59, Jane S. Kaye70, Alastair Kent71,
Taosha Li22, Amy L. McGuire72, Gil A. McVean11,18, Pilar N. Ossorio73, Charles N.
Rotimi74, Yeyang Su22, Lorraine H. Toji69, Chris Tyler-Smith1
Scientific management Lisa D. Brooks75, Adam L. Felsenfeld75, Jean E. McEwen75,
Assya Abdallah76, Christopher R. Juenger77, Nicholas C. Clemm75, Francis S. Collins9,
Audrey Duncanson20, Eric D. Green78, Mark S. Guyer75, Jane L. Peterson75, Alan J.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
1 0 7 2 | N A T U R E
O C T O B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Writing group Gonçalo R. Abecasis5, David Altshuler2,3,4, Adam Auton11, Lisa D.
Brooks75, Richard M. Durbin1, Richard A. Gibbs14, Matt E. Hurles1, Gil A. McVean11,18
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10
1SA, UK. 2The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. 3Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. 4Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 5Center for Statistical Genetics
and Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. 6Illumina
Cambridge Ltd, Chesterford Research Park, Little Chesterford, Nr Saffron Walden, Essex
CB10 1XL, UK. 7McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins
UniversitySchoolof Medicine,Baltimore,Maryland21205,USA. 8Center for Comparative
and Population Genomics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NewYork14850,USA. 9US National
Institutes of Health, 1 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 10Life Technologies,
Foster City, California 94404, USA. 11Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. 12Pall Corporation, 25 Harbor Park Drive, Port
Washington, New York 11050, USA. 13European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. 14Human Genome Sequencing Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 15Centre of
Genomics and Policy, McGill University, Montre´al, Que´bec H3A 1A4, Canada. 16Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, D-14195 Berlin-Dahlem, Germany. 17The
Genome Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63108,
USA. 18Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TG, UK. 19Department
of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA. 20Wellcome Trust, Gibbs Building, 215 Euston Road, London NW1 2BE, UK.
21US National Institutes of Health, National Center for Biotechnology Information, 45
Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 22BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083,
China. 23Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen 2200, Denmark. 24Life
Technologies, Beverly, Massachusetts 01915, USA. 25Deep Sequencing Group,
Biotechnology Center TU Dresden, Tatzberg 47/49, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
26Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel 24105,
Germany. 27Roche Applied Science, 20 Commercial Street, Branford, Connecticut
06405,USA. 28DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,InstituteofMolecularMedicine(FIMM)of
the University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00290, Finland.
29Agilent TechnologiesInc., Santa Clara,California95051, USA. 30Department of Biology,
Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts 02467, USA. 31US National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 111 T W Alexander Drive,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA. 32Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA. 33Illumina, San Diego, California 92121, USA. 34Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA. 35Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle,Washington98195,USA. 36Center for SystemsBiology,Department
of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138, USA. 37Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. 38Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Heath
Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. 39Departments of Psychiatry and Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California
92093, USA. 40Seaver Autism Center and Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. 41Department of Epidemiology and
Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.
42Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029, USA. 43Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford,
California 94305, USA. 44Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. 45European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Genome Biology Research Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany.
46Molecular Epidemiology Section, Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden
University Medical Center, 2333 ZA, The Netherlands. 47Department of Biological
Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA. 48The
Translational Genomics Research Institute, 445 N Fifth Street, Phoenix, Arizona 85004,
USA. 49Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. 50Department of Human Genetics and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
51Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, USA. 52Department of Human Genetics,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 53National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2, UK. 54Centre Nationale de Ge´notypage, Evry
91000, France. 55Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 56Department of Epidemiology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
57Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montre´al, Ste. Justine
Hospital Research Centre, Montre´al, Que´bec H3T 1C5, Canada. 58Department of
Medicine, Centre Hospitalier de l’Universite´ de Montre´al Research Center, Universite´ de
Montre´al, Montre´al, Que´bec H2L 2W5, Canada. 59Eccles Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA. 60Department of
Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. 61Department of Computer Science,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6, Canada. 62Department of
Haematology, University of Cambridge and National Health Service Blood and
Transplant, Cambridge CB2 1TN, UK. 63Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva 1211, Switzerland. 64Center
for Genome Science, Korea National Institute of Health, 194, Tongil-Lo, Eunpyung-Gu,
Seoul 122-701, Korea. 65Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. 66Department of Computer Science,
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. 67Department of Molecular
Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.
68Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Studies, Stanford University, Stanford,
California 94305, USA. 69Coriell Institute, 403 Haddon Avenue, Camden, New Jersey
08103, USA. 70Centre for Health, Law and Emerging Technologies, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 71Genetic Alliance, 436 Essex Road, London N1 3QP, UK. 72Center
for Medical Ethics and Health Policy, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. 73Department of Medical History and Bioethics, University of
Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. 74US National Institutes of Health,
Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, 12 South Drive, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA. 75US National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research
Institute, 5635 Fishers Lane, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 76The George Washington
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington DC 20037, USA. 77US
Food and Drug Administration, 11400 Rockville Pike, Rockville, Maryland 20857, USA.
78USNationalInstitutesofHealth,NationalHumanGenomeResearchInstitute,31Center
Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 79Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77251, USA. {Deceased.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
O C T O B E R
N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
CORRECTIONS & AMENDMENTS
CORRIGENDUM
doi:10.1038/nature09991
A map of human genome variation
from population-scale sequencing
The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium
Nature 467, 1061–1073 
In this Article, Yali Xue, of the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK
(Analysis group), and Reed A. Cartwright, of the Department of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas
77251,USA(Analysisgroup:UniversityofMontreal),wereinadvertently
omitted from the participant list. Also, the participants David Altshuler,
Jonathan Keebler, Paula Kokko-Gonzales and Deborah A. Nickerson
werelistedincorrectly.Inaddition,SeungtaiC.Yoonshouldbeassociated
with affiliation 40 (Seaver Autism Center and Department of Psychiatry,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA) and
not with affiliation 42 (Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine). These have been corrected in the
HTML and PDF versions of the manuscript. Supplementary Information section 7.7 has also been corrected.
| N A T U R E |
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved