Smart Grid Communications: Overview of Research
Challenges, Solutions, and Standardization
Activities
Zhong Fan, Parag Kulkarni, Sedat Gormus, Costas Efthymiou, Georgios Kalogridis, Mahesh Sooriyabandara,
Ziming Zhu, Sangarapillai Lambotharan, and Woon Hau Chin
Abstract—Optimization of energy consumption in future intelligent energy networks (or Smart Grids) will be based on
grid-integrated near-real-time communications between various
grid elements in generation, transmission, distribution and loads.
This paper discusses some of the challenges and opportunities
of communications research in the areas of smart grid and
smart metering. In particular, we focus on some of the key communications challenges for realizing interoperable and futureproof smart grid/metering networks, smart grid security and
privacy, and how some of the existing networking technologies
can be applied to energy management. Finally, we also discuss
the coordinated standardization efforts in Europe to harmonize
communications standards and protocols.
Index Terms—Smart grid, smart metering, demand response,
interoperability, standards, wireline and wireless communications, renewable energy, security, privacy.
I. INTRODUCTION
LIMATE change and greenhouse gas emissions have
become a recognized problem of international significance in recent years. Renewable energy sources offer a
key solution to this problem; however, their integration into
existing grids comes with a whole new set of barriers, such as
the intermittency of generation, the high level of distribution
of the sources and the lack of proven distributed control
algorithms to manage such a highly distributed generation
Historically, the electrical grid has been a broadcast grid
(i.e. few-to-many distribution), where a few central power
generators (i.e. power stations) provide all the electricity
production in a country or region, and then ‘broadcast’ this
electricity to the consumers via a large network of cables
and transformers. Based on load forecasting models developed
over time, the utility providers generally over-provision for
the demand (considering peak load conditions). If the demand
increases above the average, they may have to turn on the
peaker plants1 which use non-renewable sources of energy
(e.g. coal ﬁred plants) to generate additional supply of energy
Z. Fan, P. Kulkarni, S. Gormus, C. Efthymiou, G. Kalogridis, M. Sooriyabandara and W. Chin are with Toshiba Research Europe Limited, Telecommunications Research Laboratory, 32 Queen Square, Bristol, BS1 4ND, UK.
e-mail: .
Z. Zhu and S. Lambotharan are with Advanced Signal Processing Group,
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Loughborough University, Leicestershire, LE11 3TU, UK.
1Peaker plant is a standard term used in the power grid community. Peaker
plants are switched on to meet a shortfall in supply, on a timescale varying
from a few seconds up to a few minutes (cf. Table 1 in this document).
to cope with the demand. The provisioning for peak load
approach is wasteful when the average demand is much lower
than the peak because electricity, once produced, has to be
consumed as grid energy storage is expensive . Secondly,
setting up and maintaining the peaker plants is not only
environmentally unfriendly but also expensive. Also, given
the increasing demand for energy, it may be difﬁcult, perhaps
impossible in the longer run, to match the supply to this peak
demand. What is attractive in such a situation then, is to match
the demand to the available supply by using communication
technology (two way communications between the grid and
the customer premises) and providing incentives (e.g. through
variable pricing) to the consumer to defer (reschedule) the
load during times when the expected demand is lower so as to
improve utilization of the available capacity. This necessitates
the ﬂow of metering information from the customer premises
to the grid to identify the demand, and control information
(e.g. pricing information) in the other direction to coerce the
customer into adapting their demand. As mentioned earlier,
since the legacy grid is a broadcast grid, this motivates the need
for a communications infrastructure and protocols to support
the aforementioned functionalities.
While the legacy grid has served well for the last century or
so, there is a growing need to update it, from the points of view
of both the aging infrastructure and the new environmental
and societal challenges. As a result, national governments
and relevant stakeholders are making signiﬁcant efforts in the
development of future electrical grids or Smart Grids. A smart
grid is an intelligent electricity network that integrates the
actions of all users connected to it and makes use of advanced
information, control, and communications technologies to save
energy, reduce cost and increase reliability and transparency.
Development of this new grid will require signiﬁcant efforts
in technology development, standards, policy and regulatory
activities due to its inherent complexity.
A proper demand management through the smart grid
technology has the potential to yield signiﬁcant savings in
the generation and transmission of energy. This is mainly
due to the reduction of number of peaker plants needed to
cater for peak demand that occurs only a small percentage of
time. For example, it has been reported in that in Europe,
ﬁve to eight percent of installed capacity is used only one
percent of the time. By deferring the peak demand to off peak
times, the capacity and transmission cost could be reduced
up to 67 billion euros in Europe . An annual potential
value generation up to 130 billion dollars by 2019 has been
forecast by McKinsey in for a fully deployed smart grid
in the US. The work in states that even a conservative
estimate of potential saving due to grid modernization is 40
billion dollars per year. In addition to the direct savings, there
are many important economical and societal beneﬁts such as
reduction of CO2 emissions, integration of renewable energy,
elimination of regional blackouts and reduced operational costs
via for example automated meter readings.
Many countries are currently making massive investments
on smart grid research and development. For example, the
smart grid is a vital component of President Obama’s comprehensive energy plan: the American Recovery and Investment
Act includes $11 billion in investments to “jump start the
transformation to a bigger, better, smarter grid”. One of the key
elements behind the current intensive work program towards
smart grid in the United States is tightly linked with the need
to modernize their power system. In particular, the lack of
electricity distribution network reliability under stress conditions was born out of under-investment in the infrastructure
combined with growing energy demand. This was emphasized
in a series of major supply disruption events (e.g. the North-
East blackout), widely seen as a wake-up call to address
network stability by increasing inter-connectivity, local and
wide area control. Also, there are growing expectations on
the integration of a wide range of renewable energy sources
with the power grid. Therefore the US DoE Smart Grid
Research and Development Program has set the following
performance targets for 2030: 20% reduction in the nation’s
peak energy demand; 100% availability to serve all critical
loads at all times and a range of reliability services for
other loads; 40% improvement in system efﬁciency and asset
utilization to achieve a load factor of 70%; 20% of electricity
capacity from distributed and renewable energy sources (200
GW). There are also a number of huge industrial research
projects currently underway, for example, the IBM GridWise
project and the smart grid trial in New Mexico .
Europe, by contrast, presents a highly interconnected, mesh
distribution network exhibiting more robustness than the US
system. Energy network development is in a period of stability
within the European Union (EU). There is a program of
large investments in updating the distribution network already
agreed at the EU level , which is decreasing the pressure
for rapid decisions towards adoption of disruptive new technology. The biggest concern in Europe is in the integration
of renewable power generation to meet the 2020 targets for
reduction of CO2 emissions from fossil power generation. The
intermittent nature of these energy sources places demands that
existing transmission and distribution networks have not been
designed to meet. Considerable effort will be needed so as to
become less dependent on conventional and foreign sources of
energy. The important role of smart grids is mentioned in the
European Commission’s 2020 strategy document , in the
EU Smart Grids Technology Platform , and also highlighted
in the new initiative on Future Internet research (FI PPP,
 ) as a key application. A recent example FI PPP project
on smart grid is FINSENY led by Siemens . The EU,
through the technology development platform, has established
a carefully planned approach to the implementation of smart
grid technologies in the medium to long term. Establishing
work on standardization, research projects involving academia
with industries (utilities and manufacturers), and demonstration/pilot projects are the current priority.
Smart grids and smart metering are expected to contribute
signiﬁcantly towards improving energy usage levels through
the following four mechanisms:
• Energy feedback to home users through an IHD (In-
Home Display) - Accurate energy consumption, coupled
with real-time pricing information is expected to reduce
energy usage within the home, especially as energy prices
continue to rise.
• Energy consumption information for building operators to assist with the detailed understanding and optimization
of energy requirements in buildings.
• The inclusion of distributed micro-generation based on
locally-distributed clean, renewable energy sources such
as wind and solar.
• Real-time demand response and management strategies
for lowering peak demand and overall load, through
appliance control and energy storage mechanisms (including electrical vehicles).
To enable the above functionalities, an effective, reliable,
and robust communication infrastructure has to be in place.
This paper provides an overview of the following important
issues of smart grid communications: communication infrastructure, network architecture, demand response management,
security and privacy challenges, and standardization activities.
Compared to other recent surveys on smart grid (e.g. and
 which are mainly from an academic perspective), our
primary aim is to provide a coherent picture of the current
status of smart grid communications, especially focusing on
research challenges, standardization, and industry perspectives.
We would like to point out that since the smart grid is a
vast area, the main focus of this paper is on smart grid
communications. For overviews on other aspects of smart grid,
e.g. technologies on the transmission side and control center
of the smart grid, please refer to and . Furthermore,
this article mainly provides a technical perspective of the smart
grid. For a business or economic perspective, the readers are
referred to .
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 discusses several research challenges and opportunities in
smart grid communications. Section 3 addresses the important
issue of security and privacy and Section 4 presents our
vision of applying some existing networking technologies to
solve energy management problems. Section 5 provides a brief
introduction to the standardization activities in Europe and
conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
II. COMMUNICATION CHALLENGES AND ISSUES
While communications technology is seen as an essential
enabling component of future smart grids, there are a number
of challenges that must be addressed in order to have fully
robust, secure and functional smart grid networks. Some of
these challenges are discussed below. It is important to note
that these challenges are very much intertwined, i.e. they
affect each other and must be considered as parts of a bigger
problem/challenge. We begin by ﬁrst giving an overview of
smart metering communications which is a major component
of the overall smart grid communications architecture. This
is then followed by a discussion on several different related
research issues .
A. Smart metering communications
A smart metering communication system consists of the
following components: smart meter which is a two-way
communicating device that measures energy consuming at
the appliances (electricity, gas, water or heat); Home Area
Network (HAN) which is an information and communication
network formed by appliances and devices within a home to
support different distributed applications (e.g. smart metering
and energy management in the consumer premises); Neighborhood Area Network (NAN) that collects data from multiple
HANs and deliver the data to a data concentrator; Wide Area
Network (WAN) which is the data transport network that
carries metering data to central control centers; and Gateway
which is the device that collects or measures energy usage
information from the HAN members (and of the home as
a whole) and transmits this data to interested parties. Table
I indicates the typical communication requirements and the
potential technologies that could be employed to realize the
different types of network mentioned above. For a comprehensive survey on communication protocols for automatic meter
reading applications, please refer to .
Type of Network
Requirements
Technologies
Tens of meters
Application
information
Ethernet, PLC
Hundreds of
node density in
the network (e.g.
2Kbps in the case
sending 60 byte
every 2 minutes
PLC, cellular
Tens of kilometers
capability
router/switch
Mbps to a few
microwave,
WiMax, 3G/LTE,
ﬁbre optic links
COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS AND CAPABILITIES OF THE DIFFERENT
TYPES OF NETWORKS
Figure 1 shows a typical smart metering architecture that
is being reﬂected in the European standards development
process. Note that this is just an example and not a deﬁnitive
ﬁnal architecture. At the most basic level, the home will be
equipped with a series of smart meters, one each for electricity,
gas, water and heat (if applicable), according to the facilities
available at each home. These will be connected to a metering
gateway in the home, which may or may not be part of
an existing home gateway device. The HAN through which
they communicate with the metering gateway may be multistandard. This is mainly due to differing meter locations and
power availability; for example, gas and water meters may
have to use only battery power. Multiple HANs are further
connected into a NAN via a wireless mesh network.
In Figure 1, the smart metering gateway is connected to both
the utility (via a WAN) and the distribution control system
(DCS) because the utility company may not necessarily own
the DCS, especially in countries such as the UK where there
is so much competition and fragmentation - a home in London
could be supplied by a Scotland-based utility with the local
distribution infrastructure being owned by another company.
The utility is mainly responsible for services like billing,
service management and tariffs, and the distribution control
system is responsible for demand response, commands to disable certain devices/appliances, renewable energy integration,
During the European standardization process, it became
evident that a single application data model is required
to enhance the interoperability of the different meters and
databases used to store their information. One such model
which has been receiving a lot of attention is the Device
Language Message Speciﬁcation/Companion Speciﬁcation for
Energy Metering (DLMS/COSEM) model , which
is currently being modiﬁed to address all of the additional
functionalities that have been mandated.
Optionally, home devices and appliances may also be part of
the HAN, whilst any home automation system(s) may be connected to the same HAN and interface with the smart meters.
The in-home display (often called the Customer/Consumer
Display Unit - CDU), which is being considered strongly
to be mandated in the UK Smart Metering Implementation
Project, is an example of this. In the future, it is expected that
home automation systems will gather detailed energy usage
information from the smart meters and also from sub-meters
attached to speciﬁc devices and appliances, so that a number
of sensors and actuators can be brought together within the
home to optimize the energy consumption of the home as a
whole. This aspect of smart metering and home automation
is crucial to the realization of the targets of CO2 emission
reduction that the EU has set.
There are a number of options currently for the communications outside the home, i.e. between the metering gateway
and the power distribution network, utility, operators and any
other authorized parties. The obvious candidates are wireless
cellular technologies and various home broadband solutions.
However, it remains to be seen if utilities will be willing to
trust the reliability and independence of these solutions. It is
more likely that a mixture of a wide range of technologies will
be used, including proprietary solutions for the last-mile access
to the metering gateway. Data concentrators/aggregators have
been discussed (see Figure 1), which could be deployed around
residential areas. Given a wireless mesh network between
metering gateways and/or smart meters, these aggregators
Typical smart metering architecture
could gather all of the required data at periodic intervals
and then send them over to the utilities through ﬁxed line
communications.
B. Interoperability
A key feature of smart grids is the interconnection of
a potentially large number of disparate energy distribution
networks, power generating sources and energy consumers.
The components of each of these entities will need a way
of communicating that will be independent of the physical
medium used and also independent of manufacturers and
the type of devices. The communication architecture of the
future smart grid is yet to be deﬁned. As a result, multiple
communication technologies and standards could coexist in
different parts of the system. For example, short-range wireless
such as Bluetooth or UWB could be used for the interface
between meter and end customer devices, IEEE 802.15.4
(ZigBee) and IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi) could be used for smart
meter interfaces in the home and local area network, and
cellular wireless (e.g. GPRS, UMTS, or 4G technologies like
802.16m and LTE) could be used for the interface between
meters and the central system . To this end, interoperability is essential for smart metering devices, systems, and
communications architectures supporting smart grids. This has
been emphasized by the recent EU M/441 Mandate on smart
meters .
It can be envisaged that in a complex system such as
smart grid, heterogeneous communication technologies are
required to meet the diverse needs of the system. Therefore,
in contrast to conventional telecommunication standardization
such as IEEE 802.11n or 3GPP LTE, the standardization
of communications for smart grid means making interfaces,
messages and workﬂows interoperable. Instead of focusing on
or deﬁning one particular technology, it is more important to
achieve agreement on usage and interpretation of interfaces
and messages that can seamlessly bridge different standards
or technologies. In other words, one of the main aims of
communication standardization for smart grids is ensuring
interoperability between different system components rather
than deﬁning these components (meters, devices or protocols)
In this context, generic application programming interfaces
(APIs) and middleware are useful enabling technologies. The
success of commercial deployment of smart metering and
smart grid solutions will signiﬁcantly depend on the availability of open and standard mechanisms that enable different
stakeholders and vendors to interoperate and interface in a
standard manner. Open interfaces serve many purposes and
provide additional beneﬁts in multi-stakeholder scenarios such
as smart energy management in home and industrial environments. Further, open APIs provide the means for third
parties not directly associated with the original equipment
manufacturers to develop a software component which could
add functionality or enhancements to the system. On the other
hand, smart energy management solutions require access to
more information, ideally from different service providers
and devices implemented by different vendors. Such information should be available and presented in a usable format
to interested parties. Timing and speciﬁc conﬁguration of
measurements and controls are also critical for dynamic scenarios. Since support for different technologies and some level
of cooperation over administrative boundaries are required,
proprietary or widely simpliﬁed interfaces will not be sufﬁcient
in these scenarios. This situation can be improved by standard
generic API deﬁnitions covering methods and attributes related
to capability, measurement and conﬁgurations. The design of
such APIs should be technology agnostic, lightweight and
future-proof.
C. Scalable internetworking solutions
Wireless sensor networks (WSN) research should be extended to smart grid and metering. WSN has been an active
research topic for nearly ten years and has found many
applications . Smart grid/metering appears to be a
major application for WSN, especially related to Internet of
Things and machine-to-machine (M2M) communications .
Existing industry efforts include IETF 6LoWPAN and
ROLL . Based on smart metering user scenarios,
the overall M2M network architecture, service requirements,
and device capabilities are yet to be deﬁned. Recently ETSI
has established a new M2M technical committee to address
these issues .
Internetworking between cellular networks and local area
networks (e.g. WLAN) has received a lot of attention because
of the need for seamless mobility and quality of service (QoS)
requirements . Topics such as intelligent handover and
connection management have been extensively investigated.
In the context of smart grid, due to the extremely large scale
nature of the network, the characteristics of the metering and
control trafﬁc carried in the network are not clearly known.
For instance, it could be the case where 100,000 smart meters
generate meter trafﬁc data every 10 minutes. As a result, how
to design and provision a scalable and reliable network so
that this data can be delivered to the central utility control
in a timely manner is a challenging task. As trafﬁc will be
traversing different types of networks, interoperability is the
key. Further, some of the traditional research topics may need
to be revisited to cater for smart grid trafﬁc, e.g. resource allocation, routing, and QoS. This is because the trafﬁc that will
be generated by e-energy type applications will likely be quite
different to the traditional browsing/downloading/streaming
applications that are in use today, with a mix of both realtime and non-real-time trafﬁc being generated and distributed
across different parts of a smart grid .
Interworking
communication
dedicated smart metering message exchange protocols such
as DLMS/COSEM is an open research issue. The
DLMS/COSEM standard suite has been developed based
on two concepts: object modelling of application data and
the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model. This allows
covering the widest possible range of applications and communication media. Work has already started in the industry
trying to address the issue of carrying DLMS data over various
networks such as GPRS and power line communications (PLC)
networks (for an overview of PLC and its applications to the
smart grid, please refer to ). Recently, the DLMS User
Association also established a partnership with the ZigBee
Alliance and the two organizations are working on tunnelling
DLMS/COSEM over ZigBee networks to support complex
metering applications. Inside IEEE 802.15.4, the 802.15 Smart
Utility Networks (SUN) Task Group 4g is working on
a PHY amendment to 802.15.4 to provide a global standard
that supports smart grid network applications with potentially
millions of ﬁxed endpoints.
Recently a number of studies on efﬁcient networking
technologies for energy management have been published
in the literature. A routing protocol for Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) based on the framework of IPv6 routing
protocol for low power lossy networks (RPL) is discussed
in . An ETX (expected transmission count) based rank
computation method has been proposed for DAG (directed
acyclic graph) construction and maintenance in RPL. This
method enhances the unicast reliability of AMI networks.
Simulation results have shown that the proposed mechanism
produces satisfactory packet delivery ratio and end-to-end
delay. In the near future, electric vehicles (EV) are envisaged
to be a major application in the smart grid, and , among
others, has outlined architectures for vehicle-to-grid (V2G)
communications. The communication requirements and data
ﬂows between the EV and the grid (with distributed energy
source generators) have been discussed, and Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP) is considered as a suitable solution for
the establishment of communications. V2G networks have
also been studied in , focusing on the message structure
(based on ISO/IEC 15118-2) and message exchange sequence
between the EV and the server over an IPv6-based PLC
communication network.
D. Self-organizing overlay networks
Because of the scale and deployment complexity of smart
grids, telecommunication network systems supporting smart
grids are likely to rely on the existing public networks such
as cellular and ﬁxed wired access technologies, as well as
private and dedicated networks belonging to different administrative domains. The purpose of such networks can be
seen not only as a communications medium to exchange
monitoring and control information, but also as an enabler of
new services and applications. In many ways, the complexity
and heterogeneity characteristics of smart grid communications networks will be similar to that of a wireless radio
access network supporting voice and data services. However,
stakeholder expectations, QoS requirements and load patterns
will be signiﬁcantly different from those of a typical mobile
voice/data network because of the nature of the applications
and services supported. Both will share, at least partially,
problems related to managing and operating a complex and
heterogeneous network where tasks such as network planning,
operation and management functions, and network optimization are important. We believe that a self-organizing network
overlaid over existing infrastructure could be the way forward
to support wider deployment of smart grid systems. Such
a self-organizing network should support functions such as
communications resource discovery, negotiation and collaboration between network nodes, connection establishment and
maintenance to provide the performance guarantees required
by smart grid/metering applications. Recently, novel network
architectures such as cloud-based systems have been proposed
for smart grid data collection and control .
E. Home networking challenges
Research on home networking has so far focused on
providing multimedia applications with high QoS, zeroconﬁguration, and seamless connectivity to home users. With
the advent of smart grids, new features and system design
principles have to be considered. For example, consider how
to integrate smart meter or M2M gateway functions into the
home gateway (e.g. WLAN access point or femtocell base
station) in a cost-effective manner. Clearly, smart metering
adds a new dimension to home networks, complicating the
issue of interference management and resource provisioning.
With potentially every device and appliance in the home
supplying energy related information to the smart meter/home
gateway (and by extension, possibly to the energy supplier as
well), it is easy to envisage an order of magnitude increase
in the number of devices in each home that are able to
communicate with each other and with the outside world.
Today’s homes may have 2-3 computers (desktop, laptop,
smart phone) that are connected to the home network and to
the Internet. Tomorrow’s smart grid/smart meter homes could
have 20-30 or more appliances and devices connected to the
same network. Although the preferred (wireless) networking
standards for these devices have not yet been established, it
is clear that there will be many more devices connected to
whichever network is used. Although there has been much
discussion in the networking community over the years of
having “an IP address for every possible device” in the home,
the convergence of energy provisioning and communications
may be the catalyst for this to actually become a reality.
Along with the many new devices that will be connected to
home networks, new kinds of applications will undoubtedly
emerge. The prime (and easy to envisage) application is
the one of energy consumption monitoring within the home
and other areas (ofﬁces, etc.). In this direction, there are
proposals for load monitoring and real-time control from the
utility companies’ perspective. However, energy monitoring
has the potential to grow into something far more signiﬁcant
than just measuring the energy consumed. With the current
concerns over climate change and the very important need for
energy efﬁciency in all areas, it follows that ﬁne-granularity
monitoring of energy usage in the home and other areas will
become a necessity and much research will be required in
automating methods for energy usage reduction in the home.
Given that there is much perceived wastage in the way in
which the appliances and devices are used today (e.g. leaving
devices on standby, inefﬁcient usage of washing machines and
refrigerators, inefﬁcient use of heating and cooling), there is
plenty of scope for realizing automated methods for reducing
energy consumption.
III. SMART GRID SECURITY AND PRIVACY ISSUES
Analyzing and implementing smart grid security is a challenging task, especially when considering the scale of the
potential damages that could be caused by cyber attacks
 . For example, protection against unauthorized access
and repudiation is a vital requirement for usage and control
data communicated within the system, assuming that critical
system functionalities require that the data are trusted by
both the utility providers and the customers. To provide
such security services might not be trivial as it may involve the integration of different information security domains
such as secure communication protocols, tamper-proof hardware/software and regulatory frameworks on access control.
The need for protecting smart grid data cyber security emerges
from the need to interconnect smart grid components with
a two-way communication network so that energy suppliers
and customers can exchange information in an interactive,
real-time manner. This capability could assist in enabling
features such as load shedding, consumption management,
distributed energy storage (e.g. in electric cars), and distributed
energy generation (e.g. from renewable resources). Also, as
previously discussed, the network could be implemented using
a variety of media ranging from ﬁbre optic broadband to
ZigBee/WLAN, etc. Considering the need for ﬁne-grained
monitoring of smart metering data, the security of an advanced
metering infrastructure is of paramount importance.
The security challenges of a smart grid system depend
heavily on the system architecture. For example, consider the
smart metering architecture in Figure 1. Some logical components (such as the distribution controller and the utility control
services) may communicate via a hard-wired tamper-proof
link (e.g. implemented within a simple physical controller) or
may communicate using shared networks (e.g. when there is
physical fragmentation). Each case imposes different security
challenges such as protection against single point failures or
protection against multiple points of attack. For example, the
sink of a particular network can be identiﬁed based on timing
analysis of messages that are sent from there . This could
potentially allow an adversary to launch an attack against the
distribution controller which would have serious impact on
customers in the whole area. To this end, security services
should be provided through multiple layers of security so that
potential attacks result in minimal damages.
More generally, smart grid security risks and vulnerabilities
can be identiﬁed by using a top-down or a bottom-up approach.
The top-down approach analyzes well-deﬁned user scenarios
such as automated meter reading (AMR) and billing, while
the bottom-up approach focuses on well-understood security attributes and features such as integrity, authentication,
authorization, key management, and intrusion detection. A
classiﬁcation of smart grid risks and vulnerabilities recently
published by NIST can be found in while a comprehensive speciﬁcation of AMI security requirements has been
documented by OpenSG in .
A. Cyber-physical security
Smart grid cyber threats, such as the Stuxnet worm ,
have the potential to breach national security, economic stability and even physical security. Power stations and SCADA
(supervisory control and data acquisition) systems have always
been targeted by hackers. The move from closed control
systems to open IP networks opens up a new range of
vulnerabilities. For example, data integrity and authentication
may be compromised through network attacks such as manin-the-middle spooﬁng, impersonation, or Denial of Service
(DoS) attacks. Similarly, data security may be compromised
by sabotage/insider attacks such as viruses and Trojan horses.
The latter threat becomes signiﬁcant considering the potential
openness of the system and its interconnections with different
networks such as NANs and the Internet.
Once an entry point is found, it becomes easier for the
attacker to cascade an attack down the smart grid. For example,
compromising the real-time pricing channel may result in
energy theft or malicious remote control of appliances. Hence,
rigorous hardware/software security is required to ensure the
validity of different communicating parties such as head-ends
and smart meters. If an attacker takes over the head-end, then
he might be able to send smart meters a demand response
command interrupting supply. The interruption can be made
permanent by also commanding all the meters to change their
crypto keys to some new value only known to the attacker
 . The impact can be enormous: millions of homes could be
left without power until they are locally replaced or rehashed
with authentic keys, people suffer, health and safety could be
jeopardized, and businesses could lose millions. Smart grid
cyber-security needs to a) prevent such attacks from happening
and b) have a recovery/survivability mechanism in case of
(successful) attacks.
Communications security involves the design of a key
management crypto-system. This could for example be based
on existing systems such as Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
and Identity-Based Encryption (IBE) . IBE, in particular, may be attractive for smart grids as it can be deployed without prior conﬁguration, as the identity (ID) of
a device is used to generate unique keys. This allows easy
deployment of low powered devices such as sensors because
they may start sending secure messages without the need to
contact a key server. In general, a mixture of hierarchical,
decentralized, delegated or hybrid security schemes may be
feasible. Preferably, a candidate scheme should include secure
bootstrapping protocols, i.e. it should provide effective means
to initialize new devices. Further, critical security operations,
such as key updates, should preferably employ group key
management techniques, such as defence in depth techniques
used in nuclear or military control systems, to mitigate the
impact of compromised head-ends (or trusted people).
For more information on different smart grid cyber security
attacks and threat impact, interested readers are referred to the
NIST guidelines .
B. Privacy
Frequent smart metering data collection and analysis can
help improve energy efﬁciency, as discussed in previous sections. Smart meters are expected to provide accurate readings automatically at requested time intervals to the utility
company, the electricity distribution network or the wider
smart grid. However, this comes at the cost of user privacy.
That is, the information contained in such data may be used
for purposes beyond energy efﬁciency, which gives rise to
the smart grid privacy problem. In particular, frequent data
collection from smart meters reveals a wealth of information
about residential appliance usage, as discussed in .
In general, data privacy concerns the security of data that
is linked with, or infer information related to, the life of
individuals. The use of access control mechanisms, e.g. secure
authentication, authorization and conﬁdentiality services, cannot address the problem of smart grid data privacy holistically.
This is because these data need to be disseminated to many
different stakeholders within the grid. As discussed in the
consequences of the smart grid privacy problem are hard to
understand, because a) the full range of information extraction
possibilities are not known, and b) the concept of smart grid
privacy is still not well deﬁned. A good reason of why the
problem of data privacy should not be underestimated can be
found in a paper on digital inclusion and its ramiﬁcations .
Currently, the smart grid privacy problem is highlighted by
Non-intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring (NALM) technologies that use energy measurements to extract detailed information regarding domestic appliance. Since the original work
 there has been a wealth of research in the construction
and upkeep of appliance libraries and detection algorithms
 . Recent results suggest that even when household power
proﬁles are aggregated, the use of household appliances can
be identiﬁed with high accuracy . The authors of 
have described a ﬁne-grained energy monitoring system that
generates device level power consumption reports primarily
based on the acoustic signatures of household appliances.
Their experiments demonstrate that the system is able to report
the power consumption of individual household appliances
within a 10% error margin.
An example of appliance detection can be seen in Figure 2.
In general, the granularity of events that an algorithm may be
able to successfully detect depends on the frequency of smart
meter readings. The frequency range can vary, depending on
the utility, but in general this could be as high as every few
(1-5) minutes. Such detailed energy usage information could
lay bare the daily energy usage patterns of a household and
enable deduction of what kind of device or appliance was in
use at any given time. Further, the authors in suggest
that data mining techniques can be used to reveal trends of
personal behavior in the metering data even if relatively low
data sampling rates (e.g. every 30 minutes) are assumed.
From the above it becomes clear that the smart grid privacy
problem is important and solutions are needed. There are
two classes of privacy protection schemes: a) regulatory-based
ones and b) technological-based ones. Current standardization
activities focus on developing regulations and policies to help
protect smart grid privacy. In the USA, NIST has acknowledged that the major beneﬁt provided by the smart grid, i.e.
the ability to get richer data to and from customer meters and
other electric devices, is also its Achilles’ heel from a privacy
viewpoint . Further, the American National Association of
Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC) has drafted
a resolution stating that: “utility customer information can be
used to differentiate utility services in a manner that creates
added value to the customer”. On the other hand, “a balance
has to be carefully considered between the appropriate procompetitive role that utility customer information can play in
new and developing markets and the privacy implications of
using that information”.
In Europe, the European Commission has set up a Task
Force on smart grid aiming to develop a common EU smart
grid vision and identify key issues that need to be resolved.
In response, three Expert Groups (EGs) have been set up, one
of which, EG2, aims to identify the appropriate regulatory
scenarios and recommendations for data handling, security
and consumer protection. One of the EG2 recommendations
is to use anonymity services to help protect privacy. For
example, smart metering data can be separated into low
frequency attributable data (e.g. data used for billing) and
high frequency anonymous technical data (e.g. data used for
demand side management). In this case, the main challenge
resides in anonymizing the high-frequency data, which are
required for efﬁcient grid functionalities, while making sure
that the reliability, the effectiveness and the security of these
functionalities are not compromised.
A number of technological solutions have further been
proposed as follows.
• Anonymization. An example of this direction is studied
in where a secure escrow protocol is proposed to
securely anonymize the ID of frequent metering data sent
by a smart meter.
• Aggregation. In the authors introduce two different
solutions for the smart grid data privacy model. One
solution uses a third trusted party as a data aggregation
proxy. The other solution adds random value from a
particular probability distribution to the data.
• Homomorphism. The use of homomorphic encryption can
corroborate smart meter data privacy as discussed in .
This paper develops a method for a number of meters
that have a trusted component and enjoy a certain level
of autonomy. A trustworthy system provides guarantees
about the measurements for both grid operators and
consumers.
• Obfuscation. In a cooperative state estimation technique is introduced that protects the privacy of users’
daily activities. The proposed scheme can obfuscate the
privacy-prone data without compromising the performance of state estimation.
• Negotiation. In the authors introduce the concept
of competitive privacy between the utility that needs to
share the data to ensure network reliability and the user
that withholds data for proﬁtability and privacy reasons.
The resulting trade-off is captured using a lossy source
coding problem formulation.
• Energy management. In the authors introduce a
battery management algorithm that changes home energy
consumption in a manner that helps protect smart metering privacy.
Although there is still much more research to be done in
this area, it appears that smart grid privacy is a sensitive topic
which can be approached in a number of different angles.
Future protection schemes is likely to be a combination or
evolution of the solutions introduced above, depending on the
system cost and the need for privacy in different societies.
C. Secure integration
The most widely discussed smart grid security challenges
concern the protection of smart metering data against unauthorized access and repudiation. This is an important requirement
without which AMR data will not be trusted by either the
utility providers or the customers. Solutions are required on
different levels: end to end secure communication protocols
need to be used, hardware components (e.g. smart meters)
need to withstand physical attacks, the grid needs to detect
forged/hacked components, and smart meter software should
be bug-free .
We believe that AMI communications security requirements
can be addressed by combining existing cryptographic protocols and tamper-proof hardware solutions, by exhaustively
testing equipment and software against all sorts of attacks,
and by adopting an open architecture for further testing and
secure updating. Also, as discussed in the previous section,
it is equally important to develop mechanisms for protecting
smart metering data against insider attacks. The use of open
smart grid interfaces, as previously described, will create a
gateway for multiple third parties (stakeholders) to access and
process AMR data. We need to make sure that such insiders
will access smart metering data in an authorized manner and
will only use this data in an acceptable manner.
Our vision is that security policies and legislation are not a
panacea for privacy as they do not thwart attacks such as data
privacy concessions: history teaches that legitimate techniques
for mining and exploiting data evolve quickly when there is
a clear ﬁnancial incentive. Hence, the problem of smart meter
data access and usage needs to be further reviewed within
different security domains:
• Enforcement: Smart metering data should belong, in
principle, to the users. For example, a digital rights management system could be used to allow utility providers
to use the data in an acceptable manner. Any use of
personal data (acceptable or unacceptable) should not be
repudiated.
• Concealment: Users may use power routing algorithms in
a manner that conceals events extracted from their energy
usage activities .
• Reaction: There should be mechanisms that will detect
(in retrospect) misuse of smart metering data. These
mechanisms should have regulatory support for countermeasures (e.g. penalties) against malicious parties.
The common challenge in all the above cases remains to
design a system that will balance the trade-off between security and performance, i.e. use adequate security strength while
minimizing its power usage and cost overheads. In the future,
smart grid/metering communications may potentially integrate
with heterogeneous network systems, Internet applications,
etc. For example, a roaming smart grid customer may wish
to use power energy in remote areas and link this usage to
his smart metering proﬁle. This integration can be used for
billing or other personalized services. In such an example, it
will be necessary to establish secure communication protocols
between different parties such as a home smart meter, a
mobile phone, a smart roaming power appliance and the
Household electricity demand proﬁle recorded on a 30-second time base from a one-bedroom apartment
customer. The customer may additionally wish to allow third
parties get access to personal smart metering information in
exchange for services such as free entrance to facilities, or
the customer may wish to remain anonymous. One can envisage further challenges arising as smart grid communication
systems integrate with other communication systems: home
entertainment systems, medical communication systems, and
trafﬁc monitoring communication systems (e.g. via GPS), just
to name a few.
In the above scenarios it becomes clear that integration of
services and interfaces gives rise to a whole new range of
security and privacy vulnerabilities and requirements. In such
complex computing, communications and energy management
environment, it is important to understand how security risks
are cascaded, i.e. how the compromise of one system leads to
compromise of a downstream system. Risk analysis should be
able to detect both proactive and reactive system anomalies
and take appropriate measures such as creating appropriate
logs and alerts. Further, the extrapolation and combination of
multi-domain information such as energy consumption data,
location information, lifestyle information, and other personal
information increases the potential both for richer applications
and services as well as security threats and damages. Indeed,
future integration of systems and services requires transparent
and secure protection mechanisms, more than ever before.
IV. ENERGY MANAGEMENT - BUILDING ON LESSONS
LEARNT FROM COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKING
In previous sections we have discussed research challenges
for communication engineers posed by the smart grid. On
the other hand, technologies developed in communication
networking can help to solve various problems in energy
management too. We elaborate on this interesting topic in
this section. One of the main problems currently faced by
the energy suppliers is the ﬂuctuations in energy demand,
which are expected to be further exacerbated when plug-in
electric vehicles become a reality in the near future. In a
situation like this, the approach traditionally adopted by the
energy supplier is to take the peak consumption into account
and create enough reserve energy supply (potentially upgrade
existing infrastructure) to meet this uneven energy demand.
This is similar to the over-provisioning approach adopted by
the communications network service providers. Even though
this approach addresses the problem of meeting the demand,
it results in inefﬁciencies by creating a waste in the system
since the demand on average is much less than the (estimated)
peak energy requirement. Installing power plants to cater for
the peak demand is not only expensive, but also may not be
practical as the demand often keeps outpacing the supply. A
coordinated effort to shift the power load from peak to offpeak times will lead to better generator utilization and fewer
standby sources of energy which translates into reduced cost
to the utility provider and less damage to the environment.
A compilation of energy consumption statistics of typical
household electrical appliances can be found in . This data
suggests that most of the hard hitters, e.g. storage heaters,
dish washers, washing machines, etc. can be rescheduled to
operate during the odd hours, e.g. after midnight or early
morning, when the overall demand is low. The next step is
to identify how to determine the demand at the consumer
level, distribution system level, and the aggregate demand
taking into account all the distribution systems. This requires
bi-directional communication mechanisms between the grid
and the consumer premises - facilitating the consumers to
notify their demand requirements to the grid and for the grid
to feedback availability/pricing information to the consumers.
Based on the information obtained from the consumer side, the
utility providers can ascertain demand per distribution system
and hence the aggregate demand. Subsequently, considering
the capacity and the demand, the utility provider may identify
target operating points for each distribution system. These
could then be conveyed to the distribution systems following
which the distribution systems could then translate these into
individual targets for the consumers connected to it. Such
target operating points clubbed with the consumer preferences
could then factor into the decision of load scheduling at the
consumer premises.
We can look at this problem as one involving balancing
the load so as not to exceed the available capacity which,
in essence, is similar to the trafﬁc engineering problem in
the Internet where trafﬁc load balancing is analogous to
electrical load balancing. We observe parallels between the
two problems in that, mechanisms to estimate the demand are
analogous to available bandwidth estimation and the concept
of a trafﬁc engineering management server spreading trafﬁc
across different paths is analogous to the energy management
system distributing the available supply appropriately to the
different distribution systems. Common to both are concerns
of fairness (i.e. how to share the available capacity amongst
the different users/consumers?) which could build upon the numerous studies on fairness in the communications networking
On a similar note, we observe that the problem of meeting
the operating targets assigned to consumers is similar to the
resource scheduling problem; essentially how to schedule the
different devices within the house so that the net consumption conforms to the operating target. Figure 3 depicts
the interaction between a power management system (PMS),
aggregate consumer load (CL), generation plant (GP), and
spinning reserve (SR) when a peak is detected in a smart
grid. The aggregate power consumed by the PMS customers
needs to be brought into a power budget (budget) assigned to
the PMS by the smart grid. When a peak event is detected
(e.g. certain threshold being breached), the PMS could send
its customers a schedule request to match the demand to
the available supply by rescheduling non-critical loads to offpeak periods. This could possibly result in some reduction in
demand. If, however, the demand still exceeds the allocated
power budget, the PMS could send a request to the GP
to increase its output by the amount of difference between
the re-scheduled power demand and the budget of the PMS
(diffPower). It may be likely that the GP may not be able to
fulﬁl this demand in which case it could request the SR to
allocate extra power to the GP to meet the power demand
of the PMS customers. On the other hand, if the demand
(subsequent to customers rescheduling some of their loads)
drops below the budget allocated to the PMS, a request to
reduce the power output could be sent to the GP in order to
conserve energy. This ensures better utilization of the available
resources by simply shifting power demand to the low demand
periods thereby leveling the load.
Finally, it may be likely that it is impossible to satisfy
the demand in which case the energy supplier may have to
resort to controlled (partial) outage. The decision of who
does and doesn’t encounter outage could be based on the
different preferences and priorities of the different consumers
depending on their roles in the grid. It is envisaged that the
prioritization could be done in a hierarchical manner wherein
the consumers are grouped into different service classes at
the time of registration (initiation of service). For example,
hospitals/emergency services should never encounter outage
whenever possible, whereas service to other low priority consumers may be compromised. Load shedding should happen
in such a way so that loads are disconnected according to the
service classes assigned to them. The consumer in each service
class could further prioritize their appliances according to
their preferences which help the scheduler to make scheduling
decisions for the consumer in an outage event where the outage
can be avoided by merely re-scheduling non-critical loads
in the lowest priority service class (e.g. residential). This is
analogous to the QoS paradigm in computer networks where
some of the trafﬁc is dropped or delayed (using the priority
assigned to the packets) due to lack of bandwidth. Different
classes of priorities could be assigned to different types of
buildings according to their perceived importance. Further,
having sub-classes can facilitate more granular load scheduling
decisions.
Apart from the aforementioned approaches, we also observe
a number of similarities between the smart grid resource
allocation problem and well-known problems from communications and networking research.
Load Admission Control: One of the popular mechanisms
for resource management in the communications networking
world is admission control wherein a ﬂow/connection is admitted in the network only if resources are available to serve
it. Intuitively, this could be an interesting approach to explore
in the context of energy management. This could potentially
work as follows: the utility could allocate target operating
points to each distribution system connected to it. Prior to
connecting the load, the energy management gateway at the
consumer’s premises could send a load request to the Power
Management System connected to its distribution system. This
could contain both the load that is desired and the priority of
the load. If the sum of the incoming load request and the
current aggregate load is less than the target operating point,
the load request could be granted. Otherwise, if the priority
of the load request is low, a response could be sent to the
' ($
Example of an energy management scenario
consumer to reschedule the load. If the priority of the load
request is high, then the PMS could send a message to the
noncritical loads connected to it, asking them to respond if
any of them would be willing to be rescheduled. Once the responses are received, it could choose the ﬁrst of the responses
which can relinquish load equivalent to the demand of the
pending request. The PMS could then instruct this consumer to
reschedule (providing a cheaper tariff as a reward) and approve
the load request which is pending. After approving the pending
request, the PMS would update its current aggregate load by
adding the recent request’s requirement.
As elaborated in the earlier sections, the priority of different loads will vary depending on the individual customer
preferences. Hence, it should be possible to adjust the priority
of each load according to the customer’s perceived priorities.
This can be achieved using the home energy management
gateway (HEMG) device which will provide the necessary
functionality to assign preferred priorities to customer loads.
Although load admission control requires more information
exchange between HEMG and PMS which may raise privacy
concerns, this exchange can be anonymized using privacy
measures such as that introduced in .
Load Scheduling: There are similarities between the load
scheduling problem in smart grids and scheduling and resource
allocation problems in communication networks. For example,
in Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA)
wireless systems , mathematical optimization algorithms
are used to determine optimum power allocation and frequency
band selection to satisfy different data rate requirements for
various users. This has similarities in smart grids where loads
need to be allocated to various users at different time slots to
optimize resource utilization and to improve energy efﬁciency.
The solutions to load balancing in smart grids can be obtained
based on the optimization approaches used in communication
Cooperative Energy Trading: It is envisaged that a future
smart grid will include many micro generation plants. We
envisage a cooperative energy trading scheme where the
energy trading happens between energy users in a local open
market. A local market could consist of microgrids that operate
their own micro generation plants as well as being connected
to the macrogrid . The idea here is a better utilization of
the available power resources by cooperatively using available
generation resources. This approach is very similar to the
cooperative communication philosophy where the nodes
in a wireless network try to increase their throughput and
network coverage by sharing available bandwidth and power
resources cooperatively. The consumers with micro generation
plants create a market for trading energy within their local
consumer group. They cooperatively use energy generated by
the local micro generation plants to curb their dependence on
the macrogrid supply. This approach will both increase the
efﬁciency of the macrogrid and possibly fetch a better price
for micro generation electricity. If the micro generation output
in a cooperative energy area is greater than the total power
consumption (surplus power), the same cooperative trading
concept can be applied to the microgrids that are in close
proximity (e.g. neighboring microgrids). This approach could
greatly reduce the transmission costs by localizing energy
distribution in a hierarchical manner.
To summarize, the lessons learned and the optimization
approaches adopted in communication networks can be used in
energy management problems in smart grids. While solutions
to resource allocation in communication networks are well
established, adopting these within the context of smart grids
may not be trivial. Nonetheless, this could be a good starting
point as these concepts could potentially offer invaluable
insights into the design of reliable and efﬁcient smart grids
 . There has been a recent surge of interest in extending
the optimization approaches used in communication networks
to demand management in smart grids. For example, the work
in uses convex optimization techniques for the power
consumption scheduling of appliances to minimize peak-toaverage load ratio. The concept of congestion pricing in
Internet trafﬁc control has been applied to smart grid demand
response in . The work in has demonstrated that
the burden of load leveling can be shifted from the grid (or
supplier) to the end users via this pricing mechanism. This
idea has been further extended to distributed electric vehicle
charging in . A least-cost dispatch of available generation
resources to meet the electrical load has been proposed using
a unit commitment mode that relates the demand side and
supply side management through a hidden Markov model and
a Markov-modulated Poisson process in . Most recent
work in this area can also be found in, e.g., .
We ﬁnish this section by brieﬂy discussing some of the
challenges of demand side management (DSM). Having surveyed various optimization techniques for DSM, it should be
highlighted that regardless of the potential economic beneﬁts,
not all consumers will be willing to participate in demand
side management due to reasons for example the consumption
discomfort introduced by load scheduling. Therefore, more
work in terms of incentive design is required for the successful
deployment of coordinated scheduling algorithms. Further,
various distributed energy generation and sell back technologies can help further reduce the dependency on central supply.
Therefore, optimization of energy dispatch at residential level
is also a signiﬁcant challenge for future DSM.
V. SMART METERING STANDARDIZATION ACTIVITIES IN
To realize the vision of smart grid enabled by technologies
mentioned above, it is essential that we have a whole set
of industrial standards in place to ensure interoperability and
reliability. A key component of smart grid is the smart meter,
which is capable of performing detailed measurements at customer premises and reporting them back to the utilities. Smart
meters and the information they generate will provide the glue
that allows the components of a smart grid to work together
effectively and efﬁciently. A major paradigm shift in the operation, management and behavior of the energy industry could be
achieved through smart metering. With the target of near-realtime response to potential grid problems, the communication
ﬂow between millions of residential customer premises will
also be bi-directional and at many levels. Examples include
user load controls, smart meters, user distributed energy source
control (i.e., micro-generation at the home), home network
and energy control, power distribution equipment, supply and
demand control software, large-scale power source control (i.e.
power stations), and of course, billing and service provisioning
infrastructure at the utilities themselves. For instance, having
access to real-time information on the ﬂow of energy in the
grid enables utilities and consumers to make smarter and more
responsible choices. Also, the ability to monitor demand and
supply allows remote sensing of damages, fault detection and
tampering (electricity theft). At the same time, signiﬁcant
opportunities are presented to technology solution providers
to develop enablers and techniques to deal with complex
supply, demand and controls and to facilitate sustainable
energy production and security.
While the beneﬁts of smart meters will be common across
the world, their functionality, the adopted communications
technologies, standardization and regulation will be different
due to geographical, economical, political and social factors.
The envisaged systems are highly complex, not only due to
the high level of distribution but also due to the large number
of stakeholders with direct interests in the process. Therefore,
a key enabling role to ensure successful integration is to be
played by standards, as clearly recognized in and .
Following the third Energy Package, Directive 2009/72/EC
of 13 July 2009, the European Commission has decided to set
up a Task Force on smart grids aiming to develop a common
EU smart grid vision and identify key issues that need to be
resolved2. The Task Force consists of a steering committee
and three Expert Groups. The high level steering committee
includes regulatory bodies, Transmission Systems Operators
(TSOs), Distribution System Operators (DSOs), Distribution
Network Operators (DNOs), and consumer and technology
suppliers working jointly to facilitate the smart grid and smart
metering development, and supporting the achievement of the
2020 targets. The three EGs are the following:
• EG1. Functionalities of smart grids and smart meters
(current state of the art, services, smart grid components,
functions, strategy for standards);
• EG2. Regulatory recommendations for data safety, data
handling and data protection (need for standardized data
model, cyber security);
• EG3. Roles and responsibilities of actors involved in the
deployment of smart grids, such as DSOs/DNOs and the
role of standards.
It is clear that there is a conscious effort within Europe
to harmonize smart metering/grid standards, and to create a
single set of European standards that will be widely used. A
signiﬁcant part of this endeavor targets communications architectures and solutions. This section summarizes the European
perspective on smart metering.
A. Smart metering communication standardization in Europe
Metering standardization, including automatic/remote meter
reading, is a well-established activity both at international and
2 electricity/smartgrids/taskforce en.htm
European standardization levels (CEN/CENELEC and ETSI).
However, the functionality envisaged for smart meters (e.g.
support for multiple dynamic tariffs/time of use tariffs, energy
export functions, variable scheduled meter reading, demand
control, etc.) requires interfacing to and either adopting existing or establishing new data formats and standards in areas
not considered by the metering community so far. This has
required bringing together and streamlining activities from
multiple technical committees and standardization organizations for smart metering.
In response to the identiﬁed need for comprehensive standards for all aspects of smart grids, the European Commission issued Mandate M/441 EN in March 2009.
This mandate was targeted to the standardization bodies of
CEN (European Committee for Standardization), CENELEC
(European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization)
and ETSI (European Telecommunications Standards Institute),
with the prime objective being “...to create European standards
that will enable interoperability of utility meters (water, gas,
electricity, heat), which can then improve the means by which
customers’ awareness of actual consumption can be raised in
order to allow timely adaptation to their demands (commonly
referred to as smart metering)”. The current target for the
European standard for smart meter communication solution
is August 2010, with the harmonized solution for additional
functionalities being completed by December 2011.
Table II and Table III3 present the various communication
and data exchange standards applicable in different segments
of the end-to-end smart metering distributed system. More
speciﬁcally, we have grouped together standards, either agreed
or proposed in the relevant technical committees (TCs) in
European standardization organizations (CEN/CENELEC and
ETSI), covering the HAN and WAN elements of the communication system supporting the smart metering applications, and
layered according to the application, network and transport,
and communication link technologies.
Currently the HAN area is populated strongly by IEEE
802.15.4-based communication technologies, and in particular
ZigBee-based solutions, with the forthcoming ZigBee v2.0
with native support for 6LoWPAN aiming to provide
seamless IP networking connectivity between the smart meters, the metering gateway and the home appliances. The
other candidate technologies are Bluetooth, but with no speciﬁc provisioning for application support for energy management (which ZigBee currently provides through the ZigBee
Smart Energy Proﬁle ), and various narrow-band powerline communication solutions. However, it is to be noted
that the currently existing standards for full-protocol stack
communication in a HAN for home automation applications
(Home and Building Electronic Systems - HBES) are already
proposed as the way forward, and are currently covered by
the CEN/CENELEC TC 205 technical committee in the EN
50090-x series.
The WAN solution is largely populated in the data exchange
3Please note that the connections we show in Figure 1 are physical
connections, whereas Table II, Table III and Figure 4 refer to standardization
efforts and are more to do with the logical connections between entities in
the smart metering infrastructure.
Connection
devices, and
automation
Application
proprietary
data model
13757-3 M-
ZigBee 2.0,
ZigBee 2.0,
Bluetooth,
Proprietary
wired, CEN
EN 13757-4
HAN COMMUNICATION AND DATA EXCHANGE STANDARDS FOR SMART
METERING IN EUROPE
Concentrator
Concentrator
Application
CLC TC 13:
CLC TC 13:
/ IEC TC 57:
DLMS/COSEM
and/or Ethernet/ADSL
multi-point
/ IEC TC 57:
DLMS/COSEM
WAN COMMUNICATION AND DATA EXCHANGE STANDARDS FOR SMART
METERING IN EUROPE
format (application) layer through the standards output from
CEN/CENELEC TC 13 and the IEC TC 57 committees.
Analyzing the proposed solutions and the existing standards,
it is obvious that an IP-based solution at the network layer
will have lower integration and interoperability costs than any
non-IP based solution.
While Table II and Table III mainly focus on communication network standards for smart metering, there are other
important standards that cover different aspects of smart
metering. For example, IEC 61968-9 speciﬁes interfaces for
meter reading and control. It speciﬁes the information content
of a set of message types that can be used to support many
of the business functions related to meter reading and control,
e.g. meter reading, meter control, meter events, customer data
synchronization and customer switching. It also deﬁnes a list
of functionalities such as metrology, load control, demand
response and relays, as well as a related set of XML-based
control messages .
B. Standardization technical committees
1) Smart Meters Coordination Group (SM-CG): The SM-
CG was set up as a Joint Advisory Group between CEN, CEN-
ELEC and ETSI to manage the standardization work in support
of European Commission Mandate M/441 for the creation of
European standards for an open architecture for utility meters
enabling interoperability and to improve customer awareness
of consumption. The SM-CG is not empowered to develop
standards, but to propose allocation of the work to existing
CEN, CENELEC and ETSI technical committees.
As can be seen in Figure 4, the European perspective
on smart metering (especially within the home area) has
been split into three distinct standardization targets: electricity
meters, non-electricity meters (gas, water and heat) and home
automation . The M/441 standardization area also includes
an M2M remote gateway which will send the collected metering data to the wider network (to be used by utilities
and other interested parties). Beyond basic smart metering
and communications functionality, a number of additional
functionalities (F1 to F6) have been identiﬁed as optional (but
strongly desirable) features of smart meters:
• F1 - Remote reading of metrological register(s) and provision of these values to designated market organizations,
• F2 - Two-way communication between the metering
system and designated market organizations,
• F3 - Meter supporting advanced tarifﬁng and payment
• F4 - Meter allowing remote disablement and enablement
of supply,
• F5 - Communicating with (and where appropriate directly
controlling) individual devices within the home/building,
• F6 - Meter providing information via portal/gateway to
an in-home/building display or to auxiliary equipment.
2) CENELEC TC 13 - Equipment for electrical energy
measurement and load control: The scope of CENELEC
TC 13 is to prepare European Standards (using whenever
possible IEC standards) for electrical energy measuring and
electrical load control equipment (such as watt-hour meters,
var-hour meters, maximum demand indicators, telemetering
for consumption and demand, equipment for remote meter
reading, time switches, equipment for the control of loads
and tariffs and consumer services) including the equivalent
electronic forms of these devices and their accessories. The
activities of TC 13 encompass the development of the IEC
62056 DLMS/COSEM.
3) CEN TC 294 - Communications systems for meters
and remote reading of meters: The work of CEN TC 294
encompasses the standardization of communication systems
for meters and remote reading of meters for all kind of ﬂuids
and energies distributed by network and not necessarily limited
to household meters. The activities of TC 294 encompass the
development of the EN 13757 suite of standards on Meter-Bus
(M-Bus) and wireless M-Bus.
4) CENELEC TC 205 - Home and Building Electronic Systems: The scope of CENELEC TC 205 is to prepare standards
for all aspects of home and building electronic systems in
relation to the Information Society. In more detail: to prepare
standards to ensure integration of a wide spectrum of control
applications and the control and management aspects of other
applications in and around homes and buildings, including the
gateways to different transmission media and public networks
taking into account all matters of EMC (electromagnetic
compatibility) and electrical and functional safety. TC 205
will not prepare device standards but the necessary performance requirements and necessary hardware and software
interfaces. The standards should specify conformity tests. TC
205 will perform the work in close cooperation with relevant
CENELEC TCs and those in CEN and ETSI. The activities
of TC 205 encompass the development of the EN 50090
and EN 50491 suites of standards on Home and Building
Electronic Systems (HBES) and Building Automation and
Control Systems (BACS).
5) ETSI M2M: As mentioned previously, a new ETSI
Technical Committee is developing standards for machine to
machine communications. The group aims to provide an endto-end view of machine to machine standardization, and will
cooperate closely with ETSI’s activities on Next Generation
Networks, and also with the work of the 3GPP standards
initiative for mobile communication technologies. According
to the Terms of Reference for ETSI TC M2M , the
responsibilities of the ETSI TC M2M are the following:
• “to collect and specify M2M requirements from relevant
stakeholders;
• to develop and maintain an end-to-end overall high level
architecture for M2M;
• to identify gaps where existing standards do not fulﬁl the
requirements and provide speciﬁcations and standards to
ﬁll these gaps, without duplication of work in other ETSI
committees and partnership projects;
• to provide the ETSI main center of expertise in the area
• to coordinate ETSI’s M2M activity with that of other
standardization groups and fora.”
As part of their activities in smart metering, ETSI M2M
has recently approved a smart metering use cases document
 which discusses various detailed use cases in relation to
TC responsibilities in European smart metering standardization
a typical smart metering conﬁguration, as shown in Figure
1. Examples of these use cases include: obtain meter reading
data, install, conﬁgure and maintain the smart metering information system, support prepayment functionality, monitor
power quality data, manage outage data, etc. All these use
cases are discussed in terms of general description, stakeholders, scenario, information exchanges, and potential new
requirements.
The use case of “obtain meter reading data”, as an example,
is aligned to the additional functionalities F1 and F2 as
described previously. It describes how the Smart Metering
Information System provides this meter reading data to the
Read Data Recipient, either periodically or on request. The
stakeholder for this use case is Read Data Recipient. The
information exchanges involve both Basic Flow and Alternative Flow. For instance, the basic ﬂow for automatically
scheduled readings is: Smart Metering Information System
registers meter reading along with time/date stamp, and Smart
Metering Information System sends meter reading data to
Read Data Recipient. The potential new requirements (from
an M2M perspective) for this use case are mainly regarding
reliability and security: minimal latency for on-demand readings of distribution network management applications such
as overload or outage detection; accurate and secure time
synchronization; support of various information exchanges
from M2M Devices and M2M Gateways; authentication of
the M2M Device or M2M Gateway; a security solution in
place to prevent eavesdropping at any point in the network;
veriﬁcation of the integrity of the data exchanged .
A number of liaisons have also been established with
other standardization bodies, e.g. CEN, CENELEC, DLMS
UA, ZigBee Alliance and other ETSI TCs. The TC M2M
domain of coordination to answer M/441 includes: providing
access to the meter databases through the best network infrastructure (cellular or ﬁxed); providing end-to-end services
capabilities, with three targets: the end device (smart meter),
the concentrator/gateway and the service platform. Further,
smart metering application proﬁles will be speciﬁed including
service functionalities.
C. Worldwide standardization
The outcome of any deployment of smart grid/metering
systems will depend on successful, quick and future-proof
standardization of the major, long-lived components of the
system, including the communications. In this section we have
given an overview of smart metering standardization activities
in Europe. However, it has to be mentioned that there are
other major smart grid standards worldwide, for example, in
US notably IEEE P2030 , ANSI , US NIST and
future IP for smart grids in the IETF . For instance, it is
important to note the development of the ANSI C12 suite of
standards in the USA, that have been developed for electricity
meters, in a similar capacity to the standards under the aegis of
CLC/TC 13 in Europe. These standards are now being updated
to reﬂect advances in smart metering, e.g. with the introduction
of, among others, the C12.19 standard for Utility Industry End
Device Data Tables (data models and formats for metering
data) and the C12.22 standard for Protocol Speciﬁcation for
Interfacing to Data Communication Networks (communicating
smart metering data across a network) .
The IEEE P2030 project addresses smart grid interoperability and is composed of three task force groups looking
at different aspects of interoperability in power systems (Task
Force 1), information systems (Task Force 2) and communication systems (Task Force 3). The aim of this project
is to provide guidelines for enabling integration of energy
technology and information and communications technology
(ICT) to achieve seamless operation of the grid components
and a more reliable and ﬂexible electric power system.
The IEEE 1547 standard was approved in October 2003 and
outlines the collection of requirements and speciﬁcations for
interconnecting distributed energy resources to the distribution
segment of the electric power system . The outlined
requirements are relevant to the performance, operation, testing, safety, and maintenance of the interconnection. They
are globally needed for interconnection of distributed energy
resources including both distributed generators and energy
storage infrastructure, which is essential to realize the goals
of smart grid.
In China, smart grid standardization is led by the State Grid
Corporation of China (SGCC). SGCC has recently signed a
strategic cooperation agreement with General Electric (GE)
and the Chinese Academy of Science to jointly develop
smart grid standards. Standardization activities are expected in
the following technical areas: electric vehicle charging, gridscale energy storage integration, distributed resources, and
microgrids . In India, the IEEE Standards Association
(IEEE-SA) has introduced two new standards, IEEE 1701 and
IEEE 1702, to create a multi-source plug and play communications environment for diverse smart metering devices. Both
standards provide lower layer communication protocols for
LAN/WAN ports and telephone ports, respectively, used in
conjunction with utility metering . In Japan, standardization activities have been focused on the vision of “Smart Community” which involves the integration of smart grid, energy
storage, electric vehicles, and intelligent transport systems.
The newly established Japan Smart Community Alliance is
coordinating industrial efforts in this area .
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented an overview of the unique
challenges and opportunities posed by smart grid communications, e.g. interoperability, new infrastructure requirements,
scalability, demand response, security and privacy. The success
of future smart grid depends heavily on the communication
infrastructure, devices, and enabling services and software.
Results from much existing communications research can be
potentially applied to the extremely large-scale and complex
smart grid, which will become a killer application. In parallel
to technical issues of smart grids, we have also discussed the
current status of standardization on smart metering in Europe.
It is very desirable to have a single set of standards deﬁning
the interfaces, communications and data exchange formats for
smart metering and smart grids in Europe. However, due to
the current pressure on deploying smart metering solutions at
different timescales in different countries, and for different
energy supply companies, the timely harmonization of the
many existing standards with the new additional functionality
requirements will be very difﬁcult. It is very important that
the European standardization activities are aligned and take
into account these requirements, and reﬂect them well at
international standardization activities.
Although the roadmap of worldwide smart grid deployment
is still not clear, it is almost certain that the future intelligent
energy network empowered by advanced ICT technology will
not only be as big as the current Internet, but also change
people’s lives in a fundamental way similar to the Internet.
As communication is an underpinning technology for this huge
development, we envisage that smart grids will be an exciting
research area for communication engineers for many years to
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank their colleagues at Toshiba
Research Europe for helpful discussions and its Directors for
their support of this work. The detailed comments from the
anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.