The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast
tumours reveals novel subgroups
Christina Curtis1,2,†,*, Sohrab P. Shah3,4,*, Suet-Feung Chin1,2,*, Gulisa Turashvili3,4,*,
Oscar M. Rueda1,2, Mark J. Dunning2, Doug Speed2,5,†, Andy G. Lynch1,2, Shamith
Samarajiwa1,2, Yinyin Yuan1,2, Stefan Gräf1,2, Gavin Ha3, Gholamreza Haffari3, Ali
Bashashati3, Roslin Russell2, Steven McKinney3,4, METABRIC Group‡, Anita Langerød6,
Andrew Green7, Elena Provenzano8, Gordon Wishart8, Sarah Pinder9, Peter Watson3,4,10,
Florian Markowetz1,2, Leigh Murphy10, Ian Ellis7, Arnie Purushotham9,11, Anne-Lise
Børresen-Dale6,12, James D. Brenton2,13, Simon Tavaré1,2,5,14, Carlos Caldas1,2,8,13, and
Samuel Aparicio3,4
1Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK.
2Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way,
Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 2B5, Canada.
4Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia
V5Z 1L3, Canada.
5Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Centre
for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge CB3 0WA, UK.
6Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital
Radiumhospitalet, Montebello, 0310 Oslo, Norway.
7Department of Histopathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK.
©2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Ca.C. ( ) or S.A. ( )..
†Present addresses: Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA (Ch.C.); University College London, Genetics Institute, WC1E 6BT, UK (D.S.).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡Lists of participants and affiliations appear at the end of the paper.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions Ch.C. led the analysis, designed experiments and wrote the manuscript. S.P.S. led the HMM-based analyses,
expression outlier and TP53 analyses, and contributed to manuscript preparation. S.-F.C. generated data, designed and performed
experiments. G.T. generated data, provided histopathology expertise and analysed TP53 sequence data. O.M.R., M.J.D., D.S., A.G.L.,
S.S., Y.Y., S.G., Ga.H., Gh.H., A.B., R.R., S.M. and F.M. performed analyses. G.T., A.G., E.P., S.P. and I.E. provided histopathology
expertise. A.L. performed TP53 sequencing. A.-L.B.-D. oversaw TP53 sequencing. S.P., P.W., L.M., G.W., I.E., A.P., Ca.C. and S.A.
contributed to sample selection. J.D.B. and S.T. contributed to study design. S.T. provided statistical expertise. The METABRIC
Group contributed collectively to this study. Ca.C. and S.A. co-conceived and oversaw the study, and contributed to manuscript
preparation and were responsible for final editing. Ca.C. and S.A. are joint senior authors and project co-leaders.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author Information The associated genotype and expression data have been deposited at the European Genome-Phenome Archive
( which is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute, under accession number EGAS00000000083.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Readers are welcome to comment on the online
version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
 
Nature. ; 486(7403): 346–352. doi:10.1038/nature10983.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
8Cambridge Breast Unit, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.
9King’s College London, Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
10Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.
11NIHR Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust and King’s College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
12Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
13Cambridge Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
14Molecular and Computational Biology Program, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90089, USA.
The elucidation of breast cancer subgroups and their molecular drivers requires integrated views
of the genome and transcriptome from representative numbers of patients. We present an
integrated analysis of copy number and gene expression in a discovery and validation set of 997
and 995 primary breast tumours, respectively, with long-term clinical follow-up. Inherited variants
(copy number variants and single nucleotide polymorphisms) and acquired somatic copy number
aberrations (CNAs) were associated with expression in ~40% of genes, with the landscape
dominated by cis- and trans-acting CNAs. By delineating expression outlier genes driven in cis by
CNAs, we identified putative cancer genes, including deletions in PPP2R2A, MTAP and
MAP2K4. Unsupervised analysis of paired DNA–RNA profiles revealed novel subgroups with
distinct clinical outcomes, which reproduced in the validation cohort. These include a high-risk,
oestrogen-receptor-positive 11q13/14 cis-acting subgroup and a favourable prognosis subgroup
devoid of CNAs. Trans-acting aberration hotspots were found to modulate subgroup-specific gene
networks, including a TCR deletion-mediated adaptive immune response in the ‘CNA-devoid’
subgroup and a basal-specific chromosome 5 deletion-associated mitotic network. Our results
provide a novel molecular stratification of the breast cancer population, derived from the impact of
somatic CNAs on the transcriptome.
Inherited genetic variation and acquired genomic aberrations contribute to breast cancer
initiation and progression. Although somatically acquired CNAs are the dominant feature of
sporadic breast cancers, the driver events that are selected for during tumorigenesis are
difficult to elucidate as they co-occur alongside a much larger landscape of random nonpathogenic passenger alterations1,2 and germline copy number variants (CNVs). Attempts to
define subtypes of breast cancer and to discern possible somatic drivers are still in their
relative infancy3–6, in part because breast cancer represents multiple diseases, implying that
large numbers (many hundreds or thousands) of patients must be studied. Here we describe
an integrated genomic/transcriptomic analysis of breast cancers with long-term clinical
outcomes composed of a discovery set of 997 primary tumours and a validation set of 995
tumours from METABRIC (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International
Consortium).
A breast cancer population genomic resource
We assembled a collection of over 2,000 clinically annotated primary fresh-frozen breast
cancer specimens from tumour banks in the UK and Canada (Supplementary Tables 1–3).
Nearly all oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive and/or lymph node (LN)-negative patients did
not receive chemotherapy, whereas ER-negative and LN-positive patients did. Additionally,
none of the HER2+ patients received trastuzumab. As such, the treatments were
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
homogeneous with respect to clinically relevant groupings. An initial set of 997 tumours
was analysed as a discovery group and a further set of 995 tumours, for which complete data
later became available, was used to test the reproducibility of the integrative clusters
(described below). An overview of the main analytical approaches is provided in
Supplementary Fig. 1. Details concerning expression and copy number profiling, including
sample assignment to the PAM50 intrinsic subtypes3,4,7 (Supplementary Fig. 2), copy
number analysis (Supplementary Tables 4–8) and validation (Supplementary Figs 3 and 4
and Supplementary Tables 9–11), and TP53 mutational profiling (Supplementary Fig. 5) are
described in the Supplementary Information.
Genome variation affects tumour expression architecture
Genomic variants are considered to act in cis when a variant at a locus has an impact on its
own expression, or in trans when it is associated with genes at other sites in the genome. We
generated a map of CNAs, CNVs (Supplementary Fig. 6, Supplementary Tables 12–15) and
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the breast cancer genome to distinguish
germline from somatic variants (see Methods), and to examine the impact of each of these
variants on the expression landscape. Previous studies8 have shown that most heritable gene
expression traits are governed by a combination of cis (proximal) loci, defined here as those
within a 3-megabase (Mb) window surrounding the gene of interest, and trans (distal) loci,
defined here as those outside that window. We assessed the relative influence of SNPs,
CNVs and CNAs on tumour expression architecture, using each of these variants as a
predictor (see Methods) to elucidate expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) among
Both germline variants and somatic aberrations were found to influence tumour expression
architecture, having an impact on >39% (11,198/28,609) of expression probes genome-wide
based on analysis of variance (ANOVA; see Methods), with roughly equal numbers of genes
associated in cis and trans. CNAs were associated with the greatest number of expression
profiles (Fig. 1, Supplementary Figs 7–13 and Supplementary Tables 16–20), but were
rivalled by SNPs to explain a greater proportion of expression variation on a per-gene basis
genome-wide, whereas the contribution from CNVs was more moderate (Fig. 1b and
Supplementary Table 21). The true ratio of putative trans versus cis eQTLs is hard to
estimate9; however, the large sample size used here allowed the detection of small effects,
with 5,401 and 5,462 CNAs significantly (Šidák adjusted P value <0.0001) associated in cis
or in trans, respectively. Whereas cis-associations tended to be stronger, the trans-acting loci
modulated a larger number of messenger RNAs, as described below.
Expression outliers refine the breast cancer landscape
As shown above, ~20% of loci exhibit CNA-expression associations in cis (Supplementary
Fig. 14). To refine this landscape further and identify the putative driver genes, we used
profiles of outlying expression (see Methods and ref. 10) and the high resolution and
sensitivity of the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 platform to delineate candidate regions. This approach
markedly reduces the complexity of the landscape to 45 regions (frequency > 5, Fig. 2) and
narrows the focus, highlighting novel regions that modulate expression. The full
enumeration of regions delineated by this approach and their subtype-specific associations
(Supplementary Figs 15 and 16 and Supplementary Tables 22–24) includes both known
drivers (for example, ZNF703 (ref. 11), PTEN (ref. 12), MYC, CCND1, MDM2, ERBB2,
CCNE1 (ref. 13)) and putative driver aberrations (for example, MDM1, MDM4, CDK3,
CDK4, CAMK1D, PI4KB, NCOR1).
The deletion landscape of breast cancer has been poorly explored, with the exception of
PTEN. We illustrate three additional regions of significance centred on PPP2R2A , MTAP (9p21, Fig. 2, region 15) and MAP2K4 (17p11, Fig. 2, region 33),
which exhibit heterozygous and homozygous deletions (Supplementary Figs 15, 17–19 and
Supplementary Table 24) that drive expression of these loci. We observe breast cancer
subtype-specific (enriched in mitotic ER-positive cancers) loss of transcript expression in
PPP2R2A, a B-regulatory subunit of the PP2A mitotic exit holoenzyme complex. Somatic
mutations in PPP2R1A have recently been reported in clear cell ovarian cancers and
endometrioid cancers14,15, and methylation silencing of PPP2R2B has also been observed in
colorectal cancers16. Thus, dysregulation of specific PPP2R2A functions in luminal B breast
cancers adds a significant pathophysiology to this subtype.
MTAP (9p21, a component of methyladenosine salvage) is frequently co-deleted with the
CDKN2A and CDKN2B tumour suppressor genes in a variety of cancers17 as we observe
here (Supplementary Figs 17c and 18). The third deletion encompasses MAP2K4 (also
called MKK4) (17p11), a p38/Jun dual specificity serine/threonine protein kinase. MAP2K4
has been proposed as a recessive cancer gene18, with mutations noted in cell lines19. We
show, for the first time, the recurrent deletion of MAP2K4 (Supplementary Figs 17d and 19)
concomitant with outlying expression (Supplementary Fig. 15) in predominantly ERpositive cases, and verify homozygous deletions (Supplementary Table 9) in primary
tumours, strengthening the evidence for MAP2K4 as a tumour suppressor in breast cancer.
Trans-acting associations reveal distinct modules
We next asked how trans-associated expression profiles are distributed across the genome.
We mapped these in the expression landscape by examining the matrices of CNA–
expression associations (see Methods). This revealed strong off-diagonal patterns at loci on
chromosomes 1q, 7p, 8, 11q, 14q, 16, 17q and 20q (Fig. 3a), including both positive and
negative associations, as well as numerous trans-acting aberration hotspots (defined as
CNAs associated with >30 mRNAs). Importantly, these aberration hotspots can be grouped
into pathway modules, which highlight known driver loci such as ERBB2 and MYC, as well
as novel loci associated with large trans expression modules (Supplementary Tables 25 and
26). The T-cell-receptor (TCR) loci on chromosomes 7 (TRG) and 14 (TRA) represent two
such hotspots that modulated 381 and 153 unique mRNAs, respectively, as well as 19 dually
regulated genes (Supplementary Fig. 20). These cognate mRNAs were highly enriched for
T-cell activation and proliferation, dendritic cell presentation, and leukocyte activation,
which indicate the induction of an adaptive immune response associated with tumourinfiltrating lymphocytes (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 20 and Supplementary Tables 27 and
28), as described later.
In a second approach, we examined the genome-wide patterns of linear correlation between
copy number and expression features (see Methods), and noted the alignment of several offdiagonal signals, including those on chromosome 1q, 8q, 11q, 14q and 16 (Supplementary
Fig. 21). Additionally, a broad signal on chromosome 5 localizing to a deletion event
restricted to the basal-like tumours was observed (Supplementary Fig. 21), but was not
detected with the eQTL framework, where discrete (as opposed to continuous) copy number
values were used. This basal-specific trans module is enriched for transcriptional changes
involving cell cycle, DNA damage repair and apoptosis (Supplementary Table 29),
reflecting the high mitotic index typically associated with basal-like tumours, described in
detail below.
Integrative clustering reveals novel subgroups
Using the discovery set of 997 breast cancers, we next asked whether novel biological
subgroups could be found by joint clustering of copy number and gene expression data. On
the basis of our finding that cis-acting CNAs dominated the expression landscape, the top
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
1,000 cis-associated genes across all subtypes (Supplementary Table 30) were used as
features for input to a joint latent variable framework for integrative clustering20 (see
Methods). Cluster analysis suggested 10 groups (based on Dunn’s index) (see Methods and
Supplementary Figs 22 and 23), but for completeness, this result was compared with the
results for alternative numbers of clusters and clustering schemes (see Methods,
Supplementary Figs 23–27 and Supplementary Tables 31–33). The 10 integrative clusters
(labelled IntClust 1–10) were typified by well-defined copy number aberrations (Fig. 4,
Supplementary Figs 22, 28–30 and Supplementary Tables 34–39), and split many of the
intrinsic subtypes (Supplementary Figs 31–33). Kaplan–Meier plots of disease-specific
survival and Cox proportional hazards models indicate subgroups with distinct clinical
outcomes (Fig. 5, Supplementary Figs 34, 35 and Supplementary Tables 40 and 41). To
validate these results, we trained a classifier (754 features) for the integrative subtypes in the
discovery set using the nearest shrunken centroids approach21 (see Methods and
Supplementary Tables 42 and 43), and then classified the independent validation set of 995
cases into the 10 groups (Supplementary Table 44). The reproducibility of the clusters in the
validation set is shown in three ways. First, classification of the validation set resulted in the
assignment of a similar proportion of cases to the 10 subgroups, each of which exhibited
nearly identical copy number profiles (Fig. 4). Second, the groups have substantially similar
hazard ratios (Fig. 5b, Supplementary Fig. 35 and Supplementary Table 40). Third, the
quality of the clusters in the validation set is emphasized by the in-group proportions (IGP)
measure22 (Fig. 4).
Among the integrative clusters, we first note an ER-positive subgroup composed of
11q13/14 cis-acting luminal tumours (IntClust 2, n = 45) that harbour other common
alterations. This subgroup exhibited a steep mortality trajectory with elevated hazard ratios
(discovery set: 3.620, 95% confidence interval (1.905–6.878); validation set: 3.353, 95%
confidence interval (1.381–8.141)), indicating that it represents a particularly high-risk
subgroup. Several known and putative driver genes reside in this region, namely CCND1
(11q13.3), EMSY (11q13.5), PAK1 (11q14.1) and RSF1 (11q14.1), which have been
previously linked to breast13,23 or ovarian cancer24. Both the copy number (Fig. 4) and
expression outlier landscapes (Fig. 2) suggest at least two separate amplicons at 11q13/14,
one at CCND1 (11q13.3) and a separate peak from 11q13.5-11q14.1 spanning UVRAG–
GAB2, centred around PAK1, RSF1, C11orf67 and INTS4, where it is more challenging to
distinguish the driver24. Notably, the expression outlier profiles for this region are enriched
for samples belonging to IntClust 2 (Fig. 2, inset region 23) and all 45 members of this
subgroup harboured amplifications of these genes, with high frequencies of amplification
also observed for CCND1 (n = 39) and EMSY (n = 34). In light of these observations, the
11q13/14 amplicon may be driven by a cassette of genes rather than a single oncogene.
Second, we note the existence of two subgroups marked by a paucity of copy number and
cis-acting alterations. These subgroups cannot be explained by low cellularity tumours (see
Methods). One subgroup (IntClust3, n = 156) with low genomic instability (Fig. 4 and
Supplementary Fig. 22) was composed predominantly of luminal A cases, and was enriched
for histotypes that typically have good prognosis, including invasive lobular and tubular
carcinomas. The other subgroup (IntClust 4, n = 167) was also composed of favourable
outcome cases, but included both ER-positive and ER-negative cases and varied intrinsic
subtypes, and had an essentially flat copy number landscape, hence termed the ‘CNAdevoid’ subgroup. A significant proportion of cases within this subgroup exhibit extensive
lymphocytic infiltration (Supplementary Table 45).
Third, several intermediate prognosis groups of predominantly ER-positive cancers were
identified, including a 17q23/20q cis-acting luminal B subgroup (IntClust 1, n = 76), an
8p12 cis-acting luminal subgroup (IntClust 6, n = 44), as well as an 8q cis-acting/20q-
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
amplified mixed subgroup (IntClust 9, n = 67). Two luminal A subgroups with similar CNA
profiles and favourable outcome were noted. One subgroup is characterized by the classical
1q gain/16q loss (IntClust 8, n = 143), which corresponds to a common translocation
event25, and the other lacks the 1q alteration, while maintaining the 16p gain/16q loss with
higher frequencies of 8q amplification (IntClust 7, n = 109). We also noted that the majority
of basal-like tumours formed a stable, mostly high-genomic instability subgroup (IntClust
10, n = 96). This subgroup had relatively good long-term outcomes (after 5 years),
consistent with ref. 26, and characteristic cis-acting alterations (5 loss/8q gain/10p gain/12p
The ERBB2-amplified cancers composed of HER2-enriched (ER-negative) cases and
luminal (ER-positive) cases appear as IntClust 5 (n = 94), thus refining the ERBB2 intrinsic
subtype by grouping additional patients that might benefit from targeted therapy. Patients in
this study were enrolled before the general availability of trastuzumab, and as expected this
subgroup exhibits the worst disease-specific survival at both 5 and 15 years and elevated
hazard ratios (discovery set: 3.899, 95% confidence interval (2.234–6.804); validation set:
4.447, 95% confidence interval (2.284–8.661)).
Pathway deregulation in the integrative subgroups
Finally, we projected the molecular profiles of the integrative subgroups onto pathways to
examine possible biological themes among breast cancer subgroups (Supplementary Tables
46 and 47) and the relative impact of cis and trans expression modules on the pathways. The
CNA-devoid (IntClust 4) group exhibits a strong immune and inflammation signature
involving the antigen presentation pathway, OX40 signalling, and cytotoxic T-lymphocytemediated apoptosis (Supplementary Fig. 36). Given that trans-acting deletion hotspots were
localized to the TRG and TRA loci and were associated with an adaptive immune response
module, we asked whether these deletions contribute to alterations in this pathway. The
CNA-devoid subgroup (IntClust 4) was found to exhibit nearly twice as many deletions
(typically heterozygous loss) at the TRG and TRA loci (~20% of cases) as compared to the
other subtypes (with the exception of IntClust 10), and deletions of both TCR loci were
significantly associated with severe lymphocytic infiltration (χ2 test, P < 10−9 and P < 10−8,
respectively). Notably, these trans-associated mRNAs were significantly enriched in the
immune response signature of the CNA-devoid subgroup (Supplementary Fig. 36) as well as
among genes differentially expressed in CNA-devoid cases with severe lymphocytic
infiltration (Supplementary Fig. 37). We conclude that genomic copy number loss at the
TCR loci drives a trans-acting immune response module that associates with lymphocytic
infiltration, and characterizes an otherwise genomically quiescent subgroup of ER-positive
and ER-negative patients with good prognosis. These observations suggest the presence of
mature T lymphocytes (with rearranged TCR loci), which may explain an immunological
response to the cancer. In line with these findings, a recent study27 demonstrated the
association between CD8+ lymphocytes and favourable prognosis.
Also among the trans-influenced groups is IntClust 10 (basal-like cancer enriched
subgroup), which harbours chromosome 5q deletions (Supplementary Fig. 21). Numerous
signalling molecules, transcription factors and cell division genes were associated in trans
with this deletion event in the basal cancers, including alterations in AURKB, BCL2, BUB1,
CDCA3, CDCA4, CDC20, CDC45, CHEK1, FOXM1, HDAC2, IGF1R, KIF2C, KIFC1,
MTHFD1L, RAD51AP1, TTK and UBE2C (Supplementary Fig. 38). Notably, TTK
(MPS1), a dual specificity kinase that assists AURKB in chromosome alignment during
mitosis, and recently reported to promote aneuploidy in breast cancer28, was upregulated.
These results indicate that 5q deletions modulate the coordinate transcriptional control of
genomic and chromosomal instability and cell cycle regulation within this subgroup.
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
In contrast to these subtype-specific trans-associated signatures, the high-risk 11q13/14
subgroup was characterized by strong cis-acting associations. Like the basal cancers, this
subgroup also exhibited alterations in key cell-cycle-related genes (Supplementary Fig. 39),
which probably have a role in its aggressive pathophysiology, but the nature of the signature
differs. In particular, the regulation of the G1/S transition by BTG family proteins, which
include CCND1, PPP2R1B and E2F2, was significantly enriched in the 11q13/14 cis-acting
subgroup, but not the basal cancers, and this is consistent with CCND1 and the PPP2R
subunit representing subtype-specific drivers in these tumours.
Discussion
We have generated a robust, population-based molecular subgrouping of breast cancer based
on multiple genomic views. The size and nature of this cohort made it amenable to eQTL
analyses, which can aid the identification of loci that contribute to the disease phenotype29.
CNAs and SNPs influenced expression variation, with CNAs dominating the landscape in
cis and trans. The joint clustering of CNAs and gene expression profiles further resolves the
considerable heterogeneity of the expression-only subgroups, and highlights a high-risk
11q13/14 cis-acting subgroup as well as several other strong cis-actingclusters and a
genomically quiescent group. The reproducibility of subgroups with these molecular and
clinical features in a validation cohort of 995 tumours suggests that by integrating multiple
genomic features it may be possible to derive more robust patient classifiers. We show here,
for the first time, that subtype-specific trans-acting aberrations modulate concerted
transcriptional changes, such as the TCR deletion-mediated adaptive immune response that
characterizes the CNA-devoid subgroup and the chromosome 5 deletion-associated cell
cycle program in the basal cancers.
The integrated CNA-expression landscape highlights a limited number of genomic regions
that probably contain driver genes, including ZNF703, which we recently described as a
luminal B specific driver11, as well as somatic deletion events affecting key subunits of the
PP2A holoenzyme complex and MTAP, which have previously been under-explored in
breast cancer. The CNA-expression landscape also illuminates rare but potentially
significant events, including IGF1R, KRAS and EGFR amplifications and CDKN2B,
BRCA2, RB1, ATM, SMAD4, NCOR1 and UTX homozygous deletions. Although some of
these events have low overall frequencies (<1% patients) (Figs 2, Supplementary Fig. 15 and
Supplementary Tables 22–24), they may have implications for understanding therapeutic
responses to targeted agents, particularly those targeting tyrosine kinases or phosphatases.
Finally, because the integrative subgroups occur at different frequencies in the overall
population, focusing sequencing efforts on representative numbers from these groups will
help to establish a comprehensive breast cancer somatic landscape at sequence-level
resolution. For example, a significant number (~17%, n = 167 in the discovery cohort) of
breast cancers are devoid of somatic CNAs, and are ripe for mutational profiling. Our work
provides a definitive framework for understanding how gene copy number aberrations affect
gene expression in breast cancer and reveals novel subgroups that should be the target of
future investigation.
METHODS SUMMARY
All patient specimens were obtained with appropriate consent from the relevant institutional
review board. DNA and RNA were isolated from samples and hybridized to the Affymetrix
SNP 6.0 and Illumina HT-12 v3 platforms for genomic and transcriptional profiling,
respectively. A detailed description of the experimental assays and analytical methods used
to analyse these data are available in the Supplementary Information.
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The METABRIC project was funded by Cancer Research UK, the British Columbia Cancer Foundation and
Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation BC/Yukon. The authors also acknowledge the support of the University of
Cambridge, Hutchinson Whampoa, the NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, the Cambridge
Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, the Centre for Translational Genomics (CTAG) Vancouver and the BCCA
Breast Cancer Outcomes Unit. S.P.S. is a Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research fellow. S.A. is supported
by a Canada Research Chair. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health Centers of Excellence in
Genomics Science grant P50 HG02790 (S.T.). The authors thank C. Perou and J.Parkerfor discussions on the use of
the PAM50 centroids. Theyalso acknowledge the patients who donated tissue and the associated pseudoanonymized clinical data for this project.
METABRIC Group
Co-chairs Carlos Caldas1,2, Samuel Aparicio3,4
Writing committee Christina Curtis1,2†, Sohrab P. Shah3,4, Carlos Caldas1,2, Samuel
Aparicio3,4
Steering committee James D. Brenton1,2, Ian Ellis5, David Huntsman3,4, Sarah Pinder6,
Arnie Purushotham6, Leigh Murphy7, Carlos Caldas1,2, Samuel Aparicio3,4
Tissue and clinical data source sites: University of Cambridge/Cancer Research UK
Cambridge Research Institute Carlos Caldas (Principal Investigator)1,2; Helen Bardwell2,
Suet-Feung Chin1,2, Christina Curtis1,2†, Zhihao Ding2, Stefan Gräf1,2, Linda Jones8, Bin
Liu1,2, Andy G. Lynch1,2, Irene Papatheodorou1,2, Stephen J. Sammut9, Gordon Wishart9;
British Columbia Cancer Agency Samuel Aparicio (Principal Investigator)3,4, Steven
Chia4, Karen Gelmon4, David Huntsman3,4, Steven McKinney3,4, Caroline Speers4, Gulisa
Turashvili3,4, Peter Watson3,4,7; University of Nottingham: Ian Ellis (Principal
Investigator)5, Roger Blamey5, Andrew Green5, Douglas Macmillan5, Emad Rakha5;
King’s College London Arnie Purushotham (Principal Investigator)6, Cheryl Gillett6, Anita
Grigoriadis6, Sarah Pinder6, Emanuele de Rinaldis6, Andy Tutt6; Manitoba Institute of
Cell Biology Leigh Murphy (Principal Investigator)7, Michelle Parisien7, Sandra Troup7
Cancer genome/transcriptome characterization centres: University of Cambridge/
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute Carlos Caldas (Principal
Investigator)1,2, Suet-Feung Chin (Team Leader)1,2, Derek Chan1, Claire Fielding2, Ana-
Teresa Maia1,2, Sarah McGuire2, Michelle Osborne2, Sara M. Sayalero2, Inmaculada
Spiteri2, James Hadfield2; British Columbia Cancer Agency Samuel Aparicio (Principal
Investigator)3,4, Gulisa Turashvili (Team Leader)3,4, Lynda Bell4, Katie Chow4, Nadia
Gale4, David Huntsman3,4, Maria Kovalik4, Ying Ng4, Leah Prentice4
Data analysis subgroup: University of Cambridge/Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Research Institute Carlos Caldas (Principal Investigator)1,2, Simon Tavaré (Principal
Investigator)1,2,10,11, Christina Curtis (Team Leader)1,2†, Mark J. Dunning2, Stefan Gräf1,2,
Andy G. Lynch1,2, Oscar M. Rueda1,2, Roslin Russell2, Shamith Samarajiwa1,2, Doug
Speed2,10; Florian Markowetz (Principal Investigator)1,2, Yinyin Yuan1,2; James D. Brenton
(Principal Investigator)1,2; British Columbia Cancer Agency Samuel Aparicio (Principal
Investigator)3,4, Sohrab P. Shah (Team Leader)3,4, Ali Bashashati3, Gavin Ha3, Gholamreza
Haffari3 & Steven McKinney3,4
Curtis et al.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 21.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
1Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XZ,
UK. 2Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 2B5,
Canada. 4Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver,
British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada. 5Department of Histopathology, School of Molecular
Medical Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK. 6King’s College
London, Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, London, WC2R 2LS, UK. 7Manitoba
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada. 8Cambridge
Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. 9Cambridge Breast Unit,
Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and NIHR
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. 10Department of
Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Centre for
Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge CB3 0WA, UK. 11Molecular and Computational
Biology Program, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.
†Present address: Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.