Prescribed Active Learning Increases Performance in
Introductory Biology
Scott Freeman, Eileen O’Connor, John W. Parks, Matthew Cunningham,
David Hurley, David Haak, Clarissa Dirks, and Mary Pat Wenderoth
Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Submitted September 25, 2006; Revised February 12, 2007; Accepted February 13, 2007
Monitoring Editor: Martha Grossel
We tested five course designs that varied in the structure of daily and weekly active-learning
exercises in an attempt to lower the traditionally high failure rate in a gateway course for biology
majors. Students were given daily multiple-choice questions and answered with electronic
response devices (clickers) or cards. Card responses were ungraded; clicker responses were
graded for right/wrong answers or participation. Weekly practice exams were done as an
individual or as part of a study group. Compared with previous versions of the same course
taught by the same instructor, students in the new course designs performed better: There were
significantly lower failure rates, higher total exam points, and higher scores on an identical
midterm. Attendance was higher in the clicker versus cards section; attendance and course grade
were positively correlated. Students did better on clicker questions if they were graded for
right/wrong answers versus participation, although this improvement did not translate into
increased scores on exams. In this course, achievement increases when students get regular
practice via prescribed (graded) active-learning exercises.
INTRODUCTION
Recent efforts to improve science education at U.S. universities have focused on three themes: 1) faculty should apply
the same hypothesis-testing framework in their teaching as
they do in their benchwork and fieldwork ; 2) the overall number of
undergraduate and graduate degrees awarded to U.S. citizens in science, mathematics, and engineering needs to increase dramatically ; and 3)
more underrepresented minorities (URMs) and students
from disadvantaged backgrounds need to be recruited and
retained in science and technology majors . Our work was inspired by these themes and addressed a simple question:
Can the high failure rate in an introductory biology course
for majors be reduced?
Our approach grew out of the first author’s experience
while teaching the initial quarter of a year-long sequence for
University of Washington (UW) students who intend to
major in biology and/or apply to health-related professional
schools. In spring 2002, the instructor taught the course in a
modified Socratic style, stopping the lecture frequently to
ask questions and not proceeding until one or more students
had responded. Although student ratings of the course and
instructor were high, 19.6% of the students did not qualify to
proceed in biology; almost half failed to do well enough to
declare the major. In response, the instructor introduced an
array of daily active-learning, in-class exercises in spring
2003. These tasks included case history problems done by
informal groups, think/pair/share exercises ,
muddiest point writing , exam-question writing, minute papers
 , and discussions of exam questions
from previous quarters. These exercises were not graded.
Although the course still received high ratings, the failure
rates did not show significant improvement.
High failure rates in “gateway” courses are unacceptable
for two reasons: they contribute to low graduation rates and
extended time-to-graduation for the institution as a whole,
and they have a disproportionately large impact on URMs
and other students from disadvantaged backgrounds. A
review of students enrolled in Biology 180 during a recent
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.06–09–0194
Address correspondence to: Scott Freeman ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 6, 132–139, Summer 2007
© 2007 by The American Society for Cell Biology
3-yr period showed that on average, approximately 40% of URMs and economically disadvantaged students received a grade below 2.0 or withdrew before completing the course . URM
students often come from high schools that have not been as
demanding as those attended by white or Asian students
 . Teaching techniques that increase achievement by the
most poorly prepared students should be an effective way to
increase recruitment and retention of minorities in the natural sciences.
On the basis of our own observations and extensive interviews with students, we generated the following explanations for the traditionally high failure rate in this course:
• ESL (English as a second language) and other students
struggle with written exams;
• Most students were being asked to answer exam questions
written at the application and analysis levels of Bloom’s
Taxonomy of Learning Objectives for the
first time;
• Many students do not understand the time commitment
required to succeed in the course; and
• Students learn better if they are active, but most prefer
being passive.
To test these ideas, we designed, implemented, and evaluated a series of course designs that attempted to accomplish two goals: 1) offer extensive practice with written and
multiple-choice questions above the bottom rung of Bloom’s
taxonomy; and 2) prescribe active participation by grading
weekly and daily practice. Our fundamental premise was
that active learning increases performance on exams because
it gives students opportunities to practice and that introductory students must be required to practice by awarding
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The course in question enrolls 345 students and is usually taken
by sophomores. A typical demographic makeup is 58% female, 46%
white, 30% ESL, and 7% URM students, of whom 17% are in the
Educational Opportunity Program (EOP). EOP students have been
identified by the UW as economically or educationally disadvantaged. The course is offered every quarter of the year and is taken by
a total of 1200 students per year or almost 25% of an average
incoming class at our university. The course prerequisites are two
quarters of inorganic chemistry.
On a grading scale from 0.0 to 4.0, a grade of 1.5 or higher in the
initial course is required to register for the next course in the
year-long (3-quarter) sequence. Thus, students who do not receive a
grade of 1.5 or higher fail to advance in the life sciences. Students
who do not receive 2.5 or higher must average 2.0 or higher over the
three courses in the series in order to declare biology as their major.
Thus, students who receive less than 2.5 are at high risk of failing to
advance in biology or other life sciences majors.
The study was organized in three steps: 1) analyzing the characteristics of students who had taken the course previously to better
understand the reasons for failure and to predict student performance a priori; 2) implementing four contrasting course designs
during the spring quarter 2005; and 3) repeating one of these four
course designs and contrasting it with a fifth course design in the
fall quarter 2005.
Risk Analysis
To better understand the reasons for the high failure rate, we
analyzed data on 3338 students who had started the introductory
biology series at the UW between the autumn quarters of 2001 and
2004. Specifically, we attempted to correlate the following demographic variables and measures of prior academic performance with
failure in one or more of the courses in the series: gender, ethnicity
as Caucasian, Asian, or URM (African-American, Native American,
Hispanic, or Pacific Islander), chronological age, average grade in
UW chemistry classes at the time of entering the course, overall UW
grade point average (GPA) at the time of entering the course, UW
class standing (freshman, sophomore, etc.) at the time of entering
the course, high school GPA, Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) verbal
score, SAT math score, American College Test (ACT) score, score on
the UW math placement test given to matriculating students, Test of
English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) score, and EOP status.
After analyzing these variables for covariation and evaluating
them for missing data, we performed a factor analysis to determine
which variables could be omitted from the analysis or aggregated
into a single index. These steps led us to drop UW chemistry GPA,
high school GPA, ACT score, TOEFL score, and UW math placement score from the model.
To determine which of the remaining variables were most capable
of predicting failure in the course, we performed bivariate logistic
regression with backward elimination. After determining which
variables were most important, we used them to design a regression
model that predicted student grades in the first course in the sequence. In this way, we could identify students who were at low
risk or high risk of failing the course. We defined high-risk students
as those predicted to get below a grade of 2.5 in the course, and
low-risk students as those predicted to get a grade of 2.5 or higher.
Spring 2005 Course Design
The spring 2005 course was listed as two equal-size sections during
registration, so that students signed up for sections unaware of
contrasting course designs. The two sections were taught back-toback by the same instructor (S.F.) in the same room, using identical
notes. Students from the two sections were mixed randomly in lab
sections and required field trips.
During each class the instructor posed four multiple-choice questions that required a response from all students. The period started
with a question based on the previous session’s material and a
question on the reading for that day. Twice during a lecture delivered in a modified Socratic style, the instructor posed questions
based on the material being discussed and that had to be answered
by all students. The questions were designed to be difficult. Specifically, they attempted to either test students’ ability to analyze an
aspect of the topic or apply a concept in a new situation. If less than
60% of the answers to these questions were correct, the instructor
told the students to discuss the question among themselves and
then reanswer . Students answered from four to
eight formal questions each day, with an average of 5.6.
In the “clickers section,” students were given an electronic response device that they registered with their name and student
number. After each class session, the instructor would choose three
of the four to eight responses to grade. Correct answers on these
three questions were worth 1 point each. A total of 100 clicker points
were possible for the quarter, representing 14% of the total points.
In the “cards section,” students were given four cards with A, B,
C, or D printed on them. Students held up these cards to answer the
same in-class questions posed to the clicker section. Because other
students could look at the cards if they desired, card responses were
public. To enforce or prescribe participation, the instructor “stared
down” students who occasionally did not hold up a card, so that
virtually all students responded to all questions. Card responses
were public but ungraded; clicker responses were private but
Performance in Introductory Biology
Vol. 6, Summer 2007
The full class met 4 d per week; during the fifth class period each
week students were given five written, exam-style questions to
complete in 35 min. Answers were then randomly assigned to
another student for a 15-min grading period based on a key and
rubric provided by the instructor. Correct answers were to be given
2 points, partial credit answers 1 point, and blank or unintelligible
answers 0 points. Both the answerer and grader were anonymous to
each other; only course staff knew their identities. Students did nine
of these practice exams for a total of 90 possible points—roughly
15% of the total grade.
Students in the cards and clickers sections were randomly assigned to one of two methods of completing identical practice
exams. Within each section, half the students did the practice exams
and grading by themselves online, and half did the practice exams
and grading as part of a study group. Students who did the assignment online could do so anywhere, but had to log in and submit
answers and grades on the 35-min  15-min schedule during the
class period. Students assigned to study groups met in a classroom
on campus and were proctored by a staff member. The staff member
did not answer content questions or assist the groups in any way.
The staff member distributed the hard-copy questions, accepted
answers after 35 min, randomly assigned answer sheets for the
15-min grading period, and collected the graded sheets.
Students were assigned to study groups by the instructor, on the
basis of their course grade predicted by the regression model from
the risk analysis. Each study group had one student who was
predicted to receive below 1.5 in the course, two students who were
predicted to receive between 1.5 and 3.0, and one student who
was predicted to receive 3.0 or higher. Students were unaware of
this structure, however. Each week, study group members signed
up to serve as their group’s “manager,” who coordinated the exercise; “strategist,” who considered ways to approach each question;
“recorder,” who wrote the answers; or “encourager,” who gave
positive feedback to participants. These roles were explained by the
staff proctor but were not enforced by peer evaluation or other
techniques.
To summarize, the spring quarter tested the following four designs: clickers  online practice, clickers  study group practice,
cards  online practice, and cards  study group practice. All
students took a common final and a common second midterm. On
the first midterm, several questions on the exams given to the two
sections were identical or formally equivalent. Thus, there were a
total of 336 out of 400 total exam points available to use in evaluating student performance on identical exam questions. Students
who dropped the course or who were caught cheating on exams
were not included in any of the analyses.
We also collected data on attendance. This was done automatically from clicker responses and from the cards section by counting
the number of students present during each class period. Although
we could only evaluate overall class attendance in the cards section,
in the clickers section we could also analyze the number of classes
attended by each student.
Fall 2005 Course Design
As in spring 2005, students registered blindly for two equal-sized
sections in the fall 2005 course. The sections were again taught
back-to-back by the same instructor (S.F.) in the same room using
identical notes, with students from the two sections mixed randomly for labs and field trips. In both sections, students completed
and graded weekly practice exams by themselves online.
All students in the course were required to purchase a clicker and
register it to their name and student number. The instructor posed
identical, daily, in-class, multiple-choice questions to each section.
In one section, the questions were graded for right/wrong answers
using the same format as spring 2005. In the other section, students
were given points for participation, with two points per day possible if students answered all questions posed—irrespective of
whether their answers were correct or incorrect.
To summarize, the fall quarter repeated the clickers (graded) 
online course design and added a clickers (participation)  online
course design. Students again took a common final exam; although
the sections were given different midterm exams, enough midterm
questions were identical or formally equivalent that there were a
total of 335 of the 400 total exam points to use in evaluating student
performance on common exam questions. Unless otherwise noted,
all statistical tests reported here are two-tailed tests.
Risk Analysis
For the first course in the year-long introductory sequence,
the logistic regression analysis identified four variables that
had a significant effect in predicting the probability of receiving 1.5 in the course when all 3338 students were
considered: student age, SAT math, SAT verbal, and UW
GPA. Older students were at higher risk of failing; students
with higher SAT math and verbal scores and higher UW
GPAs were at lower risk of failing. The Wald t-statistic
coefficients were much higher for UW GPA and SAT verbal
than for age and SAT math, however. When we did the same
analysis on individual-year student cohorts, we found that
UW GPA and SAT verbal were also the most stable year-toyear predictors of student risk of failure. Thus, UW GPA and
SAT verbal were the most important variables in predicting
student success in the course. On average, students who got
below 1.5 in the initial course entered with a UW GPA of
2.60 and an SAT verbal score of 488; students who got above
1.5 in this course entered with a UW GPA of 3.24 and an SAT
verbal score of 586.
On the basis of this analysis, we developed a linear regression model to predict the grade that incoming students
were likely to receive in the initial course. The model is as
Predicted grade  (0.00291  [SAT verbal]) 
(1.134  [UW GPA])  2.663
Figure 1 shows the relationship between predicted and
actual grades for students in spring 2005 (R2  0.58, slope 
1.01, n  320); the regressions for the fall 2005 sections were
similar (R2  0.60, slope  1.18, n  325). In addition, an
A grade predictor model based on overall UW GPA and
SAT verbal score predicts actual grades efficiently (R2  0.58,
slope  1.01, n  320, p  0.0001).
S. Freeman et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
ANOVA indicated that the predicted grades for students in
the spring 2003, spring 2005, and fall 2005 did not differ
significantly (data not shown), indicating that student populations were comparable in these three quarters. Note that
these and subsequent analyses do not include students who
dropped the course or were caught cheating on exams or
assignments; for a small number of students who were
admitted to the university without an SAT score, we substituted the class average SAT verbal score to generate a predicted grade.
Because some instructors choose to focus their time and
attention on high-achieving students who are most likely to
attend graduate or professional school, it is instructive to
analyze who the high-risk students are. In our course, 56%
of URM students and 71% of EOP students are at high risk
of failing (Table 1). URM and EOP students are much more
likely than Caucasian, Asian, or non-EOP students to be at
high risk of failing (Chi-square test, p  0.001 for both
ethnicity and EOP status).
Spring 2005 Course Design
The percentage of students who failed to receive at least 1.5
in the course declined from 15.6% in spring 2003, when the
course was taught in a modified Socratic style, to 10.9% in
spring 2005, when the course was taught with prescribed
active-learning techniques. This drop in failure rate was
significant (Fisher’s exact test, one-tailed p  0.049).
Exam scores also indicate that as a whole, students in the
spring 2005 course did much better in the course than in
spring 2003. Out of 400 possible exam points, students
in spring 2005 earned on average 14 more points than students in spring 2003 (t test, p  0.001). Although questions
from previous exams had not been reused in the past, the
spring 2003 and spring 2005 classes were administered an
identical midterm exam. The average on this exam in spring
2005 was 11 points higher than in spring 2003 (t test, p 
0.001; see Figure 2).
Our next goal was to evaluate whether any of the four
course designs increased student achievement more than
others. By chance, average grade predictor scores were
much higher in the cards section compared with the clickers
section (Table 2). To control for this bias between sections,
we analyzed high-risk students—defined as those with a
predicted grade 2.5—and low-risk students—defined as
those with a predicted grade 2.5—separately. We also
performed two-way ANCOVAs, with predicted grade as the
covariate, to factor out the effect of unlike student populations when comparing performance between students in the
two sections.
When we used ANCOVA to evaluate average performance on common exam questions for students in the four
course designs (see Table 3), we found no significant effect
of practice exam type or in-class question type and no significant interaction between the two variables. Thus, the four
course designs worked equally well in terms of boosting
student achievement. When we looked at performance on
Students in a course with daily, graded,
multiple-choice questions and weekly, graded practice exams did
better on an identical midterm exam than students in a course
 with daily, ungraded, active-learning exercises (t test,
p  0.001).
Table 1. Risk of failure by ethnicity and EOP status
Low risk (%)
High risk (%)
EOP status
Values are expressed a percentage, with n in parentheses. Chisquare tests, p  0.001.
Table 2. Predicted grades in Biology 180, spring 2005
2.50  0.65 (87)
2.84  0.74 (80)
Study groups
2.58  0.70 (80)
2.70  0.67 (78)
2.54  0.67 (167)
2.77  0.71 (158)
Values are mean  SD, with n in parentheses. Two-way ANOVA,
p  0.003.
Performance in Introductory Biology
Vol. 6, Summer 2007
common exam questions for high-risk students only, the
data indicated a weak trend for students in the clickers
section to perform better than students in the cards section,
although the difference did not reach statistical significance
(Table 3; ANOVA, p  0.08). In contrast, low-risk students in
the cards section clearly performed better on common exam
questions than low-risk students in the clickers section (Table 3;
ANOVA, p  0.034). There was no significant difference in
performance on common exam questions between students
who did practice exams online or in study groups, when either
high- or low-risk students were analyzed separately.
The other significant difference between the clickers and
cards sections was in attendance. Average attendance was
much higher in the clickers section than the cards section
(Figure 3A; paired t test, n  34, p  0.0001). Within the
clickers section, attendance had a significant effect on predicting final grade (Figure 4; R2  0.24, n  173, p  0.0001).
Fall 2005 Course Design
In fall 2005, the class average for total exam points (out of
400 possible) was nearly identical to the class average in
spring 2005 and significantly higher than spring 2003
(ANOVA, p  0.001). This result replicates the improvement
in exam performance shown in the course designs of spring
2005. Because of differences in performance in other parts of
the course, however, the percentage of fall 2005 students receiving a course grade 1.5 increased slightly to 11.7%. This
failure rate was not significantly different from the percentage
in spring 2003 (Fisher’s exact test, one-tailed p  0.09).
To compare achievement between the graded and participation sections, we again used ANCOVA with predicted
grade as a covariate. This approach allowed us to control for
a clear but chance disparity between the predicted grades in
the graded and participation sections, with students in the
participation
grades than students in the graded section (Table 4). A
one-way ANCOVA showed no difference in common exam
points between sections, when all students were considered
(Table 5). t tests showed that there was also no difference in
performance on common exam questions when only lowrisk students or only high-risk students were compared
between sections (Table 5). These results suggest that the
two course designs worked equally well in improving student performance on exams.
In contrast, there was a clear difference in how students in
the two sections performed on clicker questions (Table 6). A
one-way ANCOVA, with predicted grade serving as the
covariate, showed that students in the graded section did
significantly better on clicker questions than students in the
participation section (p  0.001). t tests showed that this
result held if all students were considered irrespective of the
predicted grade differences between sections and when only
high-risk students or only low-risk students were compared
between sections (Table 6). A paired t test showed that there
was no difference between sections in attendance 
260  48 (80)
223  40 (48)
206  48 (22)
272  41 (39)
281  27 (58)
Study groups
248  45 (80)
253  54 (78)
215  36 (36)
206  51 (31)
275  32 (44)
285  25 (47)
246  46 (167)
257  51 (158)
219  38 (84)
206  49 (53)
273  36 (83)
283  26 (105)
Values are total points (mean  SD), with n in parentheses.
a Two-way ANCOVA, NS.
b ANOVA, p  0.08.
c ANOVA, p  0.034.
Use of graded in-class exercises increased attendance.
(A) Average daily attendance was higher in the section with graded
(“clickers”) versus ungraded (“cards”) in-class questions (paired t
test, n  34, p  0.0001). (B) There was no difference in average daily
attendance in classes with in-class questions graded by correct
answer versus participation (paired t test, p  0.05). Regression lines
are shown in both graphs.
S. Freeman et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
3B). A regression analysis indicated that attendance was
again a significant predictor of final grade (R2  0.18, n 
310, p  0.0001).
DISCUSSION
This study is one of many showing that active learning
increases student performance in undergraduate science
courses . The unique aspects of this research are the emphasis
on grading or public display of cards as a way to prescribe
student participation in active-learning exercises and the
ability to distinguish performance by high- and low-risk
students. The fundamental messages of this work are that
introductory biology students benefit from highly structured active-learning environments and that highly structured course designs may have a particular benefit for students who are at high risk of failing the course. At our
university, high-risk students include a disproportionate
number of URM and EOP individuals. Therefore, our findings provide some insight for improving introductory biology courses in a way that will help retain students who are
historically underrepresented in science majors.
Risk Analysis
The risk analysis showed that UW GPA and SAT verbal are
the most reliable predictors of student grades in the initial
course in our introductory biology sequence. Thus, students
who struggle in the initial biology course are also struggling
in other college courses, and students with poor verbal skills
do poorly on the course’s written midterm and final exams.
It is interesting to note that when we analyzed the overall
risk of failing to complete the entire three-quarter sequence
successfully, the most reliable predictors were UW GPA at
the time of entering each course and SAT math score. We
interpret the change from SAT verbal as an initial predictor
to SAT math as an overall predictor as follows: Students
with poor verbal skills quickly fail to progress in the series,
whereas analytical and quantitative skills become more important over the combined sequence of courses. It would be
interesting to know whether college GPA and SAT verbal or
math scores are equally robust predictors of performance in
introductory biology courses at other institutions.
Spring 2005 Course Design
The spring 2005 course designs were inspired by an observation we made during the spring 2003 course: initially,
students participated enthusiastically in ungraded activelearning exercises. As the course wore on, however, participation dropped dramatically. In effect, many students appeared to say to themselves, “I’m not being graded on this
stuff and I’ve got an organic chemistry midterm tomorrow;
I’m not going to bother.”
The four course designs tested in spring 2005 attempted to
address the general issue of prescribing or “enforcing” active learning. More specifically, the course designs focused
on addressing the four hypotheses proposed to explain the
traditionally high failure rate. The goal of the weekly practice exams was to provide ESL and other students with
Class attendance is a significant
predictor of final grade (R2  0.24, n  173,
p  0.0001).
Table 5. Performance on common exam questions, fall 2005
All studentsa
students onlyb
students onlyc
Participation
229  39 (154)
191  35 (50)
247  25 (104)
218  43 (171)
187  34 (71)
240  33 (100)
Values are total points (mean  SD), with n in parentheses.
a One-way ANCOVA, NS.
b t test, NS.
c t test, NS.
Table 4. Predicted grades in Biology 180, fall 2005
Participation
2.77  0.57 (154)
2.59  0.61 (171)
Values are mean  SD, with n in parentheses. t test, p  0.007.
Performance in Introductory Biology
Vol. 6, Summer 2007
increased opportunities to practice writing exam questions
posed at the application and analysis levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. The goals of the daily in-class questions were to
provide additional practice with answering questions at relatively high levels of Bloom’s taxonomy and to encourage
active participation in class through grading or public declaration of answers. We predicted that the combination of
daily and weekly graded practice would raise student effort
level and help sustain it throughout the course.
The dramatic gains in student achievement in all of the
spring 2005 course designs support the hypothesis that introductory students benefit more from active learning exercises when they are prescribed or enforced in some way as
opposed to being voluntary and not associated with earning
course points. If other research supports this conclusion, it
will challenge instructors to design active-learning environments where students see immediate consequences if they
fail to participate.
It is important to consider why study groups and individual practice worked equally well in raising student achievement in our course, even though study groups have been
shown to raise student performance in other contexts in
undergraduate science courses . We hypothesize that in this case, individual practice was
just as effective as peer interaction because our practice exercises focused so narrowly on written exam questions. In this
context, individual work may have had a “close-to-the-realthing” benefit in providing exam practice that balanced out the
benefits that peer interaction may have had in study groups.
This study adds to a growing literature on the efficacy of
using electronic response devices in class. It is important to
emphasize, however, that answering in-class questions with
cards instead of clickers worked equally well in our course
except for high-risk students, where our data indicate that
students using clickers may marginally outperform students
using cards. Both cards and clickers are used routinely in
other courses on our campus and both have been shown to
increase student achievement on exams in introductory science courses . Using clickers increased attendance primarily because it allowed points to be assigned, and increased attendance may have contributed to higher achievement by highrisk students. Although cards may work equally well for
high-risk students if other mechanisms are in place to promote high attendance, the public nature of card use may
lower the performance of high-risk students by contributing
to stereotype threat . In this case, stereotype
threat would occur if members of URMs felt that instructors
and peers expected them to do poorly on public responses to
in-class questions.
Fall 2005 Course Design
The fall 2005 course designs were inspired by the observation that high-risk students may benefit from course designs
that include daily use of clickers. In addition, individual
practice with written exam questions worked equally well as
study group practice and was easier for us to administer. It
is important to note that the increase in total exam points
observed in spring 2005 was replicated in fall 2005, suggesting that prescribed active-learning course designs are robust
in terms of raising student performance.
We compared right/wrong versus participation grading
schemes for clicker questions to assess whether simply increasing attendance alone can be responsible for raising
student achievement on exams. As predicted, both approaches were successful in promoting attendance to an
average of 95%. Grading also clearly increased student
achievement on the in-class questions themselves. However,
because there was no difference in exam scores between the
sections, we have no evidence of a carry-over from increased
performance on in-class multiple-choice questions to increased performance on written exams. We are still unsure
how much of the increase in exam performance is simply
due to increased class attendance.
Low-risk students in the fall course did not perform better
on common exam questions in the participation section,
even though there were significantly more low-risk students
in that section. This observation is important: The fall trial
did not replicate the result from the spring course designs,
where low-risk students did better if they were in a section
with a significantly greater percentage of low-risk students.
In both spring and fall, there was a positive relationship
between class attendance and overall course grade. Our data
are consistent with other recent work showing that coming
to class helps performance . We are unsure exactly what has to happen in
class for this benefit to occur, however. Our data suggest
that simply being in class and responding to questions has a
benefit for students.
In evaluating data on clickers (and cards), it is also critical
to note how the devices are being used. In all of our course
designs, in-class questions were posed in a highly structured
format. Each class session started with questions designed to
reward students who had reviewed the previous day’s material and done the reading for the day. The question on the
reading was posed at the knowledge or content level, but all
other questions were posed at the comprehension, application, or analytical level. Students were allowed to discuss
questions with peers and reanswer if the initial percentage
of correct answers was low, and the instructor frequently
encouraged postquestion discussion on why answers were
correct or incorrect. As the literature on the use of in-class
questions matures, it will be important to assess the questioning structure and question types that are posed in order
to compare and evaluate the costs and benefits of this aspect
of course design.
Table 6. Performance on clicker questions, fall 2005
All studentsa
students onlyb
students onlyc
Participation 55.2  11.1 (147)
46.9  11.0 (45)
58.9  9.0 (102)
58.6  11.1 (159)
51.8  10.5 (71)
62.8  9.3 (97)
Values percent correct (mean  SD), with n in parentheses.
a One-way ANCOVA, p  0.001.
b t test, p  0.021.
c t test, p  0.003.
S. Freeman et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
To summarize, our data show that prescribed active learning benefits students in introductory biology more than
voluntary or “unenforced” active learning. This study also
shows that if introductory science courses are reformed in a
way that prescribes constant student participation and practice, it is likely that more students, especially those who are
at high risk of failing, will gain the discipline and intellectual
tools required to be successful in the life sciences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are deeply grateful to the students in Biology 180 for their
advice on ways to improve the course and for their encouragement
and support of this study. The risk analysis, course staffing, and
purchase of a clicker system were funded by a grant from the
University of Washington’s College of Arts and Sciences as part of
the Foundations Course program. We thank Biology Department
Chair Tom Daniel for writing this grant. Data analysis was supported by a grant from the University of Washington–Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Undergraduate Science Education Programs (Grant 52003841). We thank Michael Griego, Cathy Beyer,
and Deb McGhee of the UW Office of Educational Assessment for
developing the risk analysis and risk predictor model.