Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1789–1798
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1789–1798
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Exploiting Argument Information to Improve Event Detection
via Supervised Attention Mechanisms
Shulin Liu1,2, Yubo Chen1,2, Kang Liu1 and Jun Zhao1,2
1 National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{shulin.liu, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
This paper tackles the task of event
detection (ED), which involves identifying and categorizing events. We argue that arguments provide signiﬁcant
clues to this task, but they are either
completely ignored or exploited in an
indirect manner in existing detection
approaches. In this work, we propose to
exploit argument information explicitly
for ED via supervised attention mechanisms. In speciﬁc, we systematically
investigate the proposed model under
the supervision of diﬀerent attention
strategies. Experimental results show
that our approach advances state-ofthe-arts and achieves the best F1 score
on ACE 2005 dataset.
Introduction
In the ACE (Automatic Context Extraction)
event extraction program, an event is represented as a structure comprising an event
trigger and a set of arguments. This work
tackles event detection (ED) task, which is a
crucial part of event extraction (EE) and focuses on identifying event triggers and categorizing them. For instance, in the sentence
“He died in the hospital”, an ED system
is expected to detect a Die event along with
the trigger word “died”. Besides, the task of
EE also includes event argument extraction
(AE), which involves event argument identi-
ﬁcation and role classiﬁcation. In the above
sentence, the arguments of the event include
“He”(Role = Person) and “hospital”(Role =
Place). However, this paper does not focus on
AE and only tackles the former task.
According to the above deﬁnitions, event arguments seem to be not essentially necessary
to ED. However, we argue that they are capable of providing signiﬁcant clues for identifying
and categorizing events. They are especially
useful for ambiguous trigger words. For example, consider a sentence in ACE 2005 dataset:
Mohamad ﬁred Anwar, his former protege, in 1998.
In this sentence, “ﬁred” is the trigger word
and the other bold words are event arguments.
The correct type of the event triggered by
“ﬁred” in this case is End-Position. However, it might be easily misidentiﬁed as Attack because “ﬁred” is a multivocal word.
In this case, if we consider the phrase “former protege”, which serves as an argument (Role = Position) of the target event, we
would have more conﬁdence in predicting it as
an End-Position event.
Unfortunately, most existing methods performed event detection individually, where the
annotated arguments in training set are totally
ignored . Although some
joint learning based methods have been proposed, which tackled event detection and argument extraction simultaneously , these approaches usually only make remarkable improvements to
AE, but insigniﬁcant to ED. Table 1 illustrates
our observations. Li et al. and Nguyen
et al. are state-of-the-art joint models in symbolic and embedding methods for
event extraction, respectively. Compared with
state-of-the-art pipeline systems, both join-
Hong’s pipeline 
Li’s joint 
Chen’s pipeline 
Nguyen’s joint 
Performances of pipeline and joint
approaches on ACE 2005 dataset. The pipeline
method in each group was the state-of-the-art
system when the corresponding joint method
was proposed.
t methods achieved remarkable improvements
on AE (over 1.9 points), whereas achieved insigniﬁcant improvements on ED (less than 0.2
points). The symbolic joint method even performed worse (67.5 vs. 68.3) than pipeline system on ED.
We believe that this phenomenon may be
caused by the following two reasons. On the
one hand, since joint methods simultaneously solve ED and AE, methods following this
paradigm usually combine the loss functions
of these two tasks and are jointly trained under the supervision of annotated triggers and
arguments. However, training corpus contains
much more annotated arguments than triggers because each trigger may
be along with multiple event arguments. Thus,
the unbalanced data may cause joint models
to favor AE task. On the other hand, in implementation, joint models usually pre-predict
several potential triggers and arguments ﬁrst
and then make global inference to select correct items. When pre-predicting potential triggers, almost all existing approaches do not
leverage any argument information. In this
way, ED does hardly beneﬁt from the annotated arguments. By contrast, the component
for pre-prediction of arguments always exploits the extracted trigger information. Thus, we
argue that annotated arguments are actually
used for AE, not for ED in existing joint methods, which is also the reason we call it an indirect way to use arguments for ED.
Contrast to joint methods, this paper proposes to exploit argument information explicitly for ED. We have analyzed that arguments
are capable of providing signiﬁcant clues to
ED, which gives us an enlightenment that arguments should be focused on when performing this task. Therefore, we propose a neural
network based approach to detect events in
texts. And in the proposed approach, we adopt a supervised attention mechanism to achieve
this goal, where argument words are expected to acquire more attention than other words. The attention value of each word in a given sentence is calculated by an operation between the current word and the target trigger
candidate. Speciﬁcally, in training procedure,
we ﬁrst construct gold attentions for each trigger candidate based on annotated arguments.
Then, treating gold attentions as the supervision to train the attention mechanism, we
learn attention and event detector jointly both
in supervised manner. In testing procedure,
we use the ED model with learned attention
mechanisms to detect events.
In the experiment section, we systematically conduct comparisons on a widely used
benchmark dataset ACE20051. In order to further demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach, we also use events from FrameNet
(FN) as extra training
data, as the same as Liu et al. to alleviate the data-sparseness problem for ED to
augment the performance of the proposed approach. The experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed approach is eﬀective for ED
task, and it outperforms state-of-the-art approaches with remarkable gains.
To sum up, our main contributions are: (1)
we analyze the problem of joint models on the
task of ED, and propose to use the annotated
argument information explicitly for this task.
(2) to achieve this goal, we introduce a supervised attention based ED model. Furthermore, we systematically investigate diﬀerent
attention strategies for the proposed model.
(3) we improve the performance of ED and
achieve the best performance on the widely
used benchmark dataset ACE 2005.
Task Description
The ED task is a subtask of ACE event evaluations where an event is deﬁned as a specific occurrence involving one or more participants. Event extraction task requires certain
speciﬁed types of events, which are mentioned
1 
in the source language data, be detected. We
ﬁrstly introduce some ACE terminologies to
facilitate the understanding of this task:
Entity: an object or a set of objects in one
of the semantic categories of interests.
Entity mention: a reference to an entity
(typically, a noun phrase).
Event trigger: the main word that most
clearly expresses an event occurrence.
Event arguments: the mentions that are
involved in an event (participants).
Event mention: a phrase or sentence within which an event is described, including the
trigger and arguments.
The goal of ED is to identify event triggers
and categorize their event types. For instance,
in the sentence “He died in the hospital”, an
ED system is expected to detect a Die event
along with the trigger word “died”. The detection of event arguments “He”(Role = Person)
and “hospital”(Role = Place) is not involved
in the ED task. The 2005 ACE evaluation included 8 super types of events, with 33 subtypes. Following previous work, we treat these
simply as 33 separate event types and ignore
the hierarchical structure among them.
The Proposed Approach
Similar to existing work, we model ED as a
multi-class classiﬁcation task. In detail, given
a sentence, we treat every token in that sentence as a trigger candidate, and our goal is to
classify each of these candidates into one of 34
classes (33 event types plus an NA class).
In our approach, every word along with its
context, which includes the contextual words
and entities, constitute an event trigger candidate. Figure 1 describes the architecture of the
proposed approach, which involves two components: (i) Context Representation Learning (CRL), which reveals the representation
of both contextual words and entities via attention mechanisms; (ii) Event Detector (ED),
which assigns an event type (including the NA
type) to each candidate based on the learned
contextual representations.
Context Representation Learning
In order to prepare for Context Representation Learning (CRL), we limit the context to a ﬁxed length by trimming longer sen-
The architecture of the proposed
approach for event detection. In this ﬁgure,
w is the candidate word, [w1, ..., wn] is the
contextual words of w, and [e1, ..., en] is the
corresponding entity types of [w1, ... , wn].
tences and padding shorter sentences with a
special token when necessary. Let n be the
ﬁxed length and w0 be the current candidate
trigger word, then its contextual words Cw is
2 +1, ..., w−1, w1, ..., w n
its contextual entities, which is the corresponding entity types (including an NA type)
of Cw, is [e−n
2 +1, ..., e−1, e1, ..., e n
For convenience, we use w to denote the current word, [w1, w2, ..., wn] to denote the contextual words Cw and [e1, e2, ..., en] to denote
the contextual entities Ce in ﬁgure 1. Note
that, both w, Cw and Ce mentioned above
are originally in symbolic representation. Before entering CRL component, we transform
them into real-valued vector by looking up
word embedding table and entity type embedding table. Then we calculate attention vectors for both contextual words and entities
by performing operations between the current word w and its contexts. Finally, the contextual words representation cw and contextual entities representation ce are formed by
the weighted sum of the corresponding embeddings of each word and entity in Cw and Ce,
respectively. We will give the details in the fol-
2The current candidate trigger word w0 is not included in the context.
lowing subsections.
Word Embedding Table
Word embeddings learned from a large amount of unlabeled data have been shown to be
able to capture the meaningful semantic regularities of words . This paper uses the learned
word embeddings as the source of basic features. Speciﬁcally, we use the Skip-gram model to learn word embeddings on the NYT corpus3.
Entity Type Embedding Table
The ACE 2005 corpus annotated not only
events but also entities for each given sentence.
Following existing work , we
exploit the annotated entity information in our
ED system. We randomly initialize embedding
vector for each entity type (including the NA
type) and update it in training procedure.
Representation Learning
In this subsection, we illustrate our proposed
approach to learn representations of both contextual words and entities, which serve as inputs to the following event detector component. Recall that, we use the matrix Cw and
Ce to denote contextual words and contextual
entities, respectively.
As illustrated in ﬁgure 1, the CRL component needs three inputs: the current candidate
trigger word w, the contextual words Cw and
the contextual entities Ce. Then, two attention vectors, which reﬂect diﬀerent aspects of
the context, are calculated in the next step.
The contextual word attention vector αw
is computed based on the current word w and
its contextual words Cw. We ﬁrstly transform
each word wk (including w and every word in
Cw) into a hidden representation wk by the
following equation:
wk = f(wk  Ww)
where f(·) is a non-linear function such as the
hyperbolic tangent, and Ww is the transformation matrix. Then, we use the hidden representations to compute the attention value for each
3 
word in Cw:
exp(w  wT
i exp(w  wT
The contextual entity attention vector
αe is calculated with a similar method to αw.
exp(we  eT
i exp(we  eT
Note that, we do not use the entity information of the current candidate token to compute
the attention vector. The reason is that only
a small percentage of true event triggers are
entities4. Therefore, the entity type of a candidate trigger is meaningless for ED. Instead,
we use we, which is calculated by transforming w from the word space into the entity type
space, as the attention source.
We combine αw and αe to obtain the ﬁnal
attention vector, α = αw+αe. Finally, the contextual words representation cw and the contextual entities representation ce are formed
by weighted sum of Cw and Ce, respectively:
Event Detector
As illustrated in ﬁgure 1, we employ a threelayer (an input layer, a hidden layer and a softmax output layer) Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
(ANNs) to model the ED
task, which has been demonstrated very eﬀective for event detection by Liu et al. .
Basic ED Model
Given a sentence, as illustrated in ﬁgure 1, we
concatenate the embedding vectors of the context (including contextual words and entities)
and the current candidate trigger to serve as
the input to ED model. Then, for a given input sample x, ANN with parameter θ outputs
a vector O, where the i-th value oi of O is
the conﬁdent score for classifying x to the i-th
event type. To obtain the conditional probability p(i|x, θ), we apply a softmax operation
over all event types:
p(i|x, θ) =
4Only 10% of triggers in ACE 2005 are entities.
Given all of our (suppose T) training instances
(x(i); y(i)), we can then deﬁne the negative loglikelihood loss function:
log p(y(i)|x(i), θ)
We train the model by using a simple optimization technique called stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) over shuﬄed mini-batches with
the Adadelta rule . Regularization is implemented by a dropout and L2 norm.
Supervised Attention
In this subsection, we introduce supervised attention to explicitly use annotated argument
information to improve ED. Our basic idea is
simple: argument words should acquire more
attention than other words. To achieve this
goal, we ﬁrst construct vectors using annotated arguments as the gold attentions. Then, we
employ them as supervision to train the attention mechanism.
Constructing Gold Attention Vectors
Our goal is to encourage argument words to
obtain more attention than other words. To
achieve this goal, we propose two strategies to
construct gold attention vectors:
S1: only pay attention to argument
words. That is, all argument words in the given context obtain the same attention, whereas
other words get no attention. For candidates
without any annotated arguments in context
(such as negative samples), we force all entities
to average the whole attention. Figure 2 illustrates the details, where α∗is the ﬁnal gold
attention vector.
Figure 2: An example of S1 to construct gold
attention vector. The word ﬁred is the trigger
candidate, and underline words are arguments
of ﬁred annotated in the corpus.
S2: pay attention to both arguments
and the words around them. The assumption is that, not only arguments are important
to ED, the words around them are also helpful. And the nearer a word is to arguments,
the more attention it should obtain. Inspired
by Mi et al. , we use a gaussian distribution g(·) to model the attention distribution
of words around arguments. In detail, given an
instance, we ﬁrst obtain the raw attention vector α in the same manner as S1 (see ﬁgure 2).
Then, we create a new vector α
′ with all points
initialized with zero, and for each αi = 1, we
′ by the following algorithm:
Algorithm 1: Updating α
for k ∈{−w, ..., 0, ..., w} do
i+k + g(|k|, µ, σ)
where w is the window size of the attention
mechanism and µ, σ are hyper-parameters of
the gaussian distribution. Finally, we normalize α
′ to obtain the target attention vector α∗.
Similar with S1, we treat all entities in the
context as arguments if the current candidate
does not has any annotated arguments (such
as netative samples).
Jointly Training ED and Attention
Given the gold attention α∗(see subsection
3.2.2) and the machine attention α produced
by our model (see subsection 3.1.3), we employ the square error as the loss function of
attentions:
Combining equation 7 and equation 8, we de-
ﬁne the joint loss function of our proposed
model as follows:
′(θ) = J(θ) + λD(θ)
where λ is a hyper-parameter for trade-oﬀbetween J and D. Similar to basic ED model, we
minimize the loss function J
′(θ) by using SGD
over shuﬄed mini-batches with the Adadelta
update rule.
Experiments
Dataset and Experimental Setup
We conducted experiments on ACE 2005
dataset. For the purpose of comparison, we fol-
lowed the evaluation of : randomly selected 30 articles from diﬀerent genres as the
development set, and subsequently conducted
a blind test on a separate set of 40 ACE 2005
newswire documents. We used the remaining
529 articles as our training set.
Hyper-parameter Setting
Hyper-parameters are tuned on the development dataset. We set the dimension of word
embeddings to 200, the dimension of entity
type embeddings to 50, the size of hidden layer to 300, the output size of word transformation matrix Ww in equation 1 to 200, the
batch size to 100, the hyper-parameter for the
L2 norm to 10−6 and the dropout rate to 0.6.
In addition, we use the standard normal distribution to model attention distributions of
words around arguments, which means that
µ = 0.0, σ = 1.0, and the window size is set to
3 (see Subsection 3.2.2). The hyper-parameter
λ in equation 9 is various for diﬀerent attention strategies, we will give its setting in the
next section.
Correctness of Our Assumption
In this section, we conduct experiments on
ACE 2005 corpus to demonstrate the correctness of our assumption that argument information is crucial to ED. To achieve this goal,
we design a series of systems for comparison.
ANN is the basic event detection model, in
which the hyper-parameter λ is set to 0. This
system does not employ argument information
and computes attentions without supervision
(see Subsection 3.1.3).
ANN-ENT assigns λ with 0, too. The difference is that it constructs the attention vector α by forcing all entities in the context to
average the attention instead of computing it
in the manner introduced in Subsection 3.1.3.
Since all arguments are entities, this system is
designed to investigate the eﬀects of entities.
ANN-Gold1 uses the gold attentions constructed by strategy S1 in both training and
testing procedure.
ANN-Gold2 is akin to ANN-Gold1, but
uses the second strategy to construct its gold
attentions.
Note that, in order to avoid the interference
of attention mechanisms, the last two systems
are designed to use argument information (via
gold attentions) in both training and testing
procedure. Thus both ANN-Gold1 and ANN-
Gold2 assign λ with 0.
ANN-Gold1†
ANN-Gold2†
Experimental results on ACE 2005
corpus. † designates the systems that employ
argument information.
Table 2 compares these systems on ACE
2005 corpus. From the table, we observe that
systems with argument information (the last
two systems) signiﬁcantly outperform systems without argument information (the ﬁrst two systems), which demonstrates that argument information is very useful for this task.
Moreover, since all arguments are entities, for
preciseness we also investigate that whether
ANN-Gold1/2 on earth beneﬁts from entities
or arguments. Compared with ANN-ENT (revising that this system only uses entity information), ANN-Gold1/2 performs much better, which illustrates that entity information
is not enough and further demonstrates that
argument information is necessary for ED.
Results on ACE 2005 Corpus
In this section, we conduct experiments on
ACE 2005 corpus to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach. Firstly, we introduce systems implemented in this work.
ANN-S1 uses gold attentions constructed
by strategy S1 as supervision to learn attention. In our experiments, λ is set to 1.0.
ANN-S2 is akin to ANN-S1, but use strategy S2 to construct gold attentions and the
hyper-parameter λ is set to 5.0.
These two systems both employ supervised
attention mechanisms. For comparison, we use
an unsupervised-attention system ANN as our
baseline, which is introduced in Subsection 4.2.
In addition, we select the following state-ofthe-art methods for comparison.
1). Li’s joint model extracts
events based on structure prediction. It is the
best structure-based system.
Li’s joint model 
Liu’s PSL 
Liu’s FN-Based 
Ngyuen’s joint 
Skip-CNN 
Table 3: Experimental results on ACE 2005.
The ﬁrst group illustrates the performances of
state-of-the-art approaches. The second group
illustrates the performances of the proposed
approach. † designates the systems that employ arguments information.
2). Liu’s PSL employs
both latent local and global information for
event detection. It is the best-reported featurebased system.
3). Liu’s FN-Based approach leverages the annotated corpus of
FrameNet to alleviate data sparseness problem
of ED based on the observation that frames in
FN are analogous to events in ACE.
4). Ngyen’s joint model 
employs a bi-directional RNN to jointly extract event triggers and arguments. It is the
best-reported representation-based joint approach proposed on this task.
2016) introduces the non-consecutive convolution to capture non-consecutive k-grams
for event detection. It is the best reported
representation-based approach on this task.
Table 3 presents the experimental results on
ACE 2005 corpus. From the table, we make the
following observations:
performs unexpectedly poorly,
which indicates that unsupervised-attention
mechanisms do not work well for ED. We believe the reason is that the training data of
ACE 2005 corpus is insuﬃcient to train a precise attention in an unsupervised manner, considering that data sparseness is an important
issue of ED .
2). With argument information employed
via supervised attention mechanisms, both
ANN-S1 and ANN-S2 outperform ANN with
remarkable gains, which illustrates the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach.
3). ANN-S2 outperforms ANN-S1, but the
latter achieves higher precision. It is not diﬃcult to understand. On the one hand, strategy S1 only focuses on argument words,
which provides accurate information to identify event type, thus ANN-S1 could achieve
higher precision. On the other hand, S2 focuses on both arguments and words around them,
which provides more general but noised clues.
Thus, ANN-S2 achieves higher recall with a
little loss of precision.
state-of-the-art
approaches, our method ANN-S2 achieves the
best performance. We also perform a t-test
(p ⩽0.05), which indicates that our method
signiﬁcantly outperforms all of the compared
methods. Furthermore, another noticeable advantage of our approach is that it achieves
much higher precision than state-of-the-arts.
Augmentation with FrameNet
Recently, Liu et al. used events automatically detected from FN as extra training
data to alleviate the data-sparseness problem
for event detection. To further demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach, we
also use the events from FN to augment the
performance of our approach.
In this work, we use the events published
by Liu et al. 5 as extra training data.
However, their data can not be used in the
proposed approach without further processing,
because it lacks of both argument and entity
information. Figure 3 shows several examples
of this data.
Examples of events detected from
FrameNet ).
Processing of Events from FN
FrameNet based on the observation that
frames in FN are analogous to events in ACE
5 
(lexical unit of a frame ↔trigger of an event, frame elements of a frame ↔arguments of
an event). All events they published are also
frames in FN. Thus, we treat frame elements
annotated in FN corpus as event arguments.
Since frames generally contain more frame elements than events, we only use core6 elements
in this work. Moreover, to obtain entity information, we use RPI Joint Information Extraction System7 to label ACE entity mentions.
Experimental Results
We use the events from FN as extra training data and keep the development and test
datasets unchanged.Table 4 presents the experimental results.
ANN +FrameNet
ANN-S1 +FrameNet
ANN-S2 +FrameNet
Experimental results on ACE 2005
corpus. “+FrameNet” designates the systems
that are augmented by events from FrameNet.
From the results, we observe that:
1). With extra training data, ANN achieves
signiﬁcant improvements on F1 measure (66.7
vs. 65.0). This result, to some extent, demonstrates the correctness of our assumption that
the data sparseness problem is the reason that
causes unsupervised attention mechanisms to
be ineﬀective to ED.
2). Augmented with external data, both
ANN-S1 and ANN-S2 achieve higher recall
with a little loss of precision. This is to be expected. On the one hand, more positive training samples consequently make higher recall. On the other hand, the extra event samples are automatically extracted from FN, thus
false-positive samples are inevitable to be involved, which may result in hurting the precision. Anyhow, with events from FN, our approach achieves higher F1 score.
6FrameNet classiﬁes frame elements into three
groups: core, peripheral and extra-thematic.
7 
Related Work
Event detection is an increasingly hot and
challenging research topic in NLP. Generally,
existing approaches could roughly be divided
into two groups.
The ﬁrst kind of approach tackled this
task under the supervision of annotated triggers and entities, but totally ignored annotated arguments. The majority of existing
work followed this paradigm, which includes
feature-based methods and representationbased methods. Feature-based methods exploited a diverse set of strategies to convert
classiﬁcation clues (i.e., POS tags, dependency relations) into feature vectors . Representation-based methods typically represent candidate event mentions by
embeddings and feed them into neural networks .
The second kind of approach, on the contrast, tackled event detection and argument
extraction simultaneously, which is called joint
approach . Joint approach is proposed to capture internal
and external dependencies of events, including trigger-trigger, argument-argument and
trigger-argument dependencies. Theoretically,
both ED and AE are expected to beneﬁt from
joint methods because triggers and arguments
are jointly considered. However, in practice,
existing joint methods usually only make remarkable improvements to AE, but insignificant to ED. Diﬀerent from them, this work
investigates the exploitation of argument information to improve the performance of ED.
Conclusions
In this work, we propose a novel approach to
model argument information explicitly for ED
via supervised attention mechanisms. Besides,
we also investigate two strategies to construct gold attentions using the annotated arguments. To demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the
proposed method, we systematically conduc-
t a series of experiments on the widely used
benchmark dataset ACE 2005. Moreover, we
also use events from FN to augment the performance of the proposed approach. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, which demonstrates that the proposed approach is eﬀective
for event detection.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61533018) and
the National Basic Research Program of China
(No. 2014CB340503). And this research work
was also supported by Google through focused
research awards program.