BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
VOLUmE 290
25 mAY 1985
A case-control study of cervical cancer screening in
north east Scotland
J ELIZABETH MACGREGOR,
SUSAN M MOSS,
D MAXWELL PARKIN,
NICHOLAS E DAY
To estimate the relative risk of invasive cervical cancer
succeeding
result the screening records of all women tested in the
north east of Scotland were examined as the basis for a
case-control study. The cases consisted of 115 women in
whom invasive cervical cancer had been diagnosed in
1968-82 and who had appeared in the screening records
once before diagnosis. For each patient
controls were selected from women of the same age who
appeared in the screening records before the date of
diagnosis in the patient. If the
cancer had
been detected by screening the controls were chosen
from women of the same age screened the same year.
A comparison was made between cases and controls of
the number of negative smears taken before the diagnosis.
The results showed a high relative protection (inverse
of the relative risk) in the first two years after a negative
test, falling steadily as time since the last negative test
elapsed. Even after 10 years, however, a considerable
residual effect was observed.
Introduction
Considerable evidence exists for the effectiveness of cervical
cytology screening
in preventing
invasive carcinoma of the
cervix. This
derives from comparisons
of time trends and
geographical differences in incidence in relation to screening
activity and from uncontrolled studies comparing incidence in
screened and unscreened groups of women.'
2 A recent approach to the evaluation of non-experimental screening programmes
of case-control
(unpublished data) have considered the design of such studies
in detail, in particular the different approaches requiredaccording to whether the screening test studied is intended to detect
early invasive disease or a precancer state.
Although screening for cervical cancer is generally accepted
to be effective in reducing morbidity and mortality from the
screening should be offered. Here we consider the question of
how often screening should be offered. One way in which this
question may be considered is in terms of the reduction in risk
of invasive disease among women with
a previous negative
smear in terms of the time elapsed since the smear was taken.
The risk will be relatively low immediately after
a negative
result and will rise as time elapses if further screening is not
Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen
J ELIZABETH MACGREGOR, MD, FRCPATH, senior lecturer and consultant
Descriptive
Epidemiology,
International
Research on Cancer, 69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France
SUSAN M MOSS, MSc, research fellow
D MAXWELL PARKIN, MD, medical officer
Unit of Biostatistics and Field Studies, Division of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, International Agency for Research on Cancer
NICHOLAS E DAY, PHD, chief
Correspondence to: Dr N E Day.
performed. Once the risk has become unacceptably high-for
example, 20% of that among unscreened women-a further
screening test would be indicated. The increase in risk after a
smear depends
on the duration of the preclinical
detectable phase and on the sensitivity of the test.5 One way of
estimating the distribution of the preclinical phase is by comparing age specific incidences of varying degrees of dysplasia in
situ and microinvasive lesions with corresponding incidences
Change in standardised incidence ratio for cervical cancer in
Aberdeen, 1957-81. 
for invasive cancer.6 A major drawback of this approach, apart
from the subjective nature of the diagnosis of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, is its insensitivity to the left hand tail of
the distribution-that is, the proportion of lesions that progress
relatively rapidly. This proportion, however,
is precisely the
quantity of interest
more slowly developing lesions
would be detected by almost any screening strategy.7 A more
sensitive approach to estimate the left hand tail of the distribution is to follow up a population of women after they have
yielded a negative screening result and to observe directly the
increasing incidence of invasive disease.8 Rather than calculate
incidences from the entire cohort relative changes in incidence
may be obtained by sampling from the cohort-a case-control
Here we report the results of such
a case-control study,
using the screening records of women examined as part of the
programme in the Grampian (north east) region of Scotland.
This programme was started in 19609 and aimed at the initial
examination of all married women aged 25-60, followed by
rescreening every five years.'0 The figure shows the reduction
in the incidence of cervical cancer in the city of Aberdeen
programme. The
laboratory in Aberdeen analyses all of the smears performed in
the region, and the records of individuals
are matched and
collated, so that a complete screening history is available for
all women who have had at least one smear. The cases in our
study comprised all patients with invasive cervical cancer, and
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
on 26 March 2025
 
Downloaded from
25 May 1985.
10.1136/bmj.290.6481.1543 on
Br Med J (Clin Res Ed): first published as
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
VOLUME 290
25 MAY 1985
TABLE I-Relative protection according to time since last negative smear
Months since last negative smear
No previous
Patients with symptomatic cervical cancer
Patients with screening detected stage I cervical cancer
Relative protection
95% Confidence interval
the exposure of interest was the screening history in terms of
the number and timing of negative smears.
This study is part of a larger programme coordinated by the
Intemational Agency for Research on Cancer in which the
results of several screening programmes are being evaluated in
a similar way.
Subjects and methods
All cases of invasive squamous carcinoma of the cervix for the years
to 1982 in the Grampian region were identified from the
inpatient records and records of the central pathology laboratory or
the regional cancer registry, or both. The screening histories of the
patients with cervical cancer were determined; the case series for the
present study comprised those
115 women with cervical cancer
who had attended for screening at least once. Only 16 (14%) of the
women concerned were aged under 35, and 22 (19%) were aged 60 or
Controls were drawn from a computer file comprising the screening
histories of a 10% random sample of all women in the region who had
undergone at least one screening test.
The women with cervical cancer were separated into two groups:
those whose cancer was judged to have presented symptomatically
(group 1; n = 35) and those whose cancer had been detected by
routine screening (group 2; n = 80). Of those in group 2, 50 had stage I
at diagnosis and were considered
to be asymptomatic,
screen detected cases. Thirty, however, had tumours of stage II or
worse and may well not have admitted to symptoms at the time of
diagnosis.
It was evident that the screening histories of the patients in groups 1
and 2 differed as many of the women in group 2 had attended about
five years after their previous screening test, in response to an invitation to rescreening. Controls for the two groups were therefore
drawn separately. Five random controls, matched for year of birth
and with the additional constraint that each must have entered the
study (at the time of her first negative smear) before the date of
diagnosis of cancer in the patient, were drawn for each of the 35
women in group 1. Five controls were again drawn, according to the
same criteria, for each of the 80 women with cancer detected by
screening, but from women who had been screened within six months
either side of the date of the screening test at which the cancer was
diagnosed. This was to ensure that both patients and controls were
drawn from the same population of women-namely, those attending
for routine (asymptomatic) screening.
The screening histories of patients and controls were summarised
in an identical manner. The definition of a negative Pap test was
based on the definition of positive smears used by Boyes et al.11
Their "class 3" or worse smears we classified as positive. "Class 2"
corresponded to a smear reported to be atypical in our study; such
smears were classified as positive if three or more consecutive smears
in the same woman were class 2, if there were two or more consecutive
class 2 smears spanning an interval of 10 months or more, or if the
smear was followed directly by a smear of class 3 or higher or by a
histological demonstration of dysplasia
or carcinoma
invasive carcinoma.
Any smears
that had been recorded
as "unsatisfactory" were
excluded, and any negative smear occurring within six months of a
previous negative smear was discounted, as an attempt to eliminate
bias due to smears being repeated once or more before a diagnosis
For each subject the number of negative smears and the length of
time between the last negative smear and date of exit were computed.
The date of exit for patients was taken as the date of diagnosis; for
it was the date of diagnosis of the matched patient. The
screening test at time of diagnosis was not included in the screening
history of either patients in group 2 or their controls. Counting of
negative smears was stopped at the first occurrence of a positive
smear because of the likelihood of subsequent negative smears being
false negatives.
As no records of emigration were available from the population
we did not know whether all the controls for the women in group 1
were still alive and resident in the region at their date of exit. Of
these 175 controls, 77 had further screening records after this date;
details of the remaining 98 were sent to the National Health Service
central register, and 62 of these were confirmed as being present in
Aberdeen at the time of diagnosis of their matched patient. We did
not include the remaining 36 controls who were not traced in the
register as we could not be certain that they were resident at the date
on which their matched patient was diagnosed, although their inclusion made little difference to the results. The controls of the
patients in group 2 were by definition still present at the date of
exit as they were screened at this time.
The analysis was first carried out separately for groups 1 and 2,
group 2 being restricted to the 50 patients with tumours detected at
stages IA to IB as a further attempt to exclude any cases that were
in reality symptomatic and had been diagnosed by a non-routine
smear. The two groups were then combined and a test for heterogeneity carried out.
A logistic regression analysis with conditional likelihood functions
was used to estimate the relative risks associated with time since
last negative smear for different time intervals compared with 10 or
more years and for different numbers of previous negative smears
compared with one previous negative. The analysis was done with
the computer program PECAN.'2 The results obtained were similar
to those from a classic analysis for the variables considered separately,
but the logistic approach allowed the joint effect to be modelled and
provided a way of handling the variable number of controls per case
resulting from the exclusion of some of the controls for the patients
in group 1.
The effect of screening is expressed here as "relative protections"
-that is, the inverses of the relative risks. The reference category for
these estimates of relative protection is the group of women with a
negative screening result obtained 10 or more years previously.
Of the women with cancer detected by screening (group 2) at
stage IA or IB, 26 (52%) had cancer diagnosed at their first appearance and had no record of a previous smear in the Grampian
screening programme. Only 41 (16%) of their controls had not undergone a previous test, so that the relative protection of at least one
previous negative smear was 5-5 (unmatched analysis, 95%
confidence interval 3-0-10 1). Of the women with symptomatic cancer
(group 1), 23 (66%) had had a negative smear less than 10 years
before diagnosis compared with 113 (81%) of the controls, giving a
relative protection of 2 3 for a negative screen within the past 10 years
(unmatched analysis, 95% confidence interval 10-5-3).
Table I shows the effect of length of time from last negative smear
to diagnosis. As a test for heterogeneity showed no significant difference between the estimates for symptomatic and screen detected
cases the pooled estimates of relative protection are presented. In
neither group did any cases have a negative smear in the 12 months
before diagnosis, giving
an "infinite"
relative protection
category. Thereafter the relative protection decreased progressively
with increasing time since last negative smear, with a relative protection of 1 9 (95% confidence interval 0 4-4-5) remaining at 48-
71 months; the trend among those with at least one previous negative
smear was highly significant (X2 =28-6, p<0-0001). There was an
apparent threefold relative risk of no previous negative smear against
one 10 or more years before diagnosis.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
on 26 March 2025
 
Downloaded from
25 May 1985.
10.1136/bmj.290.6481.1543 on
Br Med J (Clin Res Ed): first published as
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
VOLUME 290
25 MAY 1985
Table II shows the equivalent results for patients in group 2 with
tumours of stage II or worse. None of these patients had had a negative
smear within 36 months before diagnosis, and the apparent relative
risk of no previous negative smear against one 10 or more years
before diagnosis was 10-fold. There were 22 patients (73%) with no
smear before the one leading to the diagnosis of invasive cancer;
many of them may have presented with symptoms, and there may be
a high proportion of women who never attend screening programmes
and are at intrinsic high risk, so that this value of 10-fold may be
biased upwards.
Table III shows the effect of number of previous negative smears.
Again, the relative protections are a pooled estimate for the two groups
of cases. An apparent protective effect was found for three or more
previous negative smears compared with only one previous negative
(relative protection = 5 2, 95°% confidence interval 19-15 2). Tables IV
and V give the relative protection associated with the number of
previous tests and the interval since the last negative smear, while
simultaneously controlling for the other variable. The protection
achieved by increasing the number of previous tests from one to
three or more was considerably reduced (2 7 in place of 5 2) and no
longer significant
confidence
interval 0-9-8-6), whereas
effect of time since last negative smear did not alter substantially.
TABLE v-Relative protection with time and number of negative smears
No of negative smears
(after adjustment for time since last negative smear)
Relative protection
95 00o Confidence interval
who have attended for routine screening and adjusting for the
number of previous negative tests.
The screening histories of natients and controls were derived
from records of attendance in the Grampian region, and the
possible effects of migration leading to incomplete ascertainment
of screening history must be considered. The potential bias
due to incomplete screening histories in controls who might
have left the region before the date of diagnosis of the matched
patient was avoided by the exclusion of all such women from the
with asymptomatic
TABLE iI-Relative protection according to time since last negative smear for women with cervical cancer of stage II or worse detected by
Months since last negative smear
No previous negative smear
Patients with screening detected stage II cancer
Relative protection
TABLE iiI-Relative protection according to number of negative smears
Number of negative smears
Patients with symptomatic cervical
Patients with screen detected stage I
cervical cancer
Relative protection
95 °O Confidence interval
TABLE Iv-Relative protection with time since last negative smear
Months since last negative smear
(after adjustment for number of smears)
72-119 >120
Relative protection
Confidence interval
1 0-11 4 0 5-5-2 0 7-3.9 0 4-2-7
Discussion
One of the problems associated with case-control studies of
screening is that of selection bias. Known risk factors for cervical
cancer have been shown to be inversely related to probability
of attending for screening13; this would lead to overestimation
of the relative protection associated with a previous smear and
may have accounted for some of the large protective effect (5 5)
of one or more tests versus none in the patients with cervical
cancer detected by screening. A
relative protection
magnitude, however,
cannot plausibly
confounding,'4 so presumably much of the effect was real. The main
interest, moreover,
lies in the relative protections associated
with different times since the last negative test. These estimates
are modified only slightly by adjusting
for the number
previous negative tests (comparison of tables
I and IV). We
consider it unlikely that any substantial degree of confounding
would remain after both limiting the study to those women
cervical cancer (those in group 2) the criteria for matching
assured that all the controls were resident in the Grampian
region at their date of exit from the study. Thus, of the 425
controls originally chosen to match the patients and shown in
table I, only 36 were excluded because their place of residence
at the time of exit could not be ascertained. Screening histories
of immigrants to the Grampian region would have been incomplete in relation to both the existence of previous tests (in
the patients in group 2) and the number of previous tests.
This deficiency would not, however, have biased estimates of
relative protection unless there was a difference in the proportion of immigrants among patients and controls; we have no
information on this point, but there is no reason to suppose
this to have been so. In particular, immigration would not have
affected the estimates of relative protection by time since last
negative smear; by definition, women who contributed to these
estimates were resident in the region at the time the previous
smear was registered.
The results presented here show a protective effect for the
Pap test, a protection which is high immediately after a negative
smear and declines as time elapses. The absence of any patients
with a negative smear within the previous 12 months and the
small number with a negative smear 12-23 months previously
suggest a high sensitivity of screening, as does the lack of any
significant protective effect of two or more previous negative
smears compared with one. The degree of protection is therefore
high in the first three years after a negative smear but falls
steadily thereafter, so that those screened six to 10 years previously have no greater protection than those who have delayed
more than 10 years since a smear.
The estimate of a remaining threefold relative protection of a
negative smear 10 or more years previously compared with no
previous negative smear may be exaggerated owing to some of
the smears by which the patients who had had no previous
smear were detected being taken non-routinely. Nevertheless,
some of the effect is likely to have been real, indicating that the
tail of the distribution of asymptomatic disease duration extends
beyond 10 years. This in turn implies that the relative protection
at shorter time intervals, as given in table I, will be underestimates of the true effects.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
on 26 March 2025
 
Downloaded from
25 May 1985.
10.1136/bmj.290.6481.1543 on
Br Med J (Clin Res Ed): first published as
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
VOLUME 290
25 MAy 1985
Several recent studies of the efficacy of screening for cervical
case-control
three drawing
controls from the general population and hence including both
patients and controls who had never been screened, compared
with our study in which all patients and controls had been
In Toronto
Clarke and Anderson
found a relative protection against invasive cervical cancer of
2-7 in women who had been screened in the previous five years
compared with those who had not; the effect was not appreciably
changed when several possible confounding variables such as
socioeconomic state, marital state, age at marriage, and age at
intercourse were
considered.15 Raymond
obtained a relative protection of 3-2 associated with one or more
previous negative smears in their study in Geneva, in which
cases and controls were matched on nationality and marital
state as well as age.,6 The apparent diminution of this effect
with increasing number of negative smears may be explained
by repeated screening of patients with symptomatic tumours.
For both these studies estimates of relative protection as a
function of time since the last negative smear will soon be
available (personal communication). In Cali, Colombia, Aristizabal et al estimated a relative risk of 9 4 for invasive cervical
cancer among women not screened 12-72 months before the
date of diagnosis of the case compared with those screened.17
This effect refers largely to a period 12-35 months before the
date of diagnosis. Recently, a study in Milan, using hospital
controls and relying on interview data to determine screening
history, found a relative protection against invasive cervical
cancer of 3-9 in women reporting at least one previous screen
compared with those never screened, although
positive or
abnormal smears may have been included.18
Further studies will help to sharpen the estimates of relative
protection as a function of time elapsed since a negative screen
and to determine the effect of age. Our results suggest that high
protection is given certainly in the first three years, but that by
the seventh year much of this protection has disappeared,
although there
still some protective effect relative to no
screening even after 10 years. While, however, the percentage
of invasive
cancers prevented
will obviously increase with
successively shorter intervals between rescreening, the number
of screening tests required to prevent an invasive cancer will
rise, and it is this trade off that must be considered when
formulating any screening policy either for a community or for
the individual.