The diploid genome sequence of an Asian
individual
Jun Wang1,2,3,4*, Wei Wang1,3*, Ruiqiang Li1,3,4*, Yingrui Li1,5,6*, Geng Tian1,7, Laurie Goodman1, Wei Fan1,
Junqing Zhang1, Jun Li1, Juanbin Zhang1, Yiran Guo1,7, Binxiao Feng1, Heng Li1,8, Yao Lu1, Xiaodong Fang1,
Huiqing Liang1, Zhenglin Du1, Dong Li1, Yiqing Zhao1,7, Yujie Hu1,7, Zhenzhen Yang1, Hancheng Zheng1,
Ines Hellmann9, Michael Inouye8, John Pool9, Xin Yi1,7, Jing Zhao1, Jinjie Duan1, Yan Zhou1, Junjie Qin1,7, Lijia Ma1,7,
Guoqing Li1, Zhentao Yang1, Guojie Zhang1,7, Bin Yang1, Chang Yu1, Fang Liang1,7, Wenjie Li1, Shaochuan Li1,
Dawei Li1, Peixiang Ni1, Jue Ruan1,7, Qibin Li1,7, Hongmei Zhu1, Dongyuan Liu1, Zhike Lu1, Ning Li1,7, Guangwu Guo1,7,
Jianguo Zhang1, Jia Ye1, Lin Fang1, Qin Hao1,7, Quan Chen1,5, Yu Liang1,7, Yeyang Su1,7, A. san1,7, Cuo Ping1,7,
Shuang Yang1, Fang Chen1,7, Li Li1, Ke Zhou1, Hongkun Zheng1,4, Yuanyuan Ren1, Ling Yang1, Yang Gao1,6,
Guohua Yang1,2, Zhuo Li1, Xiaoli Feng1, Karsten Kristiansen4, Gane Ka-Shu Wong1,10, Rasmus Nielsen9,
Richard Durbin8, Lars Bolund1,11, Xiuqing Zhang1,6, Songgang Li1,2,5, Huanming Yang1,2,3 & Jian Wang1,2,3
Here we present the first diploid genome sequence of an Asian individual. The genome was sequenced to 36-fold average
coverage using massively parallel sequencing technology. We aligned the short reads onto the NCBI human reference
genome to 99.97% coverage, and guided by the reference genome, we used uniquely mapped reads to assemble a
high-quality consensus sequence for 92% of the Asian individual’s genome. We identified approximately 3 million
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) inside this region, of which 13.6% were not in the dbSNP database. Genotyping
analysis showed that SNP identification had high accuracy and consistency, indicating the high sequence quality of this
assembly. We also carried out heterozygote phasing and haplotype prediction against HapMap CHB and JPT haplotypes
(Chinese and Japanese, respectively), sequence comparison with the two available individual genomes (J. D. Watson and J.
C. Venter), and structural variation identification. These variations were considered for their potential biological impact. Our
sequence data and analyses demonstrate the potential usefulness of next-generation sequencing technologies for personal
The completion of a highly refined, encyclopaedic human genome
sequence1,2 was a major scientific development. Such reference
sequences have accelerated human genetic analyses and contributed
to advances in biomedical research. Given the growth of information
on genetic risk factors, researchers are developing new tools and analyses for deciphering the genetic composition of a single person to
refine medical intervention at a level tailored to the individual. The
announcements that J. Craig Venter and James D. Watson have had
their genomes sequenced3,4, along with the announcement of the
PersonalGenomeProject5, highlightthegrowthofpersonalgenomics.
Using a massively parallel DNA sequencing method, we have generated the first diploid genome sequence of a Han Chinese individual,
a representative of an East Asian population that accounts for nearly
30% of the human population. The consensus sequence of the donor,
assembled as pseudo-chromosomes, serves as one of the first
sequences available from a non-European population and adds to
the small number of publicly available individual genome sequences.
This sequence and the analyses herein provide an initial step towards
attaining information on population and individual genetic variation, and, given the use and analysis of next-generation sequencing
technology, constitute advancement towards the goal of providing
personalized medicine.
Data production and short read alignment
The genomic DNA used in this study came from an anonymous male
Han Chinese individual who has no known genetic diseases. The
donor gave written consent for public release of the genomic data
for use in scientific research (see Supplementary Information for
consent forms).
We carried out G-banded karyotyping to check the overall structural suitability of this DNA for use as a genomic standard for other
genetic comparison and found no obvious chromosomal abnormalities (Supplementary Fig. 1). We then proceeded with whole-genome
sequencing of the individual’s DNA (hereafter referred to as YH)
using Illumina Genome Analysers (GA; see Methods for details).
To minimize the likelihood of systematic biases in genome representation, multiple DNA libraries were prepared and data were generated
single-end
paired-end
(Supplementary Table 1). The read lengths averaged 35 base pairs
(bp), and the two paired-end libraries had a span size of 135 bp
1Beijing Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518000, China. 2Genome Research Institute, Shenzhen University Medical School, Shenzhen 518000, China. 3National Engineering
Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Beijing 101300, China. 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M DK-5230, Denmark.
5College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. 6Beijing Genomics Institute, Beijing Institute of Genomics of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101300, China.
7The Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100062, China. 8The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge
CB10 1SA, UK. 9Departments of Integrative Biology and Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 10Department of Biological Sciences and Department of
Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, T6G 2E9, Canada. 11Insitute of Human Genetics, University of Aarhus, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Vol 456 |6 November 2008 |doi:10.1038/nature07484
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
and 440 bp, respectively. We collected a total of 3.3 billion reads of
high-quality data: approximately 117.7 gigabases (Gb) of sequence
(72 Gb from single-end reads and 45.7 Gb from paired-end reads).
The data have been deposited in the EBI/NCBI Short Read Archive
(accession number ERA000005). (See Supplementary Information
for details concerning the availability of all data.)
Using the Short Oligonucleotide Alignment Program (SOAP)6,
102.9 Gb of sequence (87.4% of all data) was properly aligned to the
NCBI human reference genome (build 36.1; hereafter called NCBI36).
This resulted in a 36-fold average coverage of NCBI36 (Table 1). The
effective genome coverage of the single- and paired-end sequencing
was 22.5-fold and 13.5-fold, respectively. In total, 99.97% of NCBI36
(excluding Ns, which are undetermined sequence of the reference
genome) was covered by at least one uniquely or repeatedly aligned
read (uniquely aligned reads had only one best hit on NBCI36; repeatedly aligned reads had multiple possible alignments; see Methods for
About 86.1% (83.6% of single-end and 90.2% of paired-end reads)
of the mapped reads could be uniquely aligned and had an average
per-nucleotide difference of 1.45% from the NCBI36 sequence. (See
Supplementary Information for additional sequence alignment
assessment.) We used the alignment of uniquely mapped single-end
and paired-endreadstobuildtheconsensusYHgenomesequenceand
to detect genetic variations: SNPs, insertions and deletions (indels),
and structural variations.
SNP and indel identification
For SNP identification, we estimated the genotype and its accuracy
for each nucleotide using Bayesian theory with probabilities based on
previous observation of a SNP at that site. Each location was assigned
a score value as a measure of SNP call accuracy (see Methods for
For SNP detection, we used a series of filtering criteria (see
Methods) to remove unreliable portions of the consensus sequence
from the analysis. The resulting calculated YH genome consensus
sequence covered 92% of the NCBI36 sequence (92.6% of the autosomes; 83.1% of the sex chromosomes), in which we identified 3.07
million SNPs. The remaining 8% of the reference sequence was composed of either repetitive sequence (6.6%) that did not have any
uniquely mapped reads or sequence that didn’t pass our filtering
steps (1.4%).
For indel identification, we required at least three pairs of reads to
define an indel. We only considered paired-end read-gapped alignments that had insertion or deletion sizes of 3 bp or less to avoid
creating alignment errors. Confining indel size was necessary to
obtain the best detection accuracy given our short-read sequencing
strategy. From this analysis, we identified a total of 135,262 indels.
SNP and indel identification accuracy
We assessed our SNP calling accuracy by comparing the identified
SNPs in the YH sequence with dbSNP7. We found that 2.26 million
(73.5%) of the YH SNPs were present in dbSNP as validated SNPs,
and 0.4 million (12.9%) were present as non-validated SNPs. The
remaining 0.42 million SNPs were novel (Fig. 1a). Of the 135,262
small indels that we identified, the percentage that overlapped dbSNP
indels was much lower than that of the YH SNPs (40.9% compared
with 86.4%, respectively). Additionally, most (59.1%) of the indels
were novel (Fig. 1b). This isn’t surprising given that dbSNP contains
only 13,727 validated and 1,589,264 non-validated 1–3-bp indels.
We also used the Illumina 1M BeadChip for genotyping. The YH
consensus sequence covered 99.22% of the genotyped SNPs with a
concordance rate at 99.90% (Table 2). We used polymerase chain reaction(PCR)amplificationandtraditionalSangersequencingtechnology
on a subset of the inconsistent SNPs and small indels to determine
whether they conformed to the genotyping or GA sequencing results
(Supplementary Table 2). Of the 50 SNPs examined, 82.0% (41 SNPs)
were consistent with the GA sequencing, indicating that the YH
genome has a 99.98% accuracy over these genotyped sites (Supplementary Table 3). We also validated 100% of the PCR-amplified YH
genome non-coding-region indels and 90% of the frameshift indels
(Supplementary Table 4).
Depth effect on genome sequencing
To determine what sequencing depth provides the best genome
coverage and lowest SNP-calling error rates for a diploid human
genome, we randomly extracted subsets of reads with different
average depths from all the mapped reads on chromosome 12, which
has a relatively moderate number of repeats. SNPs were identified
using GA sequencing and then compared with the genotyping data.
We applied the same filtering steps as used in SNP identification (see
At a depth greater than 10-fold, the assembled consensus covered
83.63% of the reference genome using single-end reads and 95.88%
coverage using paired-end reads. Thus, greater sequencing depth
provides only a small increase in genome coverage (Fig. 2).
The error rate of SNP calling, however, greatly decreases with
increased sequencing depth. Additionally, the use of paired-end
reads as opposed to single-end reads further reduces SNP calling
errors. Of note, SNP calling errors of homozygous and heterozygous
SNPs differ significantly.
Individual genome comparison
With the availability of the YH genome sequence, there are now three
different individual genome sequences that can be compared. In
looking at the SNPs of the three individual genomes, all share 1.2
Table 1 | Data production and alignment results for the YH genome
Number of reads
mapped reads
Total bases
Mapped bases (Gb)
Effective depth
Percentage with unique
Rate of nucleotide
mismatches (%)
2,019,025,890
1,921,271,902
1,315,249,404
1,028,695,924
3,334,275,294
2,949,967,826
Single-end (SE) and paired-end (PE) sequencing reads were aligned onto the reference assembly in NCBI build 36.1, allowing at most two mismatches or one continuous gap with a size of 1–3 bp.
Effective depth was determined through the calculation of all mapped bases divided by the length of NCBI36 (excluding Ns, 2,858,013,089 bp in length). ‘Unique placement’ means a read had only
one best placement with the least number of mismatches and gaps. The rate of nucleotide mismatches is the percentage of mismatched nucleotides over all mapped nucleotides, including
sequencing errors and real genetic variations. In total, 487 million reads (14.6%) could not be aligned to the reference genome.
Validated dbSNP
2,260,896 (73.5%)
Unvalidated dbSNP
396,185 (12.9%)
417,016 (13.6%)
Validated dbSNP
1,413 (1.0%)
Unvalidated dbSNP
53,977 (39.9%)
79,872 (59.1%)
Figure 1 | The percentage of detected SNPs (a) and small indels (b) that
overlap with SNPs and small indels in the dbSNP database (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/, build 128). The dbSNP alleles were separated
into validated and non-validated SNPs, and the detected SNPs that were not
present in dbSNP were classified as novel.
NATURE |Vol 456 |6 November 2008
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
million SNPs. Each also has a set of SNPs unique to their own genome: for YH, 978,370 (31.8%) SNPs; for Venter, 924,333 (30.1%);
and for Watson, 1,096,873 (33.0%) (Supplementary Fig. 2).
The three individuals also have a similar fraction of non-synonymous SNPs (YH, 7,062 (0.23%); Venter, 6,889 (0.22%); Watson, 7,319
(0.20%)). There are 2,622 non-synonymous SNPs shared among the
three individuals, accounting for 37.1% of non-synonymous SNPs in
the YH genome.
Mutation and selection
To determine which are the ancestral versions of the small indels
between the YH genome and the NCBI reference genome, we used
the chimpanzee genome as an outgroup and assumed that the alleles
on the chimpanzee genome were the ancestral type (Supplementary
Table 5). Notably, the YH genome has the ancestral version of 66.2%
of the homozygous insertions, whereas the NCBI reference genome
contained the ancestral versions of 66.0% of the homozygous deletions. This suggests that during the process of mutation and selection
of the human genome, small DNA deletions occur more frequently
than do small DNA insertions. Among the heterozygous indels, the
allele types that are identical to those in the NCBI reference were
mostly comprised of the ancestral versions. This is probably because
alleles that are identical between two random individuals are more
likely to be the most common type of allele in the population,
whereas the fraction of alleles that differ between individuals is likely
to be those with a minor allele frequency in the population or genetic
drift mutations. The same pattern was also observed with heterozygous indels, indicating that mutations may be biased to DNA loss.
Additional mutation and selection analyses done comparing the
Supplementary
Information.
Structural variation identification
We used paired-end alignment information to identify structural
variations. We identified structural variation boundaries between
the YH and NCBI36 genomes by detecting abnormally aligned read
pairs that have improper orientation relationships or span sizes (see
Methods for details). We identified a total of 2,682 structural variations (Fig. 3a). Because our YH genome sequencing methodology
generates paired-end reads with short but very accurate insert sizes,
we could identify variations larger than 100 bp, about 6 times the
insert size standard deviation. Identified structural variations had a
median length of 492 bp, smaller than that of the database of genomic
variants (DGV; 30.8 kb)8. This indicates that our methods were
biased towards the detection of small structural variation events,
but also indicates that it has an acceptable resolution as compared
to current structural variation analyses9–11.
Using paired-end methods, we identified more deletion (2,441)
than duplication (33) events. Greater detection of deletions may be
because they are identified by observing unexpectedly long insert
sizes in paired-end clusters, whereas detection of insertions longer
than our paired-end library span size will probably be missed.
We searched for candidate regions where larger insertions might
have occurred by adopting a method based on the ratio of single-end
to paired-end read depth and found 4,819 regions with a ratio significantly higher (P , 0.001) than the average ratio over the whole
genome. Our data indicated that 4,377 (90.8%) of these candidate
regions were likely to have insertions of repetitive elements, such as
mammalian interspersed repeats (MIR; 2,067) and Alu elements
(692) in the short interspersed nuclear elements (SINE) category,
or L1 elements (1,601) in the long interspersed nuclear elements
(LINE) category (see Methods for details).
Recent studies10,11 have shown that novel sequences (those not
anchored to the NCBI reference genome) are a considerable source
of structural variations. To search for sequences unique to the YH
genome, we analysed 487 million unmapped short reads. Among
these, 0.39% could be aligned on unanchored scaffolds of NCBI36,
1.09% on novel small contigs of the Venter genome, and 0.67% on
novel sequences identified by ref. 10. Using the de novo assembler
Table 2 | Comparison of GA sequencing and Illumina 1M genotyping alleles
Allele type
Illumina 1M genotyping
Consistency (%)
GA consensus
Coverage (%)
We classified both the array-based genotyped alleles and the alleles that were called by the Illumina Genome Analyser (GA) into four categories: (1) HOM ref. (homozygotes where both alleles are
identical to the reference); (2) HOM mut. (homozygotes where both alleles differ from the reference); (3) HET ref. (heterozygotes where only one allele is identical to the reference); and (4) HET
mut. (heterozygoteswhere both alleles differ from the reference and also differ from one another). The number of GA sequencing sites that are consistent with genotyping at both alleles, at one allele,
or that are inconsistent at both alleles were categorized as 2, 1, and 0, respectively. The genotyping array primarily included the major alleles of the most common SNPs found in the human
population, so very few alleles found in the BeadChip analysis were sorted into category 4.
Paired end
Single end
HOM error rate
HET error rate
Genome coverage
Percentage
Sequencing depth
Figure 2 | Genome coverage of the assembled consensus sequence and the
accuracy of SNP detectionas a function of sequencing depth. Analyses were
carried out on human chromosome 12, and subsets of reads from all mapped
22.53 single-end and 13.53 paired-end reads were randomly extracted from
areas of different average depth. The same method and filtering threshold
(Q20) was used for SNP detection over different sequencing depths. The
error rate for SNP calling—the sum of ‘over call’, ‘under call’ and ‘misses’
rate (see Supplementary Information)—was separated into heterozygotes
(HET) and homozygotes (HOM), and was validated against the Illumina 1M
genotyping alleles.
NATURE |Vol 456 |6 November 2008
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Velvet12, we could assemble only 1,731,355 (0.36%) reads into 20,949
contigs with lengths .100 bp. In total, 10,398 (49.6%) of these contigs aligned well with unplaced human clones in GenBank. Of the
remaining short contigs, 961 (4.6%) aligned with chimpanzee and
mouse genomes at greater than 90% identity. These may represent
deletions present in populations of European descent or be regions
missed in the assembly of both NCBI36 and the Venter genome.
Becausemoststructuralvariationsoccurintransposableelementsor
repetitive sequences, they are unlikely to have any major impact on
function. (See Fig. 3b for an example of a deletion of a transposable
element complex.) In the YH genome, we did find structural variations
that resulted in the complete or partial deletion of 33 genes, and 30.3%
ofthesearehomozygousdeletions,increasingtheirlikelihoodofaffecting gene function (Supplementary Table 6). An example of a gene
disruption eventisin theCYP4F12geneon YH chromosome 19,where
an inversion has broken the gene into two segments (Fig. 3c). We used
PCR amplification and sequencing to validate the inversion breakpoints. This gene also had non-synonymous mutations in its obsolete
exons, indicating that it may have been under neutral selection.
Haplotype analysis
We used PHASE13 and the available phased genotypes of the HapMap
CHB/JPT population to predict the YH genome haplotypes. The
700,320 YH genome heterozygotes that overlapped with HapMap
loci were used to construct 4,399 haplotype blocks that averaged
587 kb in size (Fig. 4). Of these heterozygous SNPs, 3,039 (0.43%)
showed an inconsistent phase in the two adjacent fragments, which
may potentially break the haplotype blocks. Additional potential
haplotype breakpoints were 1,021,953 heterozygous YH genome
SNPs absent in the HapMap. We evaluated this by checking
paired-end reads that simultaneously covered two of the heterozygotes used in phasing. A total of 43,902 heterozygous SNP pairs were
covered by read pairs, among which 97.37% (42,746 pairs) were in
agreement with haplotypes as the corresponding covered read pairs.
In total, the 2,434 haplotypes that had sizes greater than 200 kb
covered 2.38 Gb of the genome.
Genetic ancestry
To estimate the ancestral composition of the YH individual’s genome, we did a cluster analysis using an evenly sampled 87,614 loci
with known alleles in all 270 HapMap individuals (Supplementary
Fig. 3). The YH individual was estimated to share alleles14 (thus
ancestry) at 94.12% with the Asian, 4.12% with the European and
1.76% with the African populations. Collection of more data from all
representative worldwide populations and development of analytical
models to provide better estimates of time since admixture will
improve the ability to assess an individual’s personal genetic history.
Effective population size, Ne, is the number of breeding individuals
in an idealized population that would show the same amount of allele
frequency dispersion under random genetic drift or the same amount
of inbreeding as the population under consideration15. Assuming an
infinite-site model of neutral mutations and equilibrium of mutation
and drift, and adopting the mutation rate used by ref. 16 with
2.63 3 1028 per site per generation, we estimated that the effective
Chinese population size is about 5,700. The same analysis based on
the population mutation parameters of the YH, Watson, Venter, and
NCBI36 genomes gives an estimate of 3,300 for the effective human
population size, which is closer to the estimation based on HapMap
OR10H3 OR10H2
Overlap TEs
Duplication
Other complex
Total sites
Figure 3 | Summary of structural variations. a, Abundance of each class of
structural variation. The overlap with known structural variations in the
DGV ( and with transposons
(transposable elements, TEs) was calculated. About 34% of our identified
structural variations are novel (having less than 10% of a portion of the YH
structural variations overlapping with structural variations in the DGV).
Transposable elements are a major component of the identified deletions,
with Alus and LINEs involved in 49% and 34% of the deletions, respectively.
b, An example of a deletion of a transposon complex on YH chromosome 1.
The sequencing depth by both single-end and paired-end reads are shown.
Normally aligned paired-end reads are shown in green, whereas abnormally
aligned paired-end reads, which have unexpected long insert sizes or an
incorrect orientation relationship, are shown in red. c, An example of an
inversion on YH chromosome 19. Local assembly showed that a 102,405-bp
fragment was inverted and reinserted in the genome. There are three genes in
this sequence fragment, and the last exon of gene CYP4F12 was destroyed by
this inversion event.
Block size (Mb)
Number of haplotype blocks
Figure 4 | Size distribution of predicted haplotype blocks of autosomes.
Haplotypes were constructed using PHASE software with the 700,300
autosomal heterozygous SNPs that overlapped with the CHB/JPT genotypes
from the HapMap phase II data.
NATURE |Vol 456 |6 November 2008
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
data17, but lower than the estimated 10,000–15,000 ancestral population size.
Known phenotypic or disease risk variant screen
The primary goal of personal genome sequencing is to allow identification of disease risk genotypes. We surveyed 1,495 alleles of 116
genes in the YH genome in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIM)18 database and found one mutation in the GJB2 gene, which
is associated with a recessive deafness disorder. This allele was heterozygous, thus there was no expectation of, or evidence for, deafness
in this individual, but it does raise the possibility of offspring having
this disorder.
A preliminary search of genes and variants associated with common, complex phenotypes or disorders using OMIM data (Table 3)
identified several genotypes that confer risk for tobacco addiction
and Alzheimer’s disease. This donor is a heavy smoker, as is consistent with individuals of similar genotypes in tobacco addiction
studies. The donor contains 9 (56.3%) of the 16 identified
Alzheimer’s disease risk alleles3, including two APOE alleles19 and 7
SORL1 alleles20. These findings indicate an increased risk for
Alzheimer’s disease, but there are no available data from any family
members to assess whether there is a family history of Alzheimer’s
Discussion
Here we present the first genome sequence of an Asian individual.
This sequence, which was accomplished using next-generation shortread sequencing technology, is one of the first genome sequences
from a single individual (the genome sequences of J. D. Watson
and J. C. Venter were accomplished using 454 and Sanger sequencing
technology, respectively).
Our analysis of the YH genome, including consensus assembly,
assessment of genome coverage, variation detection and validation,
demonstrated the ability of this technology for sequencing large
eukaryotic genomes given the availability of a reference genome.
This sequencing method also resulted in sequence redundancy reaching an average 36-fold; significantly deeper than the ,7-fold coverage of the Watson and Venter genomes. Thus, the YH consensus
sequence accuracy is higher and is especially suitable for calling heterozygous alleles.
Next-generation sequencing technologies have a very high
throughput, as a hundred million DNA fragments can be sequenced
in parallel on the chip. The Illumina GA sequencing used in this study
can provide up to 4–8 Gb high-quality data per week. In this regard,
the time needed to decipher a human genome (1–2 months using five
next-generation sequencers), as well as the cost of sequencing (less
than half a million US dollars), are substantially reduced.
The use of paired-end sequencing for structural variation detection allowed the identification of small but accurate insert sizes,
making the attainable resolution excellent for deletion and small
insertion identification, but limited for detection of insertions longer
than the paired-end insert sizes. Using a combination of both short
and long insert sizes in the future will enable the identification of a
larger variety of structural variations.
We were also able to phase a large number of heterozygous SNPs
that overlapped with sites of inferred haplotypes of the Asian population from the HapMap data. However, to phase all the heterozygous SNPs of the assembled diploid genome with two sites covered by
two reads belonging to a pair, we require different sized, long pairedend sequences. Improvement in haplotype prediction and heterozygote phasing will require genome sequences from many individuals
in a population.
Adding to such advances, a recently formed international collaborative project, called the 1,000 Genome Project, aims to catalogue a
detailedsetofhuman genetic variations, which will serve as a multiplegenome-sequence blueprint for building genetic maps and extend our
knowledge on genetic difference between individuals and between
different ethnic populations. Ultimately, we predict an increase in
the number of people who will be able to afford having their own
genomes sequenced. Personal genome sequencing may eventually
become an essential tool for diagnosis, prevention and therapy of
human diseases.
METHODS SUMMARY
Library preparation followed the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina).
Cluster generation was performed using the Illumina cluster station and the
workflow was as follows: template hybridization, isothermal amplification, linearization, blocking, denaturation and sequencing primer hybridization. The
fluorescent images were processed to sequences using the Illumina base-calling
pipeline (SolexaPipeline-0.2.2.6). The human reference genome, together with
the annotation of genes and repeats, were downloaded from the UCSC database
( in line with NCBI build 36.1. dbSNP v128 and
HapMap release 23 were used. The SNP set of the Venter genome was downloaded from the public FTP of JCVI, and the SNP set of the Watson genome was
provided by Baylor College of Medicine.
We used SOAP to align all short reads onto the human reference genome
(NCBI 36), and we used a statistical model based on Bayesian theory and the
Illumina quality system to calculate the probability of each possible genotype at
every position from the alignment of short reads on the NCBI reference genome.
The genotype of each position was assigned as the allele types that had the highest
probability. The final consensus probabilities were transformed to quality scores
in Phred scale. We grouped abnormally mapped paired-end reads with coordinate distances smaller than the maximum insert size on both ends into diagnostic paired-end (PE) clusters. To avoid misalignment, PE clusters with ,4
pairs were discarded. Common structural variations such as deletions, translocations, duplications, inversions and so on were examined and summarized into
alignment models. The reads were assembled locally to verify the specific coordinate of structural variation elements.
Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of
the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Received 21 August; accepted 2 October 2008.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium.. Initial sequencing and
analysis of the human genome. Nature 409, 860–921 .
Venter, J. C. et al. The sequence of the human genome. Science 291, 1304–1351
Levy, S. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol. 5,
e254 .
Wheeler, D. A. et al. The complete genome of an individual by massively parallel
DNA sequencing. Nature 452, 872–876 .
Church, G. M. The personal genome project. Mol. Syst. Biol. 1, doi:10.1038/
msb4100040 .
Li, R., Li, Y., Kristiansen, K. & Wang, J. SOAP: short oligonucleotide alignment
program. Bioinformatics 24, 713–714 .
Sherry, S. T. et al. dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res.
29, 308–311 .
Iafrate, A. J. et al. Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nature
Genet. 36, 949–951 .
Korbel, J. O. et al. Paired-end mapping reveals extensive structural variation in the
human genome. Science 318, 420–426 .
10. Kidd, J. M. et al. Mapping and sequencing of structural variation from eight human
genomes. Nature 453, 56–64 .
Bovee, D. et al. Closing gaps in the human genome with fosmid resources
generated from multiple individuals. Nature Genet. 40, 96–101 .
Table 3 | Number of alleles identified that increase the risk to specific
complex diseases
Associated
Associated
Predisposing alleles in YH
Alzheimer’s
Hypertension
Parkinson’s
Hypolactasia
Alcohol addiction
Tobacco addiction
The genes and SNPs associated with complex diseases were from curated data sources. The
results here are limited with regard to the conclusions that can be drawn, as nearly all of the
SNPs associated with disease have been tested only in a relatively small number of samples, and
haven’t been tested in the Asian population.
NATURE |Vol 456 |6 November 2008
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Zerbino, D. R. & Birney, E. Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly using
de Bruijn graphs. Genome Res. 18, 821–829 .
Stephens, M., Smith, N. J. & Donnelly, P. A new statistical method for haplotype
reconstruction from population data. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 978–989 .
14. Tang, H., Peng, J., Wang, P. & Risch, N. J. Estimation of individual admixture:
analytical and study design considerations. Genet. Epidemiol. 28, 289–301
Wright, S. Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics 16, 97–159 .
Noonan, J. P. et al. Sequencing and analysis of Neanderthal genomic DNA. Science
314, 1113–1118 .
Tenesa, A. et al. Recent human effective population size estimated from linkage
disequilibrium. Genome Res. 17, 520–526 .
McKusick, V. A. Mendelian Inheritance in Man and its online version, OMIM. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 80, 588–604 .
Coon, K. D. et al. A high-density whole-genome association study reveals that
APOE is the major susceptibility gene for sporadic late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.
J. Clin. Psychiatry 68, 613–618 .
20. Rogaeva, E. et al. The neuronal sortilin-related receptor SORL1 is genetically
associated with Alzheimer disease. Nature Genet. 39, 168–177 .
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We are indebted to the faculty and staff of Beijing Genomics
Institute at Shenzhen, whose names were not included in the author list, but who
contributed to this work. This project is funded by the Shenzhen Municipal
Government and the Yantian District local government of Shenzhen, and Shenzhen
University assisted in this work. This study is also supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (30890032, 30725008, 90403130,
90608010, 30221004, 90612019, 30392130), the Ministry of Science and
Technology of China (973 program: 2007CB815701, 2007CB815703,
2007CB815705; 863 program: 2006AA02Z334, 2006AA10A121,
2006AA02Z177), the Chinese Academy of Sciences (GJHZ0701-6,
KSCX2-YWN-023), the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission
(D07030200740000), the Danish Platform for Integrative Biology, the Ole Rømer
grant from the Danish Natural Science Research Council, a pig bioinformatics grant
from Danish Research Council and the Solexa project (272-07-0196), and the
Lundbeck Foundation Centre of Applied Medical Genomics for Personalized
Disease Prediction, Prevention and Care (LUCAMP). We thank Illumina Inc. for
their assistance in setting up the Illumina Genome Analyzer platform and providing
technology support. We appreciate the help of R. Gibbs and D. Wheeler with the
SNP data set of the genome of J. D. Watson, and S. Levy’s help for providing HuRef
novel sequences. LUDAOPEI Hospital provided karyotyping of the DNA sample.
Author Contributions Ju.W., W.W., R.L. and Yi.L. contributed equally to this work.
Ju.W., H.Y. and Ji.W. managed the project. W.W., G.T., Jun.Z., Jua.Z., Ya.L., Hu.L.,
Yi.Z., Zhenz.Y., X.Y., B.Y., W.L., Da.L., Q.H., Yu.L., S.Y., F.C., L.L., K.Z., Y.R., L.Y., Y.G.,
G.Y., Zhu.L., Xiaol.F., K.K., L.B. and X.Z. performed sequencing. Ju.W., R.L. and Yi.L.
designed the analyses. R.L., Yi.L., W.F., J.L., Y.G., B.F., He.L., Xiaod.F., Z.D., Dong Li,
Y.H., H.Z., I.H., M.I., J.P., Jin.Z., J.D., Ya.Z., J.Q., L.M., G.L., Zhent.Y., G.Z., C.Y., F.L,
S.L, P.N., J.R., Q.L., Hongm.Z., Dongy.L, Zhi.L., N.L., G.G., Jia.Z., J.Y., L.F., Q.C., Y.S., A
S., C.P., Hongk.Z., G.W., R.N., R.D. and S.L. performed the data analyses. Ju.W., R.L.,
Yi.L. and L.G. wrote the paper.
Author Information The data have been deposited in the EBI/NCBI short read
archive (accession number ERA000005). These data, together with all the
associated analyses, are freely availably at SNPs and
indels have been submitted to NCBI dbSNP and will be available in dbSNP version
130. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/
reprints. This paper is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Non-Commercial-Share Alike licence, and is freely available to all
readers at www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials
should be addressed to Ju.W. ( ) or Ji.W.
( ).
NATURE |Vol 456 |6 November 2008
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
DNA library construction and sequencing. Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral venous blood, and the blood sample was collected using the guidelines
dictated by the institutional review board of the Beijing Genomics Institute
Library preparation followed the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina).
Briefly, 2–5 mg of genomic DNA in 50 ml TE buffer were fragmented by nebulization with compressed nitrogen gas at 32 p.s.i. for 9 min. Nebulization generated
double-stranded DNA fragments with blunt ends or with 39 or 59 overhangs. The
overhangs were converted to blunt ends using T4 DNA polymerase and Klenow
polymerase, after which an ‘A’ base was added to the ends of double-stranded
DNA using Klenow exo2 (39 to 59 exo minus). Next, DNA adaptors (Illumina)
with a single ‘T’ base overhang at the 39 end were ligated to the above products.
These products were then separated on a 2% agarose gel, excised from the gel at a
position between 150 and 250 bp, and purified (Qiagen Gel Extraction Kit). The
adaptor-modified DNA fragments were enriched by PCR with PCR primers 1.1
and 2.1 (Illumina). Separate 8-, 10-, 12-, 15- and 18-cycle reactions were used for
sequencing. The concentration of the libraries was measured by absorbance at
The template DNA fragments of the constructed libraries were hybridized to
the surface of flow cells and amplified to form clusters. After double-stranded
DNA was denatured to single-stranded DNA and nonspecific sites were blocked,
genomic DNA sequencing primers were hybridized for DNA sequencing initiation. In brief, cluster generation was performed on the Illumina cluster station,
and the basic workflow (based on the standard Illumina protocol) was as follows:
template hybridization, isothermal amplification, linearization, blocking and
denaturisation, and hybridization of the sequencing primers. The fluorescent
images were converted to sequence using the Illumina base-calling pipeline
(SolexaPipeline-0.2.2.6).
Public data used. The human reference genome, together with genes and repeats
annotation, was downloadedfrom the UCSCdatabase ( 
which has the same sequence as the NCBI build 36.1. The NCBI reference genes
with prefix ‘NM’ were mapped to the reference genome using BLAT by UCSC.
Hitswith.90%identitywereretainedforfurtheranalysis,and onlyone transcript
was retained for each gene. dbSNP v128 and HapMap release 23 were used. The
SNPsetfromtheVentergenomewasdownloadedfromthepublicFTPsiteofJCVI
(ftp://ftp.jcvi.org/pub/data/huref/), and the SNP set of the Watson genome was
provided by Baylor College of Medicine.
Short reads alignment. We used SOAP to align each read or read-pair to a
position on a chromosome of the NCBI36 human reference genome that had
least number of nucleotide differences between the read and the reference genome, and called this a ‘best hit’. If a read had only a single best hit, it was
considered uniquely aligned. Reads that had more than one ‘best hit’ (meaning
they could be aligned to multiple positions that each had the same number of
mismatches) were considered repeatedly aligned. For repeatedly aligned reads a
random position was chosen from all of its best hits for placement on the
reference genome for sequencing depth calculation.
In the specific alignment process, at most two mismatches were allowed
between a read and the reference, and best hits were selected. Because errors
can accumulate during sequencing, the quality of the last several base pairs at the
end of reads can be relatively low. We thus set option –c 52 during our alignment
procedure. Thus, if a read could not be aligned, we discarded the first base, and
iteratively trimmed 2 bp at the 39 end until the read could be aligned or the
remaining sequence was shorter than 27 bp. For paired-end reads, two reads
belonging to a pair were aligned with both being in the correct orientation
and proper span size on the reference genome. If a pair could not be aligned
without gaps but allowing at most two mismatches on each read, a gapped
alignment was then performed with a maximum gap size of 3 bp. If the two reads
could not be aligned as a pair, they were aligned independently.
Consensus assembly. We used a statistical model based on Bayesian theory and
the Illumina quality system to calculate the probability of each possible genotype
at every position from the alignment of short reads on the NCBI reference
genome. A calibration matrix was built based on all uniquely mapped reads to
estimate the probability for a given genotype T to have an observed base X
located at a position k of its original read with quality score S. For a variety of
reasons, similar sequencing errors are often repeated, thus, the ith occurrence of
base X covering a particular position would contribute less to denote an X in
consensus by an adjustment formula. In brief, likelihood P(XjT) is a function of
(k, S, i, X, T), not simply of F(S). The total likelihood of all observed bases (O)
covering a site P(OjT) is the product of each one.
From observed prior probability, the SNP rate is expected to be about 0.1%,
and the most common SNPs should already be present in dbSNP. Therefore, for
positions without known polymorphisms, on one haploid, the reference bases
will dominate the prior probability as 0.999; others will share the remaining 0.1%
mutation rate. Because sequencing errors would look like heterozygous (HET)
SNPs, a penalty factor of 0.001 is multiplied to the HET prior probability. At
dbSNP sites, bases already observed dominate the prior probability equally and
the HET penalty factor is 0.01. As a result, the prior probabilities were as follows:
(1) 0.45 for a homozygote and 0.1 for a heterozygote at a SNP site that has been
validated in dbSNP; (2) 0.495 for a homozygote and 0.01 for a heterozygote at a
SNP site that has not been validated in dbSNP; and (3) 1 3 1026 for a homozygote and 2 3 1026 for a heterozygote at a potentially novel SNP site (one that is
absent in dbSNP).
Using the information above, we calculated the posterior probability of each
genotype using a Bayesian formula. The genotype of each position was assigned
as the allele type that had the highest probability. A rank sum test was applied to
adjust for the probability of heterozygotes. The final consensus probabilities were
transformed to quality scores in Phred scale.
Calling SNPs. We used six steps to filter out unreliable portions of the consensus
sequence: (1) we used a Q20 quality cutoff; (2) we required at least four reads; (3)
the overall depth, including randomly placed repetitive hits, had to be less than
100; (4) the approximate copy number of flanking sequences had to be less than 2
(this was done to avoid misreading SNPs as heterozygotes caused by the alignment of similar reads from repeat units or by copy number variations (CNVs));
(5) there had to be at least one paired-end read; and (6) the SNPs had to be at
least 5 bp away from each other. For chromosome X and Y, condition (2) was
altered by requiring only two unique reads with at least 1 paired-end (PE) read.
In the SOAP algorithm, a gap-free alignment is done first and then a gapped
alignment. Thus, we required condition (6) because most of the discrepancies
between the YH genome and the NCBI reference genome that are too close to
each other are due to mismatches across indels. After filtering, we were confident
in the calculated YH consensus sequence, and discrepancies between the YH
genome and NCBI reference genome were called as SNPs.
Identification of short indels. As the number of SNPs is roughly one order of
magnitude larger than that of indels, in the first stage of alignment we did not
allow any gaps. Thus, some read pairs containing real indels could not be
mapped when PE requirements were satisfied. After the first alignment stage,
we mapped the unmapped read pairs by allowing up to 3-bp indels to enable
them to meet PE requirements. This limited the indels that could be detected in
our study to gaps of 1–3 bp in length. If different read pairs provided the same
outer coordinates in mapping, they are likely to be duplicated products of a
single fragment during PCR. We merged these redundant pairs before looking
for indels. Gaps that were supported by at least three non-redundant paired-end
reads were extracted. If the number of ungapped reads that crossed a possible
indel was no more than twice that of gapped reads, then an indel was called. In
chromosome X and Y, we required all indel sites to be covered by only gapped
reads because valid indels on sex chromosomes are expected to be homozygous.
doi:10.1038/nature07484
©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved