MIT Open Access Articles
Conserved Function of lincRNAs in Vertebrate Embryonic
Development despite Rapid Sequence Evolution
The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please share
how this access benefits you. Your story matters.
Citation: Ulitsky, Igor, Alena Shkumatava, Calvin H. Jan, Hazel Sive, and David P. Bartel.
“Conserved Function of lincRNAs in Vertebrate Embryonic Development despite Rapid Sequence
Evolution.” Cell 147, no. 7 : 1537-1550. © 2011 Elsevier Inc.
As Published: 
Publisher: Elsevier B.V.
Persistent URL: 
Version: Final published version: final published article, as it appeared in a journal, conference
proceedings, or other formally published context
Terms of Use: Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be
subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use.
Conserved Function of lincRNAs
in Vertebrate Embryonic Development
despite Rapid Sequence Evolution
Igor Ulitsky,1,2,3,5 Alena Shkumatava,1,2,3,5 Calvin H. Jan,1,2,3,4 Hazel Sive,1,3 and David P. Bartel1,2,3,*
1Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
2Howard Hughes Medical Institute
3Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
4Present address: Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San
Francisco and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
5These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: 
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.055
Thousands of long intervening noncoding RNAs
(lincRNAs) have been identiﬁed in mammals. To
better understand the evolution and functions of
these enigmatic RNAs, we used chromatin marks,
poly(A)-site mapping and RNA-Seq data to identify
Although these shared many characteristics with
detectable
sequence similarity with putative mammalian orthologs, typically restricted to a single short region of
high conservation. Other lincRNAs had conserved
genomic locations without detectable sequence
conservation. Antisense reagents targeting conserved regions of two zebraﬁsh lincRNAs caused
developmental defects. Reagents targeting splice
sites caused the same defects and were rescued
by adding either the mature lincRNA or its human
or mouse ortholog. Our study provides a roadmap
for identiﬁcation and analysis of lincRNAs in model
organisms and shows that lincRNAs play crucial
biological roles during embryonic development with
functionality conserved despite limited sequence
conservation.
INTRODUCTION
The availability of sequenced genomes for many species has
shifted the focus from determining the genetic makeup of organisms to the delineation of the functional elements they encode.
These analyses have revealed that, in addition to loci generating
known genes, many other loci are transcribed, often in a regulated and tissue-speciﬁc fashion . In the human
and mouse genomes, thousands of loci produce RNA molecules
longer than 200 nucleotides (nt) that are capped, polyadenylated
and often spliced, yet do not overlap protein-coding genes or
previously characterized classes of noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs);
these have been called long intervening ncRNAs (lincRNAs)
 . Although a few dozen
mammalian lincRNAs have been characterized to some extent
and reported to function in important cellular processes such
as X chromosome inactivation, imprinting, pluripotency maintenance, and transcriptional regulation , the functions of
most annotated lincRNAs are unknown.
Comparative sequence analysis and functional studies in
nonmammalian species have greatly advanced the understanding of protein-coding genes as well as microRNAs and
other ncRNAs. However, these approaches were not immediately applied to lincRNAs because of their more limited
sequence conservation . Thousands of lincRNAs have been reported in
human and mouse, some of which have recognizable sequence
homology in the other species .
However, there have been only a few hints that orthologs of
mammalian lincRNAs exist outside of mammals . Therefore, the
promise of model organisms for providing insight into mammalian lincRNA genomics, evolution, and function has awaited
accurate experimental identiﬁcation of lincRNAs in a nonmammalian model organism.
Although high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) provides information useful for lincRNA identiﬁcation , the short reads of current technologies limit
the ability to accurately delineate full-length transcriptional
units, especially those of lincRNAs, which typically are expressed at low levels . Therefore, to build a robust pipeline for lincRNA discovery, complementary datasets augmenting RNA-Seq–based
reconstruction must be acquired and integrated. Chromatin
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing
(ChIP-Seq) generates genome-wide chromatin-state maps , which enabled the preliminary annotation of many mammalian lincRNAs . Particularly informative have been the
maps of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), which
marks promoters of genes actively transcribed by RNA polymerase II, and maps of histone H3 lysine 36 trimethylation
(H3K36me3), which marks the bodies of these genes . Another approach that provides
important information for deﬁning boundaries of transcriptional
units is poly(A)-position proﬁling by sequencing (3P-Seq) . This method isolates distal segments of polyadenylated
transcripts
high-throughput
sequencing. Although the initial description and application of
3P-Seq focused on protein-coding genes , the
method deﬁnes 30 termini of all polyadenylated transcripts,
including lincRNAs.
To identify lincRNAs of zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio), we acquired
chromatin maps and poly(A) sites from three developmental
stages and developed a framework for lincRNA discovery that
integrates these new datasets with transcriptome datasets,
which included RNA-Seq reads, annotated ESTs and full-length
cDNAs. We report more than 550 distinct lincRNAs in zebraﬁsh
and analyze their sequence and genomic properties, temporal
and spatial expression, and conservation. For functional studies,
we examined two lincRNAs with short stretches of deep conservation across vertebrates and found that these lincRNAs
play important roles in brain morphogenesis and eye development, and that these functions are retained in their mammalian
orthologs.
Identiﬁcation of lincRNAs in Zebraﬁsh
To allow a systematic overview of actively transcribed regions,
we generated genome-wide chromatin maps of histone H3
modiﬁcations with ChIP-Seq, focusing on zebraﬁsh embryos at
24 and 72 hr postfertilization (hpf) and mixed-gender adults
(Table S1 available online). As in other species ,
H3K4me3 marks were strongly enriched around transcription
start sites, H3K36me3 levels were higher in gene bodies, and
the amplitudes of both marks reﬂected gene expression levels
(Figures S1A and S1B). At each stage, between 16,171 and
19,557 H3K4me3 peaks were identiﬁed (Figure 1A and Table
S2), most of which were present in all three stages (Figure S1C).
We also applied 3P-Seq to poly(A)-selected RNA from the same
three stages and identiﬁed 66,895 poly(A) sites (Figure 1B and
Table S1 and Table S2).
Although the majority of H3K4me3 peaks and poly(A) sites
could be assigned to known genes, a signiﬁcant fraction
occurred in regions without transcript annotation (Figures 1A
and 1B). Poly(A) sites that could not be assigned to proteincoding or microRNA genes were used as seeds for identiﬁcation
of lincRNAs (Figure 1C), because sites identiﬁed by 3P-Seq
unambiguously determine the strand of the transcript and one
of its termini, which substantially constrained the subsequent
search space. For each of these poly(A) sites, the closest
upstream H3K4me3 peaks were identiﬁed, and putative lincRNA
domains were deﬁned as regions spanning from an H3K4me3
peak to a poly(A) site. After ﬁltering out domains overlapping
exons of protein-coding genes or small RNAs in the sense
orientation, or coding exons in the antisense orientation, the
remaining domains were signiﬁcantly enriched for H3K36me3,
indicating that they were enriched in bona ﬁde transcriptional
units (Figure S1D). Using publicly available RNA-Seq data
(SRA accession ERP000016) and cDNAs and ESTs deposited
in GenBank, transcript models of long RNA molecules were
generated, which were then extensively ﬁltered to exclude those
with predicted coding potential or insufﬁcient transcription from
the predicted strand. This procedure yielded 567 lincRNA gene
annotations giving rise to 691 isoforms (Table S2). Of those, 27
genes (4.8%) were contained within introns of protein-coding
genes (14 in the sense and 13 the antisense orientation). Hand
curation of a subset of the 567 genes conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity
of our pipeline, uncovering only a few false-positives resulting
from either gaps in the genome assembly or short unannotated
coding regions (Table S2). As in mammals , lincRNA genes were assigned provisional names based on the closest annotated protein-coding
gene (Table S2), except for cases in which vertebrate synteny
that involved another nearby gene suggested a more suitable
name (e.g., linc-plcb2).
For comparison to the zebraﬁsh lincRNAs, we ﬁltered human
and mouse lincRNA annotations to remove those overlapping
protein-coding genes, pseudogenes or small ncRNA genes,
such as microRNA genes (Table S3). Despite this ﬁltering, our
curated sets of mammalian lincRNA genes, numbering 2,458 in
human and 3,345 in mouse, were larger than our set of zebraﬁsh
lincRNA genes, in part because our pipeline for lincRNA
discovery was more stringent than those used previously , in that it required independent experimental
evidence for transcriptional initiation, elongation and termination
at each locus. In analyzing whole animals our analysis also might
have missed many lincRNAs with very restricted expression
Genomics of Zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
Our set of zebraﬁsh lincRNAs shared many characteristics with
mammalian lincRNAs. Most (61.7%) were spliced. They averaged 1,951 nt spanning an average of 2.3 exons, were more
A/U-rich than coding sequences and 50UTRs, but less so than
30UTRs, and resembled 50UTRs in prevalence of short homopolymers (Figures S1E–S1H). lincRNAs from zebraﬁsh, mouse and
human are more likely than protein-coding genes to overlap
repetitive
lincRNAs, a smaller portion of zebraﬁsh lincRNA sequence was
repetitive (Figure S1I).
Mammalian lincRNA genes tend to be within < 10 kb of proteincoding genes . Although zebraﬁsh lincRNA genes also tended to reside
near protein-coding genes (empirical p < 0.001 compared to
random intergenic regions; Figure S1J), the distances between
lincRNA genes and the closest protein-coding genes were
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
similar to the distances between adjacent protein-coding genes
(Figure S1J). The closest neighboring protein-coding gene was
most likely to appear in a divergent orientation with respect to
the lincRNA (Figure S1K).
Mammalian lincRNAs have also been reported to be enriched
near genes encoding transcription factors and genes involved in
nervous system development , although these trends are
potentially confounded by larger intergenic regions surrounding
these genes . We tested for GO
enrichments in the set of protein-coding genes ﬂanking zebraﬁsh
lincRNA loci (Figure S1L). The closest neighbors of zebraﬁsh
lincRNAs were signiﬁcantly more likely to function in transcription-related processes (2.85-fold enrichment, hypergeometric
test false-discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05), an enrichment that could
not be explained by the larger intergenic regions ﬂanking those
genes (empirical p < 0.001). Enrichment for developmental
genes was not signiﬁcant after correction for multiple hypothesis
testing or for the sizes of the intergenic regions, with similar
trends observed in mouse and human (Figure S1L).
Tissue-Speciﬁc Expression of Zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
We selected a subset of lincRNAs with relatively high expression or conservation and determined their spatial-temporal
Figure 1. Identiﬁcation of Zebraﬁsh lincRNA Genes
(A) Positions of H3K4me3 peaks from 24-hpf embryos with respect to annotations of known protein-coding genes and genes of small ncRNAs (<200 nt) annotated
in Ensembl or RefSeq.
(B) Positions of poly(A) sites with respect to annotated protein-coding and small ncRNA genes.
(C) Pipeline for identiﬁcation of lincRNAs. See text and extended experimental procedures for description.
See also Figure S1 and Table S2.
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
expression by in situ hybridization at two developmental
stages in zebraﬁsh embryos (Table S4). Most tested lincRNAs
were expressed in a highly tissue-speciﬁc manner (Figure 2A
and Figure S2), predominantly in different parts of the central
nervous system, although some were expressed in nonneural
tissues and cell types, such as the pronephros (linc-cldn7a)
and notochord (linc-trpc7). Although our pipeline was expected
to miss lincRNAs expressed in very few cells (because their
ChIP-Seq signal from entire embryos might not have exceeded
background), it did identify many lincRNAs with tissue-speciﬁc
expression, suggesting diverse and speciﬁc roles for these
noncoding RNAs.
We used RNA-Seq data from ten developmental stages
and tissues (SRA study ERP000016) to characterize lincRNA
expression across zebraﬁsh development. Akin to mammalian
lincRNAs , expression
levels of zebraﬁsh lincRNAs were generally lower than those of
protein-coding genes (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p < 1015; Figure 2B). Across the ten developmental stages/tissues, expression of lincRNAs tended to correlate with that of their nearest
protein-coding neighbors (average Spearman correlation r2 =
0.14, p < 0.001). Correlation of a similar magnitude was observed
for adjacent protein-coding genes (r2 = 0.136, which dropped to
r2 = 0.121 after excluding homologous pairs). The correlation
between lincRNAs and their neighbors was signiﬁcantly high
for divergent and tandem orientations, but not for pairs in
convergent orientation (Figure 2C). Thus, based on expression
similarity and relative distances, lincRNAs and their adjacent
protein-coding genes are no more likely to share the same
primary transcript than two adjacent protein-coding genes.
Instead, the signiﬁcant coexpression and proximity between
lincRNAs and their adjacent protein-coding genes presumably
stems from common cis-regulatory modules (especially in the
case of divergent transcripts) or shared chromatin domains.
Our lincRNA discovery was performed in late embryonic
stages (24 hpf and 72 hpf), but 270 lincRNAs were also expressed (RPKM > 1) during early development [oocyte to
Figure 2. Expression of Zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
Whole-mount
hybridizations
lincRNAs. Control experiments using sense probes for
selected lincRNAs were also performed (Figure S2).
(B) Expression levels of lincRNA and protein-coding
genes evaluated using RNA-Seq results from ten stages/
tissues. Plots indicate the median, quartiles, and 10th and
90th percentiles. RPKM is reads per kilobase per million
(C) Correlations between levels of neighboring transcripts.
For each gene, the Spearman correlation between its
expression proﬁle (across ten stages/tissues) and that of
the closest protein-coding gene was determined, and the
average is plotted for the lincRNA and coding genes. Error
bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals based on 1,000
random shufﬂes of lincRNA positions.
See also Figure S2 and Table S4.
5.5 hpf, using data from Aanes et al. ],
transcripts
upregulated
more than 4-fold in the poly(A)+ fraction during
the transition from the 1-cell to the 16- or 32-cell stage.
As transcription is not thought to occur during these stages
 , our results suggest that some lincRNAs
undergo cytoplasmic polyadenylation.
More Positional Conservation than Sequence
Conservation across Vertebrates
To examine the sequence conservation of lincRNAs, we used
the phastCons scores calculated from the
UCSC 8-way vertebrate genome alignment seeded with the
zebraﬁsh genome . By this measure,
lincRNA exons were less well conserved than mRNA coding
regions or UTRs but better conserved than introns and random
size-matched intergenic regions (control exons) (Figure 3A).
This intermediate conservation trend resembled that observed
in whole-genome alignments for mammalian lincRNAs for which
the observation of conservation above background has provided
a main argument for lincRNA functionality . Our annotation of zebraﬁsh
lincRNAs provided the impetus to take the analyses a step
further to look not just at raw conservation but also at the annotations of the homologous regions.
Of the annotated mouse and human lincRNAs, only 250
and 420 (9.0% and 16.1%), respectively, were aligned to any
zebraﬁsh sequence in the whole-genome alignments. Of those,
only seven mouse and nine human lincRNAs mapped to zebra-
ﬁsh lincRNAs identiﬁed in this study (Table S2). In contrast,
100 mouse and 286 human lincRNAs mapped to at least one
zebraﬁsh coding exon. Thus, about half of mammalian lincRNA
genes with recognizable sequence homology in the zebraﬁsh
genome are either misannotated protein-coding loci or actual
lincRNA genes that derived from ancestral protein-coding
An analogous picture emerged when starting from the zebra-
ﬁsh lincRNAs using the 8-genome alignment to the zebraﬁsh
genome (Figure 3B): 188 (33.2%) distinct zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
were aligned to human or mouse genomes (compared to 76.5%
of protein-coding genes), and of these, 20 mapped to exons of
mouse or human lincRNAs, which was a small but signiﬁcantly
enriched fraction (Figure 3B; empirical p < 0.005 when compared
to random intergenic regions). Another six of the 188 mapped to
introns of a mammalian lincRNAs (Figure 3B), and for four of
those six, further inspection revealed evidence for mapping to
unannotated exons of the respective mammalian lincRNAs. An
additional 14 were aligned to sequences overlapping GenBank
cDNAs, indicating that they might correspond to lincRNAs
that were not yet annotated in mammalian genomes. Another
recognizable
homology) were aligned to the transcribed strand of proteincoding exons in human or mouse. Overall, 55% of zebraﬁsh
lincRNAs that were aligned to human or mouse in the 8-way
alignment mapped to annotated transcribed units in those
genomes (Figure 3B), compared to 14% for random regions
(empirical p < 0.005).
Direct comparison of mammalian and zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
using BLASTN found another three zebraﬁsh lincRNAs with
annotated mammalian orthologs, bringing the total to 29, with
90% of these cases supported by synteny extending to at least
one protein-coding neighbor (Table S2). Although in most cases
the mammalian ortholog was annotated as a lincRNA in only one
of the two mammals, further inspection usually indicated that
similar transcribed loci were present in both mammals. For
these 29 lincRNAs, detectable homology with the proposed
mammalian orthologs spanned a small portion of the transcript,
Figure 3. lincRNA Conservation in Vertebrates
(A) Conservation levels of lincRNA and protein-coding introns and exons, computed using phastCons applied to the 8-way whole-genome
alignment. For each lincRNA locus, a computational control was generated by random sampling of a length-matched region from intergenic space of the same
chromosome. Within this control region, exons were assigned to the same relative positions as in the authentic lincRNA locus (control exons).
(B) Annotation of human or mouse genomic regions aligned to 188 zebraﬁsh lincRNA genes in the 8-way whole-genome alignment. Regions aligned with zebraﬁsh
lincRNAs were tested for overlap with (1) lincRNAs (Table S3), (2) protein-coding sequence, (3) 50UTR or 30UTR, (4) introns, or (5) GenBank mRNAs (unannotated
cDNAs), in this order, and assigned to the ﬁrst category for which overlap was observed.
(C) Conserved orientation of protein-coding genes with adjacent lincRNAs. Orthologous protein-coding genes adjacent to zebraﬁsh and mammalian lincRNAs
were identiﬁed, and the corresponding lincRNAs were considered to have conserved positions, regardless of their sequence conservation. Plotted is the number
of those with orientations conserved with respect to their anchoring proteins. The 95% conﬁdence intervals were estimated using 200 cohorts of computational
controls, generated as in (A).
(D) linc-tmem106a and its positionally conserved lincRNAs in the human and mouse genomes. The number of 3P tags mapping to the plus and minus strands are
indicated (red and blue, respectively).
See also Table S3.
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
averaging 308 nt (range 31–1,206 nt) and was typically restricted
to a single exon. For nine of the 11 cases in which both the
zebraﬁsh lincRNA and its mammalian ortholog were spliced,
the relative position of the exon with the conserved region was
also conserved.
The zebraﬁsh and mammalian genomes were extensively
rearranged during > 400 million years of independent evolution,
which included a whole-genome duplication in the teleost ﬁsh
lineage . As a result, only 14.7% of protein-coding gene
pairs that both have mouse orthologs and are adjacent in the
zebraﬁsh genome also have adjacent orthologs in the mouse
genome. Despite this extensive rearrangement, we found that
adjacency to a lincRNA (limited to distance % 100 kb) was
conserved: Out of the 935 protein-coding genes ﬂanking
lincRNAs in zebraﬁsh and conserved in human or mouse, 317
had an ortholog adjacent to a lincRNA annotated in either the
human or the mouse genome (hypergeometric p = 0.0028). Of
the lincRNAs adjacent to those 317 genes, 113 had conserved
orientation with respect to at least one conserved protein-coding
neighbor (empirical p < 0.005, Figure 3C). The synteny blocks
around these lincRNAs contained 2.7 protein-coding genes on
average, and were larger than those around random intergenic
regions (empirical p = 0.046). In most of these cases, including
linc-tmem106a (Figure 3D), sequence similarity between the
zebraﬁsh lincRNA and its syntenic mammalian counterpart
was not detected, and the number of lincRNAs with conserved
position and orientation was signiﬁcant even when we excluded
the 29 lincRNAs with detected sequence conservation (p =
0.01), which suggested that some lincRNAs have conserved
functional features, such as secondary structure or genomic
detectable
primarysequence conservation.
lincRNA cyrano Is Required for Proper Embryonic
Development
To investigate the roles of lincRNAs during development, we
analyzed the effects of lincRNA loss of function in zebraﬁsh
embryos using morpholino antisense oligos (MOs). One strategy
was to inject MOs designed to target lincRNA splice sites in an
attempt to disrupt maturation. The other strategy was to inject
MOs designed to target highly conserved sites presumed to be
important for interactions with other cellular factors. This
approach follows successful use of MOs for blocking speciﬁc
sites in mRNAs , and an analogous approach using locked nucleic acid (LNA) antisense oligonucleotides to disrupt Xist
lincRNA function in cultured mammalian cells (Sarma et al.,
For functional studies, we selected two lincRNAs based on
their tissue-speciﬁc expression and synteny with mammalian
lincRNAs. One was a 4.5 kb transcript with three exons convergent with oip5 (Figure 4A and Figure S3A). Although none of the
lincRNA locus was aligned between mammals and zebraﬁsh in
any of the whole-genome alignments examined, our BLASTN
search identiﬁed a conserved 67 nt match with human and
mouse lincRNAs (Figure 4A and Figures S3B–S3D). Both human
and mouse orthologs shared a similar gene structure (two to
three short exons followed by a long terminal exon of 4–8 kb,
Figure 4A) and were part of a synteny block containing not only
the oip5 ortholog but also orthologs of three other zebraﬁsh
protein-coding genes (nusap1, ndufaf1, and rtf1). Ribosome
proﬁling in HeLa cells , which express the
human homolog (LOC729082), showed that it was not translated. The PhastCons plot from the UCSC whole-genome alignments to human (which did not include alignment to any ﬁsh
genomes) showed several conserved regions within the terminal
exon, including a 300 nt region highly conserved among the
tetrapods (Figure 4A). Within this region was the segment
conserved to ﬁsh, which was identiﬁed in our BLASTN search
(Figure S3D). This segment included a 26 nt site in which all
but one nucleotide was perfectly conserved in all 52 homologous
segments that we recovered from genomic sequences and ESTs
of 52 vertebrate species (Figures 4A).
In zebraﬁsh embryos, this lincRNA is expressed in the nervous
system and notochord (Figure 5A and Figure S4A). To characterize its role during development, MOs targeting either the ﬁrst
exon-intron splice junction or the most conserved site were
injected at the one-cell stage (Figure 5B and Table S6). RNAblot, qRT-PCR and in situ hybridization analyses showed that
the splice-site MO reduced transcript accumulation, whereas
targeting the conserved site did not affect either transcript
levels or size (Figure 5C and Figures S4B and S4C). Embryos
injected with either splice- or conserved-site MOs exhibited
similar developmental defects. These morphants had small
heads and eyes, and short, curly tails, perhaps because of the
reduced levels of this lincRNA in the notochord (Figure 5D).
They also had defects in neural tube opening (Figure 5E), loss
of NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina and tectum, and
enlarged nasal placodes, as visualized by GFP expression under
the control of the neurod promoter (Figure 5F and Figure S4D).
Embryos injected with either a conserved-site MO with ﬁve
mismatches (control MO1) or an MO complementary to a nonconserved region (control MO2) lacked morphant phenotypes
(Figures 5D–5F and Figure S4D). Because of the prominent
nose phenotype in these morphants, we named this lincRNA
cyrano (designating the gene as cyrano).
As an additional control for speciﬁcity, we tested whether
the observed developmental defects could be rescued by
coinjection of spliced RNA, which would not be affected by
the splice-site MO . Coinjection of the splicesite MO with spliced cyrano RNA reduced the fraction of
embryos showing morphant phenotypes by over 40% compared to embryos injected either with only the splice-site MO
or with the splice-site MO and RFP mRNA (Figure 5G and
Figure S4E).
Encouraged by the rescue experiment showing the function of
mature zebraﬁsh cyrano RNA during embryonic development,
we tested whether the mammalian orthologs might also function
in zebraﬁsh. Remarkably, over 60% and over 35% of embryos
injected with splice-site MO were rescued by coinjection of
the mature mouse or human RNAs, respectively (Figure 5G).
Rescued embryos had normal neural tube openings, restored
neurogenesis, and normal sized brain, eyes, and nasal placodes
(Figures 5D–5F and Figure S4D). To further investigate the
functional importance of the conserved site, we introduced
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
point substitutions (Figure 5H) and tested the potency of the
mutated RNAs in rescuing the morphants. The rescuing potential
of the mutated RNAs was diminished (cyrano_mut_a and
cyrano_mut_b) or abolished (cyrano_mut_a+b) compared to
that of the wild-type (Figure 5G). Sufﬁciency for rescue was
tested using two different constructs. One was a short RNA
containing the 67 nt conserved segment and 32 ﬂanking bases
and the other was a long hybrid RNA in which this 99 nt segment
replaced the conserved region of an unrelated lincRNA, lincbirc6 (hybrid 1, Figure 5I). In both cases, coinjection of these
in vitro transcribed, capped and polyadenylated RNAs with the
splice-site MO did not rescue the morphant phenotype, which
indicated that the conserved segment was not sufﬁcient for
cyrano function (Figure 5G). Taken together, our results show
that cyrano, acting in part through its conserved site, plays an
important role during embryogenesis, and that the mammalian
orthologs retain this function.
After completing these functional studies, we recognized
that the conserved site of cyrano pairs perfectly to the all but
two central nucleotides of the miR-7 microRNA and that this
extensive pairing is conserved in all vertebrates examined (Figure 4A). Experiments are underway to determine the reason
that this pairing has been conserved. Possibilities include: (1)
miR-7 regulates cyrano, (2) cyrano regulates miR-7, and (3)
cyrano and miR-7 collaborate in a downstream function.
Although we suspect that association with miR-7 confers some
Figure 4. lincRNAs with Short Conserved Segments
(A) Genomic context and sequence conservation of the linc-oip5 (cyrano) lincRNA gene. Gray boxes include the deeply conserved region. The conservation plot is
relative to the human locus, and is based on aligned regions of 37 genomes, which do not include any ﬁsh genomes, as those do not contain any regions that are
aligned with this human locus in the whole-genome alignments. The top consensus logo highlights the RNA sequence of the most conserved segment, which we
identiﬁed in 45 vertebrate genomes, including ﬁsh genomes. Shown are the 67 aligned positions present in zebraﬁsh, with a score of 2 bits indicating residues
perfectly conserved in all 45 genomes. The bottom consensus logo shows conservation of vertebrate miR-7 sequences annotated in miRBase 18, with vertical
lines indicating Watson–Crick base pairs.
(B) Genomic context and sequence conservation of the linc-birc6 (megamind) lincRNA gene. As in (A), except the region is aligned to ﬁsh genomes in the wholegenome alignments, and the consensus logo is for the RNA sequence inferred from 75 sequences from 47 vertebrate genomes. An alternative isoform of the
zebraﬁsh RNA retains the ﬁrst intron (Figure S3E).
See also Figure S3.
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
cyrano destabilization, our observation that disrupting pairing to
miR-7 abrogates cyrano function (Figure 5G) suggests that the
pairing has not been conserved merely for the repression of cyrano, thereby disfavoring possibility (1) and favoring possibilities
(2) or (3).
lincRNA megamind Regulates Brain Morphogenesis
and Eye Development
Another conserved lincRNA was a 2.4 kb transcript composed of
3 exons (with alternative splicing sometimes skipping the middle
exon) overlapping intronic sequence of the protein-coding gene
Splice-site
Conserved-site
Control MO
Conserved-site MO
Splice-site MO
CAACAAAATCACCAATGTCTTCCATT
CAACAATAAGACCAATGTCTTCCATT
CAACAAAATCACCAATGTCTTCAAGT
cyrano_mut_a
cyrano_mut_b
CAACAATAAGACCAATGTCTTCAAGT cyrano_mut_a+b
cyrano conserved
linc-birc6
(megamind)
flanking segments
Control MO1
Control MO2
Conserved–site MO
Splice–site MO
\Splice MO + zf_cyrano RNA
Splice MO + m_cyrano RNA
Splice MO + h_cyrano RNA
Splice MO + cyrano_mut_a
Splice MO + cyrano_mut_b
Splice MO + cyrano_mut_a+b
Splice MO + RFP mRNA
Splice MO + cons. segment
Splice MO + hybrid 1
Control MO1
Conserved-site MO
Splice MOs + cyrano RNA
Figure 5. The Importance of linc-oip5 for Proper Embryonic Development
(A) In situ hybridization showing cyrano expression in the CNS and notochord of zebraﬁsh embryos at 72 hpf.
(B) Gene architecture of cyrano, showing the hybridization sites of the RNA-blot probe and MOs (red boxes).
(C) RNA blot monitoring cyrano accumulation in wild-type embryos (48 hpf) that had been injected with the indicated MOs. To control for loading, the blot was
reprobed for b-actin mRNA.
(D) Embryos at 48 hpf that had been either injected with the indicated MO or coinjected with the splice-site MO and mature mouse cyrano RNA.
(E) Brain ventricles after injection with the indicated reagents, visualized using a red ﬂuorescent dye injected into the ventricle space at 28 hpf.
(F) Embryos at 48 hpf that had been injected with the indicated reagents. NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina and nasal placode were marked with GFP
expressed from the neurod promoter . Near absence of NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina (dotted line) and enlargement of the nasal
placode (arrow) are indicated.
(G) Frequency of morphant phenotypes in injected embryos (Table S5).
(H) Schematic of DNA point substitutions in the cyrano-conserved site.
(I) Architecture of a hybrid transcript containing the cyrano-conserved segment in the context of linc-birc6 (megamind)-ﬂanking sequences.
See also Figure S4 and Table S5.
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
birc6 in an antisense orientation (Figure 4B and Figure S3E). The
expression and exon structure of this lincRNA was supported
by both RNA-Seq and EST data. A region of about 340 bp near
the 50-end of the third exon was aligned to mammalian genomes
in the 8-way whole-genome alignment to zebraﬁsh. In fact, this
lincRNA was aligned to two different regions of the human
genome—one overlapping a BIRC6 intron in the antisense orientation (part of a large synteny block containing another ﬁve
protein-coding genes) and another overlapping an annotated
lincRNA in a gene desert upstream of BDKRB1/2 (Figure 4B).
Using the zebraﬁsh and human sequences, whole-genome
alignments, and HMMER ( we identiﬁed 75
homologous sequences in 47 vertebrate species, appearing in
three distinct contexts: (1) in introns of birc6 homologs, (2) in
gene deserts upstream of bdkrb1/2 homologs, and (3) near
hhipl1 homologs (found only in ﬁsh genomes). In zebraﬁsh,
homologs with evidence of transcription were found at all three
loci (Figures S3E–S3G), although only one of the two additional
loci could be detected using BLASTN. In genomes with sufﬁcient
data, the homologous transcripts contained two exons (with
an alternative cassette exon present in some species) and
a broadly conserved region appearing in the 50 end of the last
exon. The core segment of this region spanned 93 nt and was
depleted of both insertions and deletions. Forty positions in
this segment had over 90% sequence identity across the 75
homologs, and 19 bases were perfectly conserved (Figure 4B
and Figure S3H). Interestingly, 15 of the conserved positions
were Ts that occurred with perfect 3 nt periodicity.
Of the three homologous transcripts in zebraﬁsh, the lincRNA
at the birc6 locus, which in embryos was expressed about
12-fold higher than the others, was selected for experimental
interrogation. In zebraﬁsh embryos, this lincRNA was expressed
in the eyes and brain (Figure 6A and Figure S5A), consistent with
EST evidence indicating brain expression of its mammalian
homologs. We perturbed this lincRNA using MOs targeting
either two splice sites or the conserved segment (Figure 6B
and Table S6). Splice-site morpholinos reduced the lincRNA
accumulation (Figure 6C and Figures S5B and S5C). Injections
of the splice-site MOs and the conserved-site MO resulted in
embryos with indistinguishable brain and eye defects (Figures
6D–6F), as did injection of the two splice-site MOs individually.
Morphants had defects in brain-ventricle morphology 28 hpf,
including an unusual expansion of the midbrain ventricle, loss
of the midbrain hingepoint, and contraction of the forebrain
ventricle (Figure 6D). By 48 hpf, the morphants had smaller
heads and eyes, enlarged brain ventricles (a hydrocephalic
phenotype), and loss of NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina
and tectum (Figures 6E and 6F). Embryos injected with MOs
complementary to the conserved site with ﬁve mismatches
(control MO1) or to a nonconserved region of the lincRNA
(control MO2) did not show any mutant phenotypes (Figures
6D–6F). Based on the head shape, we named this lincRNA
To test for rescue and function of the orthologous lincRNAs,
we coinjected splice-site MOs with in vitro transcribed zebraﬁsh
megamind, or the orthologous mouse or human lincRNAs.
Mature megamind RNA from each of the three species rescued
the morphant phenotypes, despite the limited overall sequence
conservation (Figures 6D–6G). Embryos coinjected with the
splice-site MO and RFP mRNA control showed no improvement
(Figure 6G and Figure S5D).
Although the inferred polypeptide of the most plausible open
reading frame was poorly conserved and only 49 amino acids
long, the conserved 3 nt periodicity in much of this region of
megamind, essentially without insertions or deletions, suggested
the possibility of a coding region. To test this possibility, we introduced either a stop codon to disrupt the most plausible frame or
a frameshift-inducing single-nucleotide deletion at the beginning
of the highly conserved segment (Figure 6H). Coinjecting the
splice-site MO with these mutated lincRNAs (megamind_stop
and megamind_frameshift) rescued as well as coinjecting the
wild-type RNA (Figure 6G), conﬁrming that the conserved
segment is very unlikely to act as part of a coding sequence. To
test its functional importance, the conserved segment was
mutated (Figure 6H). Point substitutions at six conserved nucleotides slightly reduced rescue (megamind_mut_a), and combining
these with three point substitutions that had no detectable effect
on their own (megamind_mut_b) completely abolished rescue
(megamind_mut_a+b), thereby indicating that an intact conserved segment is required for megamind function (Figures 6G
and 6H). The conserved segment was not sufﬁcient on its
own for function, as splice-site morphants were not rescued by
coinjection of either a short RNA containing only the 93 nt
conserved segment or a hybrid RNA (hybrid 2, Figure 6I) in which
the megamind-conserved segment replaced with that of cyrano
(Figures 6G).
DISCUSSION
Origins and Evolution of Vertebrate lincRNAs
Our mapping of lincRNAs in a nonmammalian vertebrate
genome indicates that such genomes encode hundreds of
lincRNAs, of which only a few can be traced to potential
mammalian homologs. In those cases, the homology spanned
a small portion of the transcript, typically restricted to a single
exon. Similar short regions of conservation nested in rapidly
evolving sequence have been described for lincRNAs conserved only within mammals . For both cyrano and megamind, the conserved regions
were not extensively complementary to other conserved regions
in the genome and did not show enrichment for known binding
motifs of RNA-binding factors (data not shown), apart from the
microRNA complementarity noted for cyrano. In addition to
a short region of sequence conservation, cyrano and megamind
also preserve genomic architecture, with respect to the sizes
and arrangement of exons. Similar patterns were observed in
several other conserved lincRNAs, one of which was MALAT1,
a lincRNA characterized in mammalian cells , an ortholog of which we identiﬁed in zebraﬁsh (malat1,
Figure 7A). Sequence similarity between zebraﬁsh and mammalian MALAT1 is restricted to the 30 end, likely due to a conserved
mechanism for 30 end formation . Despite
this limited sequence conservation, the length of MALAT1
(7 kb) along with the lack of any efﬁciently spliced introns appeared to be roughly ﬁxed in all vertebrates. These observations
suggest that conserved functionality of some lincRNAs requires
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
relatively small amount of speciﬁc sequence, supported by long
ﬂanking regions deprived of deeply conserved sequence
Although we found mammalian orthologs for only 29 (5.1%) of
the zebraﬁsh lincRNA genes, analysis of synteny suggested that
a greater fraction might have orthologous function. Perhaps
additional lincRNA sequence constraints are present but not
detectable above background when carrying out whole-genome
alignments or BLASTN comparisons. We used a relatively
nonstringent BLASTN E-value threshold of 105. Reducing the
Splice-site
Splice-site
Conserved-site
megamind_stop
megamind_mut_a+b
megamind_mut_a
megamind_mut_b
GCGAG...TCTGGGGATCATAGGCACC...TGTGTTTG
GTGAG...TCTGGGGATCATAGGCACC...TGTGTTTG
GCGAG...TCGGTTGATCATATTCCCC...TGTGTTTG
GCGAG...TCTGGGGATCATAGGCACC...TGGGAGTG
Control MO1
Splice MOs + megamind RNA
GCGAG...TCGGTTGATCATATTCCCC...TGGGAGTG
Control MO
Conserved-site MO
Splice MO1 + MO2
Splice MO1 + MO2
megamind conserved
linc-oip5 (cyrano)
flanking segments
PCR primers
GCGAG...TCTGGGGATCATAGGCACC...TGTGTTTG megamind_frameshift
Fraction of embryos (%)
Conserved-site MO
Control MO1
Control MO2
Conserved-site MO
Splice-site MOs
Splice MOs + zf_megamind RNA
Splice MOs + m_megamind RNA
Splice MOs + h_megamind RNA
Splice MOs + megamind_stop
Splice MOs + megamind_mut_a
Splice MOs + megamind_mut_b
Splice MOs + megamind_mut_a+b
Splice MOs + RFP mRNA
Splice MOs + megamind_frameshift
Figure 6. The Importance of linc-birc6 for Proper Brain Development
(A) In situ hybridization showing megamind expression in the brain and eyes of zebraﬁsh embryos at 28 hpf.
(B) Gene architecture of megamind, showing the hybridization sites of the MOs (red boxes) and RT-PCR primers (arrows).
(C) Semiquantitative RT-PCR of mature megamind in embryos at 72 hpf that had been injected with the indicated MOs. b-actin mRNA was used as a control.
(D) Brain ventricles after injection with either the indicated MOs or coinjected with the splice-site MO and mature mouse megamind RNA, visualized using a red
ﬂuorescent dye injected into the ventricle space at 28 hpf. An expanded midbrain ventricle (arrow) and abnormal hindbrain hinge point (asterisk) are indicated.
(E) Embryos at 48 hpf that had been injected with the indicated reagents. Abnormal head shape and enlarged brain ventricles are indicated (arrow).
(F) Embryos at 48 hpf that had been injected with the indicated reagents. NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina and nasal placode were marked with GFP expressed from the neurod promoter . Near absence of NeuroD-positive neurons in the retina and tectum (arrows) is indicated.
(G) Frequency of morphant phenotypes in injected embryos (Table S5).
(H) Schematic of DNA point substitutions in the megamind-conserved segment.
(I) Architecture of a hybrid transcript containing the megamind-conserved segment in the context of cyrano-ﬂanking sequences.
See also Figure S5 and Table S5.
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
stringency even further to a threshold of 104 recovered another
nine zebraﬁsh-mammal lincRNAs pairs, but none of these
had conserved synteny, suggesting that such pairs with less
signiﬁcant sequence similarity were less likely to be truly orthologous. Regardless of whether undetectable homology exists,
lincRNA genes clearly evolve more rapidly than do those of
mRNAs, and they appear to be more rapidly gained and lost
during evolution. Indeed, some lincRNAs identiﬁed here and
elsewhere might be transcribed from newly emergent genes
that have not yet acquired a biological function and might be
lost before they do acquire one.
New lincRNAs can emerge from one of three mechanisms:
(1) de novo formation from previously untranscribed genomic
sequence, (2) duplication of another lincRNA, or (3) transformation of a protein-coding gene. Model (1) appears to have been
the most frequent. A small portion (6.7%) of zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
showed similarity to another zebraﬁsh lincRNA (compared to
44.2% of protein-coding genes showing similarity to another
protein-coding gene within the genome). Although this comparison is confounded by weaker sequence constraints leading
to rapid loss of recognizable sequence similarity following
duplication, it provides little evidence for high prevalence of
model (2). In addition, 47 zebraﬁsh lincRNAs (8.6%) showed
signiﬁcant sequence similarity to zebraﬁsh protein-coding
genes, and as mentioned above, about a quarter of zebraﬁsh
lincRNAs that were aligned to mammals mapped to mammalian protein-coding exons and about half of the mammalian
lincRNAs that were aligned to ﬁsh mapped to coding exons.
Although some of these might be mRNAs misannotated as
lincRNAs, many are probably authentic lincRNAs, as indicated
by the lack of long open reading frames or sequences predicted to encode conserved polypeptides. These ﬁndings
suggest that some lincRNAs originated from genes that
formerly coded for proteins (model 3), as has been proposed
for XIST, a well-characterized lincRNA, which functions in X
chromosome inactivation . We note that
the conservation observed for these lincRNAs might arise
from purifying selection in only the lineages of their mRNA
Figure 7. lincRNA Conservation Patterns
(A) The human MALAT1 locus and the orthologous locus in zebraﬁsh. Protein-coding genes are in green and lincRNA genes are in blue. Arrows indicate direction
of transcription, black triangles indicate canonical poly(A) sites and white triangles indicate 30 termini obtained by RNase P cleavage . The
conservation plot is relative to the zebraﬁsh locus and based on the 8-genome alignment.
(B) The zebraﬁsh linc-epb4.1l4 gene showing homology to the 30UTR of an mRNA expressed in human, mouse, chicken and other amniotes. Gray boxes indicate
two deeply conserved regions. The repeats track indicates all the repetitive elements predicted by RepeatMasker, taken from the UCSC genome browser. The
conservation plot is as in (A).
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.
cousins and not speak to lincRNA function, thereby illustrating
biological
conservation.
In model (3), a functional lincRNA might arise from a pseudogene, which has already lost its protein-coding function, or
lincRNA function might emerge while the transcript still codes
for a functional protein, with subsequent evolutionary loss of
the protein-coding function (sometimes after gene duplication
and subfunctionalization) to produce a new lincRNA. This
second scenario raises the possibility that some mRNAs might
currently carry out important noncoding functions, thereby
signiﬁcantly contributing to the number of transcripts with
conserved lincRNA-like functions. The same mature transcript
carrying out both types of functions would extend the paradigm
represented by the SRA1 gene, in which different transcript
isoforms from the same gene carry out either coding or noncoding functions . Although moonlighting mRNAs are difﬁcult to distinguish
from normal mRNAs, our annotation of zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
enabled identiﬁcation of bifunctional transcripts that emerged
from the reciprocal evolutionary scenario, i.e., the acquisition
of protein-coding potential by a lincRNA. For example, a highly
expressed, brain-enriched lincRNA in zebraﬁsh (linc-epb4.1l4)
showed synteny and sequence conservation with the 30UTR of
a gene encoding neuronal protein 3.1 (P311) in human and
mouse (Figure 2A and Figure 7B). Although P311 is only 68
amino acids long, its translation was supported by ribosome
footprinting in HeLa cells . However, despite
the clear presence of a homologous transcript in bony and
cartilaginous ﬁsh, no protein homologs of P311 were detected
more basal to tetrapods, and only the 30UTR of P311 was highly
throughout
vertebrate
suggest that the transcript originally was a lincRNA that performed a function that might still be retained throughout extant
vertebrates and began moonlighting as a coding transcript in
tetrapods.
A System for Studying lincRNA Functions
In addition to providing insights into lincRNA origins and evolution, the identiﬁcation of lincRNAs in zebraﬁsh unlocks the
toolbox of zebraﬁsh molecular genetics for the study of lincRNA
function. With the exceptions of studies of Xist and its associated
transcripts , and more recent work done
with Neat1 , lincRNA functions have
been studied exclusively in cell lines. Moreover, for the vast
majority of lincRNAs, biological functions remain unknown, as
do answers to some basic questions: Do any lincRNAs employ
common mechanisms of action? Do they function mostly in cis
or in trans? For how many does the RNA itself have any importance over the mere act of its transcription? Finding answers
to these questions has been hampered by a lack of a model
system amenable to quick genetic manipulations and in which
phenotypes can be scored on an organismal level. Using
zebraﬁsh, we identiﬁed biological functions of two lincRNAs in
vertebrate development and began to unravel their sequencefunction relationships, as well as the functional equivalence of
lincRNAs from different species. We anticipate that this system
and approach can be used to rapidly reveal biological functions
of other lincRNAs and to identify additional lincRNAs with
conserved roles across vertebrates, which can be prioritized
for functional studies in mammals.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
High-Throughput Datasets
Zebraﬁsh were maintained and staged using standard procedures . ChIP-Seq, 3P-Seq and RNA-Seq were performed as described
 , and reads were
mapped to the genome using Bowtie . H3K4me3
enrichment peaks meeting FDR < 0.1 were determined using MACS . Raw 3P-Seq data was processed as described . Additional RNA-Seq reads were obtained from SRA (accession
ERP000016), and processed using TopHat and Cufﬂinks
 . For additional details, see Extended Experimental
Procedures.
Identiﬁcation of Zebraﬁsh lincRNAs
Our lincRNA prediction pipeline (Figure 1C) is explained in the Extended Experimental Procedures.
Human and Mouse lincRNA Collections
Sets of 2,458 human and 3,345 mouse lincRNAs (Table S3) were obtained by
combining long (>200 bp) noncoding transcripts from Ensembl, RefSeq,
UCSC genes and Guttman et al. and ﬁltering for overlap with proteincoding genes, coding transcripts from other species mapped to the human
genome in the UCSC genome browser, pseudogenes and ‘‘other RNAs’’
annotated in Ensembl. For additional details, see Extended Experimental
Procedures.
Control Regions for lincRNA Genes
For each lincRNA locus, a computational control was generated by random
sampling of a length-matched region from intergenic space of the same
chromosome. To estimate conﬁdence intervals, 200–1000 cohorts of computational controls were used.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
ChIP-Seq, 3P-Seq and RNA-Seq sequencing data have been deposited into
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, accession number GSE32880).
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, seven
tables, and ﬁve ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at doi:10.1016/
j.cell.2011.11.055.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank V. Auyeung, O. Rissland, I. Drinnenberg, R. Shalgi, S. Hong, and
D. Garcia for comments on the manuscript; T. DiCesare for illustration;
M. Guenther for help with the ChIP-Seq protocol; WI genome technology
core for sequencing and W. Johnston, O. Paugois and G. Lafkas for technical
support. The Tg(neurod:egfp) transgenic line was kindly provided by the Nicolson lab. RNA-Seq data was kindly made available by the Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute. This work was supported by a grant (GM067031) from the
NIH (D.P.B.), an EMBO long-term fellowship (I.U.), a Human Frontiers Science
Program long-term fellowship (A.S.), and an NSF predoctoral fellowship
Received: July 28, 2011
Revised: October 5, 2011
Accepted: November 18, 2011
Published: December 22, 2011
Cell 147, 1537–1550, December 23, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.