NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF
NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS
Jeffrey R. Kling
Jeffrey B. Liebman
Lawrence F. Katz
Working Paper 11577
 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
This paper integrates material previously circulated in Kling and Liebman , Kling et al. , and
Liebman et al. . Support for this research was provided by grants from the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the National Institute of Child Health and Development (NICHD) and the National
Institute of Mental Health (R01-HD40404 and R01-HD40444), the National Science Foundation (9876337
and 0091854), the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the W.T. Grant Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation. Additional
support was provided by grants to Princeton University from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and from
NICHD (5P30-HD32030 for the Office of Population Research), by the Princeton Industrial Relations
Section, the Bendheim-Thomas Center for Research on Child Wellbeing, the Princeton Center for Health and
Wellbeing, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Todd Richardson and Mark
Shroder of HUD; to Eric Beecroft, Judie Feins, Barbara Goodson, Robin Jacob, Stephen Kennedy, Larry Orr,
and Rhiannon Patterson of Abt Associates; to our collaborators Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Alessandra Del Conte
Dickovick, Greg Duncan, Tama Leventhal, Jens Ludwig, Bruce Psaty, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, and Robert
Whitaker; to our research assistants Ken Fortson, Jane Garrison, Erin Metcalf, and Josh Meltzer; and to
numerous colleagues and three anonymous referees for valuable suggestions. Any findings or conclusions
expressed are those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects
Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 11577
August 2005
JEL No. H43, I18, I38, J38
Families, primarily female-headed minority households with children, living in high-poverty public
housing projects in five U.S. cities were offered housing vouchers by lottery in the Moving to
Opportunity program. Four to seven years after random assignment, families offered vouchers lived
in safer neighborhoods that had lower poverty rates than those of the control group not offered
vouchers. We find no significant overall effects of this intervention on adult economic selfsufficiency or physical health. Mental health benefits of the voucher offers for adults and for female
youth were substantial. Beneficial effects for female youth on education, risky behavior, and physical
health were offset by adverse effects for male youth. For outcomes exhibiting significant treatment
effects, we find, using variation in treatment intensity across voucher types and cities, that the
relationship between neighborhood poverty rate and outcomes is approximately linear.
Jeffrey R. Kling
Firestone A-16-J
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
 
Jeffrey B. Liebman
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
 
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
 
The residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods fare substantially worse on a wide range of
socioeconomic and health outcomes than do those with more affluent neighbors. Economic
models of residential sorting --partially motivated by these observed associations between
neighborhood characteristics and individual outcomes -- suggest that inefficient equilibria can
arise when individual outcomes are influenced by neighbors and individuals do not take their
external effects on neighbors into account in their location decisions .
It is hard to judge from theory alone whether the externalities from having neighbors of
higher socioeconomic status are predominantly beneficial (from social connections, positive role
models, reduced exposure to violence, and more community resources), inconsequential (only
family influences, genetic endowments, and individual human capital investments matter), or
adverse (from competition with advantaged peers and discrimination).1 Empirical assessment of
the importance of such externalities has also proven difficult using non-experimental data
because individuals sort across neighborhoods for reasons that are likely to be correlated with the
underlying determinants of their outcomes.
In this paper, we avoid the problem of endogenous neighborhood selection by using data
from a randomized experiment in which some families living in high-poverty housing projects
were offered housing vouchers to enable them to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods while
others were not offered vouchers.2 Thus our analysis provides direct evidence on the existence,
direction, and magnitude of neighborhood effects for important socioeconomic and health
outcomes in both adult and youth populations. The findings also bear on key housing policy
decisions such as whether it is better for the government to provide housing subsidies tied to
public housing projects or housing vouchers that can be used in the private-sector rental market.
1 Jencks and Mayer , Becker and Murphy , Brock and Durlauf ), Kawachi and Berkman .
2 Tenants in U.S. public housing and those using federal Section 8 housing vouchers both pay approximately 30
percent of their income in rent . The value of a voucher is the difference between 30 percent of income
and the city’s Fair Market Rent, set at the 40th percentile of area rents.
The research design used in this paper is based on comparisons of three groups to which
households were randomly assigned in the Moving To Opportunity (MTO) social experiment,
operated in five cities -- Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York -- by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development. A control group received no new assistance,
but continued to be eligible for public housing. A Section 8 group received a traditional Section
8 voucher, without geographic restriction. An experimental group received a Section 8 voucher,
restricted for one year to a census tract with a poverty rate of less than 10 percent, and mobility
counseling. Our sample consists of 4248 households assigned from 1994-97 at the five sites.
In 2002, extensive data were collected on outcomes from five key domains: economic selfsufficiency, mental health, physical health, risky behavior, and education. This paper provides
the main results from MTO for adults and for youth ages 15-20 at all five sites an average of five
years after random assignment, providing the most comprehensive experimental analysis to date
of neighborhoods effects.3
1. Data and descriptive statistics.
The data for this study come from a baseline survey, from administrative data, and from an
impact evaluation survey conducted in 2002 of one adult and up to two randomly selected
children in each MTO household. The baseline survey was administered to household heads
prior to random assignment. Administrative data on earnings and welfare benefits were obtained
from state and county agencies in California, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, and New York.4
3 Additional results are available from Sanbonmatsu et al. who analyze reading and math test scores for
children ages 6-20 and from Kling, Ludwig, and Katz who analyze arrest records for youth ages 15-25. The
earlier single-site pilot studies of MTO are collected in Goering and Feins .
4 Four of the states provided individual-level earnings information on each MTO sample member who matched to
the UI records. Massachusetts could provide the data only aggregated across groups consisting of at least 10 MTO
individuals. Data was linked by Social Security Number (SSN). SSNs from each state of random assignment were
linked to agency data only for that state. Earnings and welfare amounts were inflation adjusted to 2001 dollars using
the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers.
The 2002 survey had an effective response rate of 90 percent for adults and female youth and 86
percent for male youth.5 All statistical estimates in this paper use weights.6 The baseline
covariates included in the regressions and supplemental details regarding outcome variables are
given in the Appendix.
The Boston, Los Angeles, and New York families in our sample are mainly black or
Hispanic; those in Baltimore and Chicago are nearly all black. Overall, 85 percent of the
households are female-headed and either African-American or Hispanic. 98 percent of the
sample adults were female, and 93 percent were ages 25-54 as of December 31, 2001. At the
time of random assignment, one quarter of sample adults were employed, three quarters were
receiving AFDC, more than half had never married, fewer than half had graduated from high
school, and a quarter had been teenage parents. In a baseline survey, a majority said they wanted
to move out of public housing “to get away from drugs and gangs.”
Participants volunteered for this study, presumably because they were interested in moving
out of their original high-poverty neighborhoods. Although this may be the most relevant
population when considering incremental expansion of the use of housing vouchers to replace
public housing, care should be taken in applying these results to populations with different
characteristics. The experiment did not result in large clusters of moves to the same new
5 An initial phase from January - June 2002 resulted in an 80% response rate for adults. At that point, we drew a 3in-10 subsample of remaining cases and located 48% of them. The purpose of the subsampling was to concentrate
our remaining resources on finding hard-to-locate families in a way that would minimize the potential for nonresponse bias. We calculate the effective response rate for adults as 80 + (1 - .8)*48 = 89.6. The effective response
rate for youths is calculated in an analogous manner.
6 The weights have three components . First, subsample members receive greater weight since, in
addition to themselves, they represent individuals whom we did not attempt to contact during the subsampling
phase. Second, youth from large families receive greater weight since we randomly sampled two children per
household implying that youth from large families are representative of a larger fraction of the study population; this
component does not apply to adults. Third, all individuals are weighted by the inverse of their probability of
assignment to their experimental group to account for changes in the random assignment ratios over time. The ratio
of individuals randomly assigned to treatment groups was changed during the course of the demonstration to
minimize the minimum detectable effects after take-up of the vouchers turned out to be different than had been
projected. This third component of the weights prevents time or cohort effects from confounding the results. Our
weights imply that each random assignment period is weighted in proportion to the number of people randomly
assigned in that period. Analyses of administrative data use only the third component of the weights.
neighborhoods; therefore it is unlikely to have had large effects on receiving neighborhoods or
via “social multiplier” or “general equilibrium” effects .
Families in the treatment groups had four to six months to find qualified housing and move
using an MTO voucher. The fraction of treatment group families who used an MTO voucher to
move -- which we refer to as the compliance rate -- was 47 percent for the experimental group
and 60 percent for the Section 8 group. Compared to non-compliers (those in the treatment
groups who do not use an MTO voucher), compliers (those who move using an MTO voucher)
are younger and more likely to have had no teenage children at baseline, to have reported that
their neighborhood was very unsafe at night, to have said that they were very dissatisfied with
their apartment, to have been enrolled in school, and to have forecast that they would be “very
likely” to find a new apartment if offered a voucher. Compliance rates differed substantially by
site from a low of 32 percent in the Chicago experimental group to a high of 77 percent in the
Los Angeles Section 8 group.7
To characterize the neighborhoods in which families lived and the differences in residential
location for those who used an MTO voucher versus those who did not, Figure 1 shows several
densities of neighborhood (census tract) poverty rates. The poverty rates are duration-weighted
averages over locations lived at since random assignment, and use linear interpolation for
poverty rates between the Census years of 1990 and 2000. Figure 1 indicates that experimental
compliers lived in neighborhoods with significantly lower poverty rates than did controls, with
nearly 60 percent living in neighborhoods below 20 percent poverty; Section 8 compliers also
lived in lower-poverty neighborhoods, but their density is shifted by a more modest magnitude.
The densities for experimental non-compliers, Section 8 non-compliers, and controls are quite
7 The intensity of housing search assistance provided to the experimental group by the non-profits responsible for
the counseling varied considerably across sites, as did the tightness of local housing markets.
similar to each other.8
Additional descriptive statistics of the residential locations are shown in Table 1. The
experimental and Section 8 groups are both substantially less likely to live in very poor areas
with visible drug activity, and somewhat more likely to live in areas with greater adult
employment and a lower share of minority residents. Members of the treatment groups feel safer
and are less likely to report a household member having been victimized by crime in the previous
six months. The .82 average share minority for the experimental group tracts is indicative of the
fact that, while families moved to lower poverty census tracts, these families did not move to
distant white suburban areas. In the experimental group, only 16 percent moved 10 miles or
more, and only 12 percent had an average tract share minority less than half.
2. Analysis.
We focus on fifteen primary outcomes for adults and fifteen primary outcomes for youth.
Prior to examining the data, we decided to examine youth results pooled by gender and
separately for females and males -- both because the prevalences for some outcomes differ
greatly by gender and result in different statistical power to detect effects and because there had
been some evidence of more beneficial effects for boys in earlier MTO research and in welfare reform research . With fifteen outcomes, four population groups (adults, all youth, female youth, male
youth) and two treatment groups, there are a total of 120 treatment effect estimates in this set.
To draw general conclusions about the experiment’s results, we first present findings for
summary indices that aggregate information over multiple treatment effect estimates (later we
8 This implies that there was little selection of the type typically hypothesized, where compliers would have been
more likely to have moved to lower-poverty neighborhoods even if they had not been offered a voucher (and the
poverty distribution for controls would therefore exhibit greater density at lower neighborhood-poverty rates than
would the density for noncompliers).
present estimates for specific outcomes). For example, we create an index of economic selfsufficiency that averages together five measures of employment, earnings, and public assistance
receipt. The aggregation improves statistical power to detect effects that go in the same direction
within a domain.9 The index Y is an equally weighted average of z-scores of the components of
the index, with signs of measures oriented as defined in the notes to Table 2 so that more
beneficial outcomes have higher index scores. The z-scores are calculated by subtracting the
control group mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation, so the value of the
index has mean zero and standard deviation one by construction for the control group.10
We begin by estimating intent-to-treat (ITT) effects -- differences between treatment and
control group means. Estimation of the ITT effect π1 is from equation (1). Let Z be an indicator
for treatment group assignment, and X be a matrix of baseline covariates.
X is included to improve estimation precision and to account for chance differences between
groups in the distribution of pre-random assignment characteristics. Table 2 shows ITT results by
domain and population group for indices -- with details on the measures included in each index
provided in the notes to Table 2. The absolute magnitudes of the indices are in units akin to
standardized test scores; the ITT estimate shows where the mean of the treatment group is in the
distribution of the control group in terms of standard deviation units.
9 O’Brien constructs a global test statistic for multiple endpoints with maximum power against the alternative
that all effects have the same sign and effect size. An adaptation of the O’Brien approach is discussed in the
Appendix and implemented in Kling and Liebman which uses seemingly unrelated regression effects for
specific outcomes to estimate the covariance of the effects and calculates the mean effect size for groups of
estimates in a second step. The average z-score index used in this paper is much simpler to work with, particularly
for our results relating neighborhood poverty rates to outcomes. The two approaches yield identical treatment effects
when there is no item nonresponse and no regression adjustment.
10 If an individual has a valid response to at least one component measure of an index, then any missing values for
other component measures are imputed at the random assignment group mean. This results in differences between
treatment and control means of an index being the same as the average of treatment and control means of the
components of that index (when the components are divided by their control group standard deviation and have no
missing value imputation), so that the index can be interpreted as the average of results for separate measures scaled
to standard deviation units.
For adults, the direction of effects is positive for both the experimental and Section 8 groups
relative to the control group for all three domains: economic self-sufficiency, physical health,
and mental health. The effect on mental health for the experimental group is much larger in
magnitude than the others and is the only adult estimate that is statistically significant at the 5
percent level. For results pooling all youth, the direction of effects is positive for mental health
and education, and negative for physical health and risky behavior. Again, the effects on mental
health (for both the experimental group and Section 8 groups) are much larger and have p-values
below .06. For the overall index averaging together all fifteen outcomes, the results in columns
(i)-(iv) for adults and for all youth are positive in sign, but the magnitude is not large enough to
reject a null hypothesis of no effect with 95 percent confidence. Thus, for adults and for all
youth, the strongest evidence of effects from relocation to lower poverty neighborhoods is for the
domain of mental health.
The overall results for youth average together estimates that substantially differ for female
and male youth. Columns (v)-(viii) of Table 2 show large positive effects on mental health and
risky behavior for female youth, and large negative effects on physical health and risky behavior
for male youth.11 This gender pattern in results was the opposite of what we expected.12 Yet, as
shown in columns (ix)-(x), the medium-term effects for females are more beneficial than for
males for all four domains and in both treatment groups relative to the control group.
As a complement to the summary indices, we also examined results for each specific
outcome that was a component of an index. Because the magnitudes of these separate outcomes
11 These results are based on estimation of
, where G is an indicator
for gender, X includes household and individual-specific characteristics.
12 All of the non-experimental papers that we are aware of showing gender differences in neighborhood effects find
larger beneficial effects for boys from living in advantaged neighborhoods than for girls . The predominant
mechanism proposed in these studies is that boys spend more time hanging out in the neighborhood (rather than in
the home), and therefore are influenced more heavily by the neighborhood.
are often easier to interpret than those of the summary indices, we show in Table 3 all outcomes
with ITT effects significant at the five percent level. In addition to ITT effects, we also report the
effect of treatment-on-treated (TOT) for these measures. We estimate this effect using the offer
of an MTO voucher as an instrumental variable for MTO voucher use, so Z is the excluded
instrument for an indicator D of compliance in two stage least squares estimation of (2).13
The TOT parameter γ2 is equal to the ITT parameter divided by the regression-adjusted
compliance rate. This TOT approach relies on the assumption that there was no average effect of
being offered an MTO voucher on those who did not use an MTO voucher, which we believe is a
reasonable approximation, but not strictly true.14 Under this assumption, we can assess the
average magnitude of the effect of the voucher offer for those who complied and used an MTO
voucher to move to a lower-poverty neighborhood.
As an example, results for the specific outcome of adult obesity, using a standard body mass
index cutpoint (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2), are shown in the first row of Table 3. The results in column (i)
compare the experimental and control groups (E-C), and the ITT effect on obesity is a five
percentage point reduction in obesity for the experimental group relative to the control group.
13 We interpret the 2SLS results as treatment-on-treated estimates rather than local average treatment effect (LATE)
estimates because the endogenous variable is use of a voucher offered by the MTO
program, and MTO vouchers are never offered to the control group; there are no always-takers in the terminology of
Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin . Over time, some control group members do receive housing vouchers from
other sources, but they tend to receive them significantly later than treatment group members do. Therefore, in our
TOT estimates, we do not define control group voucher recipients as having been treated. We do interpret both our
ITT and TOT estimates as averages of heterogeneous treatment effects across individuals.
14 For the experimental group, this assumption implies that the later outcomes of households who met with a housing
mobility counselor were not affected by the counselor if that household did not make a subsidized move through the
MTO program. For both treatment groups, this assumption implies that the experience of housing search induced by
assignment to a treatment group did not affect later outcomes if that household did not make a subsidized program
move. For noncompliers, we believe that the effects of mobility counselors (who mainly provided housing advice
and not general social services) on self-sufficiency and health outcomes are likely to be orders of magnitude smaller
than the effects of moving to a new residential location. The TOT approach also requires that the control group was
not affected by the experience of losing the voucher lottery, something we view as a reasonable approximation.
Assuming no effect on those who did not use an MTO voucher to move, the TOT effect was ten
percentage points.
Since outcomes are directly observed for treatment group compliers and we have a TOT
estimate, we can estimate the mean level of each outcome for those in the control group who
would have complied if they had been offered a voucher -- which we refer to as the control
complier mean or CCM -- based on relation that CCM = E[Y |
Z=1, D=1] - γ.15 For the fraction obese, the CCM in column (iv) is estimated to be .502.16 Thus
a ten percentage point change would be a decline in relative risk among compliers of 21 percent
and a relative odds ratio of .66 for obesity for experimental relative to control compliers.17
These effects on adult obesity are of substantial magnitude, yet they are the smallest in
relative risk and relative odds among the 13 binary outcomes in Table 3. The two continuous
outcomes in Table 3 (the z-scores from the K6 distress index) have TOT effect sizes of .2 and .5
standard deviations. Thus, each of the TOT effects in Table 3 appears to be of a substantively
important magnitude.
Another metric in which the magnitude of the results can be assessed is in terms of the
association between a change in the neighborhood poverty rate (W) and the change in an
outcome.18 Thus in equation (3) the key parameter is γ3, the OLS coefficient on poverty rate.19
15 For binary outcomes, sampling variation can produce negative estimates of the CCM. Our analytic method
assumes that the there would have been the same fraction of noncompliers in the control group as were observed in
the treatment group, and that these noncompliers had exactly the same outcome prevalence as treatment
noncompliers. In any one sample this method may produce a negative estimate of a CCM if a particular realization
of the treatment noncomplier mean is higher than the realization of the control noncomplier mean, even though the
method is unbiased in repeated sampling. In our results, we report a CCM of zero when the CCM estimate for a
binary outcome is negative.
16 BMI = 30 for a woman five feet four inches and 175 pounds. Nationally for ages 18-44, 33 percent of black
women and 22 percent of Hispanic women have BMI ≥ 30 .
17 The odds of obesity for control compliers are .502/(1-.502) = 1.01. The odds for experimental compliers are
.399/(1-.399) = .664. The relative odds are .664 / 1.01 = .659.
18 This approach permits direct comparison with the large nonexperimental literature. In addition, sociological
threshold models and economic models of sorting across neighborhoods, schools, and
OLS estimation of this regression may be biased by endogenous residential location as
previously discussed, but treatment group assignment can be used to form instrumental variables.
Consider a regression using all sample members, regardless of MTO group. With a set of
excluded instruments containing site-by-treatment interactions and when X contains only site
indicators, then the 2SLS estimate of γ3 is the line fit through a scatterplot of 15 outcome and
poverty rate means for the three random assignment groups in each of five sites, normalized so
that each site has mean zero. This is depicted graphically in Figure 2, with four panels for four
summary indices (adult mental health, female youth mental health, female youth overall, and
male youth overall). The figures show that there is a consistent pattern across the sites and
groups that larger differences in poverty rates (relative to the site mean) are associated with
differences of larger magnitude in outcomes. The relationship between poverty rate and
outcomes appears fairly linear, and in each case, a test of the overidentifying restrictions
 has a p-value of less than .30 indicating that the data are
consistent with a linear model.20
Estimates based on equation (3) are given in Table 4 for selected outcomes. The first column
shows OLS estimates using data for the control group only – results illustrative of the approach
taken in the non-experimental literature on neighborhood effects that could have been applied in analysis of this population without the random assignment
classrooms hinge
on the exact form of the relationship between neighborhood or peer groups characteristics and individual outcomes.
19 We interpret the coefficient on neighborhood poverty rate as the effect of moving a neighborhood with a lower
poverty rate and other associated differences in neighborhood characteristics, and not as the effect of changing the
poverty rate while holding other characteristics of the neighborhood constant.
20 We have also used another diagnostic technique for examining the form of the relationship between the outcomes
and poverty rates in each group-site – examining augmented partial residual plots, recommended by Mallows 
to detect nonlinearity in the relationship of W and Y. This analysis did not suggest any evidence of nonlinearities in
our estimated relationships.
of vouchers. The second column shows 2SLS estimates of γ3 for the entire sample with sitegroup interactions as excluded instruments for the neighborhood poverty rate W, and a full set of
covariates in X. The 2SLS estimates bear little relation to the OLS estimates, implying that
endogeneity is a substantial issue for non-experimental approaches to these data. Differences in
neighborhood poverty rates of ten percentage points (roughly the treatment-control difference in
poverty rates in Table 1) are associated with outcome effect sizes similar in magnitude to those
for the ITT effects in Table 2.
To test the hypotheses that differences in poverty rates had the primary effects on outcomes
as opposed to simply using an MTO voucher to move out of public housing, we also enriched W
in equation (3) to include both the poverty rate and an indicator for compliance (D), with results
reported in columns (iii) and (iv) of Table 4. Comparing columns (ii) and (iii), results without
and with controls for compliance are quite similar for female youth and are within sampling error
for adult mental health and for male youth (accounting for the covariance of the estimates). For
the more precisely estimated models (adult mental health, female youth overall, male youth
overall), the coefficients on poverty rates are large both in absolute magnitude and relative to
their standard errors, while the coefficients on compliance are wrong-signed and small relative to
their standard errors -- providing some evidence that the poverty rate effect was more important
than the “move per se” effect. We have also examined other models with two endogenous
variables, such as poverty and poverty-squared, intercept shifts in poverty rates, and kink points
in poverty rates; while there is no evidence of nonlinearities in these models, the research design
has little power to identify these effects.
3. Discussion
Adult economic self-sufficiency. The idea that residence in a distressed community can limit
an individual’s economic prospects has been powerfully advanced by Wilson , and the
related hypothesis that proximity to employment is important has its roots in the spatial
mismatch hypothesis of Kain . However, we found no significant evidence of treatment
effects on earnings, welfare participation, or amount of government assistance after an average
of five years since random assignment. As shown in Figure 3, the fraction of MTO adults with
positive quarterly UI earnings increased from less than 25 percent in early 1995 to more than 50
percent in 2001. The time-patterns are, however, similar for the three randomly-assigned
In analyses shown in the Appendix, we explore possible reasons for the lack of effects. There
do not appear to be important differences across the three MTO groups in job accessibility, to the
extent that aggregate employment growth in establishments at the zip code level reflects
available job vacancies.22 Also, the MTO intervention had only small impacts on job-related
social networks. While we found that the intervention modestly increased the fraction of sample
members who “had a friend who graduated from college or earned more than $30,000 a year,”
we also found that only about eight percent of the sample “found a job through someone living in
21 The strength of the U.S. labor market, welfare reform, and the declining fraction of sample members with
preschool-age children at home are the most likely explanations for this upward trend. In analyses shown in the
Appendix we found similar results based on survey and administrative data, suggesting little bias in self-reports.
Given that the name of the demonstration is “Moving To Opportunity” and it was promoted by the government as a
pathway to better jobs, one might have expected employment and earnings to be the most likely outcomes to be
exaggerated by treatment group members if they were trying to “tell us what they thought we wanted to hear.”
22 It is somewhat surprising that the MTO intervention – which assisted families in moving out of some of the most
concentrated pockets of poverty in the U.S. – had no discernable overall effects on employment, given that a recent
comprehensive survey concludes that the empirical evidence overwhelmingly
supports the spatial mismatch hypothesis that inner-city low-skilled minority workers have relatively weak access to
jobs because job opportunities are disproportionately in suburban areas and housing market discrimination plus
commuting costs create barriers that prevent minorities from reaching suburban jobs. It turns out, however, that the
MTO experiment provides only a weak test of this aspect of spatial mismatch since the effects on distance moved
and on local area job growth are small. If spatial mismatch is construed more broadly to encompass residence in
distressed, unsafe, crime-ridden communities inhibiting access to jobs outside these communities, the results do
indicate that moving to communities that are substantially safer does not have detectable effects on employment.
their neighborhood such as a friend, relative, or acquaintance” -- and that this proportion did not
vary across MTO groups.
We also explored whether effects differed by baseline characteristics, and in general results
do not differ appreciably by these characteristics.23 In results shown in the Appendix, we find
some suggestive evidence using UI data of interesting dynamics in the treatment effects on
employment and earnings for younger adults, with initial negative treatment effects in the first
two years after random assignment fading away over time for the Section 8 group and turning
positive and substantial in the fourth and fifth years after random assignment for the
experimental group.24
Adult physical health. Our early work at the Boston site 
suggested that the MTO intervention may have had important health impacts and led us to
expand the outcomes studied beyond the economic and housing outcomes that were the original
focus of the MTO demonstration. In the much more extensive health data gathered in the current
study, there was not a broad pattern of physical health improvements for the treatment groups.
The intervention did not have statistically significant effects on self-reported overall health,
hypertension, asthma, or trouble carrying groceries or climbing stairs and there was not a
statistically significant effect on the physical health index in Table 2.25
There was a large and statistically significant effect on obesity (see Table 3), possibly related
to the reduced psychological distress and increase in exercise and nutrition that we also observed
23 Results are given in the Appendix by age. Results by education level, gender composition of the household, and
whether the household head was a prime-age minority single mother are available from the authors.
24 Examining effects by age was an exploratory and not a confirmatory exercise, and we note that this type of
searching for significant effects in subgroups raises the chance of concluding that there are statistically significant
results even when the null hypothesis of no effects is true.
25 Further exploration of the data by age showed a positive and significant impact of the MTO experimental
treatment on our summary measure of physical health outcomes for the younger adults and no significant overall
impact for older adults. These health impacts come from aggregating five consistently-signed estimates with small
magnitudes rather than from a large effect on any one measure. This result, along with the suggestive evidence of
employment gains among younger adults, leads us to speculate that the habits and behaviors of younger adults may
be more malleable and therefore more responsive to a change in residential environment.
for the treatment groups. The interpretation of the obesity results depends largely on one’s reason
for focusing on obesity. If a researcher was searching for social experiments about the effects of
neighborhoods on obesity (and this is the only one), focusing on the t-statistic of 2.2 and the
associated per-comparison p-value of .03 is highly suggestive of an important effect of
residential location on obesity. If a researcher is searching through the MTO results for
significant effects, however, we suggest some caution in interpreting the obesity results. When
using a method that focuses on particular results from among many outcomes of a family
because of their t-statistics, there is considerable likelihood that the obesity results could have
been observed by chance under a joint null hypothesis of no effects for all estimates in that
Adult mental health. In contrast to the results for physical health, the adult mental health
results were quite consistent across specific measures (distress, depression, anxiety, calmness,
sleep) in finding beneficial effects for the experimental group relative to the control group. This
consistency led to the large mean (ITT) effect size estimate of .08 standard deviations for the
adult mental health summary measure in Table 2. The confidence level that the results are not
due to chance is quite high under a method where the focus on mental health is determined
exogenously (leading to per-comparison inference) or endogenously from the high t-statistic
(leading to familywise inference).27 The magnitude of the mental health results – for example a
45 percent reduction in relative risk among compliers of scoring above the K6 screening cutpoint
26 The probability that the second largest t-statistic among 30 adult estimates is 2.2 or higher under the joint null
hypothesis of no effect is a familywise adjusted p-value of .80, which is indicative of the fact that there is little
power to reject the joint null hypothesis for specific outcomes. The adjusted p-values throughout this paper are
based on a bootstrap procedure accounting for covariance among estimates, using a method adapted from Westfall
and Young as described in the Appendix.
27 We focus our familywise inference on the summary indices, which reduces the dimension of the inference
problem. For adults, we focus on 8 ITT estimates for summary indices in Table 2. The familywise adjusted p-value
for the mental health index t-statistic being 2.8 or higher (i.e., the largest t-statistic on estimates for 8 adult indices)
under the joint null hypothesis of no effect on any of the 8 adult indices in Table 2 is .06.
for serious mental illness -- is comparable to that found in some of the most
effective clinical and pharmacologic mental health interventions.28
The overall pattern of adult results -- with the agreement of estimated effects based on selfreports and administrative records of economic outcomes, with effects concentrated in the single
domain of mental health, and with mental health effect sizes systematically related to changes in
neighborhood poverty rates in Figure 2A and in Table 4 -- indicates that there are beneficial
impacts on mental health of moving to less distressed neighborhoods. In addition, this pattern is
contrary to a model in which the unrestricted choice of the Section 8 group should have led to
better outcomes than the restricted choice of the experimental group. Based in part on evidence
from the extensive qualitative interviews that have been done with MTO participants and the
strong associations shown in the MTO quantitative research, we believe that the leading
hypothesis for the mechanism producing the mental health improvements involves the reduction
in stress that occurred when families moved away from dangerous neighborhoods in which the
fear of random violence influenced all aspects of their lives .
Female youth outcomes. Teenage youth are often seen as the population most at risk from the
adverse effects of high-poverty neighborhoods. In this study, 15 specific outcomes were assessed
for youth within the four domains of physical health, mental health, risky behavior, and
education. A summary index of all 15 outcomes shows large benefits for female youth in the
28 In a study often cited as an exemplar of an effective clinical intervention, Wells et al. analyzed outcomes
of depressive patients randomized to obtain usual care or improved quality care (better training of medical staff and
better follow-up with patients). 12 months later, the fraction with depressive symptoms in the quality improvement
group was .42, while the fraction was .51 in the usual care group – a reduction in relative risk of 18 percent. A metaanalysis of clinical trials of medications for major depressive disorder found that on average 50 percent of patients
receiving an active medication showed improvement compared with 29 percent receiving a placebo -- a reduction in
relative risk of 30 percent . The reduction in relative risk for major depressive episode among
MTO experimental compliers was also 30 percent (Appendix Table F5). Improved mental health for the treatment
groups relative to the control group was a mechanism that we had hypothesized might increase employment and
earnings. Although the effects on mental health reported here are large, Kling et al. calculate that these are
unlikely to translate into effects on earnings large enough to detect.
experimental and Section 8 groups relative to the control group. This pattern of beneficial effects
is quite consistent across outcomes, with 13 of 15 outcomes having the sign of a treatment effect
in a beneficial direction for both treatments. The magnitudes of the effects are largest for mental
health, still substantial for education and risky behavior, and small for physical health. For
example, the experimental compliers have a relative risk of serious generalized anxiety
symptoms 70 percent lower than the control complier mean.
In terms of assessing statistical significance, we adopt a similar framework as with the adult
outcomes. If there is ex-ante interest by a researcher in a particular estimate, then the percomparison p-value for that estimate is appropriate. When considering the many estimates for
youth simultaneously, there is a high probability of observing a few large estimates due to
sampling variability even if there were no true effect. To account for these multiple comparisons
while restricting the set to a manageable size, we considered inference for three youth subgroups
(all, female, male), two treatments (experimental, Section 8), and five domains (physical health,
mental health, risky behavior, education, and overall) -- which correspond to the 30 estimates in
columns (iii)-(viii) of Table 2. We calculated familywise adjusted p-values, similar to Bonferroni
corrections, but adjusted for the ordering of the tests and the covariance of the estimates as
described in the Appendix. The estimate in this set with the largest t-statistic was the overall
summary index for the experimental group, and the probability of observing an effect this large
or larger as the maximum of the 30 estimates was less than .001 under the joint null hypothesis
of no effects for the 30 estimates. The familywise adjusted p-value was .003 for the experimental
group mental health index. Based on these calculations, we conclude that the overall pattern and
the mental health result for the experimental group were quite unlikely to have occurred by
chance even if one focused on these results because of their large t-statistics.
Male youth outcomes. The results for the overall summary index of male youth outcomes are
of almost exactly the same magnitude as for female youth but with the opposite sign, implying
more adverse effects in the treatment groups than in the control group. Among specific
outcomes, the effects are largest for injuries and for substance use, as shown in Table 3, leading
to large effects for the male physical health and risky behavior summary indices in Table 2.
These summary index measures for males have highly significant per-comparison p-values,
although familywise adjusted p-values were greater than .05.
There are a number of issues that complicate interpretation of the results for male youth.
First, males in the treatment groups exhibited more behavior and other problems at baseline than
did those in the control group (there were no such baseline differences among females).29 This
imbalance appears largely due to the random sampling that occurred when we subsampled
children for our interviews, rather than to survey attrition or imbalance in the original random
assignment.30 The key question for our analysis is whether our regression controls for baseline
covariates are sufficient to adjust for the imbalance. In many situations where imbalance is due
to attrition or some other systematic reason, it is intuitive that unobservable variables are also
imbalanced; therefore controlling for observable differences might not be sufficient. In our case,
however, the source of imbalance is largely randomness. Therefore there is less reason to be
29 This result comes from a summary index of baseline covariates constructed in the same manner as the outcomes
indices (normalizing the control group for each gender to mean zero and standard deviation one). The index includes
variables (collected prior to random assignment) for age, gifted classes, school suspension, problems at school,
behavior problems, learning problems, physical activity problems, and other medical problems. To orient the index,
the signs are reversed for all items except gifted classes.
30 For the following E-C and S-C refer to ITT differences in the baseline covariate index in standard deviation units
for male youth (with standard errors). For all 1604 male youth ages 15-20 in MTO households, the E-C difference
was -.022 (.031), and the S-C difference was -.019 (.034). For the 923 male youth we attempted to survey (drawing
two children per household and a 3-in-10 subsample of initial nonrespondents), the E-C difference was -.133 (.053),
and the S-C difference was -.108 (.055). For the 879 youth with whom we completed surveys, the E-C difference
was -.158 (.054), and the S-C difference was -.129 (.056). Since there was less than half a standard error difference,
respectively, between the estimates for all male youth for whom surveys were attempted and for those completed but
large imbalance between treatment groups in baseline covariates for those attempted, we conclude that the
imbalance was largely driven by random sampling. For comparison with the 928 female youth surveyed, the E-C
difference was -.021 (.044), and the S-C difference was -.047 (.055).
concerned about imbalance in unobservables, and we suspect that our regression adjustment is
sufficient to remove most of the potential bias.31 Moreover, in analysis of administrative arrest
data using the full set of MTO youth (with little imbalance in covariates and no survey attrition),
Kling, Ludwig, and Katz find adverse treatment effects for males and beneficial effects
for females, supporting out conclusion that gender differences in effects are substantial and not
simply an artifact of sampling issues.
A second issue is that the rates of some adverse outcomes in the control group seem
implausibly low. For example, the proportion of non-sports injuries for male youth in the control
group is barely half as high as the injury rate for females, whereas our analysis of National
Health Interview Survey data found non-sports injury rates for male youth over 30 percent higher
than for female youth. Moreover, assuming that the injury rate among control noncompliers is
the same as for treatment noncompliers implies a control complier mean of less than zero. Both
of these facts are consistent with a low realization of injury rates for the particular sample and
time period for which we have data; we speculate that the injury rate for males would be at least
as high for males as for females if we were to run the experiment again. The rates of substance
use for males in the control group are also low relative to demographically similar individuals in
national data, whereas there are smaller differences between MTO controls and national data for
females.32 Our interpretation of the results is that issues such as random covariate imbalance,
31 It turns out that the estimates for injuries are scarcely different with and without regression adjustment. In
contrast, risky behavior estimates are affected by regression adjustment. ITT estimates without regression
adjustment for the four risky behavior outcomes are 0.3 to 1.7 percentage points larger for the experimental group
and 1.8 to 4.9 percentage points larger for the Section 8 group than the regression-adjusted estimates.
32 In the Appendix, we describe our method for producing results for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1997 (NLSY97) that are adjusted to match the demographics of the MTO sample. The following results in
parentheses are for the MTO control group, the adjusted NLSY97, and the unadjusted NLSY97 respectively.
Marijuana (females: .13, .13, .16; males: .12, .21, .18). Cigarettes (females .20, .26, .33; males: .13, .29, .33).
Alcohol (females: .23, .28, .43; males: .13, .30, .45). The deviations of the MTO controls from the adjusted NLSY97
across these three outcomes (in parentheses, respectively) are substantially smaller for females (0, .06, .05) than for
males (.09, .16, .17), which is consistent with a random draw of unusually low substance use among males in the
control group.
survey attrition, and surprisingly low prevalence of adverse outcomes among controls may
exaggerate the magnitude of the adverse effects for males, but that these factors are not large
enough to account for the differences in effects between males and females.
Understanding gender differences. We collected extensive data on mediating factors that
could potentially help in determining the mechanisms responsible for the observed results.33
Given the gender differences in our youth results, an important question is whether there were
gender differences in any mediating factors. In brief, we find that there were large effects of the
treatment on neighborhood characteristics and smaller effects on school characteristics, but no
significant differences by gender in the treatment effects on neighborhoods or schools (see the
Appendix for details). We conclude that female youth and male youth in the treatment groups
responded to similar new neighborhood environments in different ways.
Several mechanisms could potentially explain the gender differences in outcomes. There has
been a broad trend over the past two decades of gains in education and employment for minority
women – gains that have not been shared by minority men . Moves
through MTO may remove barriers to benefiting from these gains for female youth, whereas the
male youth have poor prospects even in lower poverty neighborhoods. It is also likely that girls
suffer disproportionately from domestic violence and sexual abuse , and the MTO intervention may have reduced their exposure to such events
– providing benefits from the moves for girls that were not nearly as relevant for boys. We do
find some statistically significant evidence that female youth are more likely to have three or
more adult role models to whom they are comfortable talking about their problems, and that the
mean effect size on a summary index of adult contact measures was significantly higher for
33 Because the MTO intervention changed so many aspects of neighborhoods and housing environments
simultaneously, the research design was not ideal for determining the mechanisms that may have produced the
effects on outcomes that we observed. Interventions that change on feature of the environment at a time would more
directly evaluation particular mechanisms.
female youth than for male youth. While the probability is quite high of observing at least one
effect this large under a joint null hypothesis of no gender differences in the many mediating
mechanisms we examined, our interpretation is that differences in adult contact are the most
likely contributor to at least part of the gender difference in effects from among the mechanisms
about which we have data to examine.34
For males, a two-audience signaling process could encourage
them to avoid peer sanction through participation in deviant group activities rather than engage
in more pro-social behaviors that are ultimately valued by employers-- a process which could be
more important when there is more uncertainty about social group affiliation due to greater
racial, ethnic, or economic diversity among peers (as there would tend to be for youth in families
using MTO vouchers). Fryer and Torelli find a stronger negative association between
popularity and grades among high achievers for black males than for black females and that this
difference is larger in less segregated schools; although this gender difference was concentrated
among those with high grades and was not found in full population, their result is consistent with
greater peer sanction against the pro-social activities of black males than those for females for
some subgroups. For MTO, we have evidence on the prevalence of visits to baseline
neighborhoods (that may have been negative influences through signaling to a group or through
lack of parental supervision); the sign is consistent with males making more visits, but the malefemale difference is insignificant. Another possibility is that relative deprivation or being at a
lower point in the ability distribution in the new schools than in the pre-move schools has
particularly adverse effects for males.35
34 We also found that the beneficial effects on adult mental health outcomes overall (such as distress and calmness)
were not evident for adults with male youth in their households, with the difference for male-female youth being
significant. This finding could be the effect of adverse male outcomes rather than the cause.
35 Also, male youth may have less effective coping strategies in stressful situations , and the disruption of moving itself may have been greater for male
Reconciling OLS and 2SLS estimates. If low neighborhood poverty rates were beneficial and
the neighborhood selection process operated such that people with unobserved characteristics
associated with good outcomes tended to locate in lower-poverty neighborhoods, these
assumptions would predict that the OLS estimates of effects of higher poverty rates would be
more adverse than 2SLS estimates. In Table 4, however, we found OLS estimates (based on the
control group only) were smaller in absolute magnitude than 2SLS and often of opposite sign.
The implied selection process is that adults and families with female teenagers likely to have
adverse outcomes tended to move to low poverty neighborhoods, and families with male
teenagers likely to have beneficial outcomes tended to move to low-poverty neighborhoods.36
The complexity of these selection patterns implies that it will not in general be possible to
identify the direction of bias in non-experimental studies of neighborhood effects.37
Younger Children. Sanbonmatsu et al. hypothesized finding greater effects of the
MTO treatment on children who are younger than the youth whose outcomes we study in this
youth. However, at least two strands of evidence run counter to this hypothesis. First, mobility rates were slightly
higher among households with female youth than those with male youth. Second, the adverse effects for males did
not manifest themselves right after the initial moves, as predicted by a simple mobility disruption model, but only
after several years. In studies of single MTO sites 1-3 years after random assignment, there were either no gender
differences in effects reported, or more beneficial effects for males than females . In administrative arrest data, the adverse effects on male property
crime are not found in the first two years after random assignment, but in the third and fourth years . It is also possible that the destination neighborhoods lacked some of the institutional support for atrisk boys that might have been present in the origin neighborhoods and that male youth lacked male role models of
their race or ethnicity in the new neighborhoods (given that nearly all MTO families are headed by single mothers, a
female MTO youth will generally have an adult same-sex role model). We find however that the MTO intervention
had no significant impacts on parenting practices, peer characteristics, school engagement, or access to health care
for either boys or girls.
36 These implications about the pattern of residential sorting are borne out within the treatment groups as well. For
nearly all outcomes, the compliers are more similar to the noncompliers than to the control group. For female youth
and adults, this pattern can only be consistent with beneficial treatment effects if compliers were people who
otherwise would have had poor outcomes. And for male youth, this pattern can only be consistent with adverse
treatment effects if compliers were people who would otherwise have had good outcomes. We examined the
predictors of compliance and of average tract poverty rate separately for each group. Consistent predictors of greater
compliance include younger adult age, smaller household size, and dissatisfaction with original neighborhood. No
characteristics except site were consistent predictors of poverty rates across all three of the groups. Unfortunately,
none of these predictors shed much light on the selection pattern.
37 The standard assumption of positive selection may be more applicable to populations where the frequency is
lower of recent moves and attendant transitory shocks or where there is greater scope for differences in unobserved
characteristics than in this MTO sample of largely female-headed minority households from public housing.
paper because the younger children (such as those ages 6-10) will have had less lifetime
exposure to the high poverty neighborhoods, but they found no statistically significant treatment
effects for younger children on reading test scores, math test scores, or behavior problems. It is
also the case, however, that the main outcomes for which we found large treatment effects for
teenage youth – mental health problems and risky behavior – have very low prevalence at
younger ages, and it is therefore too early to tell whether the outcomes of the younger children
will be different.
4. Conclusion
Using a housing voucher lottery which caused otherwise similar groups of families to reside
in very different neighborhoods, we have investigated the effects of moving out of some of the
highest poverty neighborhoods in the United States on outcomes for adults and teenage youth.
Our findings – no effects on adult economic self-sufficiency, improvements in adult mental
health, beneficial outcomes for teenage girls, adverse outcomes for teenage boys – have three
important implications.
First, housing mobility by itself does not appear to be an effective anti-poverty strategy – at
least over a five-year horizon. The MTO demonstration program was motivated by theories and
non-experimental empirical results suggesting that there would be large economic gains from
moving to lower-poverty neighborhoods. However, we found no evidence of treatment effects on
adult earnings or welfare participation. Whether economic gains begin to appear in the longer
run, particularly among MTO children, remains to be seen.
Second, even in the absence of economic gains, policies that move families out of distressed
public housing projects using rental vouchers are likely to have benefits that significantly exceed
their costs. Because the MTO intervention produced large mental health improvements and
because other research suggests that it is cheaper to provide a unit of subsidized housing with
vouchers than in a public housing project , an offer of a housing voucher is likely to
pass the Kaldor-Hicks criterion --the gains to those who benefit would be large enough to
hypothetically compensate those who experience adverse effects and still be better off. We note,
however, that spillovers onto neighborhoods to which these families moved remain unknown. If
there were large negative spillovers this conclusion could be reversed. In addition, the largely
offsetting male and female youth results complicate the welfare analysis.
Third, substantively important neighborhood effects do exist, but only for some outcomes.
Teenagers – the population often thought to be most affected by neighborhood conditions –
exhibited effects on the broadest range of outcomes. The evidence that effects of housing
vouchers appear to accrue from changes in neighborhood characteristics rather than from moves
per se suggests that interventions which substantially improve distressed neighborhoods could
have effects as least as large as those observed from moving to lower-poverty neighborhoods.38
Although numerous non-experimental studies document strong associations between
neighborhood characteristics and individual outcomes, these associations appear to be much
weaker in the studies with the most credible identification strategies.39 Because the current study
used randomization to solve the selection problem, because it studied families who made very
large moves as measured by changes in neighborhood poverty rates, and because it collected
extensive data on teenagers, it provides us with the clearest answer so far to the threshold
question of whether important neighborhood effects exist.
38 Bloom, Riccio, and Verma found substantial positive earnings effects in a community-based intervention.
39 Reviewing the early non-experimental literature, Mayer and Jencks conclude “the more we learn about a
given outcome, the smaller the effects of mean SES usually look.” More recently, Ellen and Turner report
that “some recent studies that have done the most careful job of controlling for unobserved family characteristics . . .
find no independent neighborhood effects, casting doubt on the robustness of results from other studies.” Finally,
recent quasi-experimental studies find little or no effect of living in high-poverty
housing projects on child outcomes.