Learning visually grounded words and syntax for
a scene description task
Deb K. Roy!
The Media Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, U.S.A.
A spoken language generation system has been developed that learns to
describe objects in computer-generated visual scenes. The system is
trained by a ‘show-and-tell" procedure in which visual scenes are paired
with natural language descriptions. Learning algorithms acquire probabilistic structures which encode the visual semantics of phrase
structure, word classes, and individual words. Using these structures, a
planning algorithm integrates syntactic, semantic, and contextual
constraints to generate natural and unambiguous descriptions of objects
in novel scenes. The system generates syntactically well-formed
compound adjective noun phrases, as well as relative spatial clauses.
The acquired linguistic structures generalize from training data,
enabling the production of novel word sequences which were never
observed during training. The output of the generation system is
synthesized using word-based concatenative synthesis drawing from the
original training speech corpus. In evaluations of semantic comprehension by human judges, the performance of automatically generated
spoken descriptions was comparable to human-generated descriptions.
This work is motivated by our long-term goal of developing spoken
language processing systems which grounds semantics in machine
perception and action.
! 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
A growing number of applications require the translation of perceptual or sensory data
into natural language descriptions. Automatic sports commentators in video games
map spatial relations and dynamic events of virtual players into speech. Car navigation
systems generate spoken directions based on map routes and geographical position
data. We envision assistive aids which translate visual information into speech for the
visually impaired. Most current approaches to this class of language generation
problems rely on manually created rules which encode domain speciﬁc knowledge.
These rules are used for all aspects of the generation process including, for example,
lexical selection and sentence frame selection. In this paper, we develop a learning-based
Computer Speech and Language 16, 353–385
doi:10.1016/S0885-2308(02)00024-4
Available online at on
!E-mail: 
0885-2308/02/$35
! 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
approach for creating spoken language generation systems. Our ultimate goal is to
develop trainable systems that can learn domain speciﬁc rules of language generation
from examples produced directly by domain experts. We present an implemented system called DESCRIBER which represents a ﬁrst step in this direction.
We consider the problem of generating spoken descriptions from visual scenes to be
a form of language grounding . Grounding refers to the process of connecting language to referents in
the language user’s environment.1 In contrast to methods which rely on symbolic
representations of semantics, grounded representations bind words (and sequences of
words) directly to non-symbolic perceptual features.2 Crucially, bottom-up sub-symbolic structures must be available to inﬂuence symbolic processing .
All symbolic representations are ultimately encoded in terms of representations of the
machine’s environment which are available to the machine directly through its perceptual system.
We present a grounded system, DESCRIBER, that learns to generate contextualized
spoken descriptions of objects in visual scenes. Input to DESCRIBER consists of visual
scenes paired with naturally spoken descriptions and their transcriptions. A set of
statistical learning algorithms extract syntactic and semantic structures which link
spoken utterances to visual scenes. These acquired structures are used by a generation
algorithm to produce spoken descriptions of novel visual scenes. Concatenative synthesis is used to convert output of the generation subsystem into speech. In evaluations
of semantic comprehension by human judges, the performance of automatically generated spoken descriptions is found to be comparable to human-generated descriptions.
1.1. Related work
The problem of generating referring expressions in text and multimedia environments
has been addressed in many previous computational systems including the work of
Dale , Dale and Reiter and Andr!e and Rist . Dale’s system, EPI-
CURE, addresses the problem of generating anaphoric referring expressions. A planner
maps communicative goals to surface text making use of models of the discourse, the
hearer, and the world state. Dale and Reiter examined computationally eﬃcient
methods for generating expressions which use the minimal set of attributes to distinguish an intended referent from a set of competitor referents. Andr!e and Rist designed
a generation system which combines text and image output to refer to objects. These
and most other previous generation systems may be contrasted with our work in three
signiﬁcant ways. First, our emphasis is on learning all necessary linguistic structures
from training data. Second, we take the notion of grounding semantics in sub-symbolic
representations to be a critical aspect of linking natural language to visual scenes.
Third, we limit the scope of our work to generating referring expressions based solely
on information available in static visual scenes. Thus, discourse history is not used by
our system.
1Grounding symbols in the physical world may be argued to lay the foundation for representing a large range
of concepts at many levels of abstraction through analogical and metaphorical reasoning .
2Semantics may also be grounded in terms of actions which the language user performs on its environment.
This aspect of grounding is not considered in this paper.
The Visual Translator system (VITRA) is a natural language generation system which is grounded directly in perceptual input. VITRA generates
natural language descriptions of dynamic scenes from multiple domains including automobile traﬃc and soccer games. Semantic representations are extracted from video
image sequences. Detailed domain knowledge is used to categorize spatial relations between objects and dynamic events. Higher level propositions are formed from these
representations which are mapped to natural language using a rule-based text planner. An
‘imaginary listener" predicts what the listener is most likely to understand from a proposed
description. Any disagreements between the predicted message and the intended message
are fed back into the text planner until expected ambiguities are minimized. In contrast to
our work, VITRA is not designed as a learning system. Thus porting it to a new domain
would presumably be a arduous and labor intensive task.
Jordan and Walker used machine learning to train a system which generates
nominal descriptions of objects. Each nominal expression consists of up to four attributes. The learning system was trained to automatically select which subset of attributes
to use in a referring expression (i.e. a choice from 1 of 16 possible combinations of four
attributes). The decision process is based on a set of dialog context features (for example, what is assumed to be known by the hearer, attributes used recent references to
the same object, etc.). The learning algorithm acquires an optimal set of rules by which
to map context features into attribute selections which are, in turn, used to generate
referring expressions. In comparison to DESCRIBER, Jordan and Walker’s approach
uses a much richer set of features which encode dialog context. DESCRIBER does not
encode any history of interaction and relies solely on features extracted from a static
visual scene. The scope of what is learned by DESCRIBER, however, is signiﬁcantly
broader. In addition to attribute selection, syntactic structures and the visual semantics
of words are also acquired by DESCRIBER.
Learning grounded representation of spatial terms has been studied by Regier
 . He designed a set of psychologically motivated perceptual features that underlie
spatial concepts across a wide range of languages. For example, to represent static
spatial relations such as above and beside, a pair of relative angles which take into
account the center of mass and points of closest proximity between objects was proposed. We employed these features in the system described in this paper. Regier’s
system acquired spatial terms using connectionist learning methods. Input consisted of
synthetic images of pairs of objects and their singleword labels. Regier’s work demonstrates the importance of choosing perceptual features carefully to ensure eﬃcient
concept acquisition. In related work, Siskind has proposed the use of visual
primitives which encode notions of support, contact, and attachment to ground the
semantics of events for verb learning.
In our own previous work , we have modeled the early
stages of word acquisition from sensor-grounded speech and visual signals. We demonstrated the utility of learning algorithms based on cross-modal mutual information in
discovering words and their visual associations from untranscribed speech paired with
images of three-dimensional everyday objects. An implemented system was able to
learn object names from a corpus of spontaneous infant-directed speech. A focus of this
work was the discovery and segmentation of word-like acoustic units from spontaneous
speech driven by cross-modal analysis. An acquired lexicon of visually grounded words
served as the basis for a small vocabulary speech understanding and generation system.
The system was able to process single and two-word phrases which referred to the color
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
and shape of objects. The language processing system was integrated into an interactive
robot. A person was able to issue verbal commands (‘‘red ball’’) and the robot would
actively search for the best matching referent. The system was also able to verbally
describe novel objects using two-word phrases. The system presented in this paper
extends our prior work in that it addresses the problem syntactic structure acquisition
within a grounded learning framework.
1.2. The learning problems
In this paper, we consider learning problems in which each training example is comprised of (1) a natural language word sequence and (2) a vector of real-valued features
which represents the semantics of the word sequence. We assume no prior knowledge
about lexical semantics, word classes, or syntactic structures.
A basic problem is to establish the semantics of individual words. To bootstrap the
acquisition of word associations, utterances are treated as ‘‘bags of words.’’ Each word
in an utterance may potentially be a label for any subset of co-occurring visual features.
Consider the situation in which we measure three features of an object as potential
grounding for adjective terms: height, area, and brightness. A person looks at an object
and says, ‘‘That is a big red apple.’’ In the bag of words model, any word in the sentence
(including ‘‘that’’ or ‘‘a’’) might refer to any subset of the measured features. Possibilities include associations that we would like the learner to make such as ‘‘big’’ with
area, as well as countless associations which are undesirable such as ‘‘red’’ or ‘‘a’’ with
height and brightness. Thus one problem facing the language learner is feature selection: choosing the subset of potential features which should be bound to a word. Once
feature assignments have been made, statistical learning methods can be used to train
classiﬁers which map words to ranges of values within those features. For example
‘‘dark’’ might select only the brightness feature and prefer small values of that feature.
A second problem is to cluster words into word classes based on semantic and
syntactic constraints. We assume that word classes are a necessary ﬁrst step in acquiring
rules of word order. For example, before a language learner can learn the English rule
that adjectives precede nouns, some primitive notion of adjective and noun word classes
presumably needs to be in place. Word classes might be derived strictly from distributional analysis of word co-occurrences. Alternatively, semantic associations might be
used to group words. In this paper, we present a hybrid method which combines distributional and semantic cues.
A third problem is learning word order. We address the problems of learning adjective ordering (‘‘the large blue square’’ vs. ‘‘the blue large square’’) and phrase ordering for generating relative spatial clauses. In the latter, the semantics of phrase order
needs to be learned (i.e. the diﬀerence in meaning between ‘‘the ball next to the block’’
vs. ‘‘the block next to the ball’’). A statistical bigram language model is learned in terms
of the acquired word classes which is used to generate compound word descriptions of
objects such as ‘‘the thin dark green rectangle.’’ Statistical bigrams of phrases are
employed to model syntactic structures necessary for generating relative spatial clauses.
The semantic implications of phrase order are captured in the grounding of spatial
lexical items in terms of relative spatial visual features.
Once the problems outlined above have been addressed, the system has at its disposal
a grounded language model which enables it to map novel visual scenes into natural
language descriptions. The language generation problem is treated as a search problem
in a probabilistic framework in which syntactic, semantic, and contextual constraints
are integrated.
1.3. Outline
This paper begins by outlining the experimental task and training corpus which we have
created as a development test bed. Algorithms for learning to generate natural language
expressions which refer to single objects are presented. A second set of algorithms are
then presented which enables the system to generate expressions that include relative
spatial clauses. These clauses help listeners disambiguate between similar objects in the
visual scene. Finally, an evaluation of the system is presented in which the system’s
performance in semantic understandability is compared with the original human produced training corpus.
2. The visual description task
The experiments reported in this paper are based on a rectangle description task. A
program was created to generate images consisting of a set of 10 colored rectangles
set on a black background. A typical image generated by this program is shown in
Figure 1. The width, height, position, and RGB color of each rectangle is randomly
Figure 1. A typical image from the rectangle task. Each synthetic image consists
of 10 rectangles, each of random height, width, color, and non-overlapping
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
generated. The placement of rectangles is constrained such that they never overlap
although they may touch. During data collection (described below), each image is
augmented with an indicator arrow which selects one of the 10 rectangles as the target
object. For example, in Figure 1 the blue rectangle on the right is the target.
The description task consists of generating phrases which best describe target objects. The generation process must be context sensitive since the best choice of words
will often depend on the other objects in the scene. Descriptions are evaluated for semantic understandability by measuring how reliably human listeners select the intended
target object from the same scene based on the provided verbal description.
This task was chosen as a manageable starting point for our experiments. The
variation of objects is limited to shape, color, size, and position. The syntactic structure
required to generate descriptive phrases is relatively simple and well modeled by statistical n-grams. By using computer-generated images, visual feature extraction is
greatly simpliﬁed (when compared to using camera images). Nonetheless, we found that
the challenges raised in this task were substantive and lead to useful new algorithms.
Results from this task will form the basis for future explorations of more complex
language learning tasks in richer contexts.
3. Visual features
Lexical semantics are grounded in terms of visual features. Table I lists the set of eight
visual features that are generated by the image synthesis program to represent each
object in an image. We refer back to these features in the remainder of the paper using
the names listed in the left column of this table.
These features were selected with the language learning task in mind. For example,
we would expect color terms to be grounded in some combination of the r, g, and b
features. Spatial terms such as ‘‘leftmost’’ and ‘‘highest’’ should be grounded in the x
and y features. Other words such as ‘‘bright’’ or ‘‘thin’’ are less obvious. Features are
normalized so that each feature has zero mean and unit variance.
4. Data collection and preparation
We collected a speech corpus from a male speaker (an undergraduate student unfamiliar with the project). He was instructed to speak naturally and describe target objects
from images displayed on a computer screen. He was asked to produce descriptions
such that a listener could later select the same target from the identical scene with the
target unmarked.
TABLE I. Visual features extracted from objects
Description
Red component of RGB color
Green component of RGB color
Blue component of RGB color
Height to width ratio
Surface area
X position of upper left corner
Y position of upper left corner
Ratio of maximum dimension to minimum dimension
A data collection program was written which displays images and records spoken
responses. In preparation for data collection, a set of 3000 images were generated oﬀline, each with a randomly selected target object. The speaker wore a noise-canceling
headset microphone. The presentation program displayed each image and recorded the
speaker’s spoken response. An on-line speech end-point detection algorithm based on
Hidden Markov models of speech and silence was used to segment incoming speech into utterances. Each segmented utterance was saved as a separate
speech ﬁle. Each ﬁle was automatically tagged with the identity of the image and target
object on display at the time.
The speaker participated in two 90-min recording sessions resulting in 518 utterances.3 Each spoken utterance was manually transcribed at the word level. We divided
training utterances into two types: simple utterances and complex utterances. Simple
utterances contain reference to exactly one object whereas complex utterances make
reference to two or more objects. Classiﬁcation of utterances was based on text keyword spotting. Any transcript containing multiple instances of the words ‘‘rectangle’’ or
‘‘square’’ was classiﬁed as complex and the remainder as simple. Table II lists some
representative utterances of each type from the corpus. Out of the total 518 utterances,
326 are simple and 192 complex. The mean utterance length in the corpus is 5.8 words.
The mean utterance length of simple utterances is 4.0 words.
An initial histogram analysis of the corpus indicated insuﬃcient exemplars of some
color and spatial terms. A second speaker was asked to provide an additional set of
descriptions focused on color and spatial terms. This speaker was instructed to produce
only simple utterances. New random images where generated for this collection.
An additional 157 simple utterances were collected in a single recording session. Put
together with the data from the ﬁrst speaker, the training corpus consisted of 675
utterances (483 simple, 192 complex).
A complication in learning from this data is that complex utterances contain reference to multiple objects. In a bag of words model, any word must be considered a
label for any co-occurring observation. To simplify the problem, we truncated each
transcription of a complex utterance after the ﬁrst instance of either ‘‘rectangle’’ or
3Although 3000 images were generated, only 518 of them were used in the data collection. The 518 images
were randomly chosen from the set of 3000.
TABLE II. Typical utterances in the rectangle task corpus
The pink square
The light blue square
The biggest grey rectangle
The large oﬀwhite rectangle
The long ﬂat purple rectangle
The brightest green rectangle
The narrow purple rectangle below and to the right of the blue square
The green rectangle below the peach rectangle
The purple rectangle to the left of the pink square
The orange rectangle above the blue rectangle
The yellow rectangle to the left of the large green square
The vertical rectangle directly below the smallest blue rectangle
Simple utterances contain reference to exactly one object. Complex utterances refer to multiple objects.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
‘‘square.’’ The truncated transcripts were used for the ﬁrst stages of learning (described
in Section 5). Learning from whole (untruncated) utterances is addressed in Section 7.
The truncation procedure is based on knowledge of the task at hand (i.e. the fact that
the ﬁrst object phrase most likely will refer to the target object) and will not necessarily
generalize to other situations. In the future, we plan to develop methods to avoid this
simpliﬁcation.
Appendix A contains histograms of word occurrences in the original and truncated
training corpora. The full training corpus contains one or more instances of 83 unique
words (i.e. 83 token types). The truncated corpus draws from 70 token types.
The manual speech transcription process is the most labor intensive aspect of the
training process. In the future, we will explore the use of speech recognition to automate
this step, but initially we preferred to work with error free transcripts.
5. Learning grounded language models for objects
This section describes the set of algorithms which have been developed for acquiring
the structures necessary to produce simple utterances as deﬁned in the previous section.
The order of presentation of algorithms corresponds to the stages of processing in the
system. Section 6 describes how these structures are employed in generating visually
grounded object description phrases.
5.1. Word class formation
The ﬁrst stage of learning is to cluster words into classes. These classes serve two roles.
First, they are used to determine which visual features are associated with a word. All
members of a word class are required to be grounded in the same set of features.
Second, word classes form the basis for learning a class-based bigram language model.
Class-based bigrams enable the system to generalize knowledge from training data to
novel word combinations.
Ideally, words which are both semantically and syntactically similar should be
clustered together. For example, color terms should be clustered and separated from
size and spatial terms. If they were all treated as part of one word class, then learning to
diﬀerentiate ‘‘large blue ball’’ vs. ‘‘blue large ball’’ would be impossible. Although such
knowledge might be preprogrammed, our goal is to develop an extensible system which
can form word classes in the absence of manually encoded structure.
We investigated three approaches to forming word classes. The ﬁrst relies only on the
distributional patterns of words in the training corpus and ignores visual information.
The second approach searches for associations between words and visual features and
then groups words which have similar feature associations. The third approach, which
we found to be most eﬀective, is a hybrid method which combines the ﬁrst two
approaches.
5.1.1. Distributional clustering
The distributional method rests on a basic assumption: words belonging to the same
class will be used in mutual exclusion. From this assumption it follows that two words
which co-occur in the same utterance are likely to belong to diﬀerent word classes. The
utterance, ‘‘the large blue square’’ lends evidence against placing ‘‘the’’ and ‘‘large,’’ or
‘‘large’’ and ‘‘square,’’ or any other word pair in the same class. This assumption is
similar to the mutual exclusion bias that has been proposed as a mechanism used by
children in language acquisition . Young children initially resist
learning two labels for the same concept such as ‘‘poodle’’ and ‘‘dog.’’ This bias leads to
eﬃcient learning from limited examples.
We will denote a corpus of M utterances by U ¼ fu1; u2; . . . ; uMg. The vocabulary of
the corpus (i.e. the set of unique token types) is denoted by W ¼ fw1; w2; . . . ; wVg,
where V is the vocabulary size and wi is a word in the vocabulary. A co-occurrence
indicator variable is deﬁned by
pðu; wi; wjÞ ¼
if wi and wj occur in u;
i.e. pðu; wi; wjÞ detects when both words wi and wj occur in the utterance u. Based on p,
we obtain V $ V co-occurrence matrix R, the elements of which are computed by
Rðwi; wjÞ ¼
pðu; wi; wjÞ;
Rðwi; wjÞ is the count of the number of times words wi and wj co-occur in an utterance,
accumulated across all M utterances in the corpus.
Our goal is to partition the vocabulary into word classes such that words within a
class co-occur infrequently with other words in the same class. A clustering procedure is
used to partition the vocabulary W into K disjoint classes Cj each with Nj words. The
kth word in word class j is CjðkÞ. Since the word classes partition the original vocabulary W, CjðkÞ 2 W. Before specifying the clustering algorithm, we ﬁrst deﬁne a distortion metric between two word classes as
ddðCi; CjÞ ¼
l¼1 RðCiðkÞ; CjðlÞÞ
k¼1 hCiðkÞi þ PNj
k¼1 hCjðkÞi
where hCiðkÞi is the count of the number of times word k from class i occurred in the
training corpus. The subscript d in ddð Þ reminds us that this distortion metric is based
on distributional cues. The numerator of Equation (3) accumulates all co-occurrences
of each pair of words drawn from class i and j. The denominator normalizes this sum by
the total number of occurrences of both word classes in the training corpus.
A greedy clustering algorithm is used to iteratively merge clusters with smallest intercluster distortion until a stopping criterion is met. The algorithm consists of ﬁve steps:
1. Begin with K ¼ V clusters, each initialized with one word from W.
2. Find Ci and Cj such that ddðCi; CjÞ is minimized, 1 6 i; j 6 K.
3. If ddðCi; CjÞ > T then stop, for some stopping threshold T.
4. Merge elements of Ci and Cj.
5. Go to Step 2.
The value of the stopping threshold T determines the number of word classes produced. We have not developed an automatic method to determine the optimal value
of T. One possibility is to adapt its value in a reinforcement learning framework.
Currently, however, this value is set manually.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
The clustering algorithm was applied to the training corpus. To avoid estimation
problems due to small sample sizes, all words occurring less than ﬁve times in the
corpus were removed from the vocabulary and from all further processing. After removal of infrequent words, the experimental corpus4 consisted of 32 unique word types.
Table III lists the 10 word classes formed using distributional analysis after 22 merges.
An examination of the word classes reveals that the mutual exclusion bias approximately separates color terms (Class 2), shape descriptors (Class 3), and size descriptors
(Class 5). However, errors are also evident in the classes. Some color terms (grey,
salmon) are included with non-color terms in Class 1 and spatial terms (leftmost,
rightmost, highest, lowest) have not been clustered.
5.1.2. Clustering based on semantic feature associations
We investigated a second method of clustering which ignores co-occurrence patterns of
words within utterances and instead focuses on semantic associations between words
and visual referents. The goal of this approach is to cluster words which are grounded
in similar sets of visual features. In principle, many of the errors introduced by distributional analysis could be resolved by factoring in semantic constraints.
One problem in establishing semantic associations of words is that natural language
does not provide exhaustive labels of all referents in a scene. Consider an image in
which only one object is red. If asked to describe that object (relative to the others), a
person might say something to the eﬀect of ‘‘the red one.’’ Various other possible descriptions of the object such as its size, its location, etc., are absent from the description.
When learning from natural language descriptions, we cannot assume that the absence
of a label indicates the absence of the corresponding property. If the person did not use
the word ‘‘large,’’ we are unable to conclude that the object is not large. The problem of
lack of negative training examples is well known in the context of grammar acquisition
in children and arises also in the case of lexical acquisition.
In our approach, each visual feature is treated as a random variable which is
modeled with a univariate Gaussian distribution. We begin by quantifying the eﬀect of
the presence of each word on the distribution of each feature. A semantic distortion
metric which operates on word pairs will then be deﬁned in terms of these individual
4Recall that for all training described in this section, we used the corpus with utterances truncated after the
ﬁrst instance of the keywords ‘‘rectangle’’ or ‘‘square.’’
TABLE III. The 10 word classes created after 22 merges based on
distributional analysis of within-utterance word co-occurrences
Word class
Class members
light grey white dark bright leftmost salmon highest
pink blue yellow green purple red brown orange colored
horizontal vertical square largest
small large thin smallest lowest
feature eﬀects. Finally, this distortion metric will be incorporated into the word clustering algorithm.
Recall that each utterance ui in the training corpus is paired with a target object.
From each object, F visual features are extracted (F ¼ 8 in our current experiments).
The F-dimensional feature vector extracted from the object paired with utterance ui is
referred to as xi. We refer to feature j of xi as xiðjÞ. To model the eﬀect of word wn on
the distribution of feature xðjÞ, only the observations which occur in the presence of an
utterance containing wn are used to obtain the unbiased estimates of the Gaussian
parameters of a word-conditional model:
ðxiðjÞ & ljjwnÞ2
The summations are over all utterances which contain the word wn. Note that the
denominator in Equation (4) may be smaller that hwni since the former does not count
multiple instances of a word within an utternance while hwni does. The two terms would
be equal only if wn never occurs more than once within the same utterance.
The remaining observations which did not co-occur with wn are used to estimate the
parameters of a background model:
ðxiðjÞ & ljjwnÞ2
We wish to quantify the distortion between the word-conditioned and background
distributions of each feature as a measure of the degree of association between the word
and the feature. The Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence 
provides an asymmetric measure of dissimilarity between two probability distribution
functions p and q and is given by
pðxÞ ln pðxÞ
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
An extension of the KL divergence which provides a symmetric distance between distributions is
KL2ðpkqÞ ¼ KLðpkqÞ þ KLðqkpÞ:
We refer to Equation (9) as the symmetrized KL distance. The symmetrized KL distance
is used to compare the unconditioned and word-conditioned distribution of a feature:
KL2ðpðxjjwiÞkpðxjjwiÞÞ ¼ 1
2 ðljjwi & ljjwiÞ2
The symmetrized KL distance is always positive (or zero when the distributions are
equal) and provides a measure of association between words and individual visual
We wish to deﬁne a semantic distortion metric which will be used in place of the
distributional distortion (Equation (3)) in order to form word classes. For each word wn
we compute a corresponding semantic association vector as the collection of feature-wise
KL distances
KL2ðpðx1jxnÞkpðx1jwnÞÞ
KL2ðpðx2jxnÞkpðx2jwnÞÞ
KL2ðpðxFjxnÞkpðxFjwnÞÞ
To make comparisons between words, semantic association vectors are linearly scaled
such that the largest element in the vector is 1.0 . Figure 2 shows
the scaled semantic association vectors for six words from the training corpus. The word
‘‘blue’’ is associated most strongly with the r and b color features. ‘‘Dark’’ and ‘‘light’’
are both associated with color channels as well, although ‘‘light’’ is not associated with
the red feature, but ‘‘dark’’ is. ‘‘Rightmost’’ is associated most strongly, as would be
expected, with the x feature (horizontal position). ‘‘Square’’ is associated with both the
height over width and min over max features. Surprisingly, ‘‘thin’’ is associated most
strongly with area and only weakly with hw_ratio and mm_ratio. We found, in fact, that
the speaker in this corpus usually labeled only small objects as ‘‘thin.’’
Based on semantic association vectors, the distortion between two words is deﬁned
as the negative of the dot product of the corresponding semantic association vectors,
&½sðwiÞ(TsðwjÞ, where T denotes the transpose operator. The semantic distortion is
greatest for word pairs with orthogonal semantic association vectors. The word pair
distortion is computed for each pairwise combination of words from two word classes
to obtain a semantic distortion between pairs of word classes
dsðCi; CjÞ ¼
l¼1 &½sðCiðkÞÞ(TsðCjðlÞÞ
The clustering algorithm presented in the previous section was rerun on the corpus with
ddð Þ replaced by dsð Þ. The resulting word classes after 22 merges are listed in Table IV.
In contrast to the classes in Table III based on distributional analysis, semantically
TABLE IV. The 10 word classes created after 22 merges based on
semantic associations
Word class
Class members
the horizontal large vertical rectangle square bright largest
light grey red green purple colored dark blue brown
pink yellow salmon orange
small thin smallest
leftmost rightmost
lowest highest
Figure 2. Examples of semantic association vectors for six words.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
driven classes display diﬀerent groupings. For example, ‘‘leftmost’’ and ‘‘rightmost’’ are
clustered but kept separate from ‘‘lowest’’ and ‘‘highest.’’ Although semantically related
words are now separated, syntactic roles are ignored. Thus ‘‘the’’ and ‘‘rectangle’’ are
placed in the same word class as are several shape and size adjectives.
5.1.3. Hybrid clustering
Word co-occurrences and semantic associations are both clearly important cues in
forming word classes. Both sources of information can be combined by computing a
linear combination of the distortion metrics:
ddsðCi; CjÞ ¼ addðCi; CjÞ þ ð1 & aÞdsðCi; CjÞ:
Using a ¼ 0:95 and a stopping threshold of T ¼ &0:6, we obtained the word classes
listed in Table V. The large value of a should not be interpreted as favouring ddð Þ over
dsð Þ. Rather, it compensates for the fact that the range of values of ddð Þ is smaller than
that of dsð Þ. As can be seen by comparison with Tables III and IV, the grouping of
words using dds is signiﬁcantly eﬀected by both semantic and syntactic constraints. Semantically related words are grouped together, yet syntactically distinct words are kept
apart. For example, ‘‘square’’ is grouped with ‘‘rectangle’’ even though semantically,
‘‘square’’ is more similar to ‘‘vertical’’ and ‘‘horizontal’’ (i.e. terms which are associated
the ratios of height to width). The words ‘‘oﬀ,’’ ‘‘tall,’’ and ‘‘olive’’ are not grouped
because their semantic association vectors were not sharp enough to cluster them with
other words. This was due to insuﬃcient consistent training data for those words.
The word classes listed in Table V were used in the ﬁnal generation system.
5.2. Feature selection
Feature selection proceeds by ﬁrst assigning features to each word on an individual
basis. The features of a word class are then deﬁned as the conjunction of all features
selected for the members of that class.
Features for an individual word are selected to maximize the symmetrized KL distance between the word conditional distribution and the background unconditioned
distribution. In the previous section, only one feature was considered at a time. Now,
TABLE V. The 11 word classes created after 21 merges based on a linear
combination of the distributional and semantic association distortion
Word class
Class members
light white dark
pink yellow salmon orange grey red green purple colored blue brown
horizontal vertical bright
rectangle square
small thin large largest smallest
leftmost rightmost
lowest highest
we consider multivariate distributions over multiple features. The multivariate extension of the symmetrized KL distance is given by Therrien :
KL2ðp1ðxÞkp2ðxÞÞ ¼ 1
1 R2 þ R&1
2 R1 & 2IÞ
2 ðl1 & l2ÞTðR&1
2 Þðl1 & l2Þ;
where R is the full covariance matrix and l is now a mean vector. Feature selection is
achieved using a greedy algorithm. It starts by selecting the single feature which leads to
the highest symmetrized KL distance between conditioned and unconditioned distributions according to Equation (10). Next, a search iteratively ﬁnds the next best feature
which maximally increases Equation (14). Each KL distance is normalized by the
number of selected features (i.e. the number of dimensions). After each feature is added,
the increase in normalized KL distance is computed. The search stops when no increase
is obtainable.
This feature search algorithm leads to interesting behavior for words that could not
be reliably associated with visual features (‘‘oﬀ,’’ ‘‘olive,’’ and ‘‘tall’’ in our corpus): the
KL distance is maximized when all eight features are selected. This is because no
consistently distinct distribution is found along any subset of features. By modeling all
features, the data are overﬁt. Based on this observation, we added a check for words
with all features selected and marked these as ungrounded. Ungrounded words are
words which occur frequently but the semantics of which are unknown. The remaining
words (for which features are successfully selected) are referred to as grounded words.
Each word class inherits the conjunction (i.e. the inclusive logical-OR) of the features
assigned to all of its members. Table VI shows the features which were selected for each
word class. For convenience, the members of each class are listed again. By inspection,
the assignment of features matches what we would intuitively expect. The choice of
adjective partitions is driven jointly by semantic similarity and co-occurrence patterns.
The word ‘‘bright’’ was placed in Class 3 with ‘‘horizontal’’ and ‘‘vertical’’ due largely
to the inﬂuence of co-occurrence counts. ‘‘The’’ is grounded due to the unusually high
frequency of this word. The ‘background" distribution for ‘‘the’’ according to Equations
(6) and (7) was estimated with far fewer observations that the word-conditioned model.
Due to this imbalance, the feature selection procedure is able to ﬁnd a stable assignment
of features which separates the models.
TABLE VI. Word class feature selection
Word class
Class members
hw_ratio, mm_ratio
light white dark
pink yellow salmon orange grey
red green purple colored blue brown
horizontal vertical bright
r, hw_ratio, mm_ratio
rectangle square
small thin large largest smallest
area, hw_ratio
(ungrounded)
(ungrounded)
leftmost rightmost
(ungrounded)
lowest highest
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
5.3. Modeling word semantics
For each grounded word, a Gaussian model is estimated using the observations which
co-occur with that word. This is achieved using the multivariate form of Equations (4)
through (7). The word-conditional model speciﬁes a probability density function (pdf)
over the subset of visual features which have been selected for the corresponding word
class. For example, the grounding of each member of Cluster 1 is modeled using a twodimensional Gaussian distribution over the features g and b.
Figure 3 plots the mean and contours of equal probability density for the words in
Word Classes 1 and 5. These classes are simpler to visualize since both are assigned two
visual features. In Class 1 (left-hand side of ﬁgure), we ﬁnd signiﬁcant overlap between
the distributions associated with ‘‘light’’ and ‘‘white’’ but clear separation between both
from ‘‘dark.’’ Word class 5 involves distributions over the features area and mm_ratio
(the ratio between the larger dimension of a rectangle to the smaller). The shape of the
equal probability ellipse of ‘‘thin’’ indicates that the term refers to objects which have
high values of mm_ratio (as expected) and small areas.
An interesting problem is grounding the semantics of the morpheme ‘est". The distinction of ‘‘small’’ versus ‘‘smallest’’ and ‘‘large’’ versus ‘‘largest’’ is primarily a matter
of degree along the area dimension. The actual semantic distinction between these word
pairs cannot be represented in DESCRIBER since the concepts of relative ordering and
property comparison necessary to ground ‘est’ are not supported. In principle, it would
be possible provide to a basis for grounding ‘est" by adding higher order features which
compare and sequence visual attributes.
5.4. Class-based statistical bigram model
The ﬁnal component of the grounded language model necessary to generate noun
phrases is a syntactic component which encodes word order constraints. A class-based
bigram statistical language model is used for this purpose. Each word in the training
corpus is mapped to its corresponding word class label. The probability that class Ci
follows Cj is estimated from relative counts:
pðCijCjÞ ¼ hCj; Cii
Figure 3. Gaussian distributions associated with words in Word Classes 1 and 5.
The probability of beginning an utterance with a word from Ci is estimated
pðCijSTARTÞ ¼ number of times Ci at start of utterance
and similarly the probability of ending an utterance with a word from Ci is estimated
pðENDjCiÞ ¼ number of times Ci at end of utterance
Turing-Good smoothing is optionally used for all three estimates when
the numerator is less than 5. As we discuss in later sections, for language generation,
smoothing is not always desired. The bigram language model estimated from the
training corpus is shown in Figure 4. The transition probabilities are unsmoothed and
only transitions with p > 0:01 are shown in the ﬁgure. Nodes with double outlines
indicate the start and end of utterances.
Figure 4. Word-class based statistical bigram for simple utterances.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
5.5. Summary
Thus far we have presented a set of algorithms for building a language model from
utterances (sequences of words) paired with objects (visual feature vectors). The components of this model are:
• Word classes: clusters of words which are grouped according to their distributional
(co-occurrence) patterns and semantic associations. Class membership is mutually exclusive (i.e. the same word cannot belong to two classes).
• Word class features: a subset of visual features are associated with each word class.
The same feature may be linked to multiple word classes.
• Visually grounded word models: multivariate Gaussian models associated with each
word which model the expected word-conditional distribution of visual features.
Word models capture the visual semantics of the word. They only specify a distribution over the features associated with the word’s class.
• Class-based bigrams: class-based bigram transition probabilities which model word
order constraints.
These components provide the basis for generating utterances to describe single objects
embedded in visual scenes.
6. Generating spoken language descriptions of objects
We wish to generate natural language phrases of objects which are in some sense optimal given a grounded language model. The generation problem is treated as a constrained search problem. Three types of constraints must be integrated into the search.
The ﬁrst are syntactic constraints since we wish to generate words consistent with
natural language syntax. The second constraint is semantic. The semantics of the phrase
should describe the features of the target object. A third constraint is context. The
phrase must not only describe the features of the object, but should also minimize
ambiguity relative to other objects in the scene.
Semantic and contextual constraints are not the same. Consider the scene in Figure 5.
The phrase ‘‘the large green rectangle’’ would be a good choice with respect to semantic
constraints since the target ﬁts the description well. However, this utterance would be a
poor choice when context is factored in since at least one, perhaps two other objects
also ﬁt the same description.
We proceed by ﬁrst describing search constrained only by syntax and then incrementally introduce semantic and contextual constraints.
6.1. Syntactic constraints
We begin by determining the T word utterance which is most likely to be generated
using class-based bigrams. We denote an output sequence as Q ¼ q1q2 ) ) ) qT where each
element qt is the integer index of a word class, i.e. 1 6 qt 6 K. The log probability of a
word-class sequence is given by
cðQÞ ¼ log PðCq1jSTARTÞ þ
log PðCqtjCqt&1Þ þ log PðENDjCqTÞ:
The most likely sequence of length T is that which maximizes the total probability of
the utterance
Qbest ¼ arg max
Using bigrams estimated from the training corpus, the optimal word class sequence for
utterances of increasing length T are
hC0 : thei
hC0 : thei hC4 : rectangle; squarei
hC0 : thei hC2 : pink; yellow; . . .i hC4 : rectangle; squarei
hC0 : thei hC5 : small; thin; . . .i hC2 : pink; yellowi hC4 : rectangle; squarei
hC0i hC5i hC1i hC2i hC4i
hC0i hC5i hC3i hC1i hC2i hC4i
hC0i hC5i hC2i hC3i hC1i hC2i hC4i
hC0i hC5i hC1i hC2i hC3i hC1i hC2i hC4i
An additional constraint is used to avoid repetition of words classes due to loops in the
bigram networks. Utterances with word class sequences for T ¼ 7 and T ¼ 8 shown
above are eliminated based on this constraint.
Figure 5. A visual scene with a diﬃcult to describe target object.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
6.2. Mapping word classes to words using visual grounding
Each word class Ci in an output utterance may be mapped to a word by choosing
CiðjÞ;1 6 j 6 Ni
PðxjCiðjÞÞPðCiðjÞjCiÞ;
i.e. choose the word CiðjÞ from class Ci which maximizes the probability of the target
object x. Equation (20) is a standard Bayes classiﬁer using the word-conditional
Gaussian models associated with Ci as competing models. The class conditional word
probabilities are given by relative word counts
PðCiðjÞjCiÞ ¼
k¼1 hCjðkÞi
By applying Equation (20) to the scene and target object in Figure 5, we obtain the
following phrases:
the rectangle
the green rectangle
the large green rectangle
the large light green rectangle
the large vertical light green rectangle
These descriptions combine semantic and syntactic constraints. Word class sequences are chosen according to the bigram probabilities. Word choices are determined
by best ﬁt to the visual features of the target object.
The search process is implemented as an exhaustive search of all possible paths. For
the longest utterances, with K ¼ 11 word classes and T ¼ 6 words, a total of KT ¼ 1:77
million utterances need to be evaluated. On a Pentium 1 GHz single processor machine,
this takes approximately ﬁve seconds.
6.3. Contextual constraints
The simple utterances generated by the method described above can be ambiguous.
Non-target objects in the scene might accidentally match the descriptions. To address
this problem, we developed a measure of ambiguity of a target object description in the
context of a set of competing objects. We start by deﬁning the ‘‘ﬁt’’ of an utterance to
an object (ignoring context) as the product of the word-conditional pdfs evaluated for
the features of the object, x:
fitðx; QÞ ¼
t¼1 log pðxjCðqtÞÞ
The denominator term normalizes the eﬀect of length of Q. The ambiguity of a referring
phrase is deﬁned to be
wðQÞ ¼ fitðxtarget; QÞ & max
8x6¼xtargetfitðx; QÞ;
wðQÞ measures the ﬁt of the utterance Q to the target object relative to the best competing object in the scene. The best competing object is deﬁned as the object which is
best described by Q. Syntactic and contextual constraints can be combined be deﬁning a
nðQÞ ¼ qcðQÞ þ ð1 & qÞwðQÞ;
where q is an interpolation constant. As with Equation (19), we can ﬁnd the utterance
of length T which maximizes nðQÞ in order to generate descriptions of objects. We
generated a new set of descriptive phrases again based on the scene and target object in
Figure 5 with q ¼ 0:70. This choice of q does not imply a bias against the ambiguity
constraint, but instead compensates for diﬀerences of scale of cð Þ and wð Þ inherent in
the way each are computed.
Table VII shows the resulting utterances along with nðQÞ for each value of T.
A comparison between the descriptions with and without contextual constraints
reveals the eﬀect of including wðQÞ in the generation process. Based on bigram (syntactic) constraints, common color (‘‘green’’) and size (‘‘large’’) descriptors are preferred.
Looking back at Figure 5, we see that other objects in the scene could also be described
as large or green. Contextual considerations bias the system to select ‘‘highest’’ and
‘‘vertical’’ as less ambiguous terms. Bigram inﬂuences are still present in the contextsensitive phrases since the phrases are syntactically well-formed. Semantic constraints
are also in eﬀect since word classes are always mapped to words based on Equation (20)
which assures semantic accuracy.
At this point we have reached our goal of generating object descriptions which integrate syntactic, semantic, and contextual constraints. The focus of this and the previous section has been on describing single objects (the equivalent of simple utterances
in the training corpus). The next two sections describe the process of learning to generate complex utterances.
7. Learning relative spatial clauses
The original training corpus of 518 utterances contained 326 simple utterances (recall
that we deﬁned simple utterances to be utterances which refer to exactly one object).
The remaining 37% of utterances were complex and referred to two or more objects. In
this section, we describe methods for acquiring models which enable generation of
utterances with relative spatial clauses (‘‘the rectangle to the left of the red square’’).
The speciﬁc problems addressed are:
• Parsing complex utterances (from the training corpus) to identify subsequences of
words which refer to objects.
• Establishing phrase-to-object correspondences. For example, in the utterance ‘‘the
rectangle to the left of the red square,’’ the learning system must decide which of the
TABLE VII. Utterances generated by combining syntactic and contextual
constraints (a ¼ 0:70)
)1.073$108
The rectangle
The highest rectangle
The highest green rectangle
The highest vertical green rectangle
The highest green vertical green rectangle
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
two object descriptions (‘‘the rectangle’’ or ‘‘the red square’’) refers to the target object,
and which of the non-target objects serves as the referent of the remaining phrase.
• Acquiring visually grounded models of spatial words. New visual features will be introduced which measure relative angles and distances between pairs of objects.
• Learning a phrase-based bigram which models the syntax of complex utterances.
7.1. Parsing complex utterances using the acquired bigram language model
The bigrams described in Section 5.4 are estimated from truncated utterances. These
bigrams are used as the basis for a probabilistic parser which identiﬁes object phrases
embedded in complex utterances.
We refer to the ﬁrst set of bigrams as object phrase bigrams. A second set of general
bigrams were trained using the entire untruncated training corpus. A set of bigrams may
be thought of as a stochastic ﬁnite state automata (SFSA) in which each word is represented by a state and the bigram transition probabilities form arcs between states.
Thus the two sets of bigram transition probabilities may be thought of as a pair of
SFSAs. In order to construct a parser, we combine the SFSAs into one larger network.
A simpliﬁed pair of networks is depicted in Figure 6. The general SFSA has three word
states and utterance terminal nodes STARTg and ENDg. The object phrase network
consists of a subset of the words in the general network (since the vocabulary in the
truncated corpus contains a subset of the full corpus). The dotted arcs indicate new
transitions which are added to connect the two SFSAs. For each outgoing node in the
general network which terminates in a word which is also part of the object phrase
network, a new link is added with the same transition probability. Similarly, any state
in the general network with an incoming arc from a word which is also part of the
object phrase network receives a new transition of equal weight. Once all transitions are
added, weights are rescaled to insure proper probabilities.
To use the SFSA as a phrase parser, the Viterbi algorithm is used to
ﬁnd the most likely path through the network for a given utterance. A constant word
Figure 6. Stochastic ﬁnite state automata models of object phrases and complex
utterances are combined to create a probabilistic phrase parser.
insertion penalty is inserted at each transition within the general network, but not
within the object phrase network. Word insertion penalties are also inserted when
transitioning into and out of the object phrase network (i.e. transitions to START0 and
from END0Þ. This conﬁguration biases the Viterbi algorithm to align subsequences of
the input to the object phrase SFSA whenever possible.
The output of the parser for some sample complex utterances is given below. Parentheses indicate groups of words which were aligned with the phrase SFSA:
1. (the dark green rectangle) above (the light blue rectangle);
2. (the purple rectangle) to the left of (the pink square);
3. the sea (green rectangle) to the right of (the red rectangle);
4. (the olive rectangle) touching (the green rectangle);
5. (the tall green rectangle) directly to the left of (the large blue rectangle);
6. (the purple rectangle) between (the red) and blue rectangles;
7. (the green rectangle) to the right of the big (pink rectangle).
The errors in examples 3 and 6 are due to new words in the complex utterances (‘‘sea’’
and ‘‘rectangles’’) which were not acquired in the phrase model. In example 7, ‘‘big’’ is
also a new word but the parser is able to segment the remainder of the object phrase.
The majority of complex utterances in the corpus were, however, parsed successfully.
Although some errors were introduced at this stage, the probabilistic algorithms which
operate on the output of the parser are nonetheless able to acquire useful structure.
In total, the parser found 184 complex utterances in the training corpus which
contained exactly two object description phrases. The parsed utterances served as the
basis for the next stage of processing.
7.2. Establishing phrase to object correspondence
Recall that the only input to the learning system is the utterance, the visual scene (i.e.
the visual features extracted from each object in the scene), and the identity of the target
object which was used to elicit the utterance. Each utterance selected by the parser,
however, has two object phrases implying two distinct referent objects. Before relational terms may be acquired, the learning system must decide which of the two phrases
refers to the original target object, and which of the remaining objects in the scene
should be linked to the remaining phrase. We refer to the second referent as the
landmark object or simply the landmark.
We will denote the two phrases which have been extracted from an utterance Q as
Qp1 and Qp2. The correspondence problem is solved using the following steps:
1. Select the target phrase. If fitðxtarget; Qp1Þ > fitðxtarget; Qp2Þ then decide that Qtarget ¼
Qp1 else Qtarget ¼ Qp2. The remaining unassigned phrase, by default, is assigned to
be the landmark phrase Qlandmark.
2. Select the landmark object:
xlandmark ¼
all objects x6¼xtarget in scene
fitðx; QlandmarkÞ;
i.e. choose the object in the scene which is best described by the landmark phrase.
At this point, the target and landmark objects are identiﬁed, setting the basis for
acquiring visually grounded models of spatial relation words and phrases.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
7.3. Phrase tokenization
To illustrate the need for phrase tokenization, we can rewrite some sample training
utterance with the target and landmark phrases tokenized (the previous step has determined which object phrase is which):
1. TARGET_PHRASE above LANDMARK_PHRASE
2. TARGET_PHRASE to the left of LANDMARK_PHRASE.
3. the sea TARGET_PHRASE to the right of LANDMARK_PHRASE.
4. TARGET_PHRASE touching LANDMARK_PHRASE.
5. TARGET_PHRASE directly to the left of LANDMARK_PHRASE.
6. TARGET_PHRASE to the right of the big LANDMARK_PHRASE.
Four of the utterances contain the spatial phrases ‘‘to the left/right of.’’ A text ﬁlter
was developed to detect ‘stable’ phrases and tokenize them. The token encodes the
original word sequence which is required for generation. A simple iterative procedure is
applied to the training utterances which looks for bigram transition probabilities above
a preset threshold (we use 0.9 in all experiments). If PðwijwjÞ is greater than the
threshold, all subsequences ðwijwjÞ are replaced with the token wj & wi. This procedure
is also applied to reverse bigrams, i.e. the probability of a word given the next word.
The same threshold is applied to reverse bigrams. Once all stable word pairs have been
tokenized, the tokenizer is rerun on the corpus iteratively until no further pairs are
found. When run on the training corpus, four phrases were identiﬁed: ‘‘to-the-left-of,’’
‘‘to-the-right-of,’’ ‘‘to-the,’’ and ‘‘left-of.’’
7.4. Grounding spatial terms
Based on Regier’s analysis , we chose three visual features to ground
spatial semantics. Figure 7 illustrates these features. The proximal distance (prox_dist) is
the distance between the landmark and target at the points where the objects are closest.
In the ﬁgure, the dotted line segment connecting the corners of the objects is the
proximal distance. The angle between this line and the horizon is the second feature,
Figure 7. Visual features used to ground spatial semantics.
proximal orientation (prox_orient). The third feature is the center-of-mass orientation
(com_orient). If a line is drawn between the center of mass of the objects, the center-ofmass orientation is the angle this line makes relative to the horizon.
For each of the 184 training examples, the spatial features of the corresponding
target–landmark pair were computed. The target and landmark phrases were removed
from the training utterances (since they are already grounded). The remaining words in
each utterance were paired with the three spatial terms and processed using the same
learning procedures which we have described for learning object phrase acquisition. In
other words, word class formation, feature selection, word-conditional density estimation (on the new features), and bigram models were constructed. The target and
landmark phrases were used for phrase-based bigram estimation.
Table VIII lists the word classes which were acquired from the training corpus. All
grounded terms are clustered into one class and use all three visual features. In other
words, each of the terms listed in Cluster 0 have an associated three-dimensional
Gaussian distribution which models the expected values of all three spatial features. All
other words were automatically tagged as ungrounded.
Due to the small number of words involved, we decided to estimate word bigrams
rather than word class bigrams. Figure 8 shows all word transitions with probabilities
larger than 0.01.
At this point an important connection between word order and utterance semantics
has been established in the model. Through the use of visual grounding, object phrases
have been mapped to either target or landmark phrase tokens. The bigram language
model shown in Figure 8 therefore diﬀerentiates phrases based on their semantic role,
i.e. whether the phrase refers to a spatial landmark or the target. This connection between syntax and semantics will be necessary to generate complex utterances.
8. Generating relative spatial clauses
Before describing the spatial clause generation process, we address the question of how
to decide when to generate a complex versus simple utterance. In the training corpus
collected from the ﬁrst speaker, 37% of the utterances are complex. One approach is to
require the generation system to also generate complex utterances with the same frequency. We would like the system to generate complex rather than simple utterances
when the system’s conﬁdence in the best possible simple utterance is low. We accomplished this by using the object phrase generation system to produce simple utterances
for a set of 200 novel scenes. For each utterance Q generated by the system, we evaluated the context-sensitive score of the utterance nðQÞ (Equation (24)). The scores were
accumulated in a histogram. We then found the 37% threshold, i.e. the score threshold
below which the 37% of simple utterance scores lie. This threshold is denoted s. Based
on the training corpus, we found s ¼ 0:71. Given a novel scene, the system ﬁrst
TABLE VIII. Word class and feature selection for spatial terms
Word class
Class members
above, below, to-the-right-of,
to-the-left-of, touching
prox_orient, com_orient, prox_dist
(ungrounded)
directly, and
(ungrounded)
horizontal vertical bright
(ungrounded)
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
generates a simple utterance Q. If nðQÞ > s then the system outputs Q as its ﬁnal output.
If nðQÞ 6 s then a complex utterance is generated using the method presented below.
The goal of generating relative spatial clauses (‘‘touching the pink rectangle’’) is to
reduce ambiguity of the target object. Given the target object, the system must select a
landmark which is easy to describe using the grounded object language models that
have been learned, and lies in a location which is easy to describe using the acquired
spatial language. The selection of a landmark is achieved by ﬁrst generating simple
utterances for each object in the scene (other than the target). The context-sensitive
score nð Þ is computed for each utterance. The threshold s (deﬁned above) is used to
select which of the potential landmarks can be unambiguously described using a simple
utterance. If none of the objects are describable with suﬃcient conﬁdence (i.e. nðQÞ < s
for all objects), then the relative clause generator fails and the system is forced to
generate a simple utterance. Assuming one or more potential landmarks can be described, the three spatial features are extracted for each candidate relative to the target.
For each potential landmark, the best ﬁtting spatial term Qspatial is selected. The candidate landmark for which cðQÞ is highest is selected as the landmark.
At this point the system has three sequences of words: (1) a simple utterance describing the landmark, (2) a spatial term which describes the target–landmark relation,
and (3) a simple utterance describing the target. Given these components, a dynamic
Figure 8. Word-class and phrase based statistical bigram for complex utterances
with relative spatial clauses.
programming algorithm uses the phrase level bigrams (Figure 8) to ﬁnd the most likely
order in which to sequence the words to form a complex utterance.
Figure 9 shows representative output from the ﬁnal system for several randomly
generated scenes which were not part of the training corpus. The target object speciﬁed
to the system is indicated in each images with an arrow. For seven of the targets the
system decided to generate simple utterances. In ﬁve cases it was unable to generate an
unambiguous simple utterances and instead opted for a complex utterance.
9. Text-to-speech conversion
The text output from the generation system is synthesized using whole word concatenation. The corpus of speech recordings from the training corpus is used as the basis for
concatenative speech synthesis. Since only the words used in the training corpus can be
acquired by the system, we are able to use whole words as synthesis units.
To support concatenative synthesis, the speech corpus was automatically aligned to
the text transcripts using the Viterbi algorithm using context-dependent triphone
acoustic models and a phonetic dictionary with full coverage of the training corpus
vocabulary . The output the alignment process is a set of word indices
which specify start and end samples of each word in the source speech recordings.
Synthesis of a novel utterance consists of ﬁnding the set of speech segments in the
corpus which minimizes the number of jumps from one point in a speech recording to
another. The Viterbi algorithm is used to eﬃciently solve this search problem.
Although no attempt is made to smooth the points of concatenation in the ﬁnal
output, subjects in evaluations reported that the spoken utterances were usually highly
intelligible although often lacking natural prosody. Clearly, many existing techniques
may be applied to improve the quality of synthesis but for the task at hand our simple
approach was suﬃcient.
10. Evaluation
We evaluated spoken descriptions from the original human-generated training corpus
and from the output of the generation system. Three human judges unfamiliar with the
technical details of the generation system participated in the evaluation. An evaluation
program was written which presents images on a computer screen paired with spoken
descriptions which are heard through speakers. The evaluation was a forced choice
task. Judges were asked to select the rectangle which best ﬁt the description by clicking
on the object using a mouse pointer. A ‘play-again" option was provided in the interface
that allowed judges to listen to spoken descriptions multiple times if desired before
making a selection.
The goal of the evaluation was to measure the level of semantic accuracy and ambiguity of the descriptions. We did not explicitly evaluate the naturalness of the synthetic speech. Implicitly, however, the intelligibility of the synthesis was evaluated since
low intelligibility should result in low understandability.
Each judge evaluated 200 human-generated and 200 machine-generated spoken
descriptions. All judges evaluated the same sets of utterances. Responses were evaluated
by comparing the selected object for each image to the actual target object which was
selected in order to produce the verbal description. Table IX shows the results for both
human-generated and machine-generated results.
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
Figure 9. Sample output from the generation system.
Averaged across the three listeners, the original human-generated descriptions were
correctly understood 89.8% of the time. This result reﬂects the inherent diﬃcultly of the
rectangle task. An analysis of the errors reveals that a diﬀerence in intended versus
inferred referents sometimes hinged on subtle diﬀerences in the speaker and listener’s
conception of a term. For example the use of the terms ‘‘pink,’’ ‘‘dark pink,’’ ‘‘purple,’’
‘‘light purple,’’ and ‘‘red’’ often lead to comprehension errors. In some cases it appears
that the speaker did not consider a second object in the scene which matched the description he produced.
The average listener performance on the machine-generated descriptions was 81.3%,
i.e. a diﬀerence of only 8.5% compared to the results with the human-generated set. An
analysis of errors reveals that the same causes of errors found with the human set also
were at play with the machine data. Diﬀerences in intended versus inferred meaning
hinged on single descriptive terms. In some cases, an object was labeled using a descriptive term which was chosen mainly for its eﬀect in reducing ambiguity rather than
for its description accuracy. This lead at times to confusions for listeners. In addition,
we also found that the system acquired an incorrect grounded model of the spatial term
‘‘to-the-left-of’’ which lead to some generation errors. This would easily be resolved by
providing additional training examples which exemplify proper use of the phrase.
The results presented in this section demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the learning
algorithms to acquire and apply grounded structures for the visual description task.
The semantics of individual words and the stochastic generation methods were able to
produce natural spoken utterances which human listeners were able to understand with
accuracies only 8.5% lower than original utterances spoken from the training corpus.
11. Discussion
Language gains its power from its generative capacity. A ﬁnite vocabulary of words
may be combined to form vast numbers of unique word sequences. From a language
learning perspective, a key challenge is to develop algorithms which can generalize from
training examples so that novel word sequences may be generated as needed. DE-
SCRIBER achieves this goal. It is able to describe scenes it has not encountered during
training, and will often choose sequences of words which never occurred in the training
data. This generative capacity is a result of the formation and use of word classes and
phrase structure. Consider the role of acquired word classes. Statistical rules of word
order acquired from observation of some words are mapped to other words on the basis
of shared class membership. For example, if the sequence ‘large blue square" is observed, the sequence ‘small red rectangle" can be generated if the appropriate word
classes have been acquired. Since word classes are formed partially on the basis of
semantic similarity, bottom-up visual grounding directly inﬂuences the application of
TABLE IX. Results of an evaluation of human- and machine-generated
descriptions
Human-generated (% correct)
Machine-generated (% correct)
Learning visually grounded words and syntax
syntactic rules to words. Thus, the rules of symbol manipulation in DESCRIBER are
inﬂuenced by subsymbolic, visually grounded structure.
The scope of the current results is limited in several ways with respect to our longterm goal of creating domain-independent trainable systems. These limitations highlight
challenging problems which must be addressed in the future if the goal is to be achieved.
The visual scenes processed in DESCRIBER are synthetic and highly constrained.
Objects are all rectangular, of constant color, and guaranteed to be non-overlapping.
Since the scenes are computer-generated, visual features derived from the scenes are
noise-free. For operation with complex real world input such as that derived from a
computer vision system, robustness to various sources of perceptual ambiguity and
noise must be addressed.
The syntactic structures acquired by DESCRIBER are not recursive. The layered
Markov model structures used in DESCRIBER can be extended to higher levels of
embedding, but cannot represent arbitrary levels of recursion. To do so, statistical
context free grammars or functional equivalents would need to be introduced. Acquisition of recursive structures would require exploration of diﬀerent learning strategies.
The training process was simpliﬁed by using utterance truncation to focus initial
learning on simple object descriptions (i.e. without optional relative spatial phrases).
More complex training utterances including those with relative spatial clauses were
introduced in a second phase. Without this two-stage procedure, the system would have
failed to learn from the available number of training examples. To avoid this domainspeciﬁc simpliﬁcation, a model of attention is required which focuses learning on simple
examples before considering complex input. This, in turn, requires automatic domainindependent classiﬁcation of simple versus complex training examples.
The output of DESCRIBER’s learning algorithms depends on a small number of
parameters which were set manually. These include a and T used for hybrid word class
creation, the bigram transition probability threshold used for tokenizing phrases, and q
used to balance syntactic and contextual constraints during generation. These parameters have been manually adjusted for optimal system performance. A desirable but
diﬃcult extension of this work would be to automate the optimization of these parameters. The optimization process would require performance-based reinforcement
feedback. In essence, the system would attempt to put its linguistic knowledge to use,
and use environmental feedback to adjust these parameters.
12. Conclusions and future directions
Our goal in developing DESCRIBER was to explore the use of learning algorithms to
infer scene-to-language mappings from show-and-tell input. In this paper, we have
presented the underlying algorithms, implementation, and evaluation of a system which
generates natural spoken descriptions of objects in visual scenes. Learning algorithms
process training examples (images paired with natural language descriptions) to acquire
structures which link linguistic and visual representations.
Visually grounded language learning occurs in several stages. In the ﬁrst part of the
paper, we described the acquisition and use of structures for referring to single objects.
We showed that distributional analysis of word co-occurrence patterns can be combined with semantic associations to form word classes. A feature selection algorithm
assigns visual features to word classes based on an information-theoretic analysis. The
semantics of individual words are grounded in terms of selected features by estimating
Gaussian word-conditional probability density functions. A word-class bigram language model is acquired as a model of word order. These components are used in a
generation algorithm which integrates syntactic, semantic, and contextual constraints
to produce optimal natural language descriptions of objects.
In the next sections of the paper, we described methods for parsing complex training
utterances using acquired class-based language models. The parsed utterances are automatically brought into semantic correspondence with objects from the training images. The correspondence process leverages grounding models acquired in the ﬁrst stage
of learning. Grounded semantics are then acquired for spatial terms, and a phrase-level
bigram language model of complex utterances is learned. Using these new structures, a
modiﬁed generation system is able to generate complex utterances which include an
expression referring to the target object, as well as a relative spatial clause using an
automatically selected landmark. A context-sensitive score of utterance ambiguity
drives the decision of when to generate simple versus complex verbal descriptions.
The system was evaluated by three listeners. Each listener was asked to select the
most likely target within a visual scene given a verbal description. The same procedure
was repeated with these listeners on a subset of the original human-generated training
utterances. Human produced utterances led to correct object selections 89.8% of the
time whereas machine-generated utterances led to correct selections 81.3% of the time.
Thus the system is able to communicate its ‘intent" via natural language with near
human level precision. This result demonstrates the viability of learning-based approaches for grounded language generation.
There are several directions we plan to pursue to extend this work. The task chosen
for this initial investigation is of a highly abstract nature, but the underlying algorithms
can be applied to numerous practical applications. In the future, we will replace synthetic visual features with features derived from video images, and we will also experiment with tasks involving more complex linguistic constructions. We will also
experiment with ‘inverting’ the acquired linguistic structures to enable visually grounded speech understanding.
We began this paper by motivating our work as a method of developing language
generation systems for applications such as sports commentators and navigation systems. The work presented here represents our ﬁrst steps in this direction. Although
many signiﬁcant challenges remain, we believe that a teach by-example approach
is a feasible, and ultimately more ﬂexible, approach to visually grounded language
generation.
The author is grateful to Janet Cahn, Peter Gorniak, Kai-Yuh Hsiao, Yuri Ivanov,
Tony Jebara, Rupal Patel, Owen Rambow, and anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments which helped shape the presentation of this paper.