Making Sense of Vision and Touch: Self-Supervised Learning of
Multimodal Representations for Contact-Rich Tasks
Michelle A. Lee∗, Yuke Zhu∗, Krishnan Srinivasan, Parth Shah,
Silvio Savarese, Li Fei-Fei, Animesh Garg, Jeannette Bohg
Abstract— Contact-rich manipulation tasks in unstructured
environments often require both haptic and visual feedback.
However, it is non-trivial to manually design a robot controller
that combines modalities with very different characteristics.
While deep reinforcement learning has shown success in
learning control policies for high-dimensional inputs, these
algorithms are generally intractable to deploy on real robots
due to sample complexity. We use self-supervision to learn a
compact and multimodal representation of our sensory inputs,
which can then be used to improve the sample efﬁciency of our
policy learning. We evaluate our method on a peg insertion
task, generalizing over different geometry, conﬁgurations, and
clearances, while being robust to external perturbations. We
present results in simulation and on a real robot.
I. INTRODUCTION
Even in routine tasks such as inserting a car key into the
ignition, humans effortlessly combine the senses of vision
and touch to complete the task. Visual feedback provides semantic and geometric object properties for accurate reaching
or grasp pre-shaping. Haptic feedback provides observations
of current contact conditions between object and environment
for accurate localization and control under occlusions. These
two feedback modalities are complementary and concurrent
during contact-rich manipulation . Yet, there are few
algorithms that endow robots with a similar ability. While
the utility of multimodal data has frequently been shown in
robotics , the proposed manipulation strategies
are often task-speciﬁc. While learning-based methods do not
require manual task speciﬁcation, the majority of learned
manipulation policies close the control loop around a single
modality, often vision .
In this work, we equip a robot with a policy that leverages
multimodal feedback from vision and touch, two modalities
with very different dimensions, frequencies, and characteristics. This policy is learned through self-supervision and
generalizes over variations of the same contact-rich manipulation task in geometry, conﬁgurations, and clearances. It
is also robust to external perturbations. Our approach starts
with using neural networks to learn a shared representation
∗Authors have contributed equally and names are in alphabetical order.
Department
Stanford University. [mishlee,yukez,krshna,pshah9,ssilvio,feifeili,
animeshg,bohg]@stanford.edu. A. Garg is also at Nvidia, USA.
This work has been partially supported by JD.com American Technologies Corporation (“JD”) under the SAIL-JD AI Research Initiative and
by the Toyota Research Institute ("TRI"). This article solely reﬂects the
opinions and conclusions of its authors and not of JD, any entity associated
with JD.com, TRI, or any entity associated with Toyota. We are grateful to
Oussama Khatib for lending the Kuka IIWA, as well as to Shameek Ganguly
and Mikael Jorda for insightful research discussions.
Fig. 1: Force sensor readings in the z-axis (height) and visual
observations are shown with corresponding stages of a peg insertion
task. The force reading transitions from (1) the arm moving in free
space to (2) making contact with the box. While aligning the peg,
the forces capture the sliding contact dynamics on the box surface
(3, 4). Finally, in the insertion stage, the forces peak as the robot
attempts to insert the peg at the edge of the hole (5), and decrease
when the peg slides into the hole (6).
of haptic and visual sensory data, as well as proprioceptive data. Using a self-supervised learning objective, this
network is trained to predict optical ﬂow, whether contact
will be made in the next control cycle, and concurrency of
visual and haptic data. The training is action-conditional to
encourage the encoding of action-related information. The
resulting compact representation of the high-dimensional and
heterogeneous data is the input to a policy for contact-rich
manipulation tasks using deep reinforcement learning. The
proposed decoupling of state estimation and control achieves
practical sample efﬁciency for learning both representation
and policy on a real robot. Our primary contributions are:
1) A model for multimodal representation learning from
which a contact-rich manipulation policy can be learned.
2) Demonstration of insertion tasks that effectively utilize
both haptic and visual feedback for hole search, peg alignment, and insertion (see Fig 1). Ablative studies compare
the effects of each modality on task performance.
3) Evaluation of generalization to tasks with different peg
geometry and of robustness to perturbation and sensor noise.
II. RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
A. Contact-Rich Manipulation
Contact-rich tasks, such as peg insertion, block packing,
and edge following, have been studied for decades due
 
to their relevance in manufacturing. Manipulation policies
often rely entirely on haptic feedback and force control,
and assume sufﬁciently accurate state estimation . They
typically generalize over certain task variations, for instance,
peg-in-chamfered-hole insertion policies that work independently of peg diameter . However, entirely new policies
are required for new geometries. For chamferless holes,
manually deﬁning a small set of viable contact conﬁgurations
has been successful but cannot accommodate the vast
range of real-world variations. combines visual and
haptic data for inserting two planar pegs with more complex
cross sections, but assumes known peg geometry.
Reinforcement learning approaches have recently been
proposed to address variations in geometry and conﬁguration
for manipulation. trained neural network policies
using RGB images and proprioceptive feedback. Their approach works well in a wide range of tasks, but the large
object clearances compared to automation tasks may explain
the sufﬁciency of RGB data. A series of learning-based
approaches have relied on haptic feedback for manipulation.
Many of them are concerned with estimating the stability of
a grasp before lifting an object , even suggesting a
regrasp . Only a few approaches learn entire manipulation policies through reinforcement only given haptic feedback . While relies on raw force-torque
feedback, learn a low-dimensional representation of
high-dimensional tactile data before learning a policy. Even
fewer approaches exploit the complementary nature of vision
and touch. Some of them extend their previous work on grasp
stability estimation . Others perform full manipulation
tasks based on multiple input modalities but require a
pre-speciﬁed manipulation graph and demonstrate only on
a single task, or require human demonstration and object
CAD models . There have been promising works that
train manipulation policy in simulation and transfer them to a
real robot . However, only few works focused on
contact-rich tasks and none relied on haptic feedback
in simulation, most likely because of the lack of ﬁdelity
of contact simulation and collision modeling for articulated
rigid-body systems .
B. Multimodal Representation Learning
complementary
heterogeneous
modalities has previously been explored for inference and
decision making. The diverse set of modalities includes
vision, range, audio, haptic and proprioceptive data as well
as language. This heterogeneous data makes the application
of hand-designed features and sensor fusion extremely challenging. That is why learning-based methods have been on
the forefront. are examples of fusing visual
and haptic data for grasp stability assessment, manipulation,
material recognition, or object categorization. fuse
vision and range sensing and adds language labels.
While many of these multimodal approaches are trained
through a classiﬁcation objective , in this
paper we are interested in multimodal representation learning
for control. A popular representation learning objective is
reconstruction of the raw sensory input .
This unsupervised objective beneﬁts learning stability and
speed, but it is also data intensive and prone to over-
ﬁtting . When learning for control, action-conditional
predictive representations can encourage the state representations to capture action-relevant information . Studies
attempted to predict full images when pushing objects with
benign success . In these cases either the underlying
dynamics is deterministic , or the control runs at a low
frequency . In contrast, we operate with haptic feedback
at 1kHz and send Cartesian control commands at 20Hz. We
use an action-conditional surrogate objective for predicting
optical ﬂow and contact events with self-supervision.
There is compelling evidence that the interdependence and
concurrency of different sensory streams aid perception and
manipulation . However, few studies have explicitly exploited this concurrency in representation learning.
Examples include for visual prediction tasks and for audio-visual coupling. Following , we propose a
self-supervised objective to fuse visual and haptic data.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND METHOD OVERVIEW
Our goal is to learn a policy on a robot for performing contact-rich manipulation tasks. We want to evaluate
the value of combining multisensory information and the
ability to transfer multimodal representations across tasks.
For sample efﬁciency, we ﬁrst learn a neural network-based
feature representation of the multisensory data. The resulting
compact feature vector serves as input to a policy that is
learned through reinforcement learning.
We model the manipulation task as a ﬁnite-horizon, discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) M, with a state
space S, an action space A, state transition dynamics T :
S ×A →S, an initial state distribution ρ0, a reward function
r : S ×A →R, horizon T, and discount factor γ ∈(0,1]. To
determine the optimal stochastic policy π : S →P(A), we
want to maximize the expected discounted reward
We represent the policy by a neural network with parameters
θπ that are learned as described in Sec. V. S is deﬁned
by the low-dimensional representation learned from highdimensional visual and haptic sensory data. This representation is a neural network parameterized by θs and is trained as
described in Sec. IV. A is deﬁned over continuously-valued,
3D displacements ∆x in Cartesian space. The controller
design is detailed in Sec. V.
IV. MULTI-MODAL REPRESENTATION MODEL
Deep networks are powerful tools to learn representations
from high-dimensional data but require a substantial
amount of training data. Here, we address the challenge of
seeking sources of supervision that do not rely on laborious
human annotation. We design a set of predictive tasks that
are suitable for learning visual and haptic representations
for contact-rich manipulation tasks, where supervision can
“are these sensory
inputs time-aligned?”
force encoder
Proprioception
RGB Camera
Force-Torque Sensor
image encoder
proprioception encoder
flow predictor
action-conditional
optical flow
action encoder
multimodal
multimodal
representation
contact predictor
skip connections
“will it make contact
in the next step?”
alignment predictor
Fig. 2: Neural network architecture for multimodal representation learning with self-supervision. The network takes data from three
different sensors as input: RGB images, F/T readings over a 32ms window, and end-effector position and velocity. It encodes and fuses
this data into a multimodal representation based on which controllers for contact-rich manipulation can be learned. This representation
learning network is trained end-to-end through self-supervision.
be obtained via automatic procedures rather than manual
labeling. Fig. 2 visualizes our representation learning model.
A. Modality Encoders
Our model encodes three types of sensory data available
to the robot: RGB images from a ﬁxed camera, haptic
feedback from a wrist-mounted force-torque (F/T) sensor,
and proprioceptive data from the joint encoders of the robot
arm. The heterogeneous nature of this data requires domainspeciﬁc encoders to capture the unique characteristics of each
modality. For visual feedback, we use a 6-layer convolutional
neural network (CNN) similar to FlowNet to encode
128×128×3 RGB images. We add a fully-connected layer
to transform the ﬁnal activation maps into a 128-d feature
vector. For haptic feedback, we take the last 32 readings
from the six-axis F/T sensor as a 32 × 6 time series and
perform 5-layer causal convolutions with stride 2 to
transform the force readings into a 64-d feature vector. For
proprioception, we encode the current position and velocity
of the end-effector with a 2-layer multilayer perceptron
(MLP) to produce a 32-d feature vector. The resulting three
feature vectors are concatenated into one vector and passed
through the multimodal fusion module (2-layer MLP) to
produce the ﬁnal 128-d multimodal representation.
B. Self-Supervised Predictions
The modality encoders have nearly half a million learnable
parameters and require a large amount of labeled training
data. To avoid manual annotation, we design training objectives for which labels can be automatically generated
through self-supervision. Furthermore, representations for
control should encode the action-related information. To
achieve this, we design two action-conditional representation
learning objectives. Given the next robot action and the
compact representation of the current sensory data, the model
has to predict (i) the optical ﬂow generated by the action and
(ii) whether the end-effector will make contact with the environment in the next control cycle. Ground-truth optical ﬂow
annotations are automatically generated given proprioception
and known robot kinematics and geometry . Groundtruth annotations of binary contact states are generated by
applying simple heuristics on the F/T readings.
The next action, i.e. the end-effector motion, is encoded by
a 2-layer MLP. Together with the multimodal representation
it forms the input to the ﬂow and contact predictor. The
ﬂow predictor uses a 6-layer convolutional decoder with
upsampling to produce a ﬂow map of size 128 × 128 × 2.
Following , we use 4 skip connections. The contact
predictor is a 2-layer MLP and performs binary classiﬁcation.
As discussed in Sec. II-B, there is concurrency between the
different sensory streams leading to correlations and redundancy, e.g., seeing the peg, touching the box, and feeling the
force. We exploit this by introducing a third representation
learning objective that predicts whether two sensor streams
are temporally aligned . During training, we sample a
mix of time-aligned multimodal data and randomly shifted
ones. The alignment predictor (a 2-layer MLP) takes the
low-dimensional representation as input and performs binary
classiﬁcation of whether the input was aligned or not.
We train the action-conditional optical ﬂow with endpoint
error (EPE) loss averaged over all pixels , and both
the contact prediction and the alignment prediction with
cross-entropy loss. During training, we minimize a sum of
the three losses end-to-end with stochastic gradient descent
on a dataset of rolled-out trajectories. Once trained, this
network produces a 128-d feature vector that compactly
represents multimodal data. This vector from the input to
the manipulation policy learned via reinforcement learning.
V. POLICY LEARNING AND CONTROLLER DESIGN
Our ﬁnal goal is to equip a robot with a policy for performing contact-rich manipulation tasks that leverage multimodal
feedback. Though it is possible to engineer controllers for
speciﬁc instances of these tasks , this effort is difﬁcult
to scale to the large variability of real-world tasks. Therefore,
Trajectory
Impedance PD
Controller
Operational Space
Controller
Multimodal Representation
Fig. 3: Our controller takes end-effector position displacements
from the policy at 20Hz and outputs robot torque commands at
200Hz. The trajectory generator interpolates high-bandwidth robot
trajectories from low-bandwidth policy actions. The impedance PD
controller tracks the interpolated trajectory. The operational space
controller uses the robot dynamics model to transform Cartesianspace accelerations into commanded joint torques. The resulting
controller is compliant and reactive.
it is desirable to enable a robot to supervise itself where
the learning process is applicable to a broad range of tasks.
Given its recent success in continuous control , deep
reinforcement learning lends itself well to learning policies
that map high-dimensional features to control commands.
Policy Learning. Modeling contact interactions and multicontact planning still result in complex optimization problems that remain sensitive to inaccurate actuation
and state estimation. We formulate contact-rich manipulation
as a model-free reinforcement learning problem to investigate
its performance when relying on multimodal feedback and
when acting under uncertainty in geometry, clearance and
conﬁguration. By choosing model-free, we also eliminate the
need for an accurate dynamics model, which is typically dif-
ﬁcult to obtain in the presence of rich contacts. Speciﬁcally,
we choose trust-region policy optimization (TRPO) .
TRPO imposes a bound of KL-divergence for each policy
update by solving a constrained optimization problem, which
prevents the policy from moving too far away from the
previous step. The policy network is a 2-layer MLP that takes
as input the 128-d multimodal representation and produces
a 3D displacement ∆x of the robot end-effector. To train
the policy efﬁciently, we freeze the representation model
parameters during policy learning, such that it reduces the
number of learnable parameters to 3% of the entire model
and substantially improves the sample efﬁciency.
Controller Design. Our controller takes as input Cartesian
end-effector displacements ∆x from the policy at 20Hz,
and outputs direct torque commands τu to the robot at
200Hz. Its architecture can be split into three parts: trajectory
generation, impedance control and operational space control
(see Fig 3). Our policy outputs Cartesian control commands
instead of joint-space commands, so it does not need to
implicitly learn the non-linear and redundant mapping between 7-DoF joint space and 3-DoF Cartesian space. We
use direct torque control as it gives our robot compliance
during contact, which makes the robot safer to itself, its
environment, and any nearby human operator. In addition,
compliance makes the peg insertion task easier to accomplish
under position uncertainty, as the robot can slide on the
surface of the box while pushing downwards .
The trajectory generator bridges low-bandwidth output of
the policy (limited by the forward pass of our representation
model), and the high-bandwidth torque control of the robot.
Given ∆x from the policy and the current end-effector position xt, we calculate the desired end-effector position xdes.
The trajectory generator interpolates between xt and xdes to
yield a trajectory ξt = {xk,vk,ak}t+T
k=t of end-effector position,
velocity and acceleration at 200Hz. This forms the input to a
PD impedance controller to compute a task space acceleration command: au = ades −kp(x−xdes)−kv(v−vdes), where
kp and kv are manually tuned gains.
By leveraging known kinematic and dynamics models of
the robot, we can calculate joint torques from Cartesian space
accelerations with the dynamically-consistent operational
space formulation . We compute the force at the endeffector with F = Λau, where Λ is the inertial matrix in the
end-effector frame that decouples the end-effector motions.
Finally, we map from F to joint torque commands with the
end-effector Jacobian J, which is a function of joint angle
q: τu = JT(q)F.
VI. EXPERIMENTS: DESIGN AND SETUP
The primary goal of our experiments is to examine the
effectiveness of the multimodal representations in contactrich manipulation tasks. In particular, we design the experiments to answer the following three questions: 1) What is
the value of using all instead of a subset of modalities? 2)
Is policy learning on the real robot practical with a learned
representation? 3) Does the learned representation generalize
over task variations and recover from perturbations?
Task Setup. We design a set of peg insertion tasks where task
success requires joint reasoning over visual and haptic feedback. We use ﬁve different types of pegs and holes fabricated
with a 3D printer: round peg, square peg, triangular peg,
semicircular peg, and hexagonal peg, each with a nominal
clearance of around 2mm as shown in Fig. 5a.
Robot Environment Setup. For both simulation and real
robot experiments, we use the Kuka LBR IIWA robot, a
7-DoF torque-controlled robot. Three sensor modalities are
available in both simulation and real hardware, including
proprioception, an RGB camera, and a force-torque sensor.
The proprioceptive feature is the end-effector pose as well as
linear and angular velocity. They are computed using forward
kinematics. RGB images are recorded from a ﬁxed camera
pointed at the robot. Input images to our model are downsampled to 128×128. On the real robot, we use the Kinect v2
camera. In simulation, we use CHAI3D for rendering.
The force sensor provides a 6-axis feedback on the forces
and moments along the x, y , z axes. On the real robot, we
mount an OptoForce sensor between the last joint and the
peg. In simulation, the contact between the peg and the box is
modeled with SAI 2.0 , a real-time physics simulator for
rigid articulated bodies with high ﬁdelity contact resolution.
Number of training episodes
Average episode return
Full model
No haptics
No vision & No haptics
(a) Training curves of reinforcement learning
(b) Policy evaluation statistics
Fig. 4: Simulated Peg Insertion: Ablative study of representations trained on different combinations of sensory modalities. We compare
our full model, trained with a combination of visual and haptic feedback and proprioception, with baselines that are trained without vision,
or haptics, or either. (b) The graph shows partial task completion rates with different feedback modalities, and we note that both the visual
and haptic modalities play an integral role for contact-rich tasks.
Reward Design. We use the following staged reward function to guide the reinforcement learning algorithm through
the different sub-tasks, simplifying the challenge of exploration and improving learning efﬁciency:
2 (tanhλ∥s∥+tanhλ∥sxy∥)
(reaching)
2−ca∥sxy∥2
if ∥sxy∥2 ≤ε1
(alignment)
(insertion)
if hd −|sz| ≤ε2
(completion),
where s = (sx,sy,sz) and sxy = (sx,sy) use the peg’s current
position, λ is a constant factor to scale the input to the tanh
function. The target peg position is (0,0,−hd) with hd as the
height of the hole, and cr and ca are constant scale factors.
Evaluation Metrics. We report the quantitative performance
of the policies using the sum of rewards achieved in an
episode, normalized by the highest attainable reward. We
also provide the statistics of the stages of the peg insertion
task that each policy can achieve, and report the percentage
of evaluation episodes in the following four categories:
1) completed insertion: the peg reaches bottom of the hole;
2) inserted into hole: the peg goes into the hole but has not
reached the bottom;
3) touched the box: the peg only makes contact with the box;
4) failed: the peg fails to reach the box.
Implementation Details. To train each representation model,
we collect a multimodal dataset of 100k states and generate
the self-supervised annotations. We roll out a random policy
as well as a heuristic policy while collecting the data, which
encourages the peg to make contact with the box. As the
policy runs at 20 Hz, it takes 90 to 120 minutes to collect
the data. The representation models are trained for 20 epochs
on a Titan V GPU before starting policy learning.
VII. EXPERIMENTS: RESULTS
We ﬁrst conduct an ablative study in simulation to investigate the contributions of individual sensory modalities
to learning the multimodal representation and manipulation
policy. We then apply our full multimodal model to a real
robot, and train reinforcement learning policies for the peg
insertion tasks from the learned representations with high
sample efﬁciency. Furthermore, we visualize the representations and provide a detailed analysis of robustness with
respect to shape and clearance variations.
A. Simulation Experiments
Three modalities are encoded and fused by our representation model: RGB images, force readings, and proprioception
(see Fig. 2). To investigate the importance of each modality
for contact-rich manipulation tasks, we perform an ablative
study in simulation, where we learn the multimodal representations with different combinations of modalities. These
learned representations are subsequently fed to the TRPO
policies to train on a task of inserting a square peg. We
randomize the conﬁguration of the box position and the arm’s
initial position at the beginning of each episode to enhance
the robustness and generalization of the model.
We illustrate the training curves of the TRPO agents in
Fig. 4a. We train all policies with 1.2k episodes, each lasting
500 steps. We evaluate 10 trials with the stochastic policy
every 10 training episodes and report the mean and standard
deviation of the episode rewards. Our Full model corresponds to the multimodal representation model introduced
in Section IV, which takes all three modalities as input. We
compare it with three baselines: No vision masks out
the visual input to the network, No haptics masks out
the haptic input, and No vision No haptics leaves
only proprioceptive input. From Fig. 4a we observe that
the absence of either the visual or force modality negatively
affects task completion, with No vision No haptics
performing the worst. None of the three baselines has
reached the same level of performance as the ﬁnal model.
Among these three baselines, we see that the No haptics
baseline achieved the highest rewards. We hypothesize that
vision locates the box and the hole, which facilitates the
ﬁrst steps of robot reaching and peg alignment, while haptic
feedback is uninformative until after contact is made.
The Full model achieves the highest success rate with
nearly 80% completion rate, while all baseline methods
have a completion rate below 5%. It is followed by the
semicircular
triangular
(a) Peg variations
current frame
(with next action)
ground-truth
optical flow
optical flow
EPE: 0.036
EPE: 0.024
(b) Optical ﬂow prediction examples
Fig. 5: (a) 3D printed pegs used in the real robot experiments
and their box clearances. (b) Qualitative predictions: We visualize
examples of optical ﬂow predictions from our representation model
(using color scheme in ). The model predicts different ﬂow
maps on the same image conditioned on different next actions
indicated by projected arrows.
No haptics baseline, which relies solely on the visual
feedback. We see that it is able to localize the hole and
perform insertion half of the time from only the visual inputs;
however, few episodes have completed the full insertion.
It implies that the haptic feedback plays a more crucial
role in determining the actions when the peg is placed in
the hole. The remaining two baselines can often reach the
box through random exploration, but are unable to exhibit
consistent insertion behaviors.
B. Real Robot Experiments
We evaluate our Full model on the real hardware
with round, triangular, and semicircular pegs. In contrast to
simulation, the difﬁculty of sensor synchronization, variable
delays from sensing to control, and complex real-world dynamics introduce additional challenges on the real robot. We
make the task tractable on a real robot by training a shallow
neural network controller while freezing the multimodal
representation model that can generate action-conditional
ﬂows with low endpoint errors (see Fig. 5b).
We train the TRPO policies for 300 episodes, each lasting
1000 steps, roughly 5 hours of wall-clock time. We evaluate
each policy for 100 episodes in Fig. 6. The ﬁrst three bars
correspond to the set of experiments where we train a speciﬁc
representation model and policy for each type of peg. The
robot achieves a level of success similar to that in simulation.
A common strategy that the robot learns is to reach the box,
search for the hole by sliding over the surface, align the peg
with the hole, and ﬁnally perform insertion. More qualitative
behaviors can be found in the supplementary video.
We further examine the potential of transferring the
learned policies and representations to two novel shapes
previously unseen in representation and policy training, the
hexagonal peg and the square peg. For policy transfer, we
take the representation model and the policy trained for the
triangular peg, and execute with the new pegs. From the
4th and 5th bars in Fig. 6, we see that the policy achieves
over 60% success rate on both pegs without any further
policy training on them. A better transfer performance can
be achieved by taking the representation model trained on
Representation
transferring
transferring
representations
Fig. 6: Real Robot Peg Insertion: We evaluate our Full Model
on the real hardware with different peg shapes, indicated on the
x-axis. The learned policies achieve the tasks with a high success
rate. We also study transferring the policies and representations
from trained pegs to novel peg shapes (last four bars). The robot
effectively re-uses previously trained models to solve new tasks.
the triangular peg, and training a new policy for the new
pegs. As shown in the last two bars in Fig. 6, the resulting
performance increases 19% for the hexagonal peg and 30%
for the square peg. Our transfer learning results indicate
that the multimodal representations from visual and haptic
feedback generalize well across variations of our contact-rich
manipulation tasks.
Finally, we study the robustness of our policy in the
presence of sensory noise and external perturbations to the
arm by periodically occluding the camera and pushing the
robot arm during trajectory roll-out. The policy is able to
recover from both the occlusion and perturbations. Qualitative results can be found in our supplementary video
on our website: 
visionandtouch.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We examined the value of jointly reasoning over timealigned multisensory data for contact-rich manipulation
tasks. To enable efﬁcient real robot training, we proposed
a novel model to encode heterogeneous sensory inputs into
a compact multimodal representation. Once trained, the representation remained ﬁxed when being used as input to a
shallow neural network policy for reinforcement learning.
We trained the representation model with self-supervision,
eliminating the need for manual annotation. Our experiments
with tight clearance peg insertion tasks indicated that they
require the multimodal feedback from both vision and touch.
We further demonstrated that the multimodal representations
transfer well to new task instances of peg insertion. For
future work, we plan to extend our method to other contactrich tasks, which require a full 6-DoF controller of position
and orientation. We would also like to explore the value of
incorporating richer modalities, such as depth and sound, into
our representation learning pipeline, as well as new sources
of self-supervision.