Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Filtering Thresholds
Yi Zhang Jamie Callan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA
{yiz, callan}@cs.cmu.edu
Information filtering systems based on statistical retrieval models
usually compute a numeric score indicating how well each
document matches each profile. Documents with scores above
profile-specific dissemination thresholds are delivered.
An optimal dissemination threshold is one that maximizes a given
utility function based on the distributions of the scores of relevant
and non-relevant documents. The parameters of the distribution
can be estimated using relevance information, but relevance
information obtained while filtering is biased. This paper presents
a new method of adjusting dissemination thresholds that explicitly
models and compensates for this bias. The new algorithm, which
is based on the Maximum Likelihood principle, jointly estimates
the parameters of the density distributions for relevant and nonrelevant documents and the ratio of the relevant document in the
corpus. Experiments with TREC-8 and TREC-9 Filtering Track
data demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm.
Information Filtering, Dissemination Threshold, Maximum
Likelihood Estimation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Information filtering systems monitor a document stream to find
documents that match the information needs described by profiles
consisting of queries and related context or history. Filtering
systems based on statistical models (e.g., vector space,
probabilistic, inference network) use a numeric score to indicate
how well a document matches a profile, and only disseminate a
document when its score is above some threshold (the
dissemination threshold).
As the information stream is processed, the system may be
provided with relevance judgments for some of the documents it
delivers. An adaptive filtering system can learn from this
feedback, so that it becomes more accurate over time.
Generally, an adaptive filtering system that can learn from user
feedback has three important subtasks:
Learning corpus statistics, such as idf for each term;
Learning filtering profiles, for example, adding or
deleting terms and adjusting term weights; and
Learning dissemination thresholds.
Most of the prior research on adaptive filtering has been focused
on learning filtering profiles. A common approach to learning
profiles is to use an incremental version of the Rocchio algorithm
 :
where Q is the initial profile vector, Q’ is the new profile vector, R
is the set of relevant documents, NR is the set of non-relevant
documents, Di is a document vector, and α, β, and γ are constants
indicating the relative value of each type of evidence. Machine
learning algorithms for text classification have also been used for
this task, for example, k-nearest neighbor, naive Bayes and
boosting .
The problem of how to set filtering thresholds received little
attention until recently, in part because many operational
environments relied upon Boolean retrieval models and profiles
that either matched or did not. Researchers working with
statistical algorithms could delay dissemination decisions while
scores were computed for each document in the stream, sort
documents by their scores, and then disseminate the top N
documents, as was done in the TREC Routing task. This
approach is effective when it is not necessary to disseminate
information quickly. When dissemination decisions cannot be
delayed, it is necessary to find dissemination thresholds for each
The problem of setting dissemination thresholds can be described
as finding a threshold that maximizes a utility metric in which
each relevant document is associated with some reward and each
non-relevant document is associated with some penalty, as in
recent TREC Filtering Track evaluations . Much of the
recent research on setting dissemination thresholds is based either
on heuristics or regression methods . For
example, CLARITECH used a heuristic that allowed the threshold
to vary between a lower bound utility value (zero) and an upper
bound optimal value . Microsoft Cambridge mapped a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’01, September 9-12, 2001, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-331-6/01/0009...$5.00.
document score sd to the a probability of relevance score pd using
the formula:
where γ is set according to another corpus, β is learned
adaptively, and ast1 is the average score of the top 1% of retrieved
documents . KUN assumed a Gaussian distribution for the
scores of relevant documents and an exponential distribution for
the scores of non-relevant documents, and then found the
threshold that maximized a given linear utility measure This
approach was extremely effective, achieving the best result for
utility oriented runs in the TREC9 Filtering Track evaluation .
One potential weakness with the KUN approach is that it assumes
that the training data accurately represents the distribution of
relevant and non-relevant document scores. This assumption is
not true in an adaptive filtering environment, because relevance
information is obtained only for documents that are actually
disseminated. Relevance information is not available for
documents that have scores below the threshold, so the training
data is inherently biased.
This paper presents a new method for setting dissemination
thresholds that, like the KUN method, assumes that relevant
document scores are distributed normally and non-relevant
document scores are distributed exponentially . However, our
algorithm explicitly models the sampling bias, and uses the
maximum likelihood principle to find unbiased estimates of the
parameters. It jointly estimates the parameters of the two density
distributions and the ratio of the relevant documents in the corpus.
Experiments
dissemination thresholds that are significantly more accurate than
the baseline KUN method in some cases.
This following section describes the use of Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE) for modeling score distributions. Section 3
describes our experimental methodology and our new algorithm
for setting dissemination thresholds based on these score
distribution. Section 4 reports experimental results. Finally,
Section 5 concludes.
2. MODELING SCORE DISTRIBUTIONS
2.1 A Mathematical Model of Document
Score Distributions
Usually only a small proportion of documents is relevant. Given
an accurate model of the distribution of document scores for the
top ranking documents (relevant and non-relevant), the
dissemination threshold can be set accurately.
Several researchers suggest modeling score distributions using a
Gaussian distribution for the scores of relevant documents and an
exponential distribution for the top ranking non-relevant
documents . These distributions are modeled as:
u : mean of the Gaussian distribution;
σ : variance of Gaussian distribution;
1/λ : variance of exponential distribution; and
c : minimum score a non-relevant document can get.
Analysis of experimental results on TREC9 Filtering Track data
(OHSU topics, OHSUMED collection) support this approach.
Figures 1 and 3 illustrate how the normal distribution fits relevant
document scores for two TREC9 topics. Figures 2 and 4 illustrate
how the exponential distribution fits the top-100 non-relevant
document scores for the same topics.
0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52
document score
number of documents
Figure 1. Density of relevant document scores: Topic5.
0.43 0.44 0.45 0.46 0.47 0.48 0.49 0.50
document score
number of documents
Figure 2. Density of non-relevant document scores: Topic5.
document score
number of documents
0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.5
Figure 3. Density of relevant document scores: Topic3.
document score
number of documents
0.43 0.44 0.45 0.46 0.47 0.48 0.49 0.50
Figure 4. Density of non-relevant document scores: Topic3.
This model is not perfect, especially for low scoring documents.
However, it can provide a relatively accurate estimate of the
distribution of scores for higher-scoring documents, and we
believe that in the information-filtering task the area of interest
(i.e., the area in which thresholds are likely to be located) is
among the higher-scoring documents.
2.2 Problem with KUN’s Parameter
Estimation Method
Given a set of scores, KUN’s parameter estimation method for
normal and exponential distributions is a simple calculation of the
mean and variance over training data . This approach to
parameter estimation produces biased estimates, because in the
information filtering task relevance information is available only
for documents with scores above the dissemination threshold.
When training data is restricted to scores above the threshold, the
mean of the sample scores is likely to be higher than the real
document score
Density estimation
based on all relevance
information
estimation
information
number of documents
0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.5
Figure 5. Estimation of parameters for relevant document
scores: Topic 3.
For example, for the profile in Figure 3, the mean and variance of
the Gaussian distribution (based on all relevant documents) are
(0.4343, 0.0169). However, if training data is restricted to
documents with scores above a fixed dissemination threshold ofθ
= 0.4435, the mean and variance calculated using KUN’s method
are (0.4551, 0007) (Figure 5).
In order to get an unbiased estimate of the distribution parameters,
we must take into consideration the sampling constraint, i.e., the
dissemination threshold. And in the real world of adaptive
filtering, the threshold is changing over time, so the problem
becomes more interesting.
2.3 Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Score
Distribution Parameters
Maximum Likelihood Estimation, an unbiased parameter
estimation method, can be used to solve this problem.
At a certain point in the filtering process, the filtering system has
already delivered N documents to a user and relevance judgments
of delivered documents are provided by the user. We can treat
these documents as training data. For the i th delivered document
delivered.
In order to describe the density distribution of the scores, 4
parameters are necessary: (u, σ, λ, p). The meanings of u, σ, and
λ are described in Section 2.1. p is the expected ratio of relevant
documents in the corpus according to the model. p does not
represent the ratio in the corpus as a whole, because the
exponential model fits only the top non-relevant scores. The
model is focused on, and is most accurate modeling, the scores of
the top-ranking documents, where thresholds are typically set.
Given the observed training data, which are represented by a set
of triples
, according to Bayes
theorem, the most probable value of H = (u, σ, λ, p) is:
For simplicity, we first assume that there is no prior knowledge of
the distribution of H and treat the prior probability of P(H) as
uniform. (We will revisit and remove the assumption in Section
3.3.) Because P(D) is a constant independent of H, it can be
dropped. Thus the most probable H is the one that maximizes the
likelihood of the training data.
The second step of Equation 2 is due to the assumption that each
document is independent; the third step is due to the fact that
maximizing a function is equivalent to maximizing its logarithm;
and the last step indicates the sampling constraints for training
data. Notice that although the training data are not sampled
randomly from the whole corpus, each individual training
document is sampled randomly according to the conditional
probability P(Score= Scorei, Ri| H, Score>θi). So parameters
estimated based on Equation 2 are unbiased.
For each item inside the sum operation of Equation 2, we have:
The first step in Equation 3 is based on the definition of
conditional probability; the second step is due to the chain rule of
probability; and the last step is due to the fact that all training
documents must have a score higher than the threshold.
For convenience, let f1(u,σ,θi) be the probability of a document
getting a score above threshold θi if it is relevant and f2(λ, θi) be
the probability of it getting a score above threshold if it is nonrelevant. The probability of getting a score above θi can be
calculated by integrating the density function from θi to positive
infinity. That is:
to represent the probability of a
document getting a score above threshold
iθ , we can get:
An intuitive explanation of Equation 6 is illustrated in Figure 6. If
we assume the sum of areas under the exponential and Gaussian
curves is 1, then
corresponds to the area to the
θ and below the normal distribution curve.
corresponds to the area to the right of
below the exponential distribution curve.
score of document
Non-relevant documents
Figure 6. Distribution of scores of documents for a profile.
From Equations 2-6, we get:
where for relevant documents:
and for non-relevant documents:
If the training data are random samples of the whole corpus (not
true for filtering), θi =-∞ and thus
= 1. If we
in Equation 7 with 1, the optimal
parameters will be the same as those proposed by KUN. In other
words, KUN’s method is a maximum likelihood estimation of the
parameters if the training data are a random sample of the dataset.
is not equal to 1 because the sample
is biased during filtering. We must use Equation 7 to find the
unbiased parameters.
2.4 Parameter Optimization Using Conjugate
Gradient Descent
There is no closed form solution for Equation 7, so numerical
methods must be used. One such method is conjugate gradient
descent (abbreviated CG). CG is an iterative minimization
procedure for a function
. A sketch of the CG algorithm is
shown in Figure 7. At each step, x is the approximate solution, q
is the search direction, and x is improved by searching for a better
solution along direction q. More detailed descriptions are
available in .
The derivative of the right side of Equation 7 is used for
calculating the search direction q. Taylor expansion is used to
calculate the integration in Equation 4, and the Taylor expansion
is guaranteed to converge.
Figure 7. Sketch of the CG algorithm.
3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
The baseline and unbiased ML methods of setting dissemination
thresholds were evaluated in a series of experiments with TREC
data. The experimental methodology for the TREC Filtering
Track changes from year to year. In our experiments we used the
TREC-9 experimental methodology in experiments with
TREC-8 and TREC-9 Filtering data.
The advantage of this approach is that experimental results
obtained with different datasets can be compared, because they
were obtained with the same experimental methodology.
However, a consequence is that our results with TREC-8 data are
not directly comparable to results from systems participating in
the TREC-8 Filtering Track.
The evaluation measures, datasets, and experimental methodology
are described in more detail below.
3.1 Evaluation Measure
One commonly used evaluation measure for a filtering system is
linear utility, which corresponds to assigning a positive value or
negative cost to each element in the category .
Non-relevant
Not Delivered
The variables R+, N+, R-, and N- are the number of documents in
the corresponding category, and A, B, C and D are the benefit or
cost associated with that category.
Filtering according to a linear utility function (Equation 8) is
equivalent to setting the threshold at
The solution was solved in by:
If we let (A, B, C D) = (2, 1, 0, 0), the utility becomes1:
1 The TREC-9 T9U measure is Max (2R+ - N+, MinU), where
MinU=-100 for OHSU topics or –400 for Mesh topics. T9U
sets a lower bound on profile utility, limiting the impact of poor
profiles on overall filtering results. We have no need for the
lower bound in our experiments, because all of the profiles get
scores above MinU, so we opted for the simpler definition of
x = initial guess for the minimum
q = negative of gradient at x (search direction)
x = the minimal point along direction h
q = a linear combination of new gradient and old q
} until convergence
which is a slightly simplified variant of the T9U utility metric
used in the TREC-9 Filtering track. This is the measure we used
in our experiments. The corresponding delivery rule is:
deliver if
Two different text corpora were used to test our algorithm: the
OHSUMED dataset used in the TREC-9 Filtering track and the
FT dataset used in the TREC-8 Filtering track.
3.2.1 OHSUMED Data
The OHSUMED data is a collection from the US National Library
of Medicine’s bibliographic database . It was previously used
by the TREC9 Filtering Track . It consists of 348,566 articles
from the subset of 270 journals covering the years 1987 to 1991.
63 OHSUMED queries and 500 MeSH headings were used to
simulate user profiles. The relevance judgments for the
OHSUMED queries were made by some medical librarians and
physicians on the basis of output of interactive search . For
the Mesh headings, assignment of a heading to a document by the
National Library of Medicine is treated as equivalent to a positive
relevance judgment.
In the TREC9 Filtering Track, it is assumed that the user profile
descriptions arrive at the beginning of 1988, so the 54,709 articles
from 1987 can be used to learn word occurrence (e.g., idf)
statistics and corpus statistics (e.g., average document length). For
each user, the system begins with a natural language description
of the information need and 2 examples of relevant documents.
The average numbers of relevant articles in the testing data are 51
for the OHSUMED topics and 249 for the Mesh headings.
3.2.2 FT Data
The FT data is a collection of 210,158 articles from the 1991 to
1994 Financial Times. It was previously used by the TREC8
Filtering Track . TREC topics 351-400 were used to simulate
user profiles. The relevance judgments were made by NIST on
the basis of pooled output from several searches.
For each profile, the system begins with two identified relevant
documents and a natural language description of the information
need, which is the title and description field of the corresponding
TREC topic. The average number of relevant articles in the testing
data is 36.
3.3 Methodology
The YFilter information filtering system was used for our
experiments. It processes documents by first removing unusual
symbols (such as punctuation and special characters), excluding
the 418 highly frequent terms listed in the default INQUERY stop
words list , and then stemming using the Porter stemmer .
Processed documents are compared to each profile using the
BM25 tf.idf formula to measure the similarity of the
document and user profile.
For each topic, the filtering system created initial filtering profiles
using terms from the TREC topic Title and Description fields, and
set the initial threshold to allow the highest-scoring δ = 3
documents in the training dataset to pass. For simplicity, the
filtering profile term weights are not updated while filtering.
Because the first two relevant documents given to the system were
not sampled under the constraint that their scores must exceed the
dissemination
threshold,
probabilities
, and the corresponding element of
Equation 7 was changed to:
In Section 2.3, for simplicity we set the prior probability of
to be uniform. However, in the real filtering task,
especially during the early stage of filtering where there are only a
small number of samples, this may cause problems. For example,
if only non-relevant documents are delivered, the estimate of p
will be 0 without a prior. Or, if all the relevant documents have
the same score, the variance will be 0. Smoothing using a prior of
parameters can solve these problems. The prior needn’t be very
accurate, because as the amount of sample data increases, the
influence of the prior decreases. In our experiments, we set the
prior of p as a beta distribution2:
, which is equal
ε relevant documents and
non-relevant
documents sampled randomly for smoothing. The prior of σ is
, which is equal to adding
sum of the square of the variance of relevant documents 3. We set
in our experiment, which is
equivalent to adding 0.001 relevant documents and 0.001 nonrelevant documents, and adding 0.005 to the sum of the square of
the variance of Guassian distribution.
For each query set, 4 runs were carried out. The first run (the
baseline run) used the parameter estimation method described in
 . The third run used our maximum likelihood estimation. Both
runs stopped delivering documents when ∆ is negative (Equation
12). This is especially common at the beginning of filtering, so a
minimum delivery ratio was introduced to avoid this problem. If a
profile has not achieved the minimum delivery ratio, its threshold
will be decreased automatically. This corresponds to the second
and fourth runs. In our experiments, the minimum delivery ratio
was set to let approximately 10 documents be disseminated to
each profile.
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
All of the experiments reported in this paper attempt to optimize
the T9U′ Utility metric, which is consistent with recent TREC
Filtering Track evaluation methodologies. Optimizing Utility can
lead to higher Precision or Recall as a side-effect, but is not
2 Because the beta distribution is a conjugate prior for binomial
distributions, we use it as a prior to simplify calculations.
3 This is a special case of inverse gamma distribution, which is the
conjugate prior for the variance of the normal distribution.
guaranteed to do so. In some cases the best way to increase
Utility is to increase Precision (higher threshold); in other cases
the best way to increase Utility is to increase Recall (lower
threshold). We report all three metrics to provide greater insight
into the experimental results, but we consider only Utility, the
metric being optimized, when evaluating the results.
The experimental results for the OHSUMED dataset indicate that
neither algorithm works well without using a minimum delivery
ratio (Table 1, columns 1 and 3). Especially at the early stage of
filtering, with only about 2 documents delivered, it is very hard to
estimate the score distribution correctly. When
Equation 9, the threshold is set too high to let any future
documents be delivered, hence no learning takes place.
Introducing a minimum delivery ratio (i.e., forcing the system to
deliver at least a certain percentage of documents) guarantees
enough training data to enable the system to recover
automatically.
On the OHSUMED dataset, for both OHSU topics and MESH
topics, using maximum likelihood estimation plus a minimum
delivery ratio achieved the best result. Although profile updating
was disabled while filtering, all of the runs on this dataset
received a positive average utility. The results for Run 4 on
OHSU topics are above average compared with other filtering
systems in TREC9 adaptive filtering track. This indicates how
effective the threshold-setting algorithm is, because the other
filtering systems learned improved profiles while filtering,
whereas all of our experiments used static filtering profiles.
Table 1: Utility of each filtering run: OHSUMED dataset.
 + min.
T9U′ utility
Avg. docs.
per profile
OHSU topics
T9U′ utility
Avg. docs.
per profile
MESH topics
Table 2: Utility of each filtering run: FT dataset.
 + min.
Avg. docs.
per profile
Topics 351-400
of Profiles
All four algorithms appear to perform about equally on FT data
(Table 2). One difference between the FT dataset and the
OHSUMED dataset is the average number of relevant documents
per profile in the testing set (Section 3.2). Most of the FT
filtering profiles are not good profiles, which means it is almost
impossible to find a threshold that achieves a positive utility
without profile updating. Indeed, the baseline method (Runs2)
sets thresholds so high for some profiles that no relevant
documents are delivered, thus getting zero Precision and Recall
on those profiles. Our algorithm (Run 4) does not increase the
threshold that much, which is why the baseline and unbiased ML
methods appear similar according to the utility metric yet different
according to the Precision and Recall metrics.
When we compared the utilities of each OHSU topic on Run 4
and Run 2 (Table 1), we found that our ML method did especially
well on several good profiles where the score distribution of
relevant documents and non-relevant documents are good from
the system point of view (Figure 8). For other user profiles, the
difference between our method and the baseline algorithm is not
large. Comparison at the topic level and comparison between the
OHSUMED and FT corpora suggests that our method works
much better for good profiles, while its performance on other
profiles are similar to the baseline method.
The baseline method delivered fewer OHSUMED documents, on
average, than the unbiased ML method (Figure 9, Table 1,
columns 2 and 4). The average number of documents delivered by
the baseline method was close to the minimum delivery ratio,
which is empirical justification for our previous analysis
illustrated in Figure 5: the Gaussian mean estimated by the
baseline method was higher than the actual mean, thus the
threshold was set too high. The final results of the baseline
method appear to be highly influenced by the minimum delivery
ratio. This is not a problem for the maximum likelihood method,
because thresholds based on unbiased estimates of score
distributions are more accurate.
Figure 8. Utility differences on OHSU topics: Run4 - Run2.
For some topics, Run 4 (ML method) does especially better
than Run 2 (baseline method) (indicated by points high above
the horizontal line), while they work similar on other topics.
Figure 9. Difference in number of documents delivered for
OHSU topics: Run4 - Run 2. For most of the topics, Run 4
(ML) delivered more documents (indicated by points above the
horizontal line) than Run 2 (baseline method).
We have not focused on computational efficiency in this paper,
but computational efficiency is important in environments where
the filtering system must keep pace with a high-speed document
stream. Although the mathematics may look complex, the
unbiased ML algorithm is computationally efficient. It takes
about 21 minutes (“wall-clock” time) to filter 4 years of
OHSUMED data for 64 OHSU profiles (Table 1, Run 4) on a 500
MHz Intel Pentium III processor with 256 MB of memory. This
time includes all aspects of document filtering, including the
setting and updating of dissemination thresholds while filtering.
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have developed an effective algorithm for setting
dissemination thresholds while filtering documents. Using a
Gaussian distribution for the scores of relevant documents and an
exponential distribution for the scores of non-relevant documents,
a threshold that maximizes a given utility measure can be derived
based on the parameters of the distribution.
Due to the fact that only relevance judgments of delivered
documents are available, the method of estimating score density
parameters proposed by is biased and results in a threshold
higher than optimal. We proposed an unbiased algorithm based
on the maximum likelihood principle to jointly estimate (i) the
parameters of the two density distributions, and (ii) the ratios of
relevant and non-relevant documents. The new algorithm
explicitly models the inherent bias in the filtering environment,
where training data consists only of documents with scores above
a threshold that changes constantly. We believe this is the first
paper that solves the sample bias problem for information
filtering. Our new method obtained significant improvements on
the TREC-9 Filtering task.
In our experiments, filtering profiles were not updated while
filtering. Although the effectiveness of the system is already very
competitive, we believe combining threshold updating with
profile updating will achieve better performance. One difficulty of
combining our algorithm with profile updating is adjusting
training data
, especially
based on new profile terms and weights. Future research can be
focused on this problem.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Wei Xu for discussions about some of the ideas in this
paper. We also thank Paul Ogilvie for reviewing an earlier draft
of this paper.
This material is based on work supported by Air Force Research
Laboratory contract F30602-98-C-0110. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are the
authors', and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
7. REFERENCES
 J. Allan. 1996. Incremental relevance feedback for
information filtering. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pp. 270-278. ACM.
 A. Arampatzis, J. Beney, C.H.A. Koster, and T.P. van
der Weide. 2001. KUN on the TREC-9 Filtering
Incrementality,
optimization for adaptive filtering systems. In
Proceeding of Ninth Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC-9). National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Special Publication.
 J. Broglio, J.P. Callan, W.B. Croft, and D.W. Nachbar.
1995. Document retrieval and routing using the
INQUERY system. In Proceeding of Third Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC-3), pp. 29-38. National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Special
Publication 500-225.
difference of Utility
Profile id
difference of number of documents
Profile id
 J. Callan. 1996. Document filtering with inference
networks. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 262-
filtering.
Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pp. 224-231. ACM Press.
 D A. Hull, and S. E. Robertson. 1999. The TREC-8
Filtering Track final report. In Proceeding of the
Eighth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-8), pp. 35-
56. National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Special Publication 500-246.
 Y.H. Kim, S.Y. Hahn, and B.T. Zhang. 2000. Text
filtering by boosting Naive Bayes classifiers. In
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pp. 168-175. ACM Press.
 R.D. Lyer, D.D. Lewis, R.E. Schapire, Y. Singer, and
A. Singhal. 2000. Boosting for document routing. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Information Knowledge Management ,
pp. 70-77. ACM Press.
 M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program, 14 (3), pp. 130-137.
 W.H. Press, S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, and B.P.
Flannery. 1992. Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of
Scientific
Computing,
University Press.
 W. Hersh, C. Buckley, T. J. Leone and D. Hickam
1994. OHSUMED: An interactive retrieval evaluation
and new large test collection for research. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual International
Conference
Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 192-201.
 R. Manmatha, T. Rath, and F. Feng. 2001. Modeling
score distributions for combining the outputs of search
Proceedings
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval , New
Orleans, LA. ACM.
 J. J. Rocchio. 1971. Relevance feedback in information
retrieval.
Experiments In Automatic Document Processing, pp.
313-323. Prentice Hall.
 S. E. Robertson, and D. A. Hull. 2001. Guidelines for
the TREC-9 Filtering Track. Proceeding of Ninth Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC-9). National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Special Publication.
 S.E. Robertson, and S. Walker. 2001. Microsoft
Cambridge at TREC-9: Filtering track. In Proceeding
of Ninth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-9).
National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Special Publication.
 S.E. Robertson. In press. Threshold setting in adaptive
filtering. Journal of Documentation.
 S. E. Robertson, S. Walker, M. M. Beaulieu, and M.
Gatford, A. Payne. 1995. Okapi at TREC-4. In
Proceeding of Fourth Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC-4). National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Special Publication 500-236.
 R.E. Schapire, Y. Singer, and A. Singhal. 1998.
Boosting and Rocchio applied to text filtering. In
Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pp. 215-223. ACM.
 T.Ault, and Y. Yang. 2001. kNN at TREC-9: A failure
analysis. In Proceeding of Ninth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC-9). National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Special Publication.
 C. Zhai, P. Jansen, and E. Stoica. 1998. Threshold
calibration
filtering.
Proceeding of Seventh Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC-7), pp. 149-156. National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Special Publication 500-242.
 C. Zhai, P. Jansen, N. Roma, E. Stoica, and D.A.
Evans. 1999. Optimization in CLARIT adaptive
filtering. In Proceeding of the Eighth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC-8), pp. 253-258. National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Special Publication 500-
 Y. Zhang, and J. Callan. YFilter at TREC9. 2001. In
Proceeding of Ninth Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC-9). National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Special Publication.
 
 
00/odes/node4.html