Optimization Algorithm for the Generation of ONCV Pseudopotentials
Martin Schlipf∗and Fran¸cois Gygi†
Department of Computer Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
We present an optimization algorithm to construct pseudopotentials and use it to generate a
set of Optimized Norm-Conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) pseudopotentials for elements up to Z=83
(Bi) (excluding Lanthanides). We introduce a quality function that assesses the agreement of a
pseudopotential calculation with all-electron FLAPW results, and the necessary plane-wave energy
cutoﬀ. This quality function allows us to use a Nelder-Mead optimization algorithm on a training
set of materials to optimize the input parameters of the pseudopotential construction for most of the
periodic table. We control the accuracy of the resulting pseudopotentials on a test set of materials
independent of the training set. We ﬁnd that the automatically constructed pseudopotentials provide
a good agreement with the all-electron results obtained using the FLEUR code with a plane-wave
energy cutoﬀof approximately 60 Ry.
INTRODUCTION
Pseudopotentials were introduced over three decades
ago as an elegant simpliﬁcation of electronic structure
computations.1 They allow one to avoid the calculation of electronic states associated with core electrons,
and focus instead on valence electrons that most often
dominate phenomena of interest, in particular chemical
bonding. In the context of Density Functional Theory
(DFT), pseudopotentials have made it possible to solve
the Kohn-Sham equations2,3 using a plane-wave basis
set, which considerably reduces the complexity of calculations, and allows for the use of eﬃcient Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) algorithms. The introduction of normconserving pseudopotentials (NCPP) by Hamann et al.
in 19794,5 greatly improved the accuracy of DFT plane
wave calculations by imposing a constraint (norm conservation) in the construction of the potentials, thus
improving the transferability of potentials to diﬀerent
chemical environments. More elaborate representations
of pseudopotentials were later proposed, most notably
ultrasoft pseudopotentials6 (USPP) and the projector
augmented wave7 (PAW) method, improving computational eﬃciency by reducing the required plane wave energy cutoﬀ.
The implementation of these PP is however rather complex,8 in particular for advanced calculations involving hybrid density functionals,9 many-body
perturbation theory,10 or density-functional perturbation
theory.11 Both USPP and PAW potentials have been used
with great success in a large number of computational
studies published over the past two decades. NCPP potentials were also widely used but suﬀered from the need
to use a large plane wave basis set for some elements,
especially transition metals.
Recently, Hamann suggested8 a method to construct
optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) potentials following the USPP construction algorithm without
forfeiting the norm-conservation.
The resulting potentials have an accuracy comparable to the USPP at a
moderately increased plane-wave energy cutoﬀ.
Since the very ﬁrst pseudopotentials were introduced,
there has been an interest in a database of transferable,
reference potentials that could be applied for many elements in the periodic table.5,12,13 The need for a systematic database in high-throughput calculations led to
a recent revival of this ﬁeld: Garrity et al.14 proposed
a new set of USPP for the whole periodic table except
the noble gases and the rare earths. Dal Corso15 constructed a high- and a low-accuracy PAW set for all elements up to Pu. Common to these approaches is the
fact that the input parameters of the PP construction
are selected by experience based on the results of the allelectron (AE) calculation of the bare atom. The quality
of the constructed PP is then tested by an evaluation of
diﬀerent crystal structures and by comparing to the allelectron FLAPW16–18 results. To standardize the testing
procedure, Lejaeghere et al.19 suggested to compare the
area between a Murnaghan ﬁt20 obtained with the PP
and the AE calculation resulting in a quality factor ∆.
K¨u¸c¨ukbenli et al.21 proposed a crystalline monoatomic
solid test, where the quality factor of the simple cubic
(sc), body-centered cubic (bcc), and face-centered cubic (fcc) structure is evaluated to assess the quality of
a PP. There are two improvements over these construction principles that we propose to address in this work.
First, we introduce a quality function that takes into account the computational eﬃciency of the PP as well as
its accuracy. Second, we allow for a systematic feedback
of this quality function onto the input parameters deﬁning the PP. In this way, we can introduce an automatic
construction algorithm that optimizes the properties of
the PP without bias from the constructor. We apply this
algorithm to construct ONCV pseudopotentials and compare their performance with recent USPP14 and PAW15
PP libraries. The pseudopotentials are available in UPF
and XML format on our webpage.22
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we outline
the properties of the ONCV PP and introduce the input
parameters that will be optimized by the algorithm. In
Sec. III, we introduce the quality function to assess the
performance of the PP, specify the materials we use to
construct and test the PP, outline the setting of the DFT
calculation, and ﬁnally present the optimization algorithm that iterates construction and testing until a good
PP is found. We compare the constructed PP to results
 
obtained with FLAPW, USPP, and PAW in Sec. IV and
draw our conclusions in Sec. V
ONCV PSEUDOPOTENTIALS
The optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV)
pseudopotentials were recently proposed by Hamann.8
Here, we brieﬂy sketch their construction, following
Hamann, to highlight the input parameters (bold in text)
that determine the properties of the PP. The general idea
is introduce an upper limit wave vector qc and optimize
the pseudo wave functions ϕi(r) such that the residual
kinetic energy
dq q4ϕi(q)ϕj(q)
above this cutoﬀis minimized. Here, ϕi(q) is the Fourier
transform of the pseudo wave function
ϕi(q) = 4π
dr r2 jl(qr)ϕi(r) ,
jl(qr) a spherical Bessel function, and l the angular moment of the pseudo wave function. On the one hand, the
cutoﬀqc determines which features of the physical potential can be described by the PP. On the other hand,
increasing qc makes the PP harder and hence more costly
to evaluate.
For every angular moment, a projector radius rc
determines in which region the pseudoization is done.
The projector radius is approximately inversely proportional to the cutoﬀqc so that a smaller value increases
the computational cost along with the accuracy. Outside
of this radius the wave function should follow the true
all-electron wave function ψ. To ensure the continuity at
this radius, one imposes M constrains on the continuity
of the pseudo wave function
for n = 0, . . . M −1. In this work, we use M = 5 for all
constructed PP.
The basis set used in the optimization is constructed
from spherical Bessel functions. As the basis functions
are only used inside the sphere, they are set to zero outside of the projector radius. This destroys the orthogonality of the basis, so that one needs to orthogonalize it
again. A linear combination of the orthogonalized basis
functions yields a new basis where a single basis function
ϕ0 satisﬁes the constraints in Eq. (3) and for all other
basis functions ξN
n the value and the M −1 derivatives at
rc are zero. As a consequence, the sum of ϕ0 and any linear combination of the ξN
n will satisfy the constraints in
Eq. (3). It is advantageous to select those linear combinations of ξN
n that have a maximal impact on the residual
energy by evaluating the eigenvalues en and eigenvectors
In this work, we construct the PP with N = 8 basis
functions.
Notice that the optimization of the pseudo
wave function is performed under the constraint that the
norm of the all-electron wave function is conserved.
From the obtained pseudo wave functions, one can construct projectors χi
χi(r) = (εi −T −Vloc)φi(r) ,
where T is the kinetic energy operator. Vloc is the local
potential that follows the all-electron potential outside
of rc and is extended smoothly to the origin by a polynomial. For occupied states εi is the eigenvalue of the
all-electron calculation. For unoccupied states, one needs
to specify this energy shift before the construction of
the PP. Following Ref. 8, we construct two projectors per
angular momentum l ≤lmax and only the local potential
for all l > lmax above. The projectors deﬁne the following
nonlocal potential
which is a Hermitian matrix when normconserving
pseudo wave functions are constructed.6 One can simplify this potential by a unitary transformation to the
eigenspace of the B matrix.
COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
Quality function
In order to employ numerical optimization algorithms
in the construction of PPs, we need a function that maps
the multidimensional input parameter space onto a single
number, the quality of the PP. A good PP is characterized
by a small relative deviation
alat = aPP
between the lattice constant obtained in the planewave PP calculation aPP
lat and in the AE calculation aAE
respectively.
A second criterion is the plane-wave energy cutoﬀEcut necessary to converge the PP calculation. These two criteria compete with each other because
the pseudoization of the potential reduces the necessary
energy cutoﬀat the cost of a lower accuracy near the
nucleus. Hence, we need to specify a target accuracy δ0
quality function
FIG. 1: (Color online) Quality function for various energycutoﬀs Ecut.
For small δ, it is proportional to 1/Ecut; for
large δ proportional to 1/δ2 and independent of Ecut.
which we want to achieve for our PP, i.e., for all materials
≤δ0. We select δ0 = 0.2% motivated by the
fact that the choice of diﬀerent codes or input parameters in the all-electron calculation may already lead to a
relative error of approximately 0.1%. To discriminate between PPs within the target accuracy, we include a term
∝1/Ecut in the quality function, favoring smoother PP
over hard ones. For PPs that are signiﬁcantly outside
> 2δ0 our target accuracy, we only focus on optimizing the relative deviation by an 1/(δPP
alat)2 term. We
choose a smooth continuation between the two regions,
resulting in the function depicted in Fig. 1. The quality
function has the following form
q(δ, Ecut) =
A + Cδ2 + Dδ3 + Eδ4 + Fδ5
A = 1 + 1280
y0 = 1 + 680
C = 32y0 −16A −29
D = 19A −48y0 + 54
E = 96y0 −33A −122
F = 5A −16y0 + 22
The function can be multiplied by an arbitrary scaling
constant, which we set such that the value of the quality
function is 1 at
Sets of materials
As the constructed pseudopotentials depend on the set
of materials used in the optimization algorithm, it is important that the set contain physically relevant environments of the atom. Furthermore, we select highly symmetric structures with at most two atoms per unit cell
to reduce the computation time. As representatives of
a metallic environment, we select the simple cubic (sc),
the body-centered cubic (bcc), the face-centered cubic
(fcc), and the diamond-cubic (dc) structure. Ionic environments are provided in a rock-salt or zinc-blende structure, where we combine elements such that they assume
their most common oxidation state. This leads to a combination of elements from the lithium group with the ﬂuorine group, the beryllium group with the oxygen group,
and so on. We always use the three smallest elements
of the respective groups to guarantee a variation in size
of the resulting compounds. For the transition metals,
several oxidation states are often possible.
combine them with carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen to test
these diﬀerent valencies. As the noble gases do not form
compounds, we test them only in the sc, bcc, fcc, and dc
structure.
Finally, we need to separate these materials into two
sets. The training set consists of the bcc, and the fcc
structure as well as all rock-salt compounds. It is used
in the optimization algorithm to construct the PPs. As
the PPs are speciﬁcally optimized to reproduce the structural properties of the training set, we can only judge if
the PPs are highly accurate by calculating an independent test set. The test set contains the sc and the dc
structure as well as all zinc-blende compounds. In total,
the training and test sets consist of 602 materials, where
every noble-gas atom is part of four materials, and every
other element is part of at least ten materials.
Computational setup
All pseudopotentials are constructed using the Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient density
functional.23 We use an 8 × 8 × 8 Monkhorst-Pack kpoint mesh in the AE as well as in the PP calculation.
While this may not be suﬃcient to completely converge
the lattice constant with respect to the numbers of kpoints, the errors in the PP and the AE calculation are
expected to be the same, so that we can still compare
the results. To ensure that metallic systems converge, we
use a Fermi-type smearing with a temperature of 315.8 K
corresponding to an energy of 0.001 htr.
For the AE calculation, we use the FLAPW method
as implemented in the Fleur code.24 We converge the
plane-wave cutoﬀand add unoccupied local orbitals to
provide suﬃcient variational freedom inside the muﬃntin spheres. The precise numerical values necessary to
converge the calculation are diﬀerent for every material;
all input ﬁles can be obtained from our web page.22 We
obtain the lattice constant by a Murnaghan ﬁt20 through
11 data points surrounding the minimum of the total
The automatic construction of pseudopotentials re-
FIG. 2: (Color online) Relative deviation δ of a PP w.r.t.
the AE calculation. The blue circles indicate the deviation
obtained at a certain energy cutoﬀEcut. The red diamonds
show the corrected deviation that is monotonically decreasing
with increasing cutoﬀ(see text).
quires every material to be calculated several hundred
Hence, we approximate the Murnaghan equation of state by a parabola that we ﬁt through data
points at the AE lattice constant and a 1% enlarged
or reduced value. We test the constructed PP with the
Quantum ESPRESSO25 plane-wave DFT code. Our
test consists of a calculation with a large energy cutoﬀof Emax
= 160 Ry that we consider to be the converged solution. Then, we decrease the cutoﬀin steps of
∆E = 10 Ry to the minimum of 40 Ry. Notice that as illustrated by Fig. 2, the actual deviation compared to the
AE calculation may decrease even though we reduced the
accuracy of the calculation. To correct for this, we adjust
the deviation such that it is monotonically decreasing using the following correction
cut) = |δPP(Emax
cut) −δPP(Ek−1
cut = Emax
cut −10i. This ensures that the deviation at a given cutoﬀenergy is an upper bound to the
deviation at any larger cutoﬀ.
Optimizing pseudopotentials
We start from a reasonable starting guess for the N
input parameters. We used the example input ﬁles provided with the ONCVPSP package,8 where available, or
generated our own PP otherwise.
By randomly altering all input parameters in the starting-guess PP by a
small amount, we can construct new PP. We assess these
PP by evaluating the quality function on the training set
of materials with the geometric average of all involved
materials. In the case of the rock-salt compounds, we
test always only one of the PP and for the other element we use a PP from the GBRV database.14 After
(N + 1) PP have been constructed, we employ a Nelder-
Mead algorithm26 to optimize the PP further. The PP
parameters form a simplex in an N dimensional space.
By replacing the worst corner by a better PP the simplex
contracts towards the optimal PP. The advantages of the
Nelder-Mead algorithm are that we do not need to know
the derivatives with respect to the input parameters and
that it can ﬁnd PP parameters that lie outside of the
starting simplex.
After 80 to 200 iterations of the Nelder-Mead algorithm, all PP have converged. Then, we restart the algorithm using these ﬁrst generation PP as starting guess.
Now, we employ the ﬁrst generation PP in the compounds so that our resulting PP become independent
of the GBRV database. Once the second generation is
converged as well (another 100 iterations), the properties of the training set are well reproduced for almost all
materials.
Reﬁning the training set
For a few materials, the second generation PP do not
reproduce the AE results on the test set of materials.
Our proposed optimization algorithm provides an easy
solution to overcome these cases by adding additional
materials to the training set. In particular, for the early
transition metals (Sc to Mn) it is necessary to include the
sc structure in the training set. Furthermore, we include
the dimer of hydrogen and nitrogen into the test set,
because the second generation PPs for these two elements
do not describe the bond length of the dimer accurately.
We emphasize that our optimization algorithm could
account for other material properties. As long as one is
able to deﬁne a quality function, which maps the result
of a PP potential calculation onto a number, it is possible
to optimize the input parameters of the PP generation
by standard numerical optimization techniques.
We compare the performance of the ONCV PP constructed in this work (SG15)22 with the USPP in the
GBRV database14 and the high-accuracy PAW in the
PSLIB.15 For the latter, we generate the potentials of
PSLIB version 1.0.0 with Quantum ESPRESSO version 5.1.1. In the ﬁrst subsection, we focus on the lattice constants and bulk moduli of the materials in the
training set. In the second subsection, we investigate the
materials in the test set. In the third subsection, we look
into materials that are not represented in the test set to
check the accuracy of the pseudopotentials. In the ﬁrst
TABLE I: Comparison of the performance of the USPP in the
GBRV database14 and the high-accuracy PAW in PSLIB15
with the ONCV PP in the SG15 database (this work) for
materials in a bcc structure. We analyze the relative deviation
of the lattice constant δalat and the bulk modulus δB0 between
a PP and the AE calculation. The average reveals if the PP
has a systematic bias and the root-mean-square (rms) average
tests the size of the error. We also show the proportion of
materials that are not accurately described at various energy
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
two subsections, we focus only on the trends across all
materials in the training and test set, respectively.
Training set
In Table I, we present the results obtained for the materials in a bcc structure.
We see that the USPP potentials require the smallest energy cutoﬀand have the
best performance at 40 Ry. On the other hand increasing the energy cutoﬀbeyond 40 Ry hardly improves the
results. For the PAW and the ONCV PP, a large number
of materials are not converged at 40 Ry, but increasing
the energy cutoﬀimproves the accuracy, so that they are
able to improve on the USPP results. For the converged
calculation, the root-mean-square (rms) error is around
0.1% for all PP and smallest for the ONCV PP. We see a
similar trend for the bulk moduli though the converged
results require a larger energy cutoﬀon average. The average error for the converged bulk moduli is roughly 3%
and the USPP potentials converge with a lower energy
cutoﬀthan the PAW and the ONCV PP, which have a
similar convergence behavior. In Fig. 3, we see that only
for two materials (carbon and calcium) does the converged lattice constant deviate by more than 0.2% with
the ONCV PP. For both of these materials the USPP
and the PAW approach show large deviations as well.
The fcc structures presented in Table II follow the same
trend as the bcc structures. The USPP potentials require
TABLE II: Same as Table I for fcc structures.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
TABLE III: Same as Table I for rocksalt structures.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
the smallest energy cutoﬀbut can not be improved further by increasing the energy cutoﬀ. The PAW and the
ONCV PP require a energy cutoﬀof 60 Ry to converge
most materials, but have fewer inaccurate elements when
increasing the energy cutoﬀ. Overall the ONCV PP and
the PAW are a bit better than the USPP, but all PP
are close to the AE results. In Fig. 3, we see that only
a single material (cadmium) is outside the 0.2% boundary, when using the converged calculation and the ONCV
PP. The USPP result shows a deviation of similar size for
this material, whereas the PAW lattice constant is close
to the FLAPW result.
When combining two materials to form rock-salt compounds, we obtain the results depicted in Table III. In
comparison to the metallic (bcc and fcc) system, the accuracy for the ionic compounds is a bit higher in particular for the bulk modulus. With a large energy cutoﬀthe
ONCV PPs essentially reproduce the AE results and the
FIG. 3: (Color online) Relative change δ(%) of the lattice constant in the training set for the SG15 (red circle), the GBRV
(green square), and the PSLIB (blue diamond) results as compared to the FLAPW ones for the bcc (top left), fcc (top right)
and rock-salt compounds (bottom).
accuracy at 60 Ry for the lattice constant is very good.
For the bulk modulus, about 10% of the materials require a larger energy cutoﬀ. The USPPs have a slightly
larger mismatch for the lattice constants, but converge
both lattice constants and bulk moduli with 40 Ry. The
PAW potentials provide a similar convergence behavior
as the ONCV potentials; they deviate a bit more for the
lattice constants, but provide slightly better bulk moduli.
In Fig. 4, we show a histogram of the relative error of
the lattice constant for all the examined PP (with the
converged cutoﬀof 160 Ry). The histogram conﬁrms the
conclusions we drew from Table I to III: All PPs show
a very good agreement with the all-electron results and
the USPPs have a slightly lower accuracy. The tails with
large errors are very ﬂat indicating that there are only a
few outliers.
In the sc structure (see Table IV), the performance of
the ONCV potentials is comparable to the training set
for the lattice constants and slightly worse for the bulk
moduli. We observe the same trend also for the USPP
and the PAW calculations. With an overall deviation of
about 0.1% for the lattice constant and 4% for the bulk
moduli, all PPs show a good agreement with the AE
reference data. The convergence with respect to the energy cutoﬀis best in the GBRV database, which does not
change signiﬁcantly for the lattice constants above 40 Ry.
Most of the ONCV lattice constants converge at 60 Ry
whereas PAW occasionally needs a larger cutoﬀ. For the
bulk moduli, all PPs show a similar convergence behavior. However, we observe that as compared to the other
-0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1
relative error δalat (%)
fraction of materials (%)
FIG. 4: (Color online) Histogram of the relative error of the
lattice constant compared to the all-electron result. We show
the results for all materials in the training set for the SG15
(red solid line), the GBRV (green dotted line), and the PSLIB
(blue dashed line) calculations.
TABLE IV: Same as Table I for sc structures.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
structures a larger fraction of > 10% is not accurate even
with an energy cutoﬀof 160 Ry. In Fig. 5, we see that
the ONCV PPs reproduce the lattice constant within the
0.2% boundary for all materials except calcium and lanthanum. While the ONCV PP gives similar results to the
other PP for calcium, we ﬁnd that the lattice constant
in lanthanum is underestimated by the ONCV PP and
overestimated by the USPP. For this material, the PAW
calculation did not converge.
In Table V, we present our results for the materials in
the diamond structure. These are the structures which
exhibit overall the largest deviation from the all-electron
result. The lattice constants of the USPPs are converged
well with the energy cutoﬀof 40 Ry, whereas the PAW
TABLE V: Same as Table I for diamond structures.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
TABLE VI: Same as Table I for zincblende structures.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
and the ONCV PP frequently require a cutoﬀof 60 Ry.
For the bulk moduli, we ﬁnd that the ONCV PP provide
the best agreement with the AE results.
The quality
of the USPP is similar, but the PAW potentials show
an average error larger than the desired 5% tolerance.
However the fraction of materials that are well described
with the PP calculation is similar for all methods. This
indicates that a few speciﬁc materials show a particular
large deviation, whereas the rest is accurately described.
For the ONCV PPs the lattice constants of boron, chlorine, scandium, nickel, rubidium, and yttrium deviate by
more than 0.2% from the FLAPW results. In Fig. 5, we
observe that the deviations between the diﬀerent pseudoizations are larger than for the other structures.
possible explanation is that the diamond structure is a
extreme case for many materials, because of its low space
For the zincblende compounds (cf. Table VI), we ob-
FIG. 5: (Color online) Relative change δ(%) of the lattice constant in the test set for the SG15 (red circle), the GBRV (green
square), and the PSLIB (blue diamond) results as compared to the FLAPW ones for the sc (top left), diamond (top right) and
zincblende compounds (bottom).
serve results similar to for the rock-salt compounds. We
ﬁnd that the USPPs converge for most materials with
an energy cutoﬀof 40 Ry, whereas a third of the materials with ONCV PP and half of the materials with
PAW need an energy cutoﬀof 60 Ry to converge. Overall the accuracy of the ONCV PP is slightly better than
the alternatives, but all pseudoizations are on average
well below the target of 0.2%.
For the bulk moduli a
larger energy cutoﬀis necessary, but when converged the
deviation from the AE results is around 1%. In Fig. 5,
we identify that only for BeO the deviation between the
ONCV calculation and the AE result is larger than 0.2%.
In Fig. 6, the histogram of the relative error of the
lattice constant for the test set conﬁrms the conclusions
we drew from Table IV to VI: The deviation from the
all electron results is very small for all PP. The USPP
shows a slightly larger deviation than the PAW and the
ONCV PP. The histogram reveals that this is partly due
to some outliers, for which the lattice constant is overestimated by more than 0.4%. Overall, we notice that the
accuracy of the ONCV PP for the test set of materials is
not signiﬁcantly worse than for the training set. Hence,
we are conﬁdent that these PP are transferable to other
materials as well.
Dimers and ternary compounds
Our training and test set are limited to mono- and diatomic crystals, hence one may wonder if the constructed
ONCV PPs work outside this scope. To test this we investigated diatomic molecules and ternary compounds.
-0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1
relative error δalat (%)
fraction of materials (%)
FIG. 6: (Color online) Histogram of the relative error of the
lattice constant compared to the all-electron result. We show
the results for all materials in the test set for the SG15 (red
solid line), the GBRV (green dotted line), and the PSLIB
(blue dashed line) calculations.
TABLE VII: Bond length of diatomic molecules and lattice
constant of perovskites and half-Heusler compounds investigated with diﬀerent methods.
For the half-Heusler compounds, the ﬁrst element is in Wyckoﬀposition c. All values
are given in ˚A.
aWe evaluate the lattice constant perovskites and half Heusler
with FLAPW and take the bond length of the dimers from the
CCCB DataBase.27
For the compounds, we use the same computational setup
as for the materials in the training and in the test set.
For the molecules, we optimize the bond length inside a
box with dimensions 15 ˚A × 15 ˚A × 30 ˚A with the long
side parallel to the axis of the molecule.
In Table VII, we show the bond lengths and the
lattice constants of the investigated materials.
Depending on the pseudoization, some diatomic molecules
show large deviations from the reference data from the
CCCB DataBase.27 Overall, the ONCV PPs exhibit the
smallest deviations. The relative error is larger than 0.2%
only for the O2 (0.25%) and the F2 (0.35%) dimer. For
the USPP, all diatomic molecules are outside of the desired relative accuracy of 0.2%, except for the Br2 dimer.
In PAW, the only molecule with the desired accuracy is
the H2 dimer. The other molecules show deviations of
similar magnitude to the USPP and the Br2 dimer did
not converge.
Perovskites are accurately described by all pseudoizations; we frequently ﬁnd a relative agreement of better
than 0.1% in the lattice constant with the FLAPW result. The worst case for the ONCV PP is LaAlO3, which
deviates by −0.13%. The USPP and the PAW both overestimate the lattice constant of BaTiO3 by 0.25% and
0.27%, respectively. The PAW potentials also feature a
larger deviation than the other two pseudoizations for
Finally, we consider the half-Heusler compounds. All
materials are within the desired accuracy with all pseudoizations.
The ONCV PP show slightly larger deviations than USPP and PAW for GeAlCu and NMgLi.
For NiScSb, the ONCV PP and PAW overestimate the
lattice constant more than the USPP. The lattice constant of BScSb and PdZrSn are essentially the same with
FLAPW and in any pseudoization used. In PZNa, all PP
produce very similar results and a slightly larger lattice
constant than the FLAPW result.
CONCLUSION
We have presented an algorithm to optimize the input parameters of a pseudopotential (PP) construction.
We demonstrated it by developing the SG15 dataset22
of ONCV pseudopotentials, which exhibits a similar accuracy as the ultrasoft PP database GBRV14 and the
PAW library PSLIB.15 The idea of the algorithm is to
map the PP onto a single numeric value so that standard
optimization techniques can be employed. For this, we
developed a quality function that considers the accuracy
of the lattice constant of a PP calculation and compares
it with a high accuracy FLAPW one. In addition, the
quality function takes into account the energy cutoﬀnecessary to converge the calculation. Hence, the optimzation of the PP with respect to the quality function yields
accurate and eﬃcient potentials. In order to ensure that
the constructed PPs are of a high accuracy, we systematically chose a set of approximately 600 materials and
TABLE VIII: Summary of the results depicted in Table I to
VI with same notation as Table I.
average δalat (%)
rms average δalat (%)
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%a
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%b
% of materials with |δalat| > 0.2%c
average δB0 (%)
rms average δB0 (%)
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%a
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%b
% of materials with |δB0| > 5.0%c
total number of materials
aWith an energy cutoﬀof 40Ry.
bWith an energy cutoﬀof 60Ry.
cWith an energy cutoﬀof 160Ry.
evaluate their properties with FLAPW. We split this set
in two parts, a training set used for the optimization of
the PP and a test set to analyze the performance of the
PP. When a PP does not produce our desired accuracy
after optimizing on the training set, we can improve the
quality of the PP by extending the training set by more
materials.
In Table VIII, we collect the results of all materials in
test and training set.
Compared to the PP from the
GBRV database14 and PSLIB,15 the PP in the SG15
set have the lowest root-mean-square deviation from the
FLAPW results for the lattice constant. With an energy
cutoﬀof 60 Ry, the ONCV PP feature the least number of
materials with an inaccurate lattice constant (deviation
larger than 0.2% from FLAPW results). The advantage
of the ultrasoft PP is that they oﬀer a similar accuracy
with an energy cutoﬀof 40 Ry.
For the bulk moduli
larger energy cutoﬀs are necessary for all pseudoization
methods. The ONCV PP have the smallest root-meansquare deviation for the tested materials. The fraction
of materials that can be accurately described with the
ONCV PP at a certain energy cutoﬀis very similar to
the performance of the PAW. The ultrasoft PP exhibit
a similar accuracy at a moderately lower energy cutoﬀ.
For materials that go beyond the training and test set,
we ﬁnd that the ONCV PP provides the best description
of diatomic molecules. All pseudopotentials are very accurate for perovskite and half-Heusler compounds.
We encourage the community to use the algorithm presented in this work to optimize pseudopotentials for different functionals and with diﬀerent construction methods. With only a modest increase in the energy cutoﬀ,
the proposed SG15 library of norm-conserving pseudopotentials provides a competitive alternative to the libraries
using USPP and PAW. As these pseudopotentials are less
complex than the alternatives, this results in a great simpliﬁcation in the development and implementation of new
algorithms.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the US Department of Energy through grant DOE-BES de-sc0008938. An award
of computer time was provided by the DOE Innovative
and Novel Computational Impact on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of
the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility at Argonne
National Laboratory, which is supported by the Oﬃce of
Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract
DE-AC02-06CH11357.
∗Electronic address: 
† Electronic address: 
1 See e.g. R. M. Martin, Electronic Structure. Basic Theory
and Practical Methods, Cambridge University Press, 2004.
2 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 .
3 W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 .
4 D. R. Hamann, M. Schl¨uter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 43, 1494 .
5 G. B. Bachelet, D. R. Hamann, and M. Schl¨uter, Phys.
Rev. B 26, 4199 .
6 D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 .
7 P. E. Bl¨ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 .
8 D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 .
9 A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1372 ; ibid. 98,
5648 .
10 F. Aryasetiawan and O. Gunnarsson, Rep. Prog. Phys. 61,
237 .
11 S. Baroni, P. Giannozzi, and A. Testa, Phys. Rev. Lett.
58, 1861 .
12 N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993
13 C. Hartwigsen, S. Goedecker, and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev. B
58, 3641 .
14 K. F. Garrity, J. W. Bennett, K. M. Rabe, and D. Vanderbilt, Comp. Mater. Sci. 81, 446 .
15 A. Dal Corso, Comp. Mater. Sci. 95, 337 .
16 E. Wimmer, H. Krakauer, M. Weinert, and A. J. Freeman,
Phys. Rev. B 24, 864 .
17 M. Weinert, E. Wimmer, and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev.
B 26, 4571 .
18 H. J. F. Jansen and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B 30, 561
19 K. Lejaeghere, V. Van Speybroeck, G. Van Oost, and S.
Cottenier, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci. 39, 1 .
20 F. Murnaghan, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 30, 244 .
21 E. Kucukbenli, M. Monni, B. Adetunji, X. Ge, G. Adebayo, N. Marzari, S. de Gironcoli, and A. D. Corso,
 
22 
23 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 .
24 
25 P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car,
C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari,
F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L.
Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P.
Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21, 395502 (19pp) .
26 J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, The Computer Journal 7, 308
27 NIST Computational Chemistry Comparison and Benchmark Database, NIST Standard Reference Database Number 101, Release 16a, edited by R. D. Johnson III (August