Systems genetics approaches to understand complex traits
Mete Civelek1,2,3 and Aldons J. Lusis1,2,3
1Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Los
2Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles
3Department of Medicine, A2-237 Center for Health Sciences, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1679, USA
Systems genetics is an approach to understand the flow of biological information that underlies
complex traits. It uses a range of experimental and statistical methods to quantitate and integrate
intermediate phenotypes, such as transcript, protein or metabolite levels, in populations that vary
for traits of interest. Systems genetics studies have provided the first global view of the molecular
architecture of complex traits and are useful for the identification of genes, pathways and networks
that underlie common human diseases. Given the urgent need to understand how the thousands of
loci that have been identified in genome-wide association studies contribute to disease
susceptibility, systems genetics is likely to become an increasingly important approach to
understanding both biology and disease.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified thousands of genetic loci that
contribute to common diseases in humans. However, aside from their typically modest value
for predicting future disease occurrence, this information will provide little mechanistic
insight until the loci are translated into genes and pathways. Beyond that, it will be
important to understand how the alleles interact with each other or with environmental
factors. Although the genes at each locus can be individually tested either in cell cultures or
in animal models and their mechanistic effect on the clinical trait defined using classical
molecular biology approaches1, this strategy will clearly be challenging. The vast majority
of loci that have been identified for common diseases show modest effects that may be hard
to reproduce experimentally. It is clear from studies using experimental organisms that
natural phenotypic variation usually results from many interacting alleles that show context-
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence to A.J.L. .
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
FURTHER INFORMATION
Drosophila Synthetic Population Resource: 
Genome Reference Panel: 
Human Metabolome Project: www.metabolomics.ca/
LIPID MAPS: www.lipidmaps.org/
System Genetics Resource: 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
 
Nat Rev Genet. 2014 January ; 15(1): 34–48. doi:10.1038/nrg3575.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
dependent and environmentally sensitive effects, and there is a reason to believe that
common diseases will be similarly complex2–6.
An alternative, or complementary, method to studying one locus at a time is to carry out
global analyses of biological molecules in populations that show inter-individual variability
for the clinical traits. Recent technological developments have made it possible to
quantitatively survey hundreds or thousands of biological molecules, from DNA sequence
variations to epigenetic marks to levels of transcripts, proteins and metabolites (FIG. 1). For
example, it is reasonably straightforward to globally quantify transcript levels in tissues,
assuming that the relevant tissues are available, using hybridization or sequencing
technologies. The transcript levels can then be either tested for correlation with the clinical
trait or mapped to chromosomal loci to identify functional variants that may contribute to
the clinical trait. The transcript levels can, in a sense, be considered intermediate
phenotypes, as DNA variation contributes to the clinical trait by perturbing gene expression,
proteins and metabolites — of course, such molecular traits are dynamic and can also be
reactive to the phenotype. The advantage of this systems genetics approach is that it allows
an analysis of molecular interactions in a context that is the most relevant to the clinical trait,
namely, multiple genetic perturbations (as in a natural population) rather than an individual
genetic perturbation (as in a transgenic mouse). This point is central to a ‘systems genetics
perspective’: inferences about biological phenomena are rarely separable from the genetic
system in which they are embedded; thus, to generalize results across genetic backgrounds,
experiments must be carried out across multiple genetic backgrounds (W. Valdar, personal
communication). Besides common diseases, systems genetics provides a useful window into
the general architecture of complex traits and into the flow of biological information.
Indeed, systems genetics studies in the past decade have addressed some classic questions
about the underlying molecular genetic architecture of complex traits: How common is
functional variation in natural populations? How does information flow from DNA to
phenotype? And what is the nature of gene-by-environment (G×E) interactions? Systems
genetics is, of course, limited by the extent of natural genetic variation and, currently, it is
mostly hypothesis generating. However, it can be combined with complementary
experiments and data sets, such as transgenic mice, global small interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown and predictive modelling, as discussed below, to provide detailed genotype–
phenotype maps that are similar to those envisioned by Waddington and others7,8 (FIG. 1).
In this Review, we describe systems genetics approaches and discuss how they have
provided insights into both the molecular underpinnings of complex traits and the
understanding of common, complex diseases.
Overview of systems genetics studies
Systems genetics shares with systems biology a holistic, global perspective. The typical
strategy in systems biology is to perturb a system, monitor the responses, integrate the data
and formulate mathematical models that describe the system. Systems genetics is a
particular type of systems biology, in which genetic variation within a population is used to
perturb the system. Ultimately, the goal of systems genetics is to understand the broad
molecular underpinnings, such as genetic architecture and intermediate physiological
phenotypes, of complex traits, including diseases.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
In a hypothetical systems genetics study, numerous individuals are interrogated for a clinical
trait, for transcript, protein and metabolite levels in a relevant tissue, and for microbiota
composition in the gut (FIG. 2a). The variations in molecular phenotypes can be related to
each other and to clinical traits in three ways. First, a simple correlation provides evidence
of a possible relationship between two traits9–11 (FIG. 2b). In this example, one might
postulate three probable explanations12: the molecular trait influences the clinical trait (that
is, the molecular trait is causal for the clinical trait); the clinical trait influences the
molecular trait (that is, the molecular trait is reactive to the clinical trait); or both are
affected by a confounding factor (that is, the molecular and the clinical traits are
independent). Second, genetic mapping can provide evidence of a relationship through comapping (FIG. 2c). Thus, if a molecular trait and a clinical trait map to the same genomic
region, then one may be the cause of the other. Third, statistical modelling approaches can
be used to integrate the data. For example, various network approaches, such as coexpression, can identify groups of molecular traits that share characteristics (FIG. 2d). These
groups, which are termed modules, can then be tested for relationships to the clinical trait
(FIG. 2e). Examples of each of these operations are described below.
In designing a systems genetics study, there are various considerations. First, it is important
to examine a sufficient number of individuals such that there is adequate power for genetic
mapping and for other analyses. Mapping resolution is also an important issue because the
ultimate goal is to relate specific genetic elements to changes in molecular and clinical
phenotypes. If the locus is large and contains many genes, as is the case for quantitative trait
locus (QTL) analyses in mice and rats, then it is difficult to identify the underlying causal
genetic variation. Additionally, the structure of the population may have considerable effects
on the architecture of complex traits. For example, a study of a collection of inbred strains of
Drosophila melanogaster yielded a different set of QTLs for certain quantitative traits
compared with a study of an outbred population that was derived from the same strains,
although there was a significant overlap of the networks that underlie those traits4. Systems
genetics studies are becoming increasingly powerful as additional phenotypes, multiple
biological scales, environmental conditions and changes over time are examined (FIG. 1). It
is not possible to collect such extensive data on unique individuals, and renewable reference
populations — such as collections of haploid yeast segregants and inbred strains of worms,
flies, mice or rats — are therefore proving particularly useful (TABLE 1). Some novel
experimental designs, such as ‘bulk segregant analysis’ that involves examining individuals
with extreme phenotypes from large populations of phenotyped individuals, have been used
to address specific questions13.
The flow of biological information
Gene expression
The analysis of transcript levels is fairly straightforward and is routinely done using either
microarray-based or high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) methods. Transcript
levels, similarly to other quantitative traits (such as height), can be mapped to genomic loci
that underlie the variation using either linkage analyses in segregating populations or
association analyses in population-wide surveys. Although mapping of expression levels of
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
individual genes has been carried out since the 1980s, the first genome-wide mapping of
expression levels that used microarrays to measure transcript levels was carried out in 2002
in a linkage analysis of a cross between two strains of yeast14. The results showed
widespread regulation of hundreds of transcripts. Subsequent studies in bacteria, yeast,
plants, worms, fish, flies and various cell types and tissues of mice, rats and humans
increased the understanding of the genetic regulation of gene expression and have shown
that genetic variations that affect gene expression are widespread in natural
populations14–18.
The genomic regions that are associated with transcript levels are termed expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) (FIG. 3a). When an eQTL is near the location of the gene that
encodes the transcript (commonly within ≤1 Mb), it is termed a local eQTL. Such proximity
indicates that the variation is likely to act on gene expression in cis (that is, only in the
chromosome copy in which it resides), and local eQTLs are therefore often referred to as
cis-eQTLs. Of course, it is possible that some local eQTLs act in trans — for example, a
gene could show feedback and could regulate the gene on the homologous chromosome as
well — and it is thus more accurate to use the term local. When a locus that affects the
expression level of a transcript maps distally to the gene that encodes the transcript (such as
to a gene on another chromosome), it is termed a distal eQTL or a trans-eQTL. In contrast to
cis-acting loci, trans-acting loci would be expected to affect both alleles of the target gene
equally. In some cases loci have been found to affect the expression of hundreds of genes,
and such eQTLs are termed trans bands or hot spots19 (FIG. 3b).
Studies using mice, rats, and human cells and tissues have revealed that the expression of a
high percentage of genes (≥30%) is substantially influenced by eQTLs18,20,21. Most peak
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for GWASs map outside protein-coding regions,
and >75% of GWAS SNPs map to functional regulatory elements that have been identified
in the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project22. These results suggest that
genetic variants that alter gene expression, rather than variants that alter protein sequences,
form the primary basis of natural variation in complex traits. This is in contrast to Mendelian
disorders, for which variation in protein-coding regions predominates. eQTL studies of noncoding transcripts, such as microRNAs23 and large intergenic non-coding RNAs24, have
started to emerge. It seems that the degree of genetic variation that underlies levels of these
transcripts is less than that observed for protein-coding RNAs.
The examination of gene expression using RNA-seq provides information about both RNA
splicing and transcripts that are not detected by commercial gene expression microarrays.
Comparisons of RNA-seq results with expression array results indicate fairly high
concordance for transcript abundance25,26. Next-generation sequencing has also made it
possible to carry out global cis-eQTL analyses using allele-specific expression (ASE)
analyses, which complement eQTL analyses27. ASE analyses identify sequence differences
in the transcripts that are derived from the two chromosome copies in a diploid organism
and use this information to quantitate these transcripts separately in order to determine
whether they are expressed at different levels. A disadvantage of ASE analyses compared
with eQTL analyses is that ASE analyses are restricted to the identification of cis-eQTLs (as
trans-regulated genes would not be expected to show ASE) and to genes for which the
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
alleles give rise to transcripts with sequence differences. An obvious advantage of ASE
analyses is the requirement for a much smaller number of individuals to identify a
comparable number of cis-acting loci28. Currently, only a few ASE studies have been
carried out. In two separate studies using crosses between strains of mice, the overlaps of
cis-eQTLs that were identified by linkage and by ASE were modest — 40% and 60%
overlap was found, respectively, when technical artefacts were eliminated27,29. The
explanation for the discrepancies is unclear.
Recent studies show that a substantial proportion of eQTLs is in open chromatin regions30,
methylated regions31 or transcription factor-binding sites32. Sequence-specific transcription
factors form a network that enables integration of multiple internal and external cues to
produce a specific epigenetic state and gene expression output. Such networks have been
modelled on the basis of diverse cell types33, and specific interactions have been studied
using classic single-gene perturbations. As individuals in a population probably differ at
hundreds or thousands of transcription factor-binding sites, systems genetics can provide a
useful window into the network interactions. Recently, the genome-wide effects of sequence
variation on transcription factor binding and on transcriptional outcomes were examined in
primary macrophages of two different inbred strains of mice. Many SNPs that affect the
binding of different transcription factors were identified using chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP–seq), and the results provided
convincing evidence that lineage-specific transcription factors select enhancerlike regions in
a collaborative manner34. Similar studies were carried out in humans using lymphoblastoid
cell lines (LCLs) and showed extensive effects of genetic variants on epigenetic marks and
on transcriptional activation and repression35–37.
As proteins constitute the primary ‘machines’ of biology, any comprehensive genotype–
phenotype maps will require detailed analyses of protein levels and their modifications. It is
possible to map protein QTLs (pQTLs; that is, loci that control protein levels)25,38–42 but
only a tiny fraction of all proteins, which are generally the most abundant ones in a sample,
can currently be quantitated using high-throughput proteomic approaches, such as mass
spectrometry and immunoassays25,38,41. If transcript levels were closely correlated with
protein levels, they could act as surrogates. However, systems genetics studies in both yeast
and mice suggest that transcript levels explain a small proportion of the overall variation in
protein levels among individuals in a population25,38. For example, the correlation between
the levels of >500 proteins and their corresponding transcripts in a population of 100 strains
of mice was only 27%25. Undoubtedly, this low level of correspondence is partly due to
technical issues in proteomic analyses. Heterogeneity is an important issue, as splicing
results in many more polypeptide chains than the number of genes, and >200 posttranslational modifications have been described in proteins43. Given that signalling is mostly
mediated through protein modifications, such as acetylation and phosphorylation, methods
to quantitate such modifications would be particularly informative for understanding the
flow of biological information.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Metabolites
The large-scale analysis of metabolites (that is, metabolomics) using techniques such as
mass spectrometry or NMR is a developing field that has already provided important
insights into diseases and metabolic processes44. For example, metabolite profiling revealed
that a phosphatidylcholine metabolite couples diurnal lipid synthesis to energy use in the
muscle45. Efforts are being made to catalogue the thousands of metabolites that are present
in the human body, and examples of such efforts include the Human Metabolome Project
and the LIPID Metabolites and Pathways Strategy (LIPID MAPS). In principle, metabolite
profiling offers a particularly attractive approach for the integration of genetic and
environmental factors that contribute to complex traits. Several systems genetics studies of
metabolites in human plasma have been reported and, in these studies, levels of many
metabolites showed high heritability. The levels of these metabolites could be mapped to
specific loci, and some of these loci co-mapped with GWAS-identified loci for
diseases46–48.
Complexity of interactions
Gene-by-gene interactions
Most studies of quantitative traits in animal models suggest that epistatic (that is, nonadditive) interactions between loci are widespread4,49–51, and various examples of gene-bygene (G×G) interactions for human complex traits have been identified6. The highly varied
pathological phenotypes that occur among individuals with specific Mendelian disorder (for
example, sickle cell anaemia) represent a form of epistasis. Such variation is also commonly
observed in studies using gene-targeted mice; in the extreme case, a null mutation is lethal
on one genetic background and has little or no phenotype on another52. In natural
populations, the varieties of common variations are constrained by selection, such that most
combinations of alleles must be compatible with adequate functioning (that is, ‘good enough
solutions’) but are still sufficient for adaptation to changing environments. Common
diseases are likely to result from the inheritance of particular combinations of common and
rare alleles that are ‘poor solutions’ given the age-related effects and environmental
conditions53.
At the molecular level, epistasis can take many forms. One common mechanism concerns
the dependence of the steady-state levels of a molecule on its rates of production and
degradation. For example, in a recent human GWAS among individuals who consume
alcohol, the incidence of oesophageal cancer involved a strong genetic interaction between
loci that contribute to the production of acetaldehyde (which is a carcinogen) from alcohol
and those that contribute to the degradation of acetaldehyde6 (FIG. 3c). Another example
involves the formation of molecular complexes, in which the final levels of the complex are
limited by the least abundant component. For example, a systems genetics study of transcript
levels and protein levels in mouse liver across a panel of mouse strains observed that
transcript-protein correlations were weaker for multisubunit proteins than for
homopolymers25. In particular, the correlation between the levels of ribosomal proteins and
those of their transcripts was essentially zero. This presumably results from the fact that any
excess proteins that are not assembled into ribosomes are rapidly degraded. This
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
phenomenon could partly explain the ‘phenotypic buffering’ that is observed in Arabidopsis
thaliana, as discussed below.
An advantage of systems genetics for examining the prevalence of G×G interactions is that
hundreds or thousands of molecular phenotypes (such as transcript levels) can be examined
in a single population (FIG. 3b). However, in such global mapping studies, the identification
of interactions at multiple loci is difficult because of the low significance threshold that
results from multiple comparisons54. This has usually been addressed by restricting the
analysis to QTLs that have significant main effects, which may miss the vast majority of
epistatic interactions. Although methods that overcome the computational burden of
identifying G×G interactions have been proposed55, it remains difficult to determine the
importance of G×G interactions in high-dimensional data sets. In addition to the problem of
multiple comparisons, G×G interactions are difficult to detect in outbred populations for
alleles that have small effect sizes or low frequencies56.
A recent study using a large cross between two yeast strains provided an estimate of the
importance of epistatic interactions for 46 highly heritable complex traits57. The authors
implemented a high-throughput endpoint colony size assay, which was carried out under a
variety of conditions (such as different pH, nutrient types and temperatures) to develop the
traits. The identified QTLs explained nearly the entire additive contribution to the heritable
variation of the traits. The authors quantitated epistasis from the difference between broadsense heritability (which is estimated from the reproducibility of trait measures) and narrowsense heritability (which is estimated from phenotypic similarity for different degrees of
relatedness). They observed that the traits showed epistasis that ranged from almost zero to
~50%57. The results have implications for the problem of missing heritability, as epistatic
interactions would affect heritability estimates54. The level of interactions in that study may
be somewhat limited compared with that in a mammalian population, as the yeast were
haploid and physiological interactions may be more complex in multicellular organisms.
Gene-by-environment interactions
Most complex traits have a substantial environmental component, and G×E interactions
seem to be pervasive49,58. In fact, almost all common diseases result from a combination of
genetic and environmental factors. The frequency and the nature of G×E interactions can be
conveniently studied using global gene expression traits. Studies in yeast59, human LCLs60
and endothelial cells21, and mouse macrophages20 all observed a high frequency of G×E
interactions. Environmental changes are much more likely to modulate the effect of a distal
eQTL than that of a local eQTL20. For example, one study examined gene expression in
peritoneal macrophages from 100 strains of mice either in culture medium alone or in
culture medium that contained the inflammatory mediator bacterial lipopolysaccharide20
(FIG. 3d). Of 2,802 significant eQTLs that were detected, 2,607 (93%) showed significant
evidence of G×E interactions. A particularly striking example of a G×E interaction in this
study was the finding of hot spots that regulated hundreds of genes in macrophages only
when stimulated with lipopolysaccharide20 (FIG. 3b).
The fact that G×G and G×E interactions seem to be common among complex traits has
implications for the mystery of missing heritability in human GWASs because these
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
interactions may lead to inflated estimates of heritability54. As human studies are poorly
powered to identify such interactions, experimental models will be essential for any
comprehensive understanding.
Phenotypic buffering
The integration of data for transcript, protein and metabolite levels using inbred lines of A.
thaliana resulted in surprising findings61. Although eQTLs were associated with the
expression levels of several thousand transcripts, these eQTLs corresponded poorly to
protein or metabolite levels, which suggests a buffering system for phenotypic variation. A
few genomic hot spots were also found to regulate the majority of the molecular phenotypes,
which is consistent with the concept of hub genes as inherent components of biological
networks. Multiple biological scales have also been examined in several reference
populations, including yeast62 and mice16,58.
Network modelling
Systems biology approaches that mathematically model higher-order relationships between
molecular phenotypes have been developed to understand how they interact with each other
and influence complex traits63–65. Network approaches, in particular, have proven
informative. Networks are graphical representations of the interactions between the
molecular traits. Molecules are represented as nodes and the relationships among them as
edges. They can be broadly divided into three categories: those that are based on curated
knowledge, such as metabolic pathways; those that are derived from experimental data on
the basis of physical interactions, such as protein–protein interactions from yeast two-hybrid
experiments; and those that are inferred from high-throughput data. Although the curated
pathways can capture experimentally supported knowledge, they are typically not
comprehensive. To uncover novel relationships and regulatory interactions, data-driven
network construction methods use various algorithms. These algorithms can be based on
regression models, information theory, linear and nonlinear correlations, entropy
maximization, graphical Gaussian modelling, Bayesian networks or combinations of these66.
The assessment of the insights that are provided by these methods remains challenging
because there is no experimental approach to create the ‘true’ network structure and to
compare it with computational predictions. The Dialogue on Reverse Engineering
Assessment and Methods (DREAM) project has attempted an objective assessment of
reverse engineering methods for biological networks using both simulated and experimental
data66. They evaluated the performance of >30 network inference method implementations
using gene expression microarray data from Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. The results showed that no single network method
outperformed the others in all data sets. Different network connectivity patterns were
predicted by various approaches to various levels of success. For example, although linear
cascades of regulation were more accurately predicted by regression and by Bayesian
network methods, feed-forward loops — such as those that occur when two mutually
dependent transcription factors regulate the expression level of a gene — were more
accurately predicted by mutual-information and correlation-based methods. Inference of the
eukaryotic regulatory network was less successful than that of the bacterial regulatory
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
network, which suggests the requirement for additional data, such as time course series and
transcription factor-binding data, for accurate predictions in complex systems. The
conclusion was that a consensus network created on the basis of the inferences from
multiple approaches showed the most robust performances across diverse data sets.
The integration of genetic information with network modelling approaches has been used to
refine inferences, to highlight pathways that contribute to clinical traits and to identify genes
that are likely to be ‘key drivers’ in biological processes67,68. In these implementations,
eQTLs are regarded as ‘causal anchors’ and are added to the network construction process
as prior information. For example, in Bayesian networks, genes that show evidence of cis
regulation can be modelled as ‘parents’ of genes that are not cis-regulated but not vice versa.
Thus, the direction of regulation can be established for certain gene–gene pairs using
systems genetics data (FIG. 2d). This integrative approach has recently been used to identify
molecular interactions that are disrupted in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease68.
In this study, the authors first constructed co-expression networks using gene expression
data from three different brain regions of >500 affected and healthy individuals. Comparison
of these networks showed that the connectivity of genes in several modules was
reconfigured in affected individuals. The cis-eQTL results that were identified using brain
gene expression data were used as causal anchors to construct Bayesian networks to predict
the key drivers of the differential connectivity that results from the disease. The TYRO
protein tyrosine kinase-binding protein gene (TYROBP) was identified as a key driver of a
gene module that was enriched for genes expressed in the immune system and the microglia;
this module was reconfigured in the disease state and was significantly correlated with
disease progression. Forced overexpression of TYROBP in microglial cells led to expression
changes that validated many of the network predictions. Another systems genetics study also
integrated co-expression networks from rats and humans, and identified the mechanism of
action of a transcription factor in a locus that is associated with type 1 diabetes69 (BOX 1).
Systems genetics in rats and humans for the identification of novel disease
One study69 identified a trans-regulated gene co-expression network that confers risk to
type 1 diabetes (T1D) using a cross-species systems genetics approach. First, the authors
examined expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) from 7 tissues of 30 rat recombinant
inbred strains (TABLE 1) and focused on the eQTLs that altered the expression levels of
transcription factors69. They identified 147 transcription factors with these eQTLs, most
of which were regulated in trans. They then identified genes that were likely to be
controlled by those transcription factors on the basis of co-mapping to the same eQTL,
enrichment of the transcription factor-binding sites in their promoters and chromatin
immunoprecipitation results. Combining these results with genome-wide co-expression
network analysis, they identified a co-expression module with 305 genes that was
enriched for inflammatory genes and was partly regulated by the transcription factor
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). Bayesian regression models revealed the rat 15q25
locus as a hot spot that regulates the expression of the members of the inflammatory gene
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
network. Therefore, they postulated that this locus regulates the expression of IRF7 and
its target genes. Second, they tested whether a similar network might occur in humans.
For this, they used monocytes isolated from humans who were part of the Gutenberg
Heart and Cardiogenics Study cohorts. Indeed, they observed evidence of a conserved
IRF7-regulated inflammatory network in the monocytes and went onto show that singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human orthologous locus regulates IRF7 and
the inflammatory network gene expression in trans. This network contains interferoninduced with helicase C domain 1 (IFIH1), which is a well-characterized T1D
susceptibility gene. Knowing the role of macrophages in the immunopathology of T1D,
the authors tested for association of T1D susceptibility with SNPs that are located near
the inflammatory network genes and observed that these SNPs were more likely to
associate with T1D than those that are located near non-network genes. Furthermore,
SNPs in the human locus that is orthologous to the rat 15q25 hot spot were associated
with T1D risk in a genome-wide association meta-analysis of ~7,500 cases and 9,000
controls. In summary, this study was able to identify a conserved inflammatory network
in two species and connect it to T1D in humans.
Causal interactions among molecular and clinical traits can be predicted from systems
genetics data using various algorithms12,70,71. For example, in a population that is studied
for global transcript levels and clinical traits, one can ask, given sufficient data, whether the
relationship between levels of a transcript and a clinical trait is causal, reactive or
independent. As natural genetic variation in a population is randomly distributed among
individuals, these causality algorithms take into account the effect of the multifactorial
genetic perturbations on several phenotypic outcomes. The causal predictions are depicted
as directed edges on the graphical models that represent the relationships among molecular
traits (FIG. 2d). However, these methods have some shortcomings, such as the use of linear
models to infer relationships that are not necessarily linear72,73. Moreover, networks that are
constructed from static systems genetics data cannot predict feedback loops unless time
course data are available. Despite these shortcomings, integrative approaches have been
used to infer causal relationships among phenotypes12,74,75.
Additional approaches to data integration
Integration with computational predictions
Incorporating diverse data sets from multiple organisms may substantially add to the
predictive power of systems genetics data, although the extent to which inferences in one
population can be generalized to another is unclear. Reasonable prediction models of the
effects of protein variants, such as missense variants, have been developed, and large-scale
protein interaction maps have been constructed. Systematic maps of transcription factorbinding sites and chromatin modifications are being generated. Two useful databases —
HaploReg76 and RegulomeDB77 — have automated this process using results from the
ENCODE project. Early efforts to integrate such modelling data with systems genetics data
in yeast have been promising62,78.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Integration with experimental perturbations
An alternative approach to globally link genes to molecular or even clinical phenotypes is to
use high-throughput methods such as genome-wide RNA interference screens in flies and
worms, gene deletion collections in bacteria and yeast, and siRNA knockdown in
mammalian tissue culture cells78. Such ‘systematic genetics’ screens differ from systems
genetics in that they examine the effects of single gene perturbations on a single genetic
background. Although they have the advantage that causality is easier to establish, they do
not address the gene–gene interactions that are central to complex traits and are generally
not applicable to organismal traits in mammals. Nevertheless, the two approaches should
complement each other. The integration of systematic genetics with systems genetics has so
far been used only in unicellular organisms62,79,80, but it should also be feasible in mammals
using cultured cells.
Applications for common human diseases
As discussed above, a major goal of systems genetics is to dissect common, complex
disease. In particular, eQTL studies have proven useful for prioritizing genes at GWAS loci
(FIG. 4) and, in some cases, for identifying potential trans-acting interactions (BOX 2).
Metabolomics and global analyses of microbiota have also revealed novel interactions with
common diseases. However, human studies are complicated by the difficulty of obtaining
samples from relevant tissues and by the lack of reliable environmental data, and
transformed cell lines can show biological noise that reduces power to observe genetic
effects81. Thus, as discussed below, experimental organisms such as mice and rats have been
widely used to model human disease.
KLF14 pathway mediates metabolic syndrome traits
Variants that are located near the maternally expressed imprinted Krüppel-like factor 14
gene (KLF14) have been associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D)120 and with high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels121 in genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
(see the figure). The Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource (MuTHER)
consortium started by asking whether these variants affected the expression of the nearby
KLF14 gene in cis in metabolically active adipose tissue that was isolated from >700
women82. The significant association between the variants and KLF14 transcript levels
strongly suggested that this gene is the causal gene in the GWAS locus. As KLF14 is a
transcription factor, and transcription factors regulate the expression of their target genes
in trans, members of the consortium reasoned that the transcript abundance of KLF14target genes should be influenced by the GWAS variants that are located near KLF14.
Forty-six genes with trans-eQTLs that mapped to the KLF14 locus were enriched for
KLF-binding sites in their promoter regions, which provided in silico evidence for the
binding of KLF14 regulating the expression of these genes in trans. Ten of these genes
(see the figure) had strong trans associations that reached the typical genome-wide pvalue cutoff of 5×10−8. Furthermore, variants near the 5′ end of these genes showed
significant associations with metabolic traits. Traits in bold show genome-wide
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
significant associations with local single-nucleotide polymorphisms at the corresponding
trans-regulated genes; other traits are associated with expression of the corresponding
trans-regulated genes. Collectively, the cis- and trans-eQTL networks identified KLF14
as the master regulator of the expression of multiple genes that, in turn, mediate the
effects of this transcription factor on metabolic disease. This study showed that cis- and
trans-eQTL networks can be successfully interrogated to predict the causal gene in a
GWAS locus and how the gene functions to affect disease susceptibility.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
APH1B, APH1B γ-secretase subunit; ARSD, arylsulfatase D; BMI, body mass index;
C8orf82, chromosome 8 open reading frame 82; GLU, glucose levels; GNB1, guanine
nucleotide-binding protein, β-polypeptide1; HOMA, index of insulin sensitivity; INS,
insulin levels; LDL, low-density lipoprotein levels; MYL5, myosin, light chain 5,
regulatory; NINJ2, ninjurin2; PRMT2, protein arginine methyltransferase 2; SLC7A10,
solute carrier family 7 member 10; TG, triglyceride levels; TPMT, thiopurine Smethyltransferase; WHR, waist:hip ratio. The figure is modified, with permission, from
REF. 122 © Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved.
Integration of gene expression with human GWASs
Systems genetics approaches that determine the associations of identified risk variants with
the expression levels of transcripts in risk loci in various human tissue samples provide a
powerful way to assign priority to the candidate genes. For example, one of the first such
studies involved a locus on chromosome 1p13 that is associated with plasma cholesterol
levels and myocardial infarction1. This locus contains three genes: CELSR2 (cadherin, EGF
LAG seven-pass G-type receptor 2), proline/serine-rich coiled-coil 1 (PSRC1) and sortilin 1
(SORT1). The GWAS SNPs were found to be associated with transcript levels of SORT1 in
the liver but not in the adipose tissue, and analysis of multiple haplotypes further suggested
that the causal SNP affected the binding of CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (CEB/P)
transcription factors. The role of the SNP in SORT1 regulation was confirmed using cell
transfection studies, and the causal role of SORT1 was verified using overexpression and
knockdown studies in mice. In another study, the maternally imprinted Krüppel-like factor
14 gene (KLF14) was identified as a regulator of multiple metabolic phenotypes using cis
and trans associations of gene expression82. This study shows how eQTL results have been
useful in identifying the molecular architecture of complex diseases (BOX 2). A
considerable problem with human eQTL studies is obtaining samples of the relevant tissues.
In this regard, it is noteworthy that cis-eQTLs are often conserved among various tissues,
whereas trans-eQTLs are usually tissue specific18.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Metabolomics and the microbiome
Broad metabolite screens of human populations have identified novel associations between
specific metabolites and diseases such as cancer83, atherosclerosis84 and diabetes85. The
levels of many plasma metabolites are influenced by diet, and studies suggest that the
composition of the gut microbiota can also have a major effect. For example, a recent report
showed that the metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) is strongly associated with
atherosclerosis. TMAO is derived entirely from trimethylamine, which is produced by the
gut microbiota during the catabolism of phospholipids84. A subsequent study identified the
enzyme that can generate trimethylamine and showed that it occurs in only certain genera of
bacteria86. These and other studies87,88 highlight a complex set of interactions that involve
host genetic background, diet and gut microbiota composition, all of which are likely to
contribute to metabolic disorders. In humans, the role of host genetics in setting the
composition of the gut microbiota is still unclear — whereas family members have more
similar microbiota compositions than unrelated individuals, monozygotic and dizygotic
twins have equally similar compositions89. However, in mice, in which age, diet and other
environmental factors can be more carefully controlled, it seems that the composition of the
gut microbiota is heritable58. Thus, large studies of humans that emphasize a genetic
perspective and more detailed studies in experimental organisms are of considerable interest.
One of the first important applications of systems genetics was to improve the categorization
of cancers using global gene expression analyses. Thus, expression patterns from
histologically similar cancers were found to cluster into distinct groups, which were then
found to associate with different clinical outcomes90. Recent sequencing studies have
revealed clear patterns of genetic variations that are associated with cancers. For example, a
recent study from The Cancer Genome Atlas project revealed similarities between some
endometrial cancers and subtypes of ovarian and breast cancers91. Given that relevant
cancer tissues are available, the integration of transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic
data using systems genetics approaches should provide a useful strategy for unravelling the
flow of biological information from these mutations to pathways that control cell growth and
other aspects of tumour formation92,93.
Animal models
Given the difficulties of carrying out systems genetics studies directly in humans, animal
models have proven invaluable for studies of complex traits, including atherosclerosis94,95,
heart failure10,96,97, diabetes69,98,99, obesity58,100,101, osteoporosis102,103, cancer92 and
behavioural disorders104. These organisms have been frequently studied in response to
environmental stressors or to sensitizing genetic mutations58,94. The assumption in such
studies is that even if inferences do not directly translate between animal models and
humans, the pathways that contribute to the pathologies will be shared. Although there will
certainly be important differences, animal models have generally led the way to an
understanding of both basic biology and pathology. In this regard, a comprehensive study
observed conservation of trans-regulated genes that contribute to hypertension between rats
and humans105. Some recent studies indicate that there is even a substantial overlap between
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
rodents and humans in the genes that contribute to complex traits58,106. Conversely, a large
mapping study of 122 diverse phenotypes in outbred rats concluded that orthologous genes
rarely contribute to the same phenotype in rats and mice107.
Various reference populations of rats and mice are proving useful for systems genetics
studies (TABLE 1). Renewable populations that can be interrogated repeatedly — including
inbred strains, recombinant inbred strains and congenic strains — have been particularly
useful. These have made it possible to develop large data sets that contain detailed
molecular, physiological and pathological phenotypic data under a range of environmental
conditions108. An important weakness of genetic studies of complex traits in rats and mice
has been the poor mapping resolution of linkage analyses using genetic crosses (regions
identified are tens of megabases and encode hundreds of genes). This has now been
overcome to a large extent using GWASs of either outbred stocks107 or panels of inbred and
recombinant inbred strains (in which most loci show linkage disequilibrium blocks that are
<1Mb in size)16.
New therapies
Systems genetics provides a potentially powerful approach for drug development. One can
construct networks, identify modules that are associated with disease traits and target one or
more genes in that module109. Such an approach takes a broad view of the causes of a
disease and can incorporate nonlinear G×G and G×E interactions. Systems-level approaches
are proving particularly useful for the development of anticancer therapies110. For example,
a recent study111 observed that the inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptors in a
subset of breast cancers markedly sensitized these cells to DNA damage, provided that
certain drugs were given sequentially but not simultaneously. The authors concluded that the
enhanced efficacy results from a dynamic network ‘rewiring’ by one drug which, in turn,
unmasks sensitivity to another111.
Systems genetics has also been used to screen existing promising compounds against a
reference population to identify additional targets or to reveal harmful gene-by-drug
interactions. Human LCLs, such as CEPH cell lines, have been widely investigated for such
pharmacogenetic studies, which could be considered as a sub-category of systems
genetics112. Typically, such studies treat the LCLs with various concentrations of drugs, test
for differences in toxicity or responsiveness and carry out global gene expression analyses.
For example, a recent study of gene expression and statin responsiveness using LCLs from
480 participants of a clinical trial identified the RAS homologue family member A gene
(RHOA) as a modulator of the cholesterol-lowering effects of a statin113 and the glycine
amidinotransferase gene (GATM) as a causal gene for statin-induced myopathy114.
Large-scale studies
It has been argued that high-throughput, high-dimensional phenotyping will be crucial for
the understanding of both genotype-phenotype maps and environmental interactions115.
Given the complexity of natural variation, particularly that of common disease, and
considering that modest genetic variations can have considerable biological consequences, it
will be important to assemble large data sets to maximize power through the formation of
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
consortia and meta-analyses. The Genotype-Tissue Expression Program — an ambitious
collaborative project sponsored by the US National Institutes of Health — is a step in the
right direction116. The goal of this project is to collect gene expression data in ~30 different
tissues from 1,000 people for systems genetics analyses.
Conclusions and future prospects
The concept of linking population genetic variation with biochemical variation dates back to
at least 1970 (REF. 7). The current interest in systems genetics has been driven by recent
technological and computational advances, which continue to progress rapidly and are
paving the way for large-scale applications of systems genetics in both model organisms and
humans. The approach should also be enhanced by the incorporation of additional data
modalities, such as high-resolution clinical imaging data, single-cell gene expression data,
pathway readout data and time course data. In addition to quantitating the steady-state levels
of macromolecules in populations, it may be possible to determine their rates of synthesis
and degradation, as well as their localization117.
Despite striking differences between the sexes in the prevalence of common diseases, the
underlying mechanisms have been fairly neglected. Clearly, these differences could be
‘mined’ to identify factors that confer resistance to disease118. Systems genetics analyses of
experimental organisms, as well as of human populations, have revealed marked differences
between the sexes in both gene expression and metabolic activities119. Network modelling
of transcriptomes suggest that the higher-order interactions differ between the sexes119, and
it would be of interest to understand the relationships of such interactions to disease states or
to drug responses.
As discussed above, it is now clear that the gut microbiome contributes, importantly, to
multiple common disorders, including atherosclerosis, cancer, colitis, diabetes, depression
and fatty liver. Systems genetics should provide a useful approach for understanding the
interactions between diet, microbiota composition, plasma metabolites and genetic
background.
An increased focus of systems genetics studies on biological processes that are involved in
homeostasis — such as cell cycling, oxidative stress, mitochondrial function, and synthesis
and turnover of macromolecules — might be productive. Such ‘process traits’ are likely to
be less genetically complex than any of the disease traits to which they contribute, and will
hence require smaller samples sizes for mapping. Nevertheless, these traits may integrate
considerable genetic variation that is relevant to multiple disease traits.
An important challenge will be to make systems genetics data broadly available to
biologists. Currently, much high-throughput data are fairly inaccessible to everyday bench
scientists. As educating all biologists in basic computational and statistical skills will be
difficult to achieve, it will be desirable to display association, linkage and models on
browsers that can be quickly scanned for potential links and insights.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Acknowledgments
The authors thank R. Chen for assistance in the preparation of this paper. M.C. is supported by Ruth L. Kirschstein
National Research Service Award T32HL69766; A.J.L. is supported by the US National Institutes of Health grants
HL30568, HL28481, HL094322, HL110667 and DP3D094311, and Transatlantic Networks of Excellence Award
from Foundation Leducq. They are also grateful to the detailed and critical reviewers.
Systems genetics
A global analysis of the molecular factors that underlie
variability in physiological or clinical phenotypes across
individuals in a population. It considers not only the
underlying genetic variation but also intermediate phenotypes
such as gene expression protein levels and metabolite levels,
in addition to gene-by-gene and gene-by-environment
interactions.
Natural populations
Human populations, or animal populations in wild
environments, that are experiencing normal selective
pressures. By contrast, laboratory animal populations, such as
inbred strains, can show natural genetic variation, but they
have been subjected to nonrandom breeding and artificial
selection.
Natural genetic
Genetic variation that is present in all populations as a result
of mutations that occur in the germline the frequencies of
such mutations in populations are affected by selection and by
random drift. This is in contrast with experimental variation
that is introduced by techniques such as gene targeting and
chemical mutagenesis.
Principal components
Dominant patterns in multivariate data as extracted by the
principal component analysis data reduction method.
In the context of network modelling, groups of components
that are tightly connected or correlated across a set of
conditions, perturbations or genetic backgrounds.
Inbred strains
Strains in which a set of naturally occurring genetic variations
have been fixed by many generations of inbreeding
Biological scales
Various levels in the flow of information from DNA to
proteins to metabolites to cell structures to cell interactions.
immunoprecipitation
followed by sequencing
(ChIP–seq). A method that is used to analyse protein–DNA
interactions by combining chromatin immunoprecipitation
with next-generation sequencing to identify binding sites of
DNA-associated proteins.
A statistical interaction between two or more genetic loci,
such that their effects are non-additive.
Civelek and Lusis
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Missing heritability
The phenomenon whereby the fraction of the heritability of a
trait that is explained by a genome-wide association study is
Haplotypes
Combinations of alleles at genetic loci that are inherited
Recombinant inbred
A set of inbred strains that is generally produced by crossing
two parental inbred strains and then inbreeding random
intercross progeny; they provide a permanent resource for
examining the segregation of traits that differ between the
parental strains.
Congenic strains
Strains in which a small region of the genome from one strain
has been placed, by repeated crossing, onto the genetic
background of a second strain.
Linkage disequilibrium
Regions of high correlation across genetic markers, which
results from their linkage in cis on a chromosome and thus
infrequent recombination during meiosis. LD blocks are often
demarcated by recombination hot spots.
CEPH cell lines
A large set of lymphoblastoid cell lines from European
pedigrees that serves as a reference collection for studies of
allele frequencies, linkage mapping and the genetics of gene
expression.