Analysing connectivity with Granger causality and dynamic
causal modelling
Karl Friston1, Rosalyn Moran1 and Anil K Seth2
This review considers state-of-the-art analyses of functional
integration in neuronal macrocircuits. We focus on detecting
and estimating directed connectivity in neuronal networks
using Granger causality (GC) and dynamic causal modelling
(DCM). These approaches are considered in the context of
functional segregation and integration and — within functional
integration — the distinction between functional and effective
connectivity. We review recent developments that have
enjoyed a rapid uptake in the discovery and quantiﬁcation of
functional brain architectures. GC and DCM have distinct and
complementary ambitions that are usefully considered in
relation to the detection of functional connectivity and the
identiﬁcation of models of effective connectivity. We highlight
the basic ideas upon which they are grounded, provide a
comparative evaluation and point to some outstanding issues.
1 The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College
London, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK
2 Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science and Department of
Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK
Corresponding author: Friston, Karl ( )
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
This review comes from a themed issue on Macrocircuits
Edited by Steve Petersen and Wolf Singer
For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
Available online 21st December 2012
0959-4388 # 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
 
Introduction
Several dichotomies have proved useful in thinking about
analytic approaches to functional brain architectures.
Perhaps the most fundamental is the distinction between
functional segregation and integration. Functional segregation refers to the anatomical segregation of functionally
specialised cortical and subcortical systems, while functional integration refers to the coordination and coupling
of functionally segregated systems [1]. Within functional integration, two main classes of connectivity have
emerged — functional and effective connectivity. Functional connectivity refers to the statistical dependence
or mutual information between two neuronal systems,
while effective connectivity refers to the inﬂuence
that one neural system exerts over another [2,3]. This
distinction is particularly acute when considering the
different analyses one might apply to electrophysiological
or neuroimaging timeseries.
Functional and effective connectivity
Because functional connectivity is deﬁned in terms of
statistical dependencies, it is an operational concept that
underlies the detection of (inference about) a functional
connection, without any commitment to how that connection was caused. In other words, one tests for dependencies between two or more timeseries, to reject the null
hypothesis of statistical independence. This is equivalent
to assessing the mutual information and testing for signiﬁcant departures from zero. At its simplest, this involves
assessing (patterns of) correlations — of the sort that
deﬁne intrinsic brain networks. An important distinction — within
functional
connectivity — rests
whether dependencies are instantaneous or reﬂect an
underlying dynamical process, in which causes precede
consequences. This leads to the distinction between
analyses of directed and undirected functional connectivity
that do and do not appeal to temporal precedence respectively. Common examples of techniques used to assess
undirected functional connectivity (dependencies) include independent components analysis and various
measures of synchrony, correlation, or coherence .
However, we will focus on analyses of directed functional
connectivity — of which the prime example is Granger
causality (GC) [6]. This is because coupling in the brain
is both directed and largely reciprocal (producing cyclic
graphs or networks with loops that preclude structural
causal modelling). As we will see below, GC and related
concepts such as transfer entropy (TE) rest on establishing a statistical dependence between a local measurement
of neuronal activity and measurements of activity elsewhere in the past.
Functional connectivity considers dependencies between
measured neurophysiological responses. In contrast,
effective connectivity is between hidden neuronal states
generating measurements. Crucially, effective connectivity is always directed and rests on an explicit (parameterised)
inﬂuences — usually
expressed in terms of difference (discrete time) or differential (continuous time) equations. The most popular
approach to effective connectivity is dynamic causal
modelling (DCM) [7–10,11,12]. In this context, causality is inherent in the form of the model, where ﬂuctuations in hidden neuronal states cause changes in others:
for example, changes in postsynaptic potentials in one
area are caused by inputs from other areas. The
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY license.
parameters of dynamic causal models correspond to effective connectivity — usually cast as synaptic density or
coupling parameters — that are optimised by ﬁtting the
model to data. The notion of effective connectivity stems
from the pioneering work of Gerstein and Perkel in
early attempts to interpret multivariate electrophysiological recordings. At its inception, effective connectivity
referred to models; in the sense of the simplest possible
circuit diagrams that explain observed responses . In
modern parlance, these correspond to dynamic causal
models with the greatest evidence: namely, models with
the minimum complexity that furnish an accurate explanation for data (see below). In what follows, we review
recent developments in the analysis of directed functional
connectivity with GC and TE, the analysis of directed
effective connectivity with DCM and then consider the
approaches in light of each other. Figure 1 provides an
overview of recent developments in these techniques.
Granger causality and transfer entropy
The core idea behind GC is that X ‘Granger causes’ Y if X
contains information that helps predict the future of Y
better than information already in the past of Y (and in the
past of other ‘conditioning’ variables Z). The most common implementation of GC is via linear vector autoregressive (VAR) modelling of timeseries data, enabling both
statistical signiﬁcance testing and estimation of GC magnitudes [6,15,16]. However, GC is not limited to this
implementation; it can use nonlinear, time-varying, and
non-parametric models . In particular, TE 
represents an information-theoretic generalisation of GC
that does not require a parameterised model (is modelfree). Speciﬁcally, the TE from X to Y is zero if, and only if,
Y is conditionally independent of X’s past, given its own
past. Importantly, for Gaussian data, TE is equivalent to
GC [20], furnishing a useful interpretation of GC in terms
of information transfer in ‘bits’. Related approaches include partial directed coherence and the directed transfer
function; see for a review. Here we focus on the most
popular of these techniques, namely GC:
Following its introduction within econometrics [6,15],
GC has been applied in neuroscience partly because it is
simple to estimate, given (stationary stochastic) timeseries. Such data are generated by a wide range of
neuroimaging and neurophysiological methods. GC has
some useful properties including a decomposition of
causal inﬂuence by frequency [15] and formulation in
an ‘ensemble’ form, allowing evaluation of GC between
multivariate sets of responses . GC has provided
useful descriptions of directed functional connectivity
in many electrophysiological studies . Recently,
Bosman et al. [26] analysed electrocorticographic data
from macaque monkeys to show that ‘bottom-up’ signals
across multiple cortical regions were most prominent in
the gamma band, while ‘top down’ inﬂuences dominated
at beta frequencies — a ﬁnding that is strikingly congruent with neural implementations of predictive coding
 . GC can also be applied to standard EEG or MEG
signals, either at the source or sensor level (following
spatial ﬁltering to reduce the impact of volume conduction). For example, Barrett et al. [28] used source-localised EEG to show that gamma-band GC between
posterior and anterior cingulate cortices reliably increased
during anaesthetic loss of consciousness, extending
previous results obtained using (undirected) phase synchrony . We will turn to this example later in the
context of DCM.
The application GC to fMRI is more controversial, given
the slow dynamics and regional variability of the haemodynamic response to underlying neuronal activity ;
and see ‘Pros and Cons’ below. While naı¨ve application of
GC to fMRI data is unlikely to be informative, careful
consideration of the methodological issues has permitted
some useful applications that have produced testable
hypotheses. For example, Wen et al. [32] analysed fMRI
data obtained from a cued spatial visual attention task;
ﬁnding that GC from dorsal to ventral frontoparietal
regions predicted enhanced performance, while GC in
the reciprocal direction was associated with degraded
performance. These ﬁndings are consistent with the
notion that dorsal attentional regions mediate goaloriented top-down deployment of attention, while ventral
regions mediate stimulus-driven bottom-up reorienting.
In a similar paradigm, Bressler et al. found that GC
from parietal to occipital areas was predictive of behavioural performance. In a ﬁnal and unusual example,
Schippers et al. used GC of fMRI signals to analyse
directed interactions between the brains of two subjects
engaged in a social game (charades), providing novel
evidence for ‘mirror neuron system’ formulations of social
interaction. Another promising application of GC is to
intracranial local ﬁeld potentials, which possess high
temporal and spatial resolution and which comprise comparatively few variables (as compared to fMRI voxels or
EEG sensors). An early application in this area, Gaillard
et al. examined directed functional connectivity
during supraliminal as compared to subliminal visual
word processing.
Dynamic causal modelling
The basic idea behind DCM is that neural activity
propagates through brain networks as in an input-stateoutput system, where causal interactions are mediated by
unobservable (hidden) neuronal dynamics. This multiinput multi-output neuronal model is augmented with a
forward, or observation model that describes the mapping
from neural activity to observed responses. Together
neuronal and observation model comprise a full generative model that takes a particular form depending on
the data modality. The key outputs of DCM are the
parameter estimates of the (best) model, particularly
Analysing connectivity with Granger causality and dynamic causal modelling Friston, Moran and Seth
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
Macrocircuits
Granger causality (GC) is first
applied to fMRI time-series
using the method of ‘Granger
causality mapping’ (GCM)
from a seed voxel to other
voxels 
Important extension of the GCM approach,
examining the influence of confounding
hemodynamic response functions 
GC combined with sparse
regression techniques to
allow estimation of highdimensional dynamical
models reflecting brain
networks 
GC applied to BOLD
signals to reveal topdown influences
during human visual
attention 
Theory and modelling showing invariance of
GC to hemodynamic convolution given fast
sampling and low noise
GC applied within a statespace framework
incorporating explicit
observation equations for
modelling hemodynamic
responses 
GC applied to local-field
potentials (LFPs) recorded
from cat visual cortex;
important early clarification
of statistical issues 
GC analysis of LFP data obtained
from awake monkeys reveal
directional beta-frequency
interactions in a large –scale
network during motor
maintenance behaviour 
Nonparametric GC
introduced (based on
Fourier and wavelet
transforms) and
validated on monkey
LFP data 
Equivalence shown
between GC and
transfer entropy for
Gaussian data 
Adaptive multivariate autoregressive (AMVAR)
modelling applied to multichannel event-related
potentials, showing rapidly changing cortical
dynamics during visuomotor integration 
GC validated on
electrophysiological data from
rats given deconvolution of
hemodynamic responses 
Granger Causality
electrophysiology
electrophysiology
Dynamic Causal Modelling
Dynamic causal modelling is
introduced as the Bayesian
inversion of dynamic (bilinear)
neurophysiological models of
fMRI time-series 
Bayesian model
comparison is
described for selecting
among alternative
Neural drivers in DCM for fMRI
validated using concurrent
electrophysiology in rodents 
Post-hoc Bayesian model selection
allows rapid estimation of model
evidence for very large model
spaces 
Nonlinear DCM for fMRI
is described, allowing
for (neuronal) statedependent changes in
connectivity 
DCM for fMRI
parameterises
inhibitory and
excitatory neuronal
processes 
Stochastic DCM developed
in generalised coordinates
of motion to provide
estimates of hidden
neuronal states 
DCM for evoked
electrophysiological responses
is introduced, using neural
mass models with multiple
neuronal populations 
Reciprocal
connections
are shown to
be necessary
for generating
late responses
in EEG 
DCM for steady
state responses
applied to
intracranial EEG
from rodents:
synaptic measures
validated using
microdialysis 
Conductance
based neuronal
models allow for
the testing of
connectivity
through specific
ion channels 
Validation of receptorspecific contributions
using pharmacological
challenge in humans 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology
A timeline of recent advances in Granger causality (top panel) and dynamic causal modelling (bottom panel). Entries above the time lines pertain to
functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and those below the lines report specific developments for electrophysiology.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
www.sciencedirect.com
those describing the coupling among brain regions. These
allow for model and system identiﬁcation, respectively.
DCM was introduced for fMRI timeseries , where the
neuronal model comprises one or two hidden (lumped)
neuronal states for each region. The neuronal dynamics of
each region depend on the strength of connections within
that region (parameterised by a self-connection), on the
(experimental
parameters) and on inputs from other regions in the
network (the coupling parameters). Neuronal activity is
then transformed through a haemodynamic model (with
region-speciﬁc parameters) to model measured responses
 . The coupling between brain regions can then be
estimated for a particular model architecture using standard variational Bayesian techniques . In practice, it is
usual to specify different architectures or hypotheses and
formally compare the evidence for these models, before
examining parameter estimates . DCM necessarily
accounts for directed connections among brain regions
and disambiguates the neuronal drivers of a particular
event and subsequent signal propagation. Electrophysiological measurements support richer models of neuronal
dynamics in DCM that comprise sources with laminar
speciﬁc mixtures of neuronal populations. These have
evolved from kernel-based models that use postsynaptic convolution operators to describe responses at excitatory and inhibitory synapses to conductance-based
models, where particular ion channels can be modelled
and identiﬁed . These neural mass models are accompanied by linear electromagnetic forward models to generate responses at EEG scalp electrodes, at MEG sensors
or at intracranial recording sites. Application of DCM to
animal local-ﬁeld potential data has facilitated validation
studies, where independent, invasive measurements (e.g.
microdialysis or pharmacological perturbations) suggest
that DCM can be used to estimate the physiological
mechanisms responsible for mediating effective connectivity [40].
Pros and cons
Clearly, GC and DCM have complementary aims and
strengths: GC can be applied directly to any given timeseries to detect the coupling among empirically sampled
neuronal systems. This can provide useful insights into
the system’s dynamical behaviour in different conditions
or in spontaneously active ‘resting’ states. One might then
proceed to a more mechanistic (model or hypothesis —
driven) characterisation using DCM. However, this calls
for bespoke models of the system in question [41]. In
other words, GC is a generic inferential procedure characterising directed functional connectivity, while DCM is
a framework that enforces (or enables) speciﬁc models or
hypotheses to be tested. Crucially, both rest on model
selection: In DCM this involves comparing the evidence
for different models directly , while model selection
in GC is implicit in the test for the presence of GC — and
also arises in the selection of VAR model order, using
standard approximations to model evidence, such as the
Akaike or Bayesian information criteria .
Although GC is generic, its naive application is not
always justiﬁed. For example, application to fMRI must
activity and haemodynamic responses. In particular,
regional variations in haemodynamic latency could confound the temporal precedence assumptions of GC
 . While these variations can be partially controlled
for by contrasting GC between experimental conditions
 false inferences remain possible. Interestingly, recent theory and modelling suggests that GC
may be robust to haemodynamic variations but not
when combined with down-sampling and measurement
noise . In contrast, DCM models haemodynamic
variations explicitly and tries to explain the data at the
level of hidden neuronal states — in other words, it
tries to get beneath the surface structure of the data to
explain how they were generated: see [45,46] for
further discussion.
In analysis of electrophysiological timeseries, GC is more
widely accepted because there is no temporal lag between the responses recorded and their underlying
(neuronal) causes and because the data can be sampled
at fast timescales. The advantages of GC in furnishing
frequency-dependent and multivariate measures have
been clearly demonstrated [22,26,28]. However, there
is an unresolved issue in this setting — the random
ﬂuctuations assumed by GC are serially independent
(show no temporal correlations and ﬂuctuate at very fast
timescales). This is an issue because neuronal ﬂuctuations in the brain are produced by neuronal systems
that have the same time constants as the system studied.
While serial independence can be checked for, the nature
of neuronal ﬂuctuations may deserve more attention in
the future.
A key feature of DCM is that it can include variables that
describe dynamics that are hidden from observation. For
example, the GC analysis of anaesthetic loss of consciousness by Barrett et al. [28] mentioned above, was complemented by a mechanistic study by Boly et al. [47]
using DCM. She found that a DCM that included a
hidden thalamic source performed better than DCMs
based solely on observed cortical timeseries, and established a dissociation between the effects of (measured)
cortical and (inferred) subcortical structures on levels of
consciousness. In contrast to GC, being able to model
hidden sources means the model (hypothesis) space can
be very large and calls for a principled approach to
Bayesian model comparison of models that are (a priori)
considered equally plausible. The speciﬁcation and
interrogation of the model space is an outstanding conceptual issue for DCM.
Analysing connectivity with Granger causality and dynamic causal modelling Friston, Moran and Seth
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
DCM posits and identiﬁes neuronal mechanisms responsible for functional integration in the brain. Connectivity
in this setting necessitates biologically plausible explanations. In DCM for fMRI, new developments 
enable the incorporation of background or ongoing spontaneous cortical ﬂuctuations, nonlinearities and inhibitory
neuronal populations . The addition of spontaneous
or stochastic ﬂuctuations enhances the plausibility of the
generative model at the neuronal level, where non-Markovian noise processes sit atop experimentally induced
brain activations . In DCM for electrophysiological
data, the models will potentially allow the characterisation of receptor-speciﬁc contributions to brain connectivity, which may be important in a pharmacological and
clinical setting [11].
Conclusion
In conclusion, GC and DCM are complementary: both
model neural interactions and both are concerned with
directed causal interactions. GC models dependency
among observed responses, while DCM models coupling
generating
observations.
Despite this fundamental difference, the two approaches
may be converging. On the one hand DCM for stochastic
systems can now accommodate the random ﬂuctuations assumed by GC. On the other hand, state-space GC
approaches can incorporate modality speciﬁc observation
equations . The ability to handle large numbers of
sources for regions is facilitated by multivariate (ensemble) GC and sparse regression techniques , as
well as recent developments in post hoc model optimisation for network discovery with DCM . One might
hope that both approaches — perhaps GC disclosing
candidate models for DCM — will counter the claims
that modern brain mapping is a neo-phrenology and
provide characterisations of brain circuits that may hold
promise for the treatment of neurological and psychiatric
disorders.
Acknowledgements
KJF and RM are funded by the Wellcome Trust. AKS is funded by the
EPSRC (EP/G007543/1) and the Dr. Mortimer and Theresa Sackler
Foundation.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
of special interest
 of outstanding interest
Zeki S, Shipp S: The functional logic of cortical connections.
Nature 1988, 335:311-317.
A short but important conceptual paper highlighting the importance of
functional integration among specialised or segregated visual areas —
and the hierarchical message passing supported by extrinsic (between
area) and intrinsic (within area) connections.
Friston KJ, Frith CD, Liddle PF, Frackowiak RS: Functional
connectivity: the principal-component analysis of large (PET)
data sets. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1993, 13:5-14.
This paper introduced the distinction between functional and effective
connectivity in brain imaging.
Breakspear M: Dynamic connectivity in neural systems —
theoretical and empirical considerations. Neuroinformatics
2004, 2:205-225.
Bell AJ, Sejnowski TJ: An information maximisation approach
to blind separation and blind de-convolution. Neural Comput
1995, 7:1129-1159.
Siegel M, Donner TH, Engel AK: Spectral ﬁngerprints of largescale neuronal interactions. Nat Rev Neurosci 2012, 13:131-134.
Granger CWJ: Investigating causal relations by econometric
models and cross-spectral methods. Econometrica 1969,
37:424-438.
This paper introduced the operationalization of Granger causality in the
form of linear vector autoregressive models, within the ﬁeld of econometrics.
David O, Kiebel S, Harrison L, Mattout J, Kilner JM, Friston KJ:
Dynamic causal modeling of evoked responses in EEG and
MEG. Neuroimage 2006, 30:1255-1272.
Garrido MI, Kilner JM, Kiebel SJ, Friston KJ: Evoked brain
responses are generated by feedback loops. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:20961-20966.
Kiebel SJ, Garrido MI, Friston KJ: Dynamic causal modelling of
evoked responses: the role of intrinsic connections.
Neuroimage 2007, 36:332-345.
10. Garrido MI, Kilner JM, Kiebel SJ, Stephan KE, Baldeweg T,
Friston KJ: Repetition suppression and plasticity in the human
brain. Neuroimage 2009, 48:269-279.
Moran RJ, Symmonds M, Stephan KE, Friston KJ, Dolan RJ: An in
vivo assay of synaptic function mediating human cognition.
Curr Biol 2011, 21:1320-1325.
This study served as a validation of DCM using non-invasive magnetoencephalography in human subjects. The experimental manipulation here
was pharmacological, where levodopa was used to boost prefrontal
dopamine during a working memory experiment. This induced known
changes in the receptor activation in reverberatory networks in PFC.
These changes at NMDA, AMPA and GABAa were recovered using a
conductance-based DCM. Moreover, estimates from the DCMs were
predictive of inter-individual behaviour in the memory task.
Boly M, Garrido MI, Gosseries O, Bruno MA, Boveroux P,
Schnakers C, Massimini M, Litvak V, Laureys S, Friston K:
Preserved feedforward but impaired top-down processes in
the vegetative state. Science 2011, 332:858-862.
An important example of the characterisation of directed (effective)
connectivity in distinguishing between top-down and bottom-up extrinsic
connections and their function in supporting different levels of consciousness.
13. Gerstein GL, Perkel DH: Simultaneously recorded trains of
action potentials: analysis and functional interpretation.
Science 1969, 164:828-830.
14. Aertsen AM, Gerstein GL, Habib MK, Palm G: Dynamics of
neuronal ﬁring correlation: modulation of ‘‘effective
connectivity’’. J Neurophysiol 1989, 61:900-917.
Geweke J: Measures of conditional linear dependence and
feedback between time series. J Am Stat Assoc 1984,
79:907-915.
Important extension of the basic GC concept to the frequency domain
and to multivariate variables (the latter worked out more fully in ).
16. Seth AK: A MATLAB toolbox for Granger causal connectivity
analysis. J Neurosci Meth 2010, 186:262-273.
17. Roebroeck A, Formisano E, Goebel R: The identiﬁcation of
interacting networks in the brain using fMRI: model selection,
causality and deconvolution. Neuroimage 2011, 58:296-302.
18. Dhamala M, Rangarajan G, Ding M: Analyzing information ﬂow in
brain networks with nonparametric Granger causality.
Neuroimage 2008, 41:354-362.
19. Schreiber T: Measuring information transfer. Phys Rev Lett
2000, 85:461-464.
Barnett LC, Barrett AB, Seth AK: Granger causality and transfer
entropy are equivalent for Gaussian variables. Phys Rev Lett
2009, 103:238701.
Macrocircuits
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
www.sciencedirect.com
By showing an equivalence between GC and TE in the Gaussian case, this
paper provides an information-theoretic interpretation of GC magnitude
and eliminates the need to consider more complicated nonlinear GC
measures (given Gaussian data).
21. Goure´ vitch B, Bouquin-Jeanne` s RL, Faucon G: Linear and
nonlinear causality between signals: methods, examples, and
neurophysiological applications. Biol Cybern 2006, 95:349-369.
22. Barrett AB, Barnett LC, Seth AK: Multivariate Granger causality
and generalized variance. Phys Rev E 2010, 81:041907.
23. Bernasconi C, Konig P: On the directionality of cortical
interactions studies by structural analysis of
electrophysiological recordings. Biol Cybern 1999, 81:199-210.
Ding M, Bressler SL, Yang W, Liang H: Short-window spectral
analysis of cortical event-related potentials by adaptive
multivariate autoregressive modelling: data preprocessing,
model validation, and variability assessment. Biol Cybern 2000,
25. Brovelli A, Ding M, Ledberg A, Chen Y, Nakamura R, Bressler SL:
Beta oscillations in a large-scale sensorimotor cortical
network: directional inﬂuences revealed by Granger causality.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:9849-9854.
Bosman CA, Schoffelen J-M, Brunet N, Oostenveld R, Bastos AM,
Womelsdorf T, Rubehn B, Stieglitz T, de Weerd P, Fries P:
Attentional stimulus selection through selective
synchronization between monkey visual areas. Neuron, in
This recent paper applied GC to electrocorticographic data, showing
differential top-down and bottom-up directed functional interactions in
the beta and gamma frequency bands respectively, across widely distributed cortical areas. These data-driven results align well with inﬂuential
predictive coding models of cortical processing (e.g. ).
27. Friston KJ: The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the
brain? Trends Cogn Sci 2009, 13:239-301.
Barrett AB, Murphy M, Bruno M-A, Noirhomme Q, Boly M,
Laureys S, Seth AK: Granger causality analysis of steady-state
electroencephalographic signals during propofol-induced
anaesthesia. PLoS One 2012, 7:e29072.
A rigorous application of GC to source-localised EEG data showing
increases in GC between cortical midline areas under anaesthesia,
particularly in the beta and gamma range. The same data were analysed
using DCM in [47]. Importantly, issues of bias in the GC statistic are
explicitly recognized and accounted for.
29. Murphy M, Bruno M-A, Riedner B, Boveroux P, Noirhomme Q,
Landsness EC, Brichant JF, Phillips C, Massimini M, Laureys S
et al.: Propofol anesthesia and sleep: a high-density EEG
study. Sleep 2011, 34:283-291.
30. David O, Guillemain I, Saillet S, Reyt S, Deransart C, Segebarth C,
Depaulis A: Identifying neural drivers with functional MRI: an
electrophysiological validation. PLoS Biol 2008,
6:2683-2697.
31. Roebroeck A, Formisano E, Goebel R: Mapping directed
inﬂuences over the brain using Granger causality and fMRI.
Neuroimage 2005, 25:230-242.
Wen X, Lau L, Liu Y, Ding M: Causal interactions in attention
networks predict behavioral performance. J Neurosci 2012,
32:1284-1292.
This paper describes a detailed GC analysis of fMRI data in a cued spatial
visual attention task, correlating GC from dorsal to ventral frontoparietal
regions with behavioural performance.
33. Bressler S, Tang W, Sylvester CM, Shulman GS, Corbetta M: Topdown control of human visual cortex by frontal and parietal
cortex in anticipatory visual spatial attention. J Neurosci 2008,
28:10056-10061.
34. Schippers MB, Roebroeck A, Renken R, Nanetti L, Keysers C:
Mapping the information ﬂow from one brain to another during
gestural communication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:9388-9393.
35. Gaillard R, Dehaene S, Adam C, Clemenceau S, Hasboun D,
Baulac M, Cohen L, Naccache L: Convering intracranial markers
of conscious access. PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e61.
36. Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W: Dynamic causal modelling.
Neuroimage 2003, 19:1273-1302.
37. Stephan KE, Weiskopf N, Dyrsdale PM, Robinson PA, Friston KJ:
Comparing hemodynamic models with DCM. Neuroimage
2007, 39:387-401.
38. Penny WD: Comparing dynamic causal models using AIC, BIC,
and free energy. Neuroimage 2012, 59:319-330.
39. Marreiros AC, Kiebel SJ, Daunizeau J, Harrison LM, Friston KJ:
Population dynamics under the Laplace assumption.
Neuroimage 2009, 44:701-714.
Moran RJ, Jung F, Kumagai T, Endepols H, Graf R, Dolan RJ,
Friston KJ, Stephan KE, Tittgemeyer M: Dynamic causal models
and physiological inference a validation study using isoﬂurane
anaesthesia in rodents. PLoS One 2011, 6:e22790.
A validation of DCMs’ estimates of synaptic coupling using intracranial
EEG from rodents was performed using an independent pharmacological
intervention. A two-region DCM (comprising for each region a three layer
cortical model with pyramidal cells and inhibitory interneurons in supra
and infra granular layers and spiny stellate cells in layer IV) was applied to
the steady-state summary of a timeseries from auditory cortex under 4
different doses of isoﬂurane. In line with the hierarchical conﬁguration of
electrode placement, DCM revealed a forward-backward architecture
that best described interactions between primary auditory cortex and
secondary regions, respectively. Moreover a dose effect of isoﬂurane was
observed at excitatory post-synaptic responses that corresponded to a
linear decrease, while a nonlinear increase in inhibitory responses was
commensurately observed. These measurements conformed to the
known physiological effectors of the anaesthetic. These results provide
a validation of DCM’s ability to reveal the synaptic mechanisms underlying inter-regional brain connectivity.
Daunizeau J, David O, Stephan KE: Dynamic causal modelling: a
critical review of the biophysical and statistical foundations.
Neuroimage 2011, 58:312-322.
In this recent review the authors outline the commonalities of established
DCMs, including those for fMRI and M/EEG. They describe the importance of considering major components to DCM together namely: ﬁrst,
the neuronal model, formulated as a set of ordinary differential equations; second, the static observation model that transforms neural
activity to a haemodynamic response, third, the set of priors on model
parameters that enable in-built biological plausibility (such as negative
self-connections to preclude runaway — epileptogenic activity) and
fourth, the variational Bayesian inversion scheme that furnishes both
the evidence for a particular model and its optimal parameters after
observing the data.
42. Bressler S, Seth AK: Wiener–Granger causality: a well
established methodology. Neuroimage 2011,
58:323-329.
43. Goebel R, Roebroeck A, Kim DS, Formisano E: Investigating
directed cortical interactions in time-resolved fMRI data using
vector autoregressive modelling and Granger causality
mapping. Magn Reson Imaging 2003, 21:1251-1261.
44. Seth AK, Chorley P, Barnett LC: Granger causality analysis of
fMRI BOLD signals is invariant to hemodynamic convolution
but not downsampling. Neuroimage 2013, 65:540-555.
45. Smith SM, Miller KL, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Webster M,
Beckmann CF, Nichols TE, Ramsey JD, Woolrich MW: Network
modelling methods for fMRI. Neuroimage 2011,
54:875-891.
Valdes-Sosa PA, Roebroeck A, Daunizeau J, Friston K: Effective
connectivity: inﬂuence, causality and biophysical modeling.
Neuroimage 2011, 58:339-361.
A comprehensive overview of the concepts and mathematics that underlie analyses of directed connectivity. This review surveys the background
and differences between structural and DCM, offering a comparative
evaluation of GC and DCM.
Boly M, Moran R, Murphy M, Boveroux P, Bruno M-A,
Noirhomme Q, Ledoux D, Bonhomme V, Brichant J-F, Tononi G
et al.: Connectivity changes underlying spectral EEG changes
during propofol-induced loss of consciousness. J Neurosci
2012, 32:7082-7090.
In ﬁtting a wideband spectrum of responses from source-localised
EEG (incorporating slow delta and theta up to gamma oscillations), this
report used DCM to test a set of hypothesised model architectures
that could explain spectral differences between healthy human
Analysing connectivity with Granger causality and dynamic causal modelling Friston, Moran and Seth
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
subjects during awake, propofol and loss-of-consciousness states.
The authors used a ‘‘hidden-node’’ to represent thalamus and test
whether it takes part in generating the data from all three states. While
it was found that this hidden node was required for an optimal model
of the data, the cortico-cortical connections were shown to change
with respect to consciousness per se.
48. Li B, Daunizeau J, Stephan KE, Penny WD, Hu D, Friston K:
Generalised ﬁltering and stochastic DCM for fMRI. Neuroimage
2011, 58:442-457.
49. Stephan KE, Kasper L, Harrison L, Daunizeau J, Den Ouden H,
Breakspear M, Friston KJ: Nonlinear dynamic causal models for
fMRI. Neuroimage 2008, 42:649-662.
50. Ryali S, Supekar K, Chen T, Menon V: Multivariate dynamical
systems models for estimating causal interactions in fMRI.
Neuroimage 2011, 54:807-823.
Valdes-Sosa PA, Sanchez-Bornot JM, Lage-Castellos A, Vega-
Hernandez M, Bosch-Bayard J, Melie-Garcia L, Canales-
Rodrigues E: Estimating brain functional connectivity with sparse
multivariate regression. Philos Trans R Soc B 2005, 360:969-981.
52. Friston KJ, Penny W: Post hoc Bayesian model selection.
Neuroimage 2011, 56:2089-2099.
53. Marreiros AC, Kiebel SJ, Friston KJ: Dynamic causal model for
fMRI: a two-state model. Neuroimage 2008, 39:269-278.
Macrocircuits
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2013, 23:172–178
www.sciencedirect.com