Simple Copy-Paste is a Strong Data Augmentation Method
for Instance Segmentation
Golnaz Ghiasi* 1
Yin Cui* 1
Aravind Srinivas* † 1,2
Rui Qian† 1,3
Tsung-Yi Lin1
Ekin D. Cubuk1
Quoc V. Le1
Barret Zoph1
1Google Research, Brain Team
2 UC Berkeley
3 Cornell University
Building instance segmentation models that are dataefﬁcient and can handle rare object categories is an
important challenge in computer vision. Leveraging data
augmentations is a promising direction towards addressing
this challenge.
Here, we perform a systematic study of
the Copy-Paste augmentation (e.g., ) for instance
segmentation where we randomly paste objects onto an
image. Prior studies on Copy-Paste relied on modeling the
surrounding visual context for pasting the objects. However, we ﬁnd that the simple mechanism of pasting objects
randomly is good enough and can provide solid gains on
top of strong baselines. Furthermore, we show Copy-Paste
is additive with semi-supervised methods that leverage
extra data through pseudo labeling (e.g. self-training).
On COCO instance segmentation, we achieve 49.1 mask
AP and 57.3 box AP, an improvement of +0.6 mask AP
and +1.5 box AP over the previous state-of-the-art.
further demonstrate that Copy-Paste can lead to signiﬁcant
improvements on the LVIS benchmark. Our baseline model
outperforms the LVIS 2020 Challenge winning entry by
+3.6 mask AP on rare categories. 1
1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is an important task in
computer vision with many real world applications.
Instance segmentation models based on state-of-the-art convolutional networks are often data-hungry.
At the same time, annotating large datasets for instance
segmentation is usually expensive and timeconsuming. For example, 22 worker hours were spent per
*Equal contribution. Correspondence to: .
†Work done during an internship at Google Research.
1Code and checkpoints for our models are available at https:
//github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/models/
official/detection/projects/copy_paste
Fraction of COCO Dataset
COCO Box AP
Standard Aug.
Strong Aug.
Strong Aug. + Copy-Paste
Figure 1. Data-efﬁciency on the COCO benchmark: Combining
the Copy-Paste augmentation along with Strong Aug. (large scale
jittering) allows us to train models that are up to 2× more dataefﬁcient than Standard Aug. (standard scale jittering). The augmentations are highly effective and provide gains of +10 AP in
the low data regime (10% of data) while still being effective in the
high data regime with a gain of +5 AP. Results are for Mask R-
CNN EfﬁcientNet-B7 FPN trained on an image size of 640×640.
1000 instance masks for COCO . It is therefore imperative to develop new methods to improve the data-efﬁciency
of state-of-the-art instance segmentation models.
Here, we focus on data augmentation as a simple
way to signiﬁcantly improve the data-efﬁciency of instance
segmentation models. Although many augmentation methods such as scale jittering and random resizing have been
widely used , they are more general-purpose
in nature and have not been designed speciﬁcally for instance segmentation. An augmentation procedure that is
more object-aware, both in terms of category and shape,
is likely to be useful for instance segmentation. The Copy-
Paste augmentation is well suited for this need.
By pasting diverse objects of various scales to new background images, Copy-Paste has the potential to create challenging and novel training data for free.
 
Figure 2. We use a simple copy and paste method to create new images for training instance segmentation models. We apply random scale
jittering on two random training images and then randomly select a subset of instances from one image to paste onto the other image.
The key idea behind the Copy-Paste augmentation is to
paste objects from one image to another image. This can
lead to a combinatorial number of new training data, with
multiple possibilities for: (1) choices of the pair of source
image from which instances are copied, and the target image on which they are pasted; (2) choices of object instances
to copy from the source image; (3) choices of where to paste
the copied instances on the target image. The large variety
of options when utilizing this data augmentation method allows for lots of exploration on how to use the technique
most effectively. Prior work adopts methods for deciding where to paste the additional objects by modeling the
surrounding visual context. In contrast, we ﬁnd that a simple strategy of randomly picking objects and pasting them at
random locations on the target image provides a signiﬁcant
boost on top of baselines across multiple settings. Specifically, it gives solid improvements across a wide range of
settings with variability in backbone architecture, extent of
scale jittering, training schedule and image size.
In combination with large scale jittering, we show that
the Copy-Paste augmentation results in signiﬁcant gains in
the data-efﬁciency on COCO (Figure 1). In particular, we
see a data-efﬁciency improvement of 2× over the commonly used standard scale jittering data augmentation. We
also observe a gain of +10 Box AP on the low-data regime
when using only 10% of the COCO training data.
We then show that the Copy-Paste augmentation strategy
provides additional gains with self-training wherein
we extract instances from ground-truth data and paste them
onto unlabeled data annotated with pseudo-labels. Using
an EfﬁcientNet-B7 backbone and NAS-FPN architecture, we achieve 57.3 Box AP and 49.1 Mask AP on
COCO test-dev without test-time augmentations. This
result surpasses the previous state-of-the-art instance segmentation models such as SpineNet (46.3 mask AP)
and DetectoRS ResNeXt-101-64x4d with test time augmentation (48.5 mask AP). The performance also surpasses state-of-the-art bounding box detection results of
EfﬁcientDet-D7x-1536 (55.1 box AP) and YOLOv4-
P7-1536 (55.8 box AP) despite using a smaller image
size of 1280 instead of 1536.
Finally, we show that the Copy-Paste augmentation results in better features for the two-stage training procedure
typically used in the LVIS benchmark . Using Copy-
Paste we get improvements of 6.1 and 3.7 mask AP on the
rare and common categories, respectively.
The Copy-Paste augmentation strategy is easy to plug
into any instance segmentation codebase, can utilize unlabeled images effectively and does not create training or
inference overheads. For example, our experiments with
Mask-RCNN show that we can drop Copy-Paste into its
training, and without any changes, the results can be easily improved, e.g., by +1.0 AP for 48 epochs.
2. Related Work
Data Augmentations. Compared to the volume of work
on backbone architectures and detection/segmentation frameworks , relatively less attention is paid to data augmentations 
in the computer vision community.
Data augmentations
such as random crop , color jittering ,
Auto/RandAugment have played a big role in achieving state-of-the-art results on image classiﬁcation ,
self-supervised learning and semi-supervised
learning on the ImageNet benchmark.
augmentations are more general purpose in nature and are
mainly used for encoding invariances to data transformations, a principle well suited for image classiﬁcation .
Mixing Image Augmentations. In contrast to augmentations that encode invariances to data transformations, there
exists a class of augmentations that mix the information
contained in different images with appropriate changes to
groundtruth labels. A classic example is the mixup data
augmentation method which creates new data points
for free from convex combinations of the input pixels and
the output labels. There have been adaptations of mixup
such as CutMix that pastes rectangular crops of an image instead of mixing all pixels. There have also been applications of mixup and CutMix to object detection . The
Mosaic data augmentation method employed in YOLOv4 is related to CutMix in the sense that one creates a
new compound image that is a rectangular grid of multiple individual images along with their ground truths. While
mixup, CutMix and Mosaic are useful in combining multiple images or their cropped versions to create new training
data, they are still not object-aware and have not been designed speciﬁcally for the task of instance segmentation.
Copy-Paste Augmentation. A simple way to combine information from multiple images in an object-aware manner
is to copy instances of objects from one image and paste
them onto another image. Copy-Paste is akin to mixup and
CutMix but only copying the exact pixels corresponding to
an object as opposed to all pixels in the object’s bounding
box. One key difference in our work compared to Contextual Copy-Paste and InstaBoost is that we do
not need to model surrounding visual context to place the
copied object instances. A simple random placement strategy works well and yields solid improvements on strong
baseline models. Instaboost differs from prior work on
Copy-Paste by not pasting instances from other images
but rather by jiterring instances that already exist on the image. Cut-Paste-and-Learn proposes to extract object instances, blend and paste them on diverse backgrounds and
train on the augmented images in addition to the original
dataset. Our work uses the same method with some differences: (1) We do not use geometric transformations (e.g.
rotation), and ﬁnd Gaussian blurring of the pasted instances
not beneﬁcial; (2) We study Copy-Paste in the context of
pasting objects contained in one image into another image
already populated with instances where studies Copy-
Paste in the context of having a bank of object instances and
background scenes to improve performance; (3) We study
the efﬁcacy of Copy-Paste in the semi-supervised learning
setting by using it in conjunction with self-training. (4) We
benchmark and thoroughly study Copy-Paste on the widely
used COCO and LVIS datasets while Cut-Paste-and-Learn
uses the GMU dataset . A key contribution is that our
paper shows the use of Copy-Paste in improving state-ofthe-art instance segmentation models on COCO and LVIS.
Instance Segmentation. Instance segmentation is
a challenging computer vision problem that attempts to both
detect object instances and segment the pixels corresponding to each instance. Mask-RCNN is a widely used
framework with most state-of-the-art methods 
adopting that approach. The COCO dataset is the widely
used benchmark for measuring progress. We report stateof-the-art2 results on the COCO benchmark surpassing
SpineNet by 2.8 AP and DetectoRS by 0.6 AP.3
Copy and paste approach is also used for weakly supervised instance segmentation. Remez et al. introduce an adversarial approach where it uses a generator network to predict the segmentation mask of an object within a
given bounding box. Given the generated mask, the object
is blended on another background and then a discriminator network is used to make sure the generated mask/image
looks realistic. Different from this work, we use Copy-Paste
as an augmentation method.
Long-Tail Visual Recognition. Recently, the computer vision community has begun to focus on the long-tail nature of object categories present in natural images ,
where many of the different object categories have very few
labeled images. Modern approaches for addressing longtail data when training deep networks can be mainly divided
into two groups: data re-sampling and loss reweighting . Other more complicated
learning methods (e.g., meta-learning , causal
inference , Bayesian methods , etc.) are also used to
deal with long-tail data. Recent work has
pointed out the effectiveness of two-stage training strategies by separating the feature learning and the re-balancing
stage, as end-to-end training with re-balancing strategies
could be detrimental to feature learning. A more comprehensive summary of data imbalance in object detection can
be found in Oksuz et al. . Our work demonstrates simple Copy-Paste data augmentation yields signiﬁcant gains in
both single-stage and two-stage training on the LVIS benchmark, especially for rare object categories.
Our approach for generating new data using Copy-Paste
is very simple. We randomly select two images and apply random scale jittering and random horizontal ﬂipping
on each of them. Then we select a random subset of objects
from one of the images and paste them onto the other image.
Lastly, we adjust the ground-truth annotations accordingly:
we remove fully occluded objects and update the masks and
bounding boxes of partially occluded objects.
Unlike , we do not model the surrounding context and, as a result, generated images can look very different from real images in terms of co-occurrences of objects or related scales of objects. For example, giraffes and
soccer players with very different scales can appear next to
each other (see Figure 2).
2Based on the entries in 
sota/instance-segmentation-on-coco.
3We note that better mask / box AP on COCO have been reported
in COCO competitions in 2019 - 
workshop/coco-mapillary-iccv-2019.html.
(a) Standard Scale Jittering (SSJ)
(b) Large Scale Jittering (LSJ)
Figure 3. Notation and visualization of the two scale jittering augmentation methods used throughout the paper. Standard Scale Jittering
(SSJ) resizes and crops an image with a resize range of 0.8 to 1.25 of the original image size. The resize range in Large Scale Jittering
(LSJ) is from 0.1 to 2.0 of the original image size. If images are made smaller than their original size, then the images are padded with
gray pixel values. Both scale jittering methods also use horizontal ﬂips.
Blending Pasted Objects. For composing new objects into
an image, we compute the binary mask (α) of pasted objects
using ground-truth annotations and compute the new image
as I1 × α + I2 × (1 −α) where I1 is the pasted image and
I2 is the main image. To smooth out the edges of the pasted
objects we apply a Gaussian ﬁlter to α similar to “blending”
in . But unlike , we also found that simply composing without any blending has similar performance.
Large Scale Jittering. We use two different types of
augmentation methods in conjunction with Copy-Paste
throughout the text: standard scale jittering (SSJ) and large
scale jittering (LSJ). These methods randomly resize and
crop images. See Figure 3 for a graphical illustration of the
two methods. In our experiments we observe that the large
scale jittering yields signiﬁcant performance improvements
over the standard scale jittering used in most prior works.
Self-training Copy-Paste. In addition to studying Copy-
Paste on supervised data, we also experiment with it as a
way of incorporating additional unlabeled images. Our selftraining Copy-Paste procedure is as follows: (1) train a supervised model with Copy-Paste augmentation on labeled
data, (2) generate pseudo labels on unlabeled data, (3) paste
ground-truth instances into pseudo labeled and supervised
labeled images and train a model on this new data.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Settings
Architecture. We use Mask R-CNN with Efﬁcient-
Net or ResNet as the backbone architecture. We
also employ feature pyramid networks for multi-scale
feature fusion. We use pyramid levels from P2 to P6, with
an anchor size of 8 × 2l and 3 anchors per pixel.
strongest model uses Cascade R-CNN , EfﬁcientNet-B7
as the backbone and NAS-FPN as the feature pyramid
with levels from P3 to P7. The anchor size is 4 × 2l and
we have 9 anchors per pixel. Our NAS-FPN model uses 5
repeats and we replace convolution layers with ResNet bottleneck blocks .
Training Parameters. All models are trained using synchronous batch normalization using a batch size of
256 and weight decay of 4e-5. We use a learning rate of
0.32 and a step learning rate decay . At the beginning
of training the learning rate is linearly increased over the
ﬁrst 1000 steps from 0.0032 to 0.32. We decay the learning rate at 0.9, 0.95 and 0.975 fractions of the total number
of training steps. We initialize the backbone of our largest
model from an ImageNet checkpoint pre-trained with selftraining to speed up the training. All other results are
from models with random initialization unless otherwise
stated. Also, we use large scale jittering augmentation for
training the models unless otherwise stated. For all different augmentations and dataset sizes in our experiments we
allow each model to train until it converges (i.e., the validation set performance no longer improves). For example,
training a model from scratch with large scale jittering and
Copy-Paste augmentation requires 576 epochs while training with only standard scale jittering takes 96 epochs. For
the self-training experiments we double the batch size to
512 while we keep all the other hyper-parameters the same
with the exception of our largest model where we retain the
batch size of 256 due to memory constraints.
Dataset. We use the COCO dataset which has 118k
training images.
For self-training experiments, we use
the unlabeled COCO dataset (120k images) and the Objects365 dataset (610k images) as unlabeled images.
For transfer learning experiments, we pre-train our models
on the COCO dataset and then ﬁne-tune on the Pascal VOC
dataset . For semantic segmentation, we train our models on the train set (1.5k images) of the PASCAL VOC
2012 segmentation dataset. For detection, we train on the
trainval set of PASCAL VOC 2007 and PASCAL VOC
COCO Box AP
Rand init, w/ SSJ
Rand init, w/ SSJ, w/ Copy-Paste
ImageNet init, w/ SSJ
ImageNet init, w/ SSJ, w/ Copy-Paste
COCO Box AP
Rand init, w/ SSJ
Rand init, w/ SSJ, w/ Copy-Paste
Rand init, w/ LSJ
Rand init, w/ LSJ, w/ Copy-Paste
Figure 4. Copy-Paste provides gains that are robust to training conﬁgurations. We train Mask R-CNN (ResNet-50 FPN) on 1024×1024
image size for varying numbers of epochs. Left Figure: Copy-Paste with and without initializing the backbone by ImageNet pre-training.
Right Figure: Copy-Paste with standard and large scale jittering. Across all of the conﬁgurations training with Copy-Paste is helpful.
2012. We also benchmark Copy-Paste on LVIS v1.0 (100k
training images) and report results on LVIS v1.0 val (20k
images). LVIS has 1203 classes to simulate the long-tail
distribution of classes in natural images.
4.2. Copy-Paste is robust to training conﬁgurations
In this section we show that Copy-Paste is a strong data
augmentation method that is robust across a variety of training iterations, models and training hyperparameters.
Robustness to backbone initialization. Common practice for training Mask R-CNN is to initialize the backbone with an ImageNet pre-trained checkpoint. However
He et al. and Zoph et al. show that a model
trained from random initialization has similar or better performance with longer training. Training models from ImageNet pre-training with strong data-augmentation (i.e. RandAugment ) was shown to hurt the performance by up
to 1 AP on COCO. Figure 4 (left) demonstrates that Copy-
Paste is additive in both setups and we get the best result
using Copy-Paste augmentation and random initialization.
Robustness to training schedules. A typical training
schedule for Mask R-CNN in the literature is only 24 (2×)
or 36 epochs (3×) . However, recent work with
state-of-the-art results show that longer training is helpful
in training object detection models on COCO .
Figure 4 shows that we get gains from Copy-Paste for the
typical training schedule of 2× or 3× and as we increase
training epochs the gain increases. This shows that Copy-
Paste is a very practical data augmentation since we do not
need a longer training schedule to see the beneﬁt.
Copy-Paste is additive to large scale jittering augmentation. Random scale jittering is a powerful data augmentation that has been used widely in training computer vision models. The standard range of scale jittering in the
literature is 0.8 to 1.25 . However, augmenting data with larger scale jittering with a range of 0.1 to
Res-50 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.0) 48.2
(+0.6) 42.4
Res-101 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.4) 49.8
(+0.8) 43.6
Res-101 FPN (1280)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.2) 50.3
(+1.1) 44.2
Eff-B7 FPN (640)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.5) 50.0
(+1.0) 43.7
Eff-B7 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.1) 51.9
(+0.5) 45.2
Eff-B7 FPN (1280)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.5) 52.6
(+1.1) 45.9
Cascade Eff-B7 FPN(1280)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.1) 54.0
(+0.7) 46.3
Table 1. Copy-paste works well across a variety of different model
architectures, model sizes and image resolutions. See table 13 in
the Appendix for benchmark results on different object sizes.
2.0 and longer training signiﬁcantly improves performance (see Figure 4, right plot). Figure 5 demonstrates
that Copy-Paste is additive to both standard and large scale
jittering augmentation and we get a higher boost on top of
standard scale jittering. On the other hand, as it is shown in
Figure 5, mixup data augmentation does not help
when it is used with large scale jittering.
Copy-Paste works across backbone architectures and
image sizes. Finally, we demonstrate Copy-Paste helps
models with standard backbone architecture of ResNet 
as well the more recent architecture of EfﬁcientNet .
We train models with these backbones on the image size of
640×640, 1024×1024 or 1280×1280. Table 1 shows that
we get signiﬁcant improvements over the strong baselines
trained with large scale jittering for all the models. Across
7 models with different backbones and images sizes Copy-
Paste gives on average a 1.3 box AP and 0.8 mask AP improvement on top of large scale jittering.
Fraction of COCO Dataset
w/ SSJ w/ mixup
w/ SSJ w/ Copy-Paste
Fraction of COCO Dataset
w/ LSJ w/ mixup
w/ LSJ w/ Copy-Paste
Figure 5. Copy-Paste is additive to large scale jittering augmentation. Improvement from mixup and Copy-Paste data augmentation on top
of standard scale jittering (Left Figure) and large scale jittering (Right Figure). All results are from training Mask R-CNN EfﬁcientNetB7-
FPN on the image size of 640×640.
Eff-B7 FPN (640)
w/ self-training
(+1.5) 50.0
(+1.3) 44.0
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.5) 50.0
(+1.0) 43.7
w/ self-training Copy-Paste
(+2.9) 51.4
(+2.3) 45.0
Table 2. Copy-Paste and self-training are additive for utilizing extra unlabeled data. We get signiﬁcant improvement of 2.9 box AP
and 2.3 mask AP by combining self-training and Copy-Paste.
4.3. Copy-Paste helps data-efﬁciency
In this section, we show Copy-Paste is helpful across
a variety of dataset sizes and helps data efﬁciency. Figure 5 reveals that Copy-Paste augmentation is always helpful across all fractions of COCO. Copy-Paste is most helpful in the low data regime (10% of COCO) yielding a 6.9
box AP improvement on top of SSJ and a 4.8 box AP improvement on top of LSJ. On the other hand, mixup is only
helpful in a low data regime. Copy-Paste also greatly helps
with data-efﬁciency: a model trained on 75% of COCO with
Copy-Paste and LSJ has a similar AP to a model trained on
100% of COCO with LSJ.
4.4. Copy-Paste and self-training are additive
In this section, we demonstrate that a standard selftraining method similar to and Copy-Paste can be
combined together to leverage unlabeled data. Copy-Paste
and self-training individually have similar gains of 1.5 box
AP over the baseline with 48.5 Box AP (see Table 2).
To combine self-training and Copy-Paste we ﬁrst use a
supervised teacher model trained with Copy-Paste to generate pseudo labels on unlabeled data. Next we take ground
truth objects from COCO and paste them into pseudo labeled images and COCO images. Finally, we train the student model on all these images. With this setup we achieve
51.4 box AP, an improvement of 2.9 AP over the baseline.
Pasting into
self-training
+Copy-Paste
(+0.4) 50.4
+Copy-Paste
Pseudo data
(+0.8) 50.8
(+0.5) 44.5
+Copy-Paste
Pseudo data
(+1.4) 51.4
(+1.0) 45.0
Table 3. Pasting ground-truth COCO objects into both COCO and
pseudo labeled data gives higher gain in comparison to doing either on its own.
Data to Paste on. In our self-training setup, half of the
batch is from supervised COCO data (120k images) and
the other half is from pseudo labeled data (110k images
from unlabeled COCO and 610k from Objects365). Table 3
presents results when we paste COCO instances on different portions of the training images. Pasting into pseudo labeled data yields larger improvements compared to pasting
into COCO. Since the number of images in the pseudo labeled set is larger, using images with more variety as background helps Copy-Paste. We get the maximum gain over
self-training (+1.4 box AP ) when we paste COCO instances
on both COCO and pseudo labeled images.
Data to Copy from. We also explore an alternative way to
use Copy-Paste to incorporate extra data by pasting pseudo
labeled objects from an unlabeled dataset directly into the
COCO labeled dataset. Unfortunately, this setup shows no
additional AP improvements.
4.5. Copy-Paste improves COCO state-of-the-art
Next we study if Copy-Paste can improve state-of-the-art
instance segmentation methods on COCO. Table 4 shows
the results of applying Copy-Paste on top of a strong 54.8
box AP COCO model.
This table is meant to serve as
a reference for state-of-the-art performance.4
For rigor-
4https : / / paperswithcode . com / sota / object detection-on-coco
APtest-dev
Mask APval
Mask APtest-dev
SpineNet-190 (1536) 
DetectoRS ResNeXt-101-64x4d 
SpineNet-190 (1280) 
SpineNet-190 (1280) w/ self-training 
EfﬁcientDet-D7x (1536) 
YOLOv4-P7 (1536) 
Cascade Eff-B7 NAS-FPN (1280)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+1.4) 55.9
(+1.2) 56.0
(+0.4) 47.2
(+0.5) 47.4
w/ self-training Copy-Paste
(+2.5) 57.0
(+2.5) 57.3
(+2.1) 48.9
(+2.2) 49.1
Table 4. Comparison with the state-of-the-art models on COCO object detection and instance segmentation. Parentheses next to the model
name denote the input image size. † indicates results with test time augmentation.
ReﬁneDet512+ 
SNIPER 
Cascade Eff-B7 NAS-FPN
w/ Copy-Paste pre-training
(+0.7) 89.3
(+1.5) 76.5
Table 5. PASCAL VOC 2007 detection result on test set.
We present results of our EfﬁcientNet-B7 NAS-FPN model pretrained with and without Copy-Paste on COCO.
ous comparisons, we note that models need to be evaluated with the same codebase, training data, and training
settings such as learning rate schedule, weight decay, data
pre-processing and augmentations, controlling for parameters and FLOPs, architectural regularization , training and inference speeds, etc. The goal of the table is to
show the beneﬁts of the Copy-Paste augmentation and its
additive gains with self-training. Our baseline model is a
Cascade Mask-RCNN with EfﬁcientNet-B7 backbone and
NAS-FPN. We observe an improvement of +1.2 box AP
and +0.5 mask AP using Copy-Paste.
When combined
with self-training using unlabeled COCO and unlabeled
Objects365 for pseudo-labeling, we see a further improvement of 2.5 box AP and 2.2 mask AP, resulting in a
model with a strong performance of 57.3 box AP and 49.1
mask AP on COCO test-dev without test-time augmentations and model ensembling.
4.6. Copy-Paste produces better representations for
PASCAL detection and segmentation
Previously we have demonstrated the improved performance that the simple Copy-Paste augmentation provides
on instance segmentation.
In this section we study the
transfer learning performance of the pre-trained instance
segmentation models that were trained with Copy-Paste on
COCO. Here we perform transfer learning experiments on
the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset. Table 5 shows how the
learned Copy-Paste models transfer compared to baseline
models on PASCAL detection. Table 6 shows the transfer learning results on PASCAL semantic segmentation as
well. On both PASCAL detection and PASCAL semantic
DeepLabv3+ † 
ExFuse † 
Eff-B7 
Eff-L2 
Eff-B7 NAS-FPN
w/ Copy-Paste pre-training
(+2.7) 86.6
Table 6. PASCAL VOC 2012 semantic segmentation results on
We present results of our EfﬁcientNet-B7 NAS-FPN
model pre-trained with and without Copy-Paste on COCO. † indicates multi-scale/ﬂip ensembling inference.
segmentation we ﬁnd our models trained with Copy-Paste
transfer better for ﬁne-tuning than the baseline models.
4.7. Copy-Paste provides strong gains on LVIS
We benchmark Copy-Paste on the LVIS dataset to see
how it performs on a dataset with a long-tail distribution of
1203 classes. There are two different training paradigms
typically used for LVIS: (1) single-stage where a detector
is trained directly on the LVIS dataset, (2) two-stage where
the model from the ﬁrst stage is ﬁne-tuned with class rebalancing losses to help handle the class imbalance.
Copy-Paste improves single-stage LVIS training. The
single-stage training paradigm is quite similar to our Copy-
Paste setup on COCO. In addition to the standard training
setup, certain methods are used to handle the class imbalance problem on LVIS. One common method is Repeat Factor Sampling (RFS) from , with t = 0.001. This method
aims at helping the large class imbalance problem on LVIS
by over-sampling images that contain less frequent object
categories. For single-stage training on LVIS, we follow
the same training parameters on COCO to train our models
for 180k steps using a 256 batch size. As suggested by ,
we increase the number of detections per image to 300 and
reduce the score threshold to 0. Table 8 shows the results
of applying Copy-Paste to a strong single-stage LVIS baseline of EfﬁcientNet-B7 FPN with 640×640 input size. We
observe that Copy-Paste augmentation outperforms RFS on
AP, APc and APf, but under-performs on APr (the AP for
cRT (ResNeXt-101-32×8d) 
LVIS Challenge 2020 Winner† 
ResNet-50 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+2.0) 32.3
(+4.3) 26.5
(+2.3) 31.8
(+0.6) 35.3
(+2.8) 34.3
ResNet-101 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+2.1) 34.0
(+2.7) 27.4
(+3.4) 33.9
(+0.9) 37.2
(+3.1) 36.4
EfﬁcientNet-B7 FPN (1024)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+2.3) 36.0
(+3.3) 29.7
(+2.7) 35.8
(+1.3) 38.9
(+3.7) 39.2
EfﬁcientNet-B7 NAS-FPN (1280)
w/ Copy-Paste
(+3.4) 38.1
(+6.1) 32.1
(+3.7) 37.1
(+2.1) 41.9
(+4.4) 41.6
Table 7. Comparison with the state-of-the-art models on LVIS v1.0 object detection and instance segmentation. Parentheses next to our
models denote the input image size. † We report the 2020 winning entry’s result without test-time augmentation.
Setup (single-stage)
Eff-B7 FPN (640)
w/ Copy-Paste
w/ RFS w/ Copy-Paste
Table 8. Single-stage training results (mask AP) on LVIS.
rare classes). The best overall result comes from combining RFS and Copy-Paste augmentation, achieving a boost
of +2.4 AP and +8.7 APr.
Copy-Paste improves two-stage LVIS training. Twostage training is widely adopted to address data imbalance and obtain good performance on LVIS .
We aim to study the efﬁcacy of Copy-Paste in this twostage setup. Our two-stage training is as follows: ﬁrst we
train the object detector with standard training techniques
(i.e., same as our single-stage training) and then we ﬁnetune the model trained in the ﬁrst stage using the Class-
Balanced Loss . The weight for a class is calculated by
(1−β)/(1−βn), where n is the number of instances of the
class and β = 0.999.5 During the second stage ﬁne-tuning,
we train the model with 3× schedule and only update the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer in Mask R-CNN using the classiﬁcation loss only. From mask AP results in Table 9, we can
see models trained with Copy-Paste learn better features for
low-shot classes (+2.3 on APr and +2.6 on APc). Interestingly, we ﬁnd RFS, which is quite helpful and additive with
Copy-Paste in single-stage training, hurts the performance
in two-stage training. A possible explanation for this ﬁnding is that features learned with RFS are worse than those
learned with the original LVIS dataset. We leave a more detailed investigation of the tradeoffs between RFS and data
augmentations in two stage training for future work.
Comparison with the state-of-the-art. Furthermore, we
compare our two-stage models with state-of-the-art meth-
5We scale class weights by dividing the mean and then clip their values
to [0.01, 5], as suggested by .
Setup (two-stage)
Eff-B7 FPN (640)
w/ Copy-Paste
w/ RFS w/ Copy-Paste
Table 9. Two-stage training results (mask AP) on LVIS.
ods for LVIS6 in Table 7. Surprisingly, our smallest model,
ResNet-50 FPN, outperforms a strong baseline cRT 
with ResNeXt-101-32×8d backbone.
EfﬁcientNet-B7 NAS-FPN model (without Cascade 7)
trained with Copy-Paste achieves comparable performance
to LVIS challenge 2020 winner on overall Mask AP and
Box AP without test-time augmentation. Also, it obtains
32.1 mask APr for rare categories, outperforming the LVIS
Challenge 2020 winning entry by +3.6 mask APr.
5. Conclusion
Data augmentation is at the heart of many vision systems. In this paper, we rigorously studied the Copy-Paste
data augmentation method, and found that it is very effective and robust. Copy-Paste performs well across multiple experimental settings and provides signiﬁcant improvements on top of strong baselines, both on the COCO and
LVIS instance segmentation benchmarks.
The Copy-Paste augmentation strategy is simple, easy to
plug into any instance segmentation codebase, and does not
increase the training cost or inference time. We also showed
that Copy-Paste is useful for incorporating extra unlabeled
images during training and is additive on top of successful
self-training techniques. We hope that the convincing empirical evidence of its beneﬁts make Copy-Paste augmentation a standard augmentation procedure when training instance segmentation models.
6 
7We ﬁnd using Cascade in our experiments improves APf but hurts APr.