Learning to Generate Chairs with Convolutional Neural Networks
Alexey Dosovitskiy
Jost Tobias Springenberg
Thomas Brox
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg
{dosovits, springj, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de
We train a generative convolutional neural network
which is able to generate images of objects given object
type, viewpoint, and color. We train the network in a supervised manner on a dataset of rendered 3D chair models. Our experiments show that the network does not merely
learn all images by heart, but rather ﬁnds a meaningful
representation of a 3D chair model allowing it to assess
the similarity of different chairs, interpolate between given
viewpoints to generate the missing ones, or invent new chair
styles by interpolating between chairs from the training set.
We show that the network can be used to ﬁnd correspondences between different chairs from the dataset, outperforming existing approaches on this task.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been shown
to be very successful on a variety of computer vision tasks,
such as image classiﬁcation , detection 
and segmentation . All these tasks have in common
that they can be posed as discriminative supervised learning problems, and hence can be solved using CNNs which
are known to perform well given a large enough labeled
dataset. Typically, a task solved by supervised CNNs involves learning mappings from raw sensor inputs to some
sort of condensed, abstract output representation, such as
object identity, position or scale. In this work, we stick with
supervised training, but we turn the standard discriminative
CNN upside down and use it to generate images given highlevel information.
Given the set of 3D chair models of Aubry et al. , we
aim to train a neural network capable of generating 2D projections of the models given the chair type, viewpoint, and,
optionally, other parameters such as color, brightness, saturation, zoom, etc. Our neural network accepts as input these
high-level values and produces an RGB image. We train it
using standard backpropagation to minimize the Euclidean
reconstruction error of the generated image.
It is not a surprise that a large enough neural network
Figure 1. Interpolation between two chair models (original: top
left, ﬁnal: bottom left). The generative convolutional neural network learns the manifold of chairs, allowing it to interpolate between chair styles, producing realistic intermediate styles.
can perfectly approximate any function on the training set.
In our case, a network potentially could just learn by heart
all examples and provide perfect reconstructions of these,
but would behave unpredictably when confronted with inputs it has not seen during training. We show that this is not
what is happening, both because the network is too small to
just remember all images, and because we observe generalization to previously unseen data. Namely, we show that
the network is capable of: 1) knowledge transfer: given limited number of viewpoints of an object, the network can use
the knowledge learned from other similar objects to infer
the remaining viewpoints; 2) interpolation between different objects; see Figure 1 for an example.
In what follows we describe the model in detail, analyze
the internal functioning of the network and study generalization of the network to unseen data, as described above.
As an example of a practical application, we apply point
tracking to ’morphings’ of different chairs (as in Figure 1)
to ﬁnd correspondences between these chairs. We show that
this method is more accurate than existing approaches.
2. Related work
Work on generative models of images typically addresses the problem of unsupervised learning of a data
model which can generate samples from a latent represen-
 
tation. Prominent examples from this line of work are restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) and Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBMs) , as well as the plethora of
models derived from them . RBMs and
DBMs are undirected graphical models which aim to build a
probabilistic model of the data and treat encoding and generation as an (intractable) joint inference problem.
A different approach is to train directed graphical models of the data distribution. This includes a wide variety
of methods ranging from Gaussian mixture models 
to autoregressive models and stochastic variations of
neural networks . Among them Rezende
et al. developed an approach for training a generative
model with variational inference by performing (stochastic)
backpropagation through a latent Gaussian representation.
Goodfellow et al. model natural images using a ”deconvolutional” generative network that is similar to our architecture.
Most unsupervised generative models can be extended
to incorporate label information, forming semi-supervised
and conditional generative models which lie between fully
unsupervised approaches and our work. Examples include:
gated conditional RBMs for modeling image transformations, training RBMs to disentangle face identity and
pose information using conditional RBMs , and learning a generative model of digits conditioned on digit class
using variational autoencoders . In contrast to our work,
these approaches are typically restricted to small models
and images, and they often require an expensive inference
procedure – both during training and for generating images.
The general difference of our approach to prior work
on learning generative models is that we assume a highlevel latent representation of the images is given and use
supervised training. This allows us 1) to generate relatively
large high-quality images of 128 × 128 pixels (as compared to maximum of 48 × 48 pixels in the aforementioned
works) and 2) to completely control which images to generate rather than relying on random sampling. The downside
is, of course, the need for a label that fully describes the
appearance of each image.
Modeling of viewpoint variation is often considered in
the context of pose-invariant face recognition . In
a recent work Zhu et al. approached this task with a
neural network: their network takes a face image as input
and generates a random view of this face together with the
corresponding viewpoint. The network is fully connected
and hence restricted to small images and, similarly to generative models, requires random sampling to generate a desired view. This makes it inapplicable to modeling large and
diverse images, such as the chair images we model.
Our work is also loosely related to applications of CNNs
to non-discriminative tasks, such as super-resolution or
inferring depth from a single image .
3. Model description
Our goal is to train a neural network to generate accurate
images of chairs from a high-level description: class, orientation with respect to the camera, and additional parameters
such as color, brightness, etc.
Formally, we assume that we are given a dataset of examples D = {(c1, v1, θ1), . . . , (cN, vN, θN)} with targets
O = {(x1, s1), . . . , (xN, sN)}. The input tuples consist of
three vectors: c is the class label in one-hot encoding, v –
azimuth and elevation of the camera position (represented
by their sine and cosine 1) and θ – the parameters of additional artiﬁcial transformations applied to the images. The
targets are the RGB output image x and the segmentation
We include artiﬁcial transformations Tθ described by
the randomly generated parameter vector θ to increase the
amount of variation in the training data and reduce overﬁtting, analogous to data augmentation in discriminative CNN
training . Each Tθ is a combination of the following transformations: in-plane rotation, translation, zoom,
stretching horizontally or vertically, changing hue, changing saturation, changing brightness.
3.1. Network architecture
We experimented with networks for generating images
of size 64×64 and 128×128. The network architectures for
both variations are identical except that the smaller network
is reduced by one convolutional layer. The structure of the
larger 128 × 128 generative network is shown in Figure 2.
Conceptually the generative network, which we formally
refer to as g(c, v, θ), looks like a usual CNN turned upside
down. It can be thought of as the composition of two processing steps g = u ◦h.
Layers FC-1 to FC-4 ﬁrst build a shared, high dimensional hidden representation h(c, v, θ) from the input parameters. Within these layers the three input vectors are
ﬁrst independently fed through two fully connected layers
with 512 neurons each, and then the outputs of these three
streams are concatenated. This independent processing is
followed by two fully connected layers with 1024 neurons
each, yielding the response of the fourth fully connected
layer (FC-4).
After these fully connected layers the network splits
into two streams (layers FC-5 and uconv-1 to uconv-4),
which independently generate the image and object mask
from the shared hidden representation. We denote these
streams uRGB(·) and usegm(·). Each of them consists of
a fully connected layer, the output of which is reshaped
to a 8 × 8 multichannel image and fed through 4 ’unpool-
1We do this to deal with periodicity of the angle. If we simply used the
number of degrees, the network would have no way to understand that 0
and 359 degrees are in fact very close.
Euclidean error x 10
Euclidean error x 1
(transformed)
Figure 2. Architecture of the 128 × 128 network. Layer names are shown above: FC - fully connected, uconv - unpooling+convolution.
2x2 unpooling:
2x2 unpooling +
5x5 convolution:
Illustration
unpooling+convolution (right) as used in the generative network.
ing+convolution’ layers with 5 × 5 ﬁlters and 2 × 2 unpooling. Each layer, except the output layers, is followed by a
rectiﬁed linear (ReLU) nonlinearity.
In order to map the dense 8 × 8 representation to a high
dimensional image, we need to unpool the feature maps
(i.e. increase their spatial span) as opposed to the pooling
(shrinking the feature maps) implemented by usual CNNs.
As illustrated in Figure 3 (left), we perform unpooling by
simply replacing each entry of a feature map by an s × s
block with the entry value in the top left corner and zeros elsewhere. This increases the width and the height of
the feature map s times. We used s = 2 in our networks.
When a convolutional layer is preceded by such an unpooling operation we can thus think of unpooling+convolution
as the inverse operation of the convolution+pooling steps
performed in a standard CNN (see Figure 3 right). This
is similar to the “deconvolutional” layers used in previous
work .
3.2. Generative training
The network parameters W, consisting of all layer
weights and biases, are then trained by minimizing the Euclidean error of reconstructing the segmented-out chair image and the segmentation mask (the weights W are omitted
from the arguments of h and u for brevity of notation):
λ∥uRGB(h(ci, vi, θi)) −Tθi(xi · si)∥2
+∥usegm(h(ci, vi, θi)) −Tθisi∥2
where λ is a weighting term, trading off between accurate
reconstruction of the image and its segmentation mask respectively. We set λ = 10 in all experiments.
Note that although the mask could be inferred indirectly from the RGB image by exploiting monotonous background, we do not rely on this but rather require the network
to explicitly output the mask. We never directly show these
generated masks in the following, but we use them to add
white background to the generated examples in many ﬁgures.
3.3. Dataset
As training data for the generative networks we used the
set of 3D chair models made public by Aubry et al. .
More speciﬁcally, we used the dataset of rendered views
they provide. It contains 1393 chair models, each rendered
from 62 viewpoints: 31 azimuth angles (with step of 11 degrees) and 2 elevation angles (20 and 30 degrees), with a
Figure 4. Several representative chair images used for training the
ﬁxed distance to the chair. We found that the dataset includes many near-duplicate models, models differing only
by color, or low-quality models. After removing these we
ended up with a reduced dataset of 809 models, which we
used in our experiments. We cropped the renders to have
a small border around the chair and resized to a common
size of 128 × 128 pixels, padding with white where necessary to keep the aspect ratio. Example images are shown in
Figure 4. For training the network we also used segmentation masks of all training examples, which we produced by
subtracting the monotonous white background.
3.4. Training details
For training the networks we built on top of the caffe
CNN implementation . We used stochastic gradient descent with a ﬁxed momentum of 0.9. We ﬁrst trained with
a learning rate of 0.0002 for 500 passes through the whole
dataset (epochs), and then performed 300 additional epochs
of training, dividing the learning rate by 2 after every 100
epochs. We initialized the weights of the network with orthogonal matrices, as recommended by Saxe et al. .
When training the 128 × 128 network from scratch, we
observed that its initial energy value never starts decreasing.
Since we expect the high-level representation of the 64×64
and 128 × 128 networks to be very similar, we mitigated
this problem by initializing the weights of the 128 × 128
network with the weights of the trained 64 × 64 network,
except for the two last layers.
We used the 128×128 network in all experiments except
for the viewpoint interpolation experiments in section 5.1.
In those we used the 64×64 network to reduce computation
4. Analysis of the network
Neural networks are known to largely remain ’black
boxes’ whose function is hard to understand. In this section we provide an analysis of our trained generative network with the aim to obtain some intuition about its internal
working. We only present the most interesting results here;
more can be found in the supplementary material.
4.1. Network capacity
The ﬁrst observation is that the network successfully
models the variation in the data. Figure 5 shows results
Figure 5. Generation of chair images while activating various
transformations. Each row shows one transformation: translation,
rotation, zoom, stretch, saturation, brightness, color. The middle
column shows the reconstruction without any transformation.
where the network was forced to generate chairs that are signiﬁcantly transformed relative to the original images. Each
row shows a different type of transformation. Images in the
central column are non-transformed. Even in the presence
of large transformations, the quality of the generated images
is basically as good as without transformation. The image
quality typically degrades a little in case of unusual chair
shapes (such as rotating ofﬁce chairs) and chairs including
ﬁne details such as armrests (see e.g. one of the armrests in
row 7 in Figure 5) or thin elements in the back of the chair
(row 3 in Figure 5).
An interesting observation is that the network easily
deals with extreme color-related transformations, but has
some problems representing large spatial changes, especially translations. Our explanation is that the architecture
we use does not have means to efﬁciently model, say, translations: since transformation parameters only affect fully
connected layers, the network needs to learn a separate
’template’ for each position. A more complex architecture,
which would allow transformation parameters to explicitly
affect the feature maps of convolutional layers (by translating, rotating, zooming them) might further improve generation quality.
We did not extensively experiment with different network conﬁgurations. However, small variations in the network’s depth and width did not seem to have signiﬁcant effect on the performance. It is still likely that parameters
Figure 6. Output layer ﬁlters of the 128×128 network. Top: RGB
stream. Bottom: Segmentation stream.
such as the number of layers and their sizes can be further
optimized.
The 128 × 128 network has approximately 32 million
parameters, the majority of which are in the ﬁrst fully connected layers of RGB and segmentation streams (FC-5): approximately 16 and 8 million, respectively. This is by far
fewer than the approximately 400 million foreground pixels
in the training data even when augmentation is not applied.
When augmentation is applied, the training data size becomes virtually inﬁnite. These calculations show that learning all samples by heart is not an option.
4.2. Activating single units
One way to analyze a neural network (artiﬁcial or real)
is to visualize the effect of single neuron activations. Although this method does not allow us to judge about the
network’s actual functioning, which involves a clever combination of many neurons, it still gives a rough idea of what
kind of representation is created by the different network
Activating single neurons of uconv-3 feature maps (last
feature maps before the output) is equivalent to simply looking at the ﬁlters of these layers which are shown in Figure 6.
The ﬁnal output of the network at each position is a linear
combination of these ﬁlters. As to be expected, they include
edges and blobs.
Our model is tailored to generate images from high-level
neuron activations, which allows us to activate a single neuron in some of the higher layers and forward-propagate
down to the image. The results of this procedure for different layers of the network are shown in Figures 7 and 9.
Each row corresponds to a different network layer. The leftmost image in each row is generated by setting all neurons
of the layer to zero, and the other images – by activating
one randomly selected neuron.
In Figure 7 the ﬁrst two rows show images produced
when activating neurons of FC-1 and FC-2 feature maps
of the class stream while keeping viewpoint and transformation inputs ﬁxed. The results clearly look chair-like but
do not show much variation (the most visible difference is
chair vs armchair), which suggests that larger variations are
achievable by activating multiple neurons.
The last two
rows show results of activating neurons of FC-3 and FC-
4 feature maps.
These feature maps contain joint classviewpoint-transformation representations, hence the viewpoint is not ﬁxed anymore. The generated images still re-
Figure 7. Images generated from single unit activations in feature
maps of different fully connected layers of the 128×128 network.
From top to bottom: FC-1 and FC-2 of the class stream, FC-3,
Figure 8. The effect of increasing the activation of the ’zoom neuron’ we found in the layer FC-4 feature map.
Figure 9. Images generated from single neuron activations in feature maps of some layers of the 128 × 128 network. From top
to bottom: uconv-2, uconv-1, FC-5 of the RGB stream. Relative
scale of the images is correct. Bottom images are 57 × 57 pixel,
approximately half of the chair size.
semble chairs but get much less realistic. This is to be expected: the further away from the inputs, the less semantic
meaning there is in the activations. One interesting ﬁnding
is that there is a ’zoom neuron’ in layer FC-4 (middle image
in the last row of Figure 7). When its value is increased, the
output chair image gets zoomed. This holds not only for the
case in which all other activations are zero, but also if the
hidden representation contains the information for generating an actual chair, see Figure 8 for an example.
Images generated from single neurons of the convolutional layers are shown in Figure 9. A somewhat disappointing observation is that while single neurons in later layers
(uconv-2 and uconv-3) produce edge-like images, the neurons of higher deconvolutional layers generate only blurry
’clouds’, as opposed to the results of Zeiler and Fergus 
with a classiﬁcation network and max-unpooling. Our explanation is that because we use naive regular-grid unpooling, the network cannot slightly shift small parts to precisely
arrange them into larger meaningful structures. Hence it
must ﬁnd another way to generate ﬁne details. In the next
subsection we show that this is achieved by a combination
of spatially neighboring neurons.
4.3. Analysis of the hidden layers
Rather than just activating single neurons while keeping
all others ﬁxed to zero, we can use the network to normally
generate an image and then analyze the hidden layer activations by either looking at them or modifying them and
observing the results. An example of this approach was already used above in Figure 8 to understand the effect of the
’zoom neuron’. We present two more results in this direction here, and several more can be found in the supplementary material.
In order to ﬁnd out how the blurry ’clouds’ generated by
single high-level deconvolutional neurons (Figure 9) form
perfectly sharp chair images, we smoothly interpolate between a single activation and the whole chair. Namely, we
start with the FC-5 feature maps of a chair, which have a
spatial extent of 8 × 8. Next we only keep active neurons
in a region around the center of the feature map (setting all
other activations to zero), gradually increasing the size of
this region from 2 × 2 to 8 × 8. Hence, we can see the
effect of going from almost single-neuron activation level
to the whole image level. The outcome is shown in Figure 10. Clearly, the interaction of neighboring neurons is
very important: in the central region, where many neurons
are active, the image is sharp, while in the periphery it is
blurry. One interesting effect that is visible in the images is
how sharply the legs of the chair end in the second to last
image but appear in the larger image. This suggests highly
non-linear suppression effects between activations of neighboring neurons.
Lastly some interesting observations can be made by taking a closer look at the feature maps of the uconv-3 layer
(the last pre-output layer). Some of them exhibit regular
patterns shown in Figure 11. These feature maps correspond to ﬁlters which look near-empty in Figure 6 (such as
the 3rd and 10th ﬁlters in the ﬁrst row). Our explanation
of these patterns is that they compensate high-frequency
artifacts originating from ﬁxed ﬁlter sizes and regular-grid
unpooling. This is supported by the last row of Figure 11
which shows what happens to the generated image when
these feature maps are set to zero.
Figure 10. Chairs generated from spatially masked FC-5 feature
maps (the feature map size is 8 × 8). The size of the non-zero
region increases left to right: 2 × 2, 4 × 4, 6 × 6, 8 × 8.
Figure 11. Top: Selected feature maps from the pre-output layer
(uconv-3) of the RGB stream. These feature maps correspond to
the ﬁlters which look near-empty in Figure 6. Middle: Close-ups
of the feature maps. Bottom: Generation of a chair with these
feature maps set to zero (left image pair) or left unchanged (right).
Note the high-frequency artifacts in the left pair of images.
5. Experiments
5.1. Interpolation between viewpoints
In this section we show that the generative network is
able to generate previously unseen views by interpolating
between views present in the training data. This demonstrates that the network internally learns a representation
of chairs which enables it to judge about chair similarity
and use the known examples to generate previously unseen
In this experiment we use the 64 × 64 network to reduce computational costs. We randomly separate the chair
styles into two subsets: the ’source set’ with 90 % styles
and the ’target set’ with the remaining 10 % chairs. We
then vary the number of viewpoints per style either in both
these datasets together (’no transfer’) or just in the target
set (’with transfer’) and then train the generative network
as before. In the second setup the idea is that the network
may use the knowledge about chairs learned from the source
set (which includes all viewpoints) to generate the missing
viewpoints of the chairs from the target set.
Figure 12 shows some representative examples of angle
Figure 12. Examples of interpolation between angles. In each pair
of rows the top row is with knowledge transfer and the second without. In each row the leftmost and the rightmost images are
the views presented to the network during training, while all intermediate ones are not and hence are results of interpolation. The
number of different views per chair available during training is 15,
8, 4, 2, 1 (top-down). Image quality is worse than in other ﬁgures
because we use the 64 × 64 network here.
interpolation. For 15 views in the target set (ﬁrst pair of
rows) the effect of the knowledge transfer is already visible: interpolation is smoother and ﬁne details are preserved
better, for example a leg in the middle column. Starting
from 8 views (second pair of rows and below) the network
without knowledge transfer fails to produce satisfactory interpolation, while the one with knowledge transfer works
reasonably well even with just one view presented during
training (bottom pair of rows). However, in this case some
ﬁne details, such as the armrest shape, are lost.
In Figure 13 we plot the average Euclidean error of the
generated missing viewpoints from the target set, both with
and without transfer (blue and green curves). Clearly, presence of all viewpoints in the source dataset dramatically
improves the performance on the target set, especially for
small numbers of available viewpoints.
Number of viewpoints in the target set
Average squared error per pixel
No knowledge transfer
With knowledge transfer
Nearest neighbor HOG
Nearest neighbor RGB
Figure 13. Reconstruction error for unseen views of chairs from
the target set depending on the number of viewpoints present during training. Blue: all viewpoints available in the source dataset
(knowledge transfer), green: the same number of viewpoints are
available in the source and target datasets (no knowledge transfer).
One might suppose (for example looking at the bottom
pair of rows of Figure 12) that the network simply learns all
the views of the chairs from the source set and then, given a
limited number of views of a new chair, ﬁnds the most similar one, in some sense, among the known models and simply
returns the images of that chair. To check if this is the case,
we evaluate the performance of such a naive nearest neighbor approach. For each image in the target set we ﬁnd the
closest match in the source set for each of the given views
and interpolate the missing views by linear combinations of
the corresponding views of the nearest neighbors. For ﬁnding nearest neighbors we try two similarity measures: Euclidean distance between RGB images and between HOG
descriptors. The results are shown in Figure 13. Interestingly, although HOG yields semantically much more meaningful nearest neighbors (not shown in ﬁgures), RGB similarity performs much better numerically. The performance
of this nearest neighbor method is always worse than that of
the network, suggesting that the network learns more than
just linearly combining the known chairs, especially when
many viewpoints are available in the target set.
5.2. Interpolation between classes
Remarkably, the generative network can interpolate not
only between different viewpoints of the same object, but
also between different objects, so that all intermediate images are also meaningful. To obtain such interpolations, we
simply linearly change the input label vector from one class
to another. Some representative examples of such morphings are shown in Figure 14.
The images are sorted by
subjective morphing quality (decreasing from top to bottom). The network produces very naturally looking morphings even in challenging cases, such as the ﬁrst 5 rows.
Figure 14. Examples of morphing different chairs, one morphing
per row. Leftmost and rightmost chairs in each row are present
in the training set, all intermediate ones are generated by the network. Rows are ordered by decreasing subjective quality of the
morphing, from top to bottom.
In the last three rows the morphings are qualitatively worse:
some of the intermediate samples do not look much like real
chairs. However, the result of the last row is quite intriguing
as different types of intermediate leg styles are generated.
More examples of morphings are shown in the supplementary material.
Correspondences
The ability of the generative CNN to interpolate between
different chairs allows us to ﬁnd dense correspondences between different object instances, even if their appearance is
very dissimilar.
Given two chairs from the training dataset, we use the
128 × 128 network to generate a morphing consisting of 64
images (with ﬁxed view). We then compute the optical ﬂow
in the resulting image sequence using the code of Brox et
al. . To compensate for the drift, we reﬁne the computed
optical ﬂow by recomputing it with a step of 9 frames, initialized by concatenated per-frame ﬂows. Concatenation of
these reﬁned optical ﬂows gives the global vector ﬁeld that
connects corresponding points in the two chair images.
In order to numerically evaluate the quality of the correspondences, we created a small test set of 30 image pairs
(examples are shown in the supplementary material). We
SIFT ﬂow 
Table 1. Average displacement (in pixels) of corresponding keypoints found by different methods on the whole test set and on the
’simple’ and ’difﬁcult’ subsets.
manually annotated several keypoints in the ﬁrst image of
each pair (in total 295 keypoints in all images) and asked 9
people to manually mark corresponding points in the second
image of each pair. We then used mean keypoint positions
in the second images as ground truth. At test time we measured the performance of different methods by computing
average displacement of predicted keypoints in the second
images given keypoints in the ﬁrst images. We also manually annotated an additional validation set of 20 image pairs
to tune the parameters of all methods (however, we were
not able to search the parameters exhaustively because some
methods have many).
In Table 1 we show the performance of our algorithm
compared to human performance and two baselines: SIFT
ﬂow and Deformable Spatial Pyramid (DSP). To
analyze the performance in more detail, we additionally
manually separated the pairs into 10 ’simple’ ones (two
chairs are quite similar in appearance) and 20 ’difﬁcult’
ones (two chairs differ a lot in appearance). On average
the very basic approach we used outperforms both baselines thanks to the intermediate samples produced by the
generative neural network. More interestingly, while SIFT
ﬂow and DSP have problems with the difﬁcult pairs, our algorithm does not. This suggests that errors of our method
are largely due to contrast changes and drift in the optical
ﬂow, which does not depend on the difﬁculty of the image
pair. The approaches are hence complementary: while for
similar objects direct matching is fairly accurate, for more
dissimilar ones intermediate morphings are very helpful.
6. Conclusions
We have shown that supervised training of convolutional
neural network can be used not only for standard discriminative tasks, but also for generating images given highlevel class, viewpoint and lighting information. A network
trained for such a generative task does not merely learn
to generate the training samples, but also generalizes well,
which allows it to smoothly morph different object views
or object instances into each other with all intermediate images also being meaningful. It is fascinating that the relatively simple architecture we proposed is already able to
learn such complex behavior.
From the technical point of view, it is impressive that the
network is able to process very different inputs – class label,
viewpoint and the parameters of additional chromatic and
spatial transformations – using exactly the same standard
layers of ReLU neurons. It demonstrates again the wide
applicability of convolutional networks.