High Speed Networks
OPTIMIZATION FLOW CONTROL WITH NEWTON-LIKE ALGORITHM *
Sanjeewa Athuraliya and Steven Low
Department of EEE, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Vic 3052, Australia
We proposed earlier an optimization approach to reactive
flow control where the objective of the control is to maxi-
mize the aggregate utility of all sources over their transmis-
sion rates. The control mechanism is derived as a gradi-
ent projection algorithm to solve the dual problem. In this
paper we extend the algorithm to a scaled gradient projec-
tion. The diagonal scaling matrix approximates the diago-
nal terms of the Hessian and can be computed at individual
links using the same information required by the unscaled
algorithm. We prove the convergence of the scaled algo-
rithm and present simulation results that illustrate its supe-
riority to the unscaled algorithm.
1 Introduction
We have proposed previously an optimization approach to
flow control where the control mechanism is derived as a
gradient projection algorithm to solve the dual of a global
optimization problem [14, 13, 171. The solution is decom-
posed into simple algorithms that are executed at individ-
ual links and sources using ‘local’ information. It is well
known that Newton method, where the gradient is scaled
by the inverse of the second derivative matrix, typically en-
joys a much faster convergence than gradient projection al-
gorthim. For us, however, the exact Newton method will
require non-local information and hence cannot be easily
implemented in a large network. The purpose of this paper
is to describe an approximate Newton method to solve the
dual optimization problem using only diagonal scaling, and
illustrate its behavior with preliminary simulation results.
Specifically consider a network that consists of a set L of
unidirectional links of capacities cl, 1 E L. The network is
shared by a set S of sources, where source s is characterized
by a utility function U,(z,) that is concave increasing in its
transmission rate x g . The goal is to calculate source rates
that maximize the sum of the utilities CsES
Us(z,) over
x, subject to capacity constraints. Solving this problem
centrally would require not only the knowledge of all util-
ity functions, but worse still, complex coordination among
‘The first author acknowledges the Australian Commonwealth Gov-
ernment for their Australian Postgraduate Award, and the second author
acknowledges the support of the Australian Research Council under grant
potentially all sources due to coupling of sources through
shared links. The key is to solve the dual problem that de-
composes the task into simple local computations at indi-
vidual links and sources.
The algorithm takes the familiar form of reactive flow con-
trol. Based on the local aggregate source rate each link 1 E
L calculates a ‘price’ pl for a unit of bandwidth. A source
s is fed back the scalar price ps =
pl, where the sum is
taken over all links that s uses, and it chooses a transmis-
sion rate x, that maximizes its own benefit U,(z,) - psz,,
utility minus the bandwidth cost. These individually opti-
mal rates (x, (p”) s E S ) may not be socially optimal for a
general price vector (pl, 1 E L), i.e., they may not maximize
the aggregate utility. The algorithm iteratively approaches
a price vector (p; 1 E L) that aligns individual and social
optimality.
The basic algorithm to solve the dual problem presented in
[ 141 is a gradient projection method. A preliminary proto-
type based on this algorithm is discussed in . Its con-
vergence is proved in in both synchronous and asyn-
chronous settings. The basic algorithm requires commu-
nication of link prices to sources and source rates to links
and is thus not implementatble in the current Internet. In
 , we describe a Random Early Marking (REM)
which can be regarded as a practical implementation of the
basic algorithm in [14, 181 using binary feedback. It can
be implemented, e.g., with the proposed explicit congestion
notification (ECN) bit in the IP (Internet Protocol) header
In this paper, we generalize the basic algorithm of gradient
projection to an approximate Newton algorithm that has a
better convergence property.
There is a tremendous literature on flow control, including
early schemes based on practical experiences, e.g., [lo, 71,
and recent schemes based on control theory, e.g., [l, 3, 41.
Optimization based flow control have been proposed in
[9, 5, 11, 12, 8, 14, 16, 181 All these works motivate flow
control by an optimization problem and derive their control
mechanisms as solutions to the optimization problem. They
differ in their choice of objective functions or their solution
0-7803-5796-5/99/$10.00 0
Global Telecommunications Conference - Globecorn’99
High Speed Networks
approaches, and result in rather different flow control mech-
anisms to be implemented at the sources and the network
The present paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we
review our optimization framework and describe the New-
ton like algorithm. In Section 3 we first show that the al-
gorithm converges and then show, through simulations, that
it converges significantly faster than the gradient projection
algortihm of [14, 161. All proofs are omitted due to space
limitation.
2 Model and algorithm
Consider a network that consists of a set L = (1,. . . , L}
of unidirectional links of capacities cl, 1 E L. ' The net-
work is shared by a set S = { 1, . . . , S} of sources. Source
s is characterized by four parameters (L( s), U,, m,, Ms).
The path L(s)
L is a subset of links that source s uses,
?J? is a utility function, m, 2 0 and M, 5 CO
are the minimum and maximum transmission rates, respec-
tively, required by source s. Source s attains a utility U,(z,)
when it transmits at rate z, that satisfies m, 5 z, 5 Ms.
Let I, = [m,, M,]
denote the range in which source rate
2, must lie and I = (I,,s E S) be the vector. We as-
sume that U, is increasing, strictly concave, and twice con-
tinuously differentiable on I,[m,, M,]. For each link I let
S(1) = {s E S 1 1 E L(s)) be the set of sources that use
link 1. Note that 1 E L(s) if and only ifs E S(1).
Our objective is to choose source rates z = (xs, s E S) so
p: max&€I. C U s ( z s )
subject to
z, 5 CI, E = 1, ..., L. (2)
The constraint (2) says that the aggregate source rate at any
link 1 is less than the capacity. A unique maximizer, called
the primal optimal solution, exists since the objective func-
tion is strictly concave, and hence continuous, and the fea-
sible solution set is compact.
Though the objective function is separable in z,, the source
rates 2, are coupled by the constraint (2). Solving the pri-
mal problem (1-2) directly requires coordination among
possibly all sources and is impractical in real networks. The
key to a distributed and decentralized solution is to look at
We abuse notation and use the same symbol to denote both a set and
its cardinality when there is no danger of confusion.
its dual, e.g., [2, Section 3.4.21, :
The first term of the dual objective function D(p) is decom-
posed into S separable subproblems (4-5).
If we interpret
pi as the price per unit bandwidth at link 1 then p s is the
total price per unit bandwidth for all links in the path of s.
Hence zsps represents the bandwidth cost to source s when
it transmits at rate z,, and Bs(pS)
represents the maximum
benefit s can achieve at the given price ps. A source s can be
induced to solve maximization (4) by bandwidth charging.
For each p , a unique maximizer, denoted by z,(p), exists
since U, is strictly concave.
In general ( z s ( p ) , s E S) may not be primal optimal, but
by the duality theory, there exists a p* 2 0 such that
(z,(p*), s E S ) is indeed primal optimal. Hence we will
focus on solving the dual problem (3). Once we have ob-
tained the minimizing prices p* the primal optimal source
rates x* = z ( p * ) can be obtained by individual sources s
by solving (4), a simple maximization (see below). The im-
portant point to note is that, given p*, individual sources s
can solve (4) separately without the need to coordinate with
other sources. In a sense p* serves as a coordination signal
that aligns individual optimality of (4) with social optimal-
ity of(1)2.
Indeed the unique maximizer z(p) for (4) can be given ex-
plicitly, from the Kuhn-Tucker theorem, in terms of the
marginal utility3:
where [z]: = max{a,min{b,z}}.
is the in-
verse of U:, which exists over the range [Ui(M,), Ui(rn,)]
if U: is continuous and U, strictly concave. Let z ( p ) =
(ES(P),S E SI.
'Despite the notation, a source s does not require the vector price p , but
only a scalar p" = clEL.(s)
pl that represents the sum of link prices on
its path; see below.
3We abuse notation and use zs (.) both as a function of scalar price
p E R+ and of vector price p E d:'.
When p is a scalar, zs
(p) is given
by (6). When p is a vector, z s ( p ) = z , ( p s ) = z s ( c l c L ( s ) p l ) . The
meaning should be clear from the context.
Global Telecommunications Conference - Globecom'99
High Speed Networks
2.2 Algorithm
gradient projection algorithm where link prices are adjusted
in opposite direction to the gradient VD(p(t)):
zs(t) = [U;-l(p"(t - l))]::
is the source rate at time
as each link Z requires the path price p"(t) of all sources
s E S(1) going through 1. Instead we use link price p l ( t ) as
a substitute:
In [14, 161 we propose to solve the dual problem using the
t' This approximation is however
to imp1ement
assumption, the utility functions are stiictly concave and
hence VD(p) indeed exists with its Z-th component given
Simulation results suggest that using pl (t) in place of p"(t)
has a similar behavior. Finally we ensure that H ( t ) is
strictly positive definite by making its diagonal terms at
least as large as an 6 > 0:
where z1 (p) := CsEs(l)
z, (p) is the aggregate source rate
at link 1. Hence the algorithm is decentralized: each link
1 can individually carry out the price adjustment given the
aggregate source rates d (t) at its link, and each source can
= Cl - .YP)
individually compute its rate using (6) given the scalar price
we summarize.
PS(t) = C&L.(")
It is well known that Newton method, where the gradient is
scaled by the inverse of the Hessian,
At update times t = 1,2,. . .:
gradient Projection
P(t -k 1) = b(t) - r[v2D@(t))l-'VD(p(t))1+ (9)
Link 1's algorithm:
typically converges much
than the gradient projection
algorithm (7). This price adjustment however is difficult
to implement in a large network since the Hessian V2D(p)
computation cannot be distributed to individual links, as a
link may require the rates or the second derivatives of utili-
ties of sources at other links [16, Lemma21. This is clearly
not scalable. We propose instead an approximating positive
definite diagonal scaling matrix H ( t ) that can be computed
Given Source rates 2, (t), s E S(l), at ljnk 1, compute a new
Pl(t + 1) = [P&) + rHi'(z"t) - C l ) ] + .
wherezl(t) = Cscs(i) zs(t) andHll is given bY (10)-
at individual links using the same information available un-
der the gradient projection algorithm.
Given path price p"(t) = &L(8)pl(t), choose a new
source rate z, (t + 1) :
zs(t + 1) = arg max Us(zs)
First H(t) retains only the diagonal terms of the Hessian
and has zero off-diagonal terms. Second the diagonal terms
are approximated by finite differences. From (8) the diago-
= [U;-'(P"(t))lmM,"
nal terms are
3 Performance
In this section we first prove that the scaled gradient projec-
tion algorithm given in the last section converges. Then we
illustrate through simulation studies that its convergence is
superior to the unscaled algorithm.
zs(t) - zs(t - 1)
p"(t) - p " ( t - 1)
3.1 Convergence
The scaled algorithm generates a sequence that approaches
the optimal rate allocation, provided the following condi-
tions are satisfied:
where s',(P"(t)) is the total derivative of the scalar func-
tion xs(-) evaluated at the path price p"(t) at time t, and
Global Telecommunications Conference - Globecom'99
High Speed Networks
C1: On the interval I, = [m,,M,], the utility functions
U, are increasing, strictly concave, and twice continu-
ously differentiable.
C2: The curvatures of U, are bounded away from zero on
I,: -Ui(x,)
> 0 for all x, E I,.
These conditions imply the VD is Lipschitz which
leads to the convergence of the algorithm.
L := maxSEs IL(s)I, 3 :=-maqEL IS(l)l, and Z :=
max {E,, s E S}. In words X is the length of a longest
path used by the sources, 7 is the number of sources shar-
ing a most congested link, and E is the upper bound on all
4 J i ( X 8 ) .
Theorem 1 Suppose assumptions CI-C2 hold and the step
size satisjes 0 < y < 2~/%%. Then starting from any
initial rates m 5 x(0) 5 M and prices p(0) 2 0, every
limit point (x*,p*)
of the sequence (x(t),p(t)) generated
by the algorithm are primal-dual optimal. That is, x * gives
the source rates that maximize aggregate utility and p* the
shadow bandwidth prices.
Note that x* is unique but p* may not be unique. We have
found from our simulation experience that, in practice, a
step size y much larger than the bound in the theorem can be
used, e.g., in the simulation reported below, y = 1. More-
over the scaled algorithm seems much less sensitive to y
than the unscaled algorithm.
3.2 Simulation results
We now present simulation study carried out for the net-
work in Figure 1 shared by five connections, with sources
Si and destinations Di, i = 1,. . . , 5. Connection SI-Dl
time 40s S3 at time OS, S4 at time 120s, S5 at time 160s.
Once turned on, sources S2, S3, and S4 remained active un-
til time 240s, and S5 turned off earliest at time 200s. This
enabled us to observe the dynamic behaviour of the algo-
rithm as demand for bandwidth varies. The utility functions
of the sources were set to a,log(l + x,), with a, equal
to 1 x lo4, 5 x lo4, 7 x lo4, 6 x lo4, 2 x lo4 for sources
S 1 ,S2,S3,S4 and S5 respectively. Notice that the longest
connection S1-Dl was set to have the smallest marginal
utility. The step size y used to adjust the link prices was
set to 1. A new link bandwidth price was calculated every
1s. The target bandwidth was'set at 200 packets per 1s mea-
suring interval.
Figure 2 shows the source rates for each source under the
unscaled gradient projection algorithm. From time WOs,
only source S1 was active. Its rate climbed steadily to the
target bandwidth of 200 packetsh. From time 40s, source
S2 became active whose rate, after an initial overshoot, sta-
bilized to about 167 packet&. This squeezed source Sl's
rate to about 33 packetds. At these rates sources S1 and S2
had the same marginal utility. At times OS, 120s, and 160s
when sources S3, S4, S5 became-active, similar dynamics
were observed. Sl's rate bounced back to 200 packetds af-
ter all other sources had turned off.
Figure 3 shows the source rates under the scaled gradient
projection algorithm. While the same kind of interaction
among the sources occurred as under the unscaled algo-
rithm, we see that the convergence to optimal rates was
achieved much faster under the scaled algorithm, though the
magnitude of rate fluctuation was also much larger. The
faster convergence rate implied less overloading of, and
hence much less buffer requirement at, the links. Figure
4 shows the buffer occupancy at each link under the two
schemes. Figure 3 shows the source rates under the scaled
gradient projection algorithm.
times of the other sources are staggered with S2 starting at
Global Telecommunications Conference - Globecom'99
High Speed Networks
Figure 3: Source rates under scaled gradient projection.
4 Conclusion
The flow control mechanism of [14, 161 is derived as a
gradient projection algorithm to solve a dual optimization
problem. In this paper we have extended the algorithm to a
scaled gradient projection, using a diagonal scaling that can
be implemented with the same information as that is avail-
able under the basic algorithm of [14, 161. We have proved
the convergence of the algorithm and have presented sim-
ulation results that illustrate its superior performance com-
pared to the unscaled algori