Potential Biases in Machine Learning Algorithms Using
Electronic Health Record Data
Milena A. Gianfrancesco, PhD, MPH, Suzanne Tamang, PhD, MS, Jinoos Yazdany, MD,
MPH, and Gabriela Schmajuk, MD, MS
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(Gianfrancesco, Yazdany, Schmajuk); Center for Population Health Sciences, Stanford University,
Palo Alto, California (Tamang); Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California
(Schmajuk).
A promise of machine learning in health care is the avoidance of biases in diagnosis and treatment;
a computer algorithm could objectively synthesize and interpret the data in the medical record.
Integration of machine learning with clinical decision support tools, such as computerized alerts or
diagnostic support, may offer physicians and others who provide health care targeted and timely
information that can improve clinical decisions. Machine learning algorithms, however, may also
be subject to biases. The biases include those related to missing data and patients not identified by
algorithms, sample size and underestimation, and misclassification and measurement error. There
is concern that biases and deficiencies in the data used by machine learning algorithms may
contribute to socioeconomic disparities in health care. This Special Communication outlines the
potential biases that may be introduced into machine learning–based clinical decision support
tools that use electronic health record data and proposes potential solutions to the problems of
overreliance on automation, algorithms based on biased data, and algorithms that do not provide
information that is clinically meaningful. Existing health care disparities should not be amplified
by thoughtless or excessive reliance on machines.
Corresponding Author: Milena A. Gianfrancesco, PhD, MPH, Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA 94143 ( ).
Author Contributions:
Dr Gianfrancesco had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Concept and design: All authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Gianfrancesco, Yazdany, Schmajuk.
Drafting of the manuscript: All authors.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors.
Obtained funding: Yazdany, Schmajuk.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Gianfrancesco, Schmajuk.
Supervision: Gianfrancesco, Yazdany, Schmajuk.
Additional Contributions: Stephen Shiboski, PhD, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, and Lester Mackey, PhD, Microsoft Research New England and Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, provided review and comments on the manuscript. They were not compensated for this work.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Publisher's Disclaimer: Disclaimer: The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality or the National Institutes of Health.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA Intern Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 25.
 
JAMA Intern Med. 2018 November 01; 178(11): 1544–1547. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.3763.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A promise of machine learningin health care is the avoidance of biases in diagnosis and
treatment. Practitioners can have bias in their diagnostic or therapeutic decision makingthat
might be circumvented if a computer algorithm could objectively synthesize and interpret
the data in the medical record and offer clinical decision support toaid or guide diagnosis
and treatment. Although all statistical models existalonga continuum offully human-guided
vs fully machine-guided data analyses,1 machine learningalgorithms in general tend to rely
less on human specification (ie, defininga set of variables to be included a priori) and instead
allowthealgorithm to decide which variables are important to include in the model. Classic
machine learningalgorithms involve techniques such as decision trees and association rule
learning, including market basket analysis (ie, customers who bought Y also bought Z).
Deep learning, a subset of machine learning that includes neural networks, attempts to
model brain architecture by usingmultiple, overlaying models. Machine learning hasgenerated substantial advances in medical imaging, for example, through improved detection of
colonic polyps, cerebral microbleeding, and diabetic retinopathy.2 Predictive modelingwith
electronic health records usingdeep learning can accurately predict in-hospital mortality, 30day unplanned readmission, prolonged length of stay, and final discharge diagnoses.3
Integration of machine learning with clinical decision support tools, such as computerized
alerts or diagnostic support, may offer physicians and others who provide health care with
targeted and timely information that can improve clinical decisions.
However, machine learning as applied to clinical decision support may be subject to
important biases. Outside medicine, there is concern that machine learningalgorithms used
in the legal andju-dicial systems, advertisements, computer vision, and language models
could make social or economic disparities worse.4–6 For example, word-embedding models,
which are used in website searches and machine translation, reflect societal biases,
associating searches for jobs that included the terms female and woman with suggestions for
openings in the arts and humanities professions, whereas searches that included the terms
male and man suggested math and engineering occupations.7
As the use of machine learning in health care increases, the underlying data sources and
methods of data collection should be examined. Could these algorithms worsen or
perpetuate existing health inequalities? All types of observational studies and traditional
statistical modeling may be biased; however, the data that are available for analysis in health
care have the potential to affect clinical decision support tools that are based on machine
learning in unexpected ways. Biases that may be introduced through reliance on data derived
from the electronic health record are listed in the Table.
Missing Data and Patients Not Identified by Algorithms
One of the advantages of machine learning algorithms is that the computer can use all the
data available in the electronic health record, which may be cumbersome or impossible for a
person to review in its entirety. Conversely, these algorithms will use only the data available
in the electronic health record or data derived from communicating sources (eg, sensor data,
patient-reported data) that may be missing in a nonrandom fashion. If data are missing, are
not accessible, or represent metadata (such as the identity of a note writer) that are not
normally included in fields used for clinical decision sup-port, algorithms may correctly
Gianfrancesco et al.
JAMA Intern Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
misinterpret available data.8 As a result, the algorithms may not offer benefit to people
whose data are missing from the data set.9
For example, studies have found that individuals from vulnerable populations,
includingthose with lowsocioeconomicstatus,10 those with psychosocial issues,11 and
immigrants,12 are more likely to visit multiple institutions or health care systems to receive
care. Clinical decision support tools that identify patients based on having a certain number
of encounters with a particular International Classification of Diseases code or medication
will be less likely to find patients who have had the same number of visits across several
different health care systems than those who receive all their care in one system. In addition,
patients with low socioeconomic status may receive fewer diagnostic tests and medications
for chronic diseases and have limited access to health care.10 One consequence is that such
patients may have insufficient information in the electronic health record to qualify for
disease definitions in a clinical decision support tool that would trigger early interventions or
may only be identified if their disease becomes more severe. The electronic health record
may also not capture data on relevant factors to improving health in these subgroups, such as
difficulties with housing or transportation.
When an algorithm cannot observe and identify certain individuals, a machine learning
model cannot assign an outcome tothem. Although the degree to which race/ethnicity,
socioeconomic status, and related variables are missing in the electronic health record is not
known, most commercial insurance plans are missing at least half of their data on ethnicity,
primary spoken language, and primary written language; only one-third of commercial plans
reported complete and partially complete data on race, patterns that are likely reflected in
electronic health record data.11
As a result, if models trained at one institution are applied to data at another institution,
inaccurate analyses and outputs may result. For example, machine learning algorithms
developed at a university hospital to predict patient-reported outcome measures, which tend
to be documented by individuals with higher income, younger age, and white race, may not
be applicable when applied to a community hospital that serves a primarily low-income,
minority patient population. Similar issues also occur in other types of studies, such as
clinical trials, and are a reasonthat diverse individuals should be recruited. Machine learning
techniques that have been developed to account for missing data can be used in such
circumstances to help control for potential biases.12 The techniques may not be used
consistently, however. A 2017 review13 found that only 54% of studies that generated
prediction algorithms based on the electronic health record accountedformissingdata.
Algorithms generated at a single institution could be improved through the integration of
larger, external data sets that include more diverse patient populations, although lack of
representation of individuals who do not seek care would remain an issue.
Sample Size and Underestimation
Even when there are some data for certain groups of patients, in-sufficient sample sizes may
make it difficult for these data to be interpreted through machine learning techniques.
Underestimation occurs when a learning algorithm is trained on insufficient data and fails to
Gianfrancesco et al.
JAMA Intern Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
provide estimates for interesting or important cases, instead approximating mean trends
toavoid overfitting.14 Low sample size and underestimation of minority groups are not
unique to machine learning or electronic health record data but a common issue in other
types of studies, such as randomized clinical trials and genetic studies. For instance, genetic
studies have been criticized for not fully accounting for genetic diversity in non-European
populations. Patients with African and unspecified ancestry have been diagnosed with
pathogenic genetic variants that were actually benign but misclassified because of a lack of
understanding of variant diversity at the time of testing.15 Using simulations, the study
demonstrated that the inclusion of African Americans in control groups could have
prevented misclassification.15
Another recent study16 aimed to identify differences in disease susceptibility and
comorbidities across different racial/ethnic groups using electronic health record data.
Researchers found race/ethnicity-based differences for risk of various conditions and noted
that Hispanic and Latino patients had lower disease connectivity patterns compared with
patients of European ancestry and African Americans, implying lower overall disease burden
among this group of patients. However, this finding could also represent confounding factors
not captured in the data, including access to health care, language barriers, or other
socioeconomic factors. Similarly, machine learning-based clinical decision support systems
could misinterpret low sample size or lack of health care use as lower disease burden and, as
a result, generate inaccurate pre-diction models for these groups. In such situations, machine
learning algorithms optimized for imbalanced data sets (ie, small number of cases and large
number of controls) will be important.17 In addition, before analysis, data can be reviewed to
ensure that they are adequately representative across racial categories and that sufficient
numbers of patients who have had interruptions in their care are included.
Misclassification and Measurement Error
Misclassification of disease and measurement error are common sources of bias in
observational studies and analyses based on data in the electronic health record. A potential
source of differential misclassification is errors by practitioners, for example, if uninsured
patients receive substandard medical care more frequently than those with insurance. Quality
of care may be affected by implicit biases related to patient factors, such as sex and race/
ethnicity, or practitioner factors. Individuals with low socioeconomic status may be more
likely to be seen in teaching clinics, where documentation or clinical reasoning may be less
accurate or systematically different than the care provided to patients of higher
socioeconomic status in other settings.18 For example, women may be less likely to receive
lipid-lowering medications and in-hospital procedures, as well as optimal care at discharge,
compared with men, despite being more likely to present with hypertension and heart
failure.19 If patients receive differential care or are differentially incorrectly diagnosed based
on sociodemographic factors, algorithms may reflect practitioner biases and misclassify
patients based on those factors. Thus, a clinical decision support tool based on such data
may suggest administration of lipid-lowering medications and in-hospital procedures only to
men, for whom a pretest probability of cardiac disease might erroneously be said to be
higher. Although the effects of measurement error and misclassification in regression models
Gianfrancesco et al.
JAMA Intern Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
are relatively well studied, these effects in the broader context of machine learning require
further assessment.
Recommendations
Suggested solutions to potential problems in implementing machine learning algorithms into
health care systems are given in the Box. These problems are overreliance on automation,
algorithms based on biased data, and algorithms that do not provide information that is
clinically meaningful. Automation is important, but overreliance on automation is not
desirable.8,20 Computer scientists and bioinformaticians, together with practitioners,
biostatisticians, and epidemiologists, should outline the “intent behind the design,”9(p982)
including choosing appropriate questions and settings for machine learning use, interpreting
findings, and conducting follow-up studies. Such measures would increase the likelihood
that the results of the models are meaningful and ethical and that clinical decision support
tools based on these algorithms have beneficial effects. Certain machine learning models
(eg, deep learning) are less transparent than others (eg, classification trees) and therefore
may be harder to interpret. However, the study discussed above that used deep learning with
electronic health records to predict such outcomes as hospital mortality, 30-day unplanned
readmission, and final discharge diagnoses demonstrated that variables that meaningfully
contributed to the model were able to be identified.3 For example, Pleurx, the trade name for
a small chest tube, was selected by the algorithm to identify inpatient mortality 24 hours
after admission. Variables in machine learning models should also make clinical sense; for
example, the occurrence of a family meeting is a variable highly correlated with mortality
for patients in the intensive care unit, but elimination of family meetings would not prevent
mortality. Models should facilitate the ability of practitioners to address modifiable factors
that are associated with patient outcomes, such as infections, specific medication use, or
laboratory abnormalities.
Clinical decision support algorithms should also be tested for the potential introduction of
discriminatory aspects throughout all stages of data processing. Feedback loops should be
designed to monitor and verify machine learning output and validity,14 ensuringthat the
algorithm is not correctly misinterpreting exposure-disease associations, including
associations based on sex, race/ethnicity, or insurance.8 Race/ethnicity should be captured in
the electronic health record so that it can be used in models to reduce confounding and
detect potential biases. All variables should be used thoughtfully, however, so that the
algorithms do not perpetuate disparities.4,21
Systems to identify erroneous documentation or incorrect diagnoses are important to reduce
misclassification based on implicit bias or data generated by inexperienced practitioners. An
electronic health record system of the future may be able to rank the utility and quality of the
information in a note or rank the importance of a note to patient care.
Finally, efforts to measure the utility of machine learning should focus on the demonstration
of clinically important improvements in relevant outcomes rather than strict performance
metrics (eg, accuracy or area underthe curve).9 Accuracy and efficiency are important but so
is ensuring that all races/ethnicities and socioeconomic levels are adequately represented in
Gianfrancesco et al.
JAMA Intern Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the data model.4 Methods to debias machine learning algorithms are under development,22
as are improvements intechniquestoenhancefairnessand reduce indirect prejudices that result
from algorithm predictions.23
Conclusions
Machine learning algorithms have the potential to improve medical care by predicting a
variety of different outcomes measured in the electronic health record and providing clinical
decision support based on these predictions. However, attention should be paid to the data
that are being used to produce these algorithms, including what and who may be
missingfrom the data. Existing health care disparities should not be amplified by thoughtless
or excessive reliance on machines.
Acknowledgments
Funding/Support: This work was supported by grants F32 AR070585 (Dr Gianfrancesco), K23 AR063770 (Dr
Schmajuk), and P30 AR070155 (Dr Yazdany) from the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases of the National Institutes of Health and grant R01 HS024412 from the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (Drs Yazdany and Schmajuk). Drs Yazdany and Schmajuk are also supported by the Russell/Engleman
Medical Research Center for Arthritis.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and
decision to submit the manuscript for publication.