Early Convolutions Help Transformers See Better
Tete Xiao1,2 Mannat Singh1 Eric Mintun1 Trevor Darrell2 Piotr Dollár1∗Ross Girshick1∗
1Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
2UC Berkeley
Vision transformer (ViT) models exhibit substandard optimizability. In particular,
they are sensitive to the choice of optimizer (AdamW vs. SGD), optimizer hyperparameters, and training schedule length. In comparison, modern convolutional neural
networks are easier to optimize. Why is this the case? In this work, we conjecture
that the issue lies with the patchify stem of ViT models, which is implemented by
a stride-p p×p convolution (p = 16 by default) applied to the input image. This
large-kernel plus large-stride convolution runs counter to typical design choices
of convolutional layers in neural networks. To test whether this atypical design
choice causes an issue, we analyze the optimization behavior of ViT models with
their original patchify stem versus a simple counterpart where we replace the ViT
stem by a small number of stacked stride-two 3×3 convolutions. While the vast
majority of computation in the two ViT designs is identical, we ﬁnd that this small
change in early visual processing results in markedly different training behavior in
terms of the sensitivity to optimization settings as well as the ﬁnal model accuracy.
Using a convolutional stem in ViT dramatically increases optimization stability
and also improves peak performance (by ∼1-2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k),
while maintaining ﬂops and runtime. The improvement can be observed across the
wide spectrum of model complexities (from 1G to 36G ﬂops) and dataset scales
(from ImageNet-1k to ImageNet-21k). These ﬁndings lead us to recommend using
a standard, lightweight convolutional stem for ViT models in this regime as a more
robust architectural choice compared to the original ViT model design.
Introduction
Vision transformer (ViT) models offer an alternative design paradigm to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) . ViTs replace the inductive bias towards local processing inherent in convolutions with global processing performed by multi-headed self-attention . The hope is that
this design has the potential to improve performance on vision tasks, akin to the trends observed
in natural language processing . While investigating this conjecture, researchers face another
unexpected difference between ViTs and CNNs: ViT models exhibit substandard optimizability.
ViTs are sensitive to the choice of optimizer (AdamW vs. SGD), to the selection of dataset
speciﬁc learning hyperparameters , to training schedule length, to network depth , etc.
These issues render former training recipes and intuitions ineffective and impede research.
Convolutional neural networks, in contrast, are exceptionally easy and robust to optimize. Simple
training recipes based on SGD, basic data augmentation, and standard hyperparameter values have
been widely used for years . Why does this difference exist between ViT and CNN models? In
this paper we hypothesize that the issues lies primarily in the early visual processing performed by
ViT. ViT “patchiﬁes” the input image into p×p non-overlapping patches to form the transformer
encoder’s input set. This patchify stem is implemented as a stride-p p×p convolution, with p = 16
as a default value. This large-kernel plus large-stride convolution runs counter to the typical design
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Sydney, Australia.
 
16x16 conv,
stride 1 or 2
Multi-Head
Multi-Head
Ours (termed ViTC, same runtime):
ü Robust to lr and wd choice
ü Converges quickly
ü Works with AdamW, and also SGD
ü Outperforms sota CNNs on ImageNet
Original ViT (baseline, termed ViTP):
o Sensitive to lr and wd choice
o Converges slowly
o Works with AdamW, but not SGD
o Underperforms sota CNNs on ImageNet
patchify (P) stem
convolutional (C) stem
stem flops ≈1 transformer block
transformer block
transformer block
Figure 1: Early convolutions help transformers see better: We hypothesize that the substandard
optimizability of ViT models compared to CNNs primarily arises from the early visual processing
performed by its patchify stem, which is implemented by a non-overlapping stride-p p×p convolution,
with p = 16 by default. We minimally replace the patchify stem in ViT with a standard convolutional
stem of only ∼5 convolutions that has approximately the same complexity as a single transformer
block. We reduce the number of transformer blocks by one (i.e., L −1 vs. L) to maintain parity
in ﬂops, parameters, and runtime. We refer to the resulting model as ViTC and the original ViT as
ViTP . The vast majority of computation performed by these two models is identical, yet surprisingly
we observe that ViTC (i) converges faster, (ii) enables, for the ﬁrst time, the use of either AdamW
or SGD without a signiﬁcant accuracy drop, (iii) shows greater stability to learning rate and weight
decay choice, and (iv) yields improvements in ImageNet top-1 error allowing ViTC to outperform
state-of-the-art CNNs, whereas ViTP does not.
choices used in CNNs, where best-practices have converged to a small stack of stride-two 3×3 kernels
as the network’s stem (e.g., ).
To test this hypothesis, we minimally change the early visual processing of ViT by replacing its
patchify stem with a standard convolutional stem consisting of only ∼5 convolutions, see Figure 1.
To compensate for the small addition in ﬂops, we remove one transformer block to maintain parity in
ﬂops and runtime. We observe that even though the vast majority of the computation in the two ViT
designs is identical, this small change in early visual processing results in markedly different training
behavior in terms of the sensitivity to optimization settings as well as the ﬁnal model accuracy.
In extensive experiments we show that replacing the ViT patchify stem with a more standard
convolutional stem (i) allows ViT to converge faster (§5.1), (ii) enables, for the ﬁrst time, the
use of either AdamW or SGD without a signiﬁcant drop in accuracy (§5.2), (iii) brings ViT’s
stability w.r.t. learning rate and weight decay closer to that of modern CNNs (§5.3), and (iv) yields
improvements in ImageNet top-1 error of ∼1-2 percentage points (§6). We consistently observe
these improvements across a wide spectrum of model complexities (from 1G ﬂops to 36G ﬂops) and
dataset scales (ImageNet-1k to ImageNet-21k).
These results show that injecting some convolutional inductive bias into ViTs can be beneﬁcial under
commonly studied settings. We did not observe evidence that the hard locality constraint in early
layers hampers the representational capacity of the network, as might be feared . In fact we
observed the opposite, as ImageNet results improve even with larger-scale models and larger-scale
data when using a convolution stem. Moreover, under carefully controlled comparisons, we ﬁnd that
ViTs are only able to surpass state-of-the-art CNNs when equipped with a convolutional stem (§6).
We conjecture that restricting convolutions in ViT to early visual processing may be a crucial design
choice that strikes a balance between (hard) inductive biases and the representation learning ability of
transformer blocks. Evidence comes by comparison to the “hybrid ViT” presented in , which
uses 40 convolutional layers (most of a ResNet-50) and shows no improvement over the default ViT.
This perspective resonates with the ﬁndings of , who observe that early transformer blocks prefer
to learn more local attention patterns than later blocks. Finally we note that exploring the design
of hybrid CNN/ViT models is not a goal of this work; rather we demonstrate that simply using a
minimal convolutional stem with ViT is sufﬁcient to dramatically change its optimization behavior.
In summary, the ﬁndings presented in this paper lead us to recommend using a standard, lightweight
convolutional stem for ViT models in the analyzed dataset scale and model complexity spectrum as a
more robust and higher performing architectural choice compared to the original ViT model design.
Related Work
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The breakthrough performance of the AlexNet 
CNN on ImageNet classiﬁcation transformed the ﬁeld of recognition, leading to
the development of higher performing architectures, e.g., , and scalable training
methods . These architectures are now core components in object detection (e.g., ),
instance segmentation (e.g., ), and semantic segmentation (e.g., ). CNNs are typically trained
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and are widely considered to be easy to optimize.
Self-attention in vision models. Transformers are revolutionizing natural language processing
by enabling scalable training. Transformers use multi-headed self-attention, which performs global
information processing and is strictly more general than convolution . Wang et al. show
that (single-headed) self-attention is a form of non-local means and that integrating it into a
ResNet improves several tasks. Ramachandran et al. explore this direction further with
stand-alone self-attention networks for vision. They report difﬁculties in designing an attention-based
network stem and present a bespoke solution that avoids convolutions. In contrast, we demonstrate
the beneﬁts of a convolutional stem. Zhao et al. explore a broader set of self-attention operations
with hard-coded locality constraints, more similar to standard CNNs.
Vision transformer (ViT). Dosovitskiy et al. apply a transformer encoder to image classiﬁcation
with minimal vision-speciﬁc modiﬁcations. As the counterpart of input token embeddings, they
partition the input image into, e.g., 16×16 pixel, non-overlapping patches and linearly project them
to the encoder’s input dimension. They report lackluster results when training on ImageNet-1k,
but demonstrate state-of-the-art transfer learning when using large-scale pretraining data. ViTs are
sensitive to many details of the training recipe, e.g., they beneﬁt greatly from AdamW compared
to SGD and require careful learning rate and weight decay selection. ViTs are generally considered
to be difﬁcult to optimize compared to CNNs (e.g., see ). Further evidence of challenges
comes from Chen et al. who report ViT optimization instability in self-supervised learning (unlike
with CNNs), and ﬁnd that freezing the patchify stem at its random initialization improves stability.
ViT improvements. ViTs are gaining rapid interest in part because they may offer a novel direction
away from CNNs. Touvron et al. show that with more regularization and stronger data augmentation ViT models achieve competitive accuracy on ImageNet-1k alone (cf. ). Subsequently,
works concurrent with our own explore numerous other ViT improvements. Dominant themes include
multi-scale networks , increasing depth , and locality priors .
In , d’Ascoli et al. modify multi-head self-attention with a convolutional bias at initialization and
show that this prior improves sample efﬁciency and ImageNet accuracy. Resonating with our work,
 present models with convolutional stems, but do not analyze optimizability (our focus).
Discussion. Unlike the concurrent work on locality priors in ViT, our focus is studying optimizability
under minimal ViT modiﬁcations in order to derive crisp conclusions. Our perspective brings several
novel observations: by adding only ∼5 convolutions to the stem, ViT can be optimized well with
either AdamW or SGD (cf. all prior works use AdamW to avoid large drops in accuracy ), it
becomes less sensitive to the speciﬁc choice of learning rate and weight decay, and training converges
faster. We also observe a consistent improvement in ImageNet top-1 accuracy across a wide spectrum
of model complexities (1G ﬂops to 36G ﬂops) and dataset scales (ImageNet-1k to ImageNet-21k).
These results suggest that a (hard) convolutional bias early in the network does not compromise
representational capacity, as conjectured in , and is beneﬁcial within the scope of this study.
Vision Transformer Architectures
Next, we review vision transformers and describe the convolutional stems used in our work.
The vision transformer (ViT). ViT ﬁrst partitions an input image into non-overlapping p×p patches
and linearly projects each patch to a d-dimensional feature vector using a learned weight matrix. A
patch size of p = 16 and an image size of 224×224 are typical. The resulting patch embeddings (plus
positional embeddings and a learned classiﬁcation token embedding) are processed by a standard
transformer encoder followed by a classiﬁcation head. Using common network nomenclature,
we refer to the portion of ViT before the transformer blocks as the network’s stem. ViT’s stem is a
hidden MLP num
ﬂops params acts time
mult heads blocks (B)
ViTP -18GF =ViT-B
ViTP -36GF
178.4 37.3 18.8
hidden MLP num
ﬂops params acts time
mult heads blocks (B)
167.8 36.7 18.6
Table 1: Model deﬁnitions: Left: Our ViTP models at various complexities, which use the original
patchify stem and closely resemble the original ViT models . To facilitate comparisons with
CNNs, we modify the original ViT-Tiny, -Small, -Base, -Large models to obtain models at 1GF, 4GF,
18GF, and 36GF, respectively. The modiﬁcations are indicated in blue and include reducing the MLP
multiplier from 4× to 3× for the 1GF and 4GF models, and reducing the number of transformer
blocks from 24 to 14 for the 36GF model. Right: Our ViTC models at various complexities that use
the convolutional stem. The only additional modiﬁcation relative to the corresponding ViTP models
is the removal of 1 transformer block to compensate for the increased ﬂops of the convolutional stem.
We show complexity measures for all models (ﬂops, parameters, activations, and epoch training time
on ImageNet-1k); the corresponding ViTP and ViTC models match closely on all metrics.
speciﬁc case of convolution (stride-p, p×p kernel), but we will refer to it as the patchify stem and
reserve the terminology of convolutional stem for stems with a more conventional CNN design with
multiple layers of overlapping convolutions (i.e., with stride smaller than the kernel size).
ViTP models. Prior work proposes ViT models of various sizes, such as ViT-Tiny, ViT-Small,
ViT-Base, etc. . To facilitate comparisons with CNNs, which are typically standardized to 1
gigaﬂop (GF), 2GF, 4GF, 8GF, etc., we modify the original ViT models to obtain models at about
these complexities. Details are given in Table 1 (left). For easier comparison with CNNs of similar
ﬂops, and to avoid subjective size names, we refer the models by their ﬂops, e.g., ViTP -4GF in place
of ViT-Small. We use the P subscript to indicate that these models use the original patchify stem.
Convolutional stem design. We adopt a typical minimalist convolutional stem design by stacking
3×3 convolutions , followed by a single 1×1 convolution at the end to match the d-dimensional
input of the transformer encoder. These stems quickly downsample a 224×224 input image using
overlapping strided convolutions to 14×14, matching the number of inputs created by the standard
patchify stem. We follow a simple design pattern: all 3×3 convolutions either have stride 2 and
double the number of output channels or stride 1 and keep the number of output channels constant.
We enforce that the stem accounts for approximately the computation of one transformer block of
the corresponding model so that we can easily control for ﬂops by removing one transformer block
when using the convolutional stem instead of the patchify stem. Our stem design was chosen to be
purposefully simple and we emphasize that it was not designed to maximize model accuracy.
ViTC models. To form a ViT model with a convolutional stem, we simply replace the patchify stem
with its counterpart convolutional stem and remove one transformer block to compensate for the
convolutional stem’s extra ﬂops (see Figure 1). We refer to the modiﬁed ViT with a convolutional stem
as ViTC. Conﬁgurations for ViTC at various complexities are given in Table 1 (right); corresponding
ViTP and ViTC models match closely on all complexity metrics including ﬂops and runtime.
Convolutional stem details. Our convolutional stem designs use four, four, and six 3×3 convolutions
for the 1GF, 4GF, and 18GF models, respectively. The output channels are , , and , respectively. All 3×3 convolutions are followed by
batch norm (BN) and then ReLU , while the ﬁnal 1×1 convolution is not, to be consistent
with the original patchify stem. Eventually, matching stem ﬂops to transformer block ﬂops results in
an unreasonably large stem, thus ViTC-36GF uses the same stem as ViTC-18GF.
Convolutions in ViT. Dosovitskiy et al. also introduced a “hybrid ViT” architecture that blends
a modiﬁed ResNet (BiT-ResNet ) with a transformer encoder. In their hybrid model, the
patchify stem is replaced by a partial BiT-ResNet-50 that terminates at the output of the conv4 stage
or the output of an extended conv3 stage. These image embeddings replace the standard patchify
stem embeddings. This partial BiT-ResNet-50 stem is deep, with 40 convolutional layers. In this
work, we explore lightweight convolutional stems that consist of only 5 to 7 convolutions in total,
instead of the 40 used by the hybrid ViT. Moreover, we emphasize that the goal of our work is not to
explore the hybrid ViT design space, but rather to study the optimizability effects of simply replacing
the patchify stem with a minimal convolutional stem that follows standard CNN design practices.
Measuring Optimizability
It has been noted in the literature that ViT models are challenging to optimize, e.g., they may achieve
only modest performance when trained on a mid-size dataset (ImageNet-1k) , are sensitive to data
augmentation and optimizer choice , and may perform poorly when made deeper . We
empirically observed the general presence of such difﬁculties through the course of our experiments
and informally refer to such optimization characteristics collectively as optimizability.
Models with poor optimizability can yield very different results when hyperparameters are varied,
which can lead to seemingly bizarre observations, e.g., removing erasing data augmentation 
causes a catastrophic drop in ImageNet accuracy in . Quantitative metrics to measure optimizability are needed to allow for more robust comparisons. In this section, we establish the foundations
of such comparisons; we extensively test various models using these optimizability measures in §5.
Training length stability. Prior works train ViT models for lengthy schedules, e.g., 300 to 400
epochs on ImageNet is typical (at the extreme, trains models for 1000 epochs), since results at a
formerly common 100-epoch schedule are substantially worse (2-4% lower top-1 accuracy, see §5.1).
In the context of ImageNet, we deﬁne top-1 accuracy at 400 epochs as an approximate asymptotic
result, i.e., training for longer will not meaningfully improve top-1 accuracy, and we compare it to the
accuracy of models trained for only 50, 100, or 200 epochs. We deﬁne training length stability as the
gap to asymptotic accuracy. Intuitively, it’s a measure of convergence speed. Models that converge
faster offer obvious practical beneﬁts, especially when training many model variants.
Optimizer stability. Prior works use AdamW to optimize ViT models from random initialization.
Results of SGD are not typically presented and we are only aware of Touvron et al. ’s report of a
dramatic ∼7% drop in ImageNet top-1 accuracy. In contrast, widely used CNNs, such as ResNets, can
be optimized equally well with either SGD or AdamW (see §5.2) and SGD (always with momentum)
is typically used in practice. SGD has the practical beneﬁt of having fewer hyperparameters (e.g.,
tuning AdamW’s β2 can be important ) and requiring 50% less optimizer state memory, which
can ease scaling. We deﬁne optimizer stability as the accuracy gap between AdamW and SGD. Like
training length stability, we use optimizer stability as a proxy for the ease of optimization of a model.
Hyperparameter (lr, wd) stability. Learning rate (lr) and weight decay (wd) are among the most
important hyperparameters governing optimization with SGD and AdamW. New models and datasets
often require a search for their optimal values as the choice can dramatically affect results. It is
desirable to have a model and optimizer that yield good results for a wide range of learning rate
and weight decay values. We will explore this hyperparameter stability by comparing the error
distribution functions (EDFs) of models trained with various choices of lr and wd. In this
setting, to create an EDF for a model we randomly sample values of lr and wd and train the model
accordingly. Distributional estimates, like those provided by EDFs, give a more complete view of the
characteristics of models that point estimates cannot reveal . We will review EDFs in §5.3.
Peak performance. The maximum possible performance of each model is the most commonly used
metric in previous literature and it is often provided without carefully controlling training details
such as data augmentations, regularization methods, number of epochs, and lr, wd tuning. To make
more robust comparisons, we deﬁne peak performance as the result of a model at 400 epochs using
its best-performing optimizer and parsimoniously tuned lr and wd values (details in §6), while ﬁxing
justiﬁably good values for all other variables that have a known impact on training. Peak performance
results for ViTs and CNNs under these carefully controlled training settings are presented in §6.
Stability Experiments
In this section we test the stability of ViT models with the original patchify (P) stem vs. the
convolutional (C) stem deﬁned in §3. For reference, we also train RegNetY , a state-of-the-art
CNN that is easy to optimize and serves as a reference point for good stability.
We conduct experiments using ImageNet-1k ’s standard training and validation sets, and report
top-1 error. Following , for all results, we carefully control training settings and we use a minimal
set of data augmentations that still yields strong results, for details see §5.4. In this section, unless
noted, for each model we use the optimal lr and wd found under a 50 epoch schedule (see Appendix).
training epochs
top-1 error
1GF models
training epochs
4GF models
training epochs
18GF models
Figure 2: Training length stability: We train 9 models for 50 to 400 epochs on ImageNet-1k and plot
the ∆top-1 error to the 400 epoch result for each. ViTC demonstrates faster convergence than ViTP
across the model complexity spectrum, and helps close the gap to CNNs (represented by RegNetY).
training epochs
top-1 error
1GF models
training epochs
4GF models
training epochs
18GF models
Figure 3: Optimizer stability: We train each model for 50 to 400 epochs with AdamW (upward
triangle ▲) and SGD (downward triangle ▼). For the baseline ViTP , SGD yields signiﬁcantly worse
results than AdamW. In contrast, ViTC and RegNetY models exhibit a much smaller gap between
SGD and AdamW across all settings. Note that for long schedules, ViTP often fails to converge with
SGD (i.e., loss goes to NaN), in such cases we copy the best results from a shorter schedule of the
same model (and show the results via a dashed line).
Training Length Stability
We ﬁrst explore how rapidly networks converge to their asymptotic error on ImageNet-1k, i.e., the
highest possible accuracy achievable by training for many epochs. We approximate asymptotic error
as a model’s error using a 400 epoch schedule based on observing diminishing returns from 200 to
400. We consider a grid of 24 experiments for ViT: {P, C} stems × {1, 4, 18} GF model sizes ×
{50, 100, 200, 400} epochs. For reference we also train RegNetY at {1, 4, 16} GF. We use the best
optimizer choice for each model (AdamW for ViT models and SGD for RegNetY models).
Results. Figure 2 shows the absolute error deltas (∆top-1) between 50, 100, and 200 epoch schedules
and asymptotic performance (at 400 epochs). ViTC demonstrates faster convergence than ViTP
across the model complexity spectrum, and closes much of the gap to the rate of CNN convergence.
The improvement is most signiﬁcant in the shortest training schedule (50 epoch), e.g., ViTP -1GF has
a 10% error delta, while ViTC-1GF reduces this to about 6%. This opens the door to applications
that execute a large number of short-scheduled experiments, such as neural architecture search.
Optimizer Stability
We next explore how well AdamW and SGD optimize ViT models with the two stem types. We
consider the following grid of 48 ViT experiments: {P, C} stems × {1, 4, 18} GF sizes × {50, 100,
200, 400} epochs × {AdamW, SGD} optimizers. As a reference, we also train 24 RegNetY baselines,
one for each complexity regime, epoch length, and optimizer.
Results. Figure 3 shows the results. As a baseline, RegNetY models show virtually no gap when
trained using either SGD or AdamW (the difference ∼0.1-0.2% is within noise). On the other hand,
ViTP models suffer a dramatic drop when trained with SGD across all settings (of up to 10% for
larger models and longer training schedules). With a convolutional stem, ViTC models exhibit much
smaller error gaps between SGD and AdamW across all training schedules and model complexities,
including in larger models and longer schedules, where the gap is reduced to less than 0.2%. In other
words, both RegNetY and ViTC can be easily trained via either SGD or AdamW, but ViTP cannot.
top-1 error
cumulative prob.
1GF models
top-1 error
4GF models
top-1 error
18GF models
Figure 4: Hyperparameter stability for AdamW (lr and wd): For each model, we train 64 instances
of the model for 50 epochs each with a random lr and wd (in a ﬁxed width interval around the optimal
value for each model). Top: Scatterplots of the lr, wd, and lr ·wd for three 4GF models. Vertical bars
indicate optimal lr, wd, and lr ·wd values for each model. Bottom: For each model, we generate an
EDF of the errors by plotting the cumulative distribution of the ∆top-1 errors (∆to the optimal error
for each model). A steeper EDF indicates better stability to lr and wd variation. ViTC signiﬁcantly
improves the stability over the baseline ViTP across the model complexity spectrum, and matches or
even outperforms the stability of the CNN model (RegNetY).
top-1 error
cumulative prob.
1GF models
top-1 error
4GF models
top-1 error
18GF models
Figure 5: Hyperparameter stability for SGD (lr and wd): We repeat the setup from Figure 4 using
SGD instead of AdamW. The stability improvement of ViTC over the baseline ViTP is even larger
than with AdamW. E.g., ∼60% of ViTC-18GF models are within 4% ∆top-1 error of the best result,
while less than 20% of ViTP -18GF models are (in fact most ViTP -18GF runs don’t converge).
Learning Rate and Weight Decay Stability
Next, we characterize how sensitive different model families are to changes in learning rate (lr) and
weight decay (wd) under both AdamW and SGD optimizers. To quantify this, we make use of error
distribution functions (EDFs) . An EDF is computed by sorting a set of results from low-to-high
error and plotting the cumulative proportion of results as error increases, see for details. In
particular, we generate EDFs of a model as a function of lr and wd. The intuition is that if a model is
robust to these hyperparameter choices, the EDF will be steep (all models will perform similarly),
while if the model is sensitive, the EDF will be shallow (performance will be spread out).
We test 6 ViT models ({P, C} × {1, 4, 18} GF) and 3 RegNetY models ({1, 4, 16} GF). For each
model and each optimizer, we compute an EDF by randomly sampling 64 (lr, wd) pairs with learning
rate and weight decay sampled in a ﬁxed width interval around their optimal values for that model
and optimizer (see the Appendix for sampling details). Rather than plotting absolute error in the EDF,
we plot ∆top-1 error between the best result (obtained with the optimal lr and wd) and the observed
result. Due to the large number of models, we train each for only 50 epochs.
Results. Figure 4 shows scatterplots and EDFs for models trained by AdamW. Figure 5 shows SGD
results. In all cases we see that ViTC signiﬁcantly improves the lr and wd stability over ViTP for
both optimizers. This indicates that the lr and wd are easier to optimize for ViTC than for ViTP .
Experimental Details
In all experiments we train with a single half-period cosine learning rate decay schedule with a
5-epoch linear learning rate warm-up . We use a minibatch size of 2048. Crucially, weight decay
is not applied to the gain factors found in normalization layers nor to bias parameters anywhere in the
model; we found that decaying these parameters can dramatically reduce top-1 accuracy for small
models and short schedules. For inference, we use an exponential moving average (EMA) of the
model weights (e.g., ). The lr and wd used in this section are reported in the Appendix. Other
hyperparameters use defaults: SGD momentum is 0.9 and AdamW’s β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999.
Regularization and data augmentation. We use a simpliﬁed training recipe compared to recent
work such as DeiT , which we found to be equally effective across a wide spectrum of model
complexities and dataset scales. We use AutoAugment , mixup (α = 0.8), CutMix 
(α = 1.0), and label smoothing (ϵ = 0.1). We prefer this setup because it is similar to common
settings for CNNs (e.g., ) except for stronger mixup and the addition of CutMix (ViTs beneﬁt
from both, while CNNs are not harmed). We compare this recipe to the one used for DeiT models in
the Appendix, and observe that our setup provides substantially faster training convergence likely
because we remove repeating augmentation , which is known to slow training .
Peak Performance
A model’s peak performance is the most commonly used metric in network design. It represents
what is possible with the best-known-so-far settings and naturally evolves over time. Making fair
comparisons between different models is desirable but fraught with difﬁculty. Simply citing results
from prior work may be negatively biased against that work as it was unable to incorporate newer,
yet applicable improvements. Here, we strive to provide a fairer comparison between state-of-the-art
CNNs, ViTP , and ViTC. We identify a set of factors and then strike a pragmatic balance between
which subset to optimize for each model vs. which subset share a constant value across all models.
In our comparison, all models share the same epochs (400), use of model weight EMA, and set of
regularization and augmentation methods (as speciﬁed in §5.4). All CNNs are trained with SGD with
lr of 2.54 and wd of 2.4e−5; we found this single choice worked well across all models, as similarly
observed in . For all ViT models we found AdamW with a lr/wd of 1.0e−3/0.24 was effective,
except for the 36GF models. For these larger models we tested a few settings and found a lr/wd of
6.0e−4/0.28 to be more effective for both ViTP -36GF and ViTC-36GF models. For training and
inference, ViTs use 224×224 resolution (we do not ﬁne-tune at higher resolutions), while the CNNs
use (often larger) optimized resolutions speciﬁed in . Given this protocol, we compare ViTP ,
ViTC, and CNNs across a spectrum of model complexities (1GF to 36GF) and dataset scales (directly
training on ImageNet-1k vs. pretraining on ImageNet-21k and then ﬁne-tuning on ImageNet-1k).
Results. Figure 6 shows a progression of results. Each plot shows ImageNet-1k val top-1 error vs.
ImageNet-1k epoch training time.1 The left plot compares several state-of-the-art CNNs. RegNetY
and RegNetZ achieve similar results across the training speed spectrum and outperform EfﬁcientNets . Surprisingly, ResNets are highly competitive at fast runtimes, showing that under
a fairer comparison these years-old models perform substantially better than often reported (cf. ).
The middle plot compares two representative CNNs (ResNet and RegNetY) to ViTs, still using
only ImageNet-1k training. The baseline ViTP underperforms RegNetY across the entire model
complexity spectrum. To our surprise, ViTP also underperforms ResNets in this regime. ViTC is
more competitive and outperforms CNNs in the middle-complexity range.
The right plot compares the same models but with ImageNet-21k pretraining (details in Appendix).
In this setting ViT models demonstrates a greater capacity to beneﬁt from the larger-scale data:
now ViTC strictly outperforms both ViTP and RegNetY. Interestingly, the original ViTP does not
outperform a state-of-the-art CNN even when trained on this much larger dataset. Numerical results
are presented in Table 2 for reference to exact values. This table also highlights that ﬂop counts are
not signiﬁcantly correlated with runtime, but that activations are (see Appendix for more details), as
also observed by . E.g., EfﬁcientNets are slow relative to their ﬂops while ViTs are fast.
1We time models in PyTorch on 8 32GB Volta GPUs. We note that batch inference time is highly correlated
with training time, but we report epoch time as it is easy to interpret and does not depend on the use case.
training speed (min.)
top-1 error
EfficientNet
training speed (min.)
training speed (min.)
Figure 6: Peak performance (epoch training time vs. ImageNet-1k val top-1 error): Results
of a fair, controlled comparison of ViTP , ViTC, and CNNs. Each curve corresponds to a model
complexity sweep resulting in a training speed spectrum (minutes per ImageNet-1k epoch). Left:
State-of-the-art CNNs. Equipped with a modern training recipe, ResNets are highly competitive in
the faster regime, while RegNetY and Z perform similarly, and better than EfﬁcientNets. Middle:
Selected CNNs compared to ViTs. With access to only ImageNet-1k training data, RegNetY and
ResNet outperform ViTP across the board. ViTC is more competitive with CNNs. Right: Pretraining
on ImageNet-21k improves the ViT models more than the CNNs, making ViTP competitive. Here,
the proposed ViTC outperforms all other models across the full training speed spectrum.
ﬂops params acts time batch
(M) (min) size
3.4 2048 22.5 21.2 20.7 21.6
ResNet-101
5.5 2048 20.3 19.1 18.5 19.2
ResNet-152
7.7 2048 19.5 18.4 17.7 18.2
ResNet-200
64.7 32.3 10.7 1024 19.5 18.3 17.6 17.7
RegNetY-1GF
3.1 2048 23.2 22.2 21.5
RegNetY-4GF
7.6 2048 19.4 18.3 17.9 18.4
RegNetY-16GF 15.5
72.3 30.7 17.9 1024 17.1 16.4 16.3 15.6
RegNetY-32GF 31.1
128.6 46.2 35.1
512 16.2 15.9 15.9 15.0
RegNetZ-1GF
4.2 2048 20.8 20.2 19.6
RegNetZ-4GF
28.1 24.3 12.9 1024 17.4 16.9 16.6
RegNetZ-16GF 16.0
95.3 51.3 32.0
512 16.0 15.9 15.9
RegNetZ-32GF 32.0
175.1 79.6 55.3
256 16.3 16.2 16.1
ﬂops params acts time batch
(M) (min) size
5.9 2048 21.4 20.5 19.9
19.3 49.5 19.4
512 18.5 17.8 17.5
256 17.3 17.0 17.0
2.6 2048 33.2 29.7 27.7
3.8 2048 23.3 20.8 19.6 20.6
ViTP -18GF 17.5
86.6 24.0 11.5 1024 19.9 18.4 17.9 16.4
ViTP -36GF 35.9
178.4 37.3 18.8
512 19.9 18.8 18.2 15.1
2.7 2048 28.6 26.1 24.7
3.9 2048 20.9 19.2 18.6 18.8
ViTC-18GF 17.7
81.6 24.1 11.4 1024 18.4 17.5 17.0 15.1
ViTC-36GF 35.0
167.8 36.7 18.6
512 18.3 17.6 16.8 14.2
Table 2: Peak performance (grouped by model family): Model complexity and validation top-1
error at 100, 200, and 400 epoch schedules on ImageNet-1k, and the top-1 error after pretraining
on ImageNet-21k (IN 21k) and ﬁne-tuning on ImageNet-1k. This table serves as reference for the
results shown in Figure 6. Blue numbers: best model trainable under 20 minutes per ImageNet-1k
epoch. Batch sizes and training times are reported normalized to 8 32GB Volta GPUs (see Appendix).
Additional results on the ImageNet-V2 test set are presented in the Appendix.
These results verify that ViTC’s convolutional stem improves not only optimization stability, as seen in
the previous section, but also peak performance. Moreover, this beneﬁt can be seen across the model
complexity and dataset scale spectrum. Perhaps surprisingly, given the recent excitement over ViT,
we ﬁnd that ViTP struggles to compete with state-of-the-art CNNs. We only observe improvements
over CNNs when using both large-scale pretraining data and the proposed convolutional stem.
Conclusion
In this work we demonstrated that the optimization challenges of ViT models are linked to the largestride, large-kernel convolution in ViT’s patchify stem. The seemingly trivial change of replacing this
patchify stem with a simple convolutional stem leads to a remarkable change in optimization behavior.
With the convolutional stem, ViT (termed ViTC) converges faster than the original ViT (termed
ViTP ) (§5.1), trains well with either AdamW or SGD (§5.2), improves learning rate and weight decay
stability (§5.3), and improves ImageNet top-1 error by ∼1-2% (§6). These results are consistent
across a wide spectrum of model complexities (1GF to 36GF) and dataset scales (ImageNet-1k to
ImageNet-21k). Our results indicate that injecting a small dose of convolutional inductive bias into
the early stages of ViTs can be hugely beneﬁcial. Looking forward, we are interested in the theoretical
foundation of why such a minimal architectural modiﬁcation can have such large (positive) impact on
optimizability. We are also interested in studying larger models. Our preliminary explorations into
72GF models reveal that the convolutional stem still improves top-1 error, however we also ﬁnd that
a new form of instability arises that causes training error to randomly spike, especially for ViTC.
Acknowledgements. We thank Hervé Jegou, Hugo Touvron, and Kaiming He for valuable feedback.
stem kernel size
ﬂops params acts
top-1 error
(M) AdamW SGD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Stem designs: We compare ViT’s standard patchify stem (P) and our convolutional stem
(C) to four alternatives (S1 - S4) that each include a patchify layer, i.e., a convolution with kernel
size (> 1) equal to stride (highlighted in blue). Results use 50 epoch training, 4GF model size, and
optimal lr and wd values for all models. We observe that increasing the pixel size of the patchify
layer (S1 - S4) systematically degrades both top-1 error and optimizer stability (∆) relative to C.
top-1 err.
ViTP (bn)-4GF
ViTC(ln)-4GF
Figure 7: Stem normalization and non-linearity: We apply BN and ReLU after the patchify stem
and train ViTP -4GF (left plot), or replace BN with layer norm (LN) in the convolutional stem of
ViTC-4GF (middle plot). EDFs are computed by sampling lr and wd values and training for 50
epochs. The table (right) shows 100 epoch results using best lr and wd values found at 50 epochs. The
minor gap in error in the EDFs and at 100 epochs indicates that these choices are fairly insigniﬁcant.
Appendix A: Stem Design Ablation Experiments
ViT’s patchify stem differs from the proposed convolutional stem in the type of convolution used and
the use of normalization and a non-linear activation function. We investigate these factors next.
Stem design. The focus of this paper is studying the large, positive impact of changing ViT’s default
patchify stem to a simple, standard convolutional stem constructed from stacked stride-two 3×3
convolutions. Exploring the stem design space, and more broadly “hybrid ViT” models , to
maximize peak performance is an explicit anti-goal because we want to study the impact under
minimal modiﬁcations. However, we can gain additional insight by considering alternative stem
designs that fall between the patchify stem (P) the standard convolutional stem (C). Four alternative
designs (S1 - S4) are presented in Table 3. The stems are designed so that overall model ﬂops remain
comparable. Stem S1 modiﬁes C to include a small 2×2 patchify layer, which slightly worsens
results. Stems S2 - S4 systematically increase the pixel size p of the patchify layer from p = 2 up
to 16, matching the size used in stem P. Increasing p reliably degrades both error and optimizer
stability. Although we selected the C design a priori based on existing best-practices for CNNs, we
see ex post facto that it outperforms four alternative designs that each include one patchify layer.
Stem normalization and non-linearity. We investigate normalization and non-linearity from two
directions: (1) adding BN and ReLU to the default patchify stem of ViT, and (2) changing the
normalization in the proposed convolutional stem. In the ﬁrst case, we simply apply BN and ReLU
after the patchify stem and train ViTP -4GF (termed ViTP (bn)-4GF) for 50 and 100 epochs. For the
second case, we run four experiments with ViTC-4GF: {50, 100} epochs × {BN, layer norm (LN)}.
As before, we tune lr and wd for each experiment using the 50-epoch schedule and reuse those values
for the 100-epoch schedule. We use AdamW for all experiments. Figure 7 shows the results. From
the EDFs, which use a 50 epoch schedule, we see that the addition of BN and ReLU to the patchify
stem slightly worsens the best top-1 error but does not affect lr and wd stability (left). Replacing BN
with LN in the convolutional stem marginally degrades both best top-1 error and stability (middle).
The table (right) shows 100 epoch results using optimal lr and wd values chosen from the 50 epoch
runs. At 100 epochs the error gap is small indicating that these factors are likely insigniﬁcant.
top-1 error
cumulative prob.
ViTP-16GF (48 blocks)
ViTC-16GF (47 blocks)
top-1 error
ViTP-16GF (48 blocks)
ViTP-4GF (12 blocks)
ViTP-18GF (12 blocks)
top-1 error
ViTC-16GF (47 blocks)
ViTC-4GF (11 blocks)
ViTC-18GF (11 blocks)
Figure 8: Deeper models: We increase the depth of ViTP -4GF from 12 to 48 blocks, termed as
ViTP -16GF (48 blocks), and create a counterpart with a convolutional stem, ViTC-16GF (47 blocks);
all models are trained for 50 epochs. Left: The convolutional stem signiﬁcantly improves error and
stability despite accounting for only ∼2% total ﬂops. Middle, Right: The deeper 16GF ViTs clearly
outperform the shallower 4GF models and achieve similar (slightly worse) error to the shallower and
wider 18GF models. The deeper ViTP also has better lr/wd stability than the shallower ViTP models.
parameters (M)
training time (min.)
EfficientNet
EfficientNet
activations (M)
EfficientNet
Figure 9: Complexity measures vs. runtime: We plot the GPU runtime of models versus three
commonly used complexity measures: parameters, ﬂops, and activations. For all models, including
ViT, runtime is most correlated with activations, not ﬂops, as was previously shown for CNNs .
Appendix B: Deeper Model Ablation Experiments
Touvron et al. found that deeper ViT models are more unstable, e.g., increasing the number of
transformer blocks from 12 to 36 may cause a ∼10 point drop in top-1 accuracy given a ﬁxed choice
of lr and wd. They demonstrate that stochastic depth and/or their proposed LayerScale can remedy
this training failure. Here, we explore deeper models by looking at EDFs created by sampling lr and
wd. We increase the depth of a ViTP -4GF model from 12 blocks to 48 blocks, termed ViTP -16GF
(48 blocks). We then remove one block and use the convolutional stem from ViTC-4GF, yielding a
counterpart ViTC-16GF (47 blocks) model. Figure 8 shows the EDFs of the two models and shallower
models for comparison, following the setup in §5.3. Despite the convolutional stem accounting for
only 1/48 (∼2%) total ﬂops, it shows solid improvement over its patchify counterpart. We ﬁnd that
a variety of lr and wd choices allow deeper ViT models to be trained without a large drop in top-1
performance and without additional modiﬁcations. In fact, the deeper ViTP -16GF (48 blocks) has
better lr and wd stability than ViTP -4GF and ViTP -18GF over the sampling range (Figure 8, middle).
Appendix C: Larger Model ImageNet-21k Experiments
In Table 2 we reported the peak performance of ViT models on ImageNet-21k up to 36GF. To study
larger models, we construct a 72GF ViTP by using 22 blocks, 1152 hidden size, 18 heads, and 4 MLP
multiplier. For ViTC-72GF, we use the same C-stem design used for ViTC-18GF and ViTC-36GF,
but without removing one transformer block since the ﬂops increase from the C-stem is marginal in
this complexity regime.
Our preliminary explorations into 72GF ViT models directly adopted hyperparameters used for 36GF
ViT models. Under this setting, we observed that the convolutional stem still improves top-1 error,
however, we also found that a new form of instability arises, which causes training error to randomly
spike. Sometimes training may recover within the same epoch, and subsequently the ﬁnal accuracy
is not impacted; or, it may take several epochs to recover from the error spike, and in this case we
observe suboptimal ﬁnal accuracy. The ﬁrst type of error spike is more common for ViTP -72GF,
while the latter type of error spike is more common for ViTC-72GF.
ViTP -18GF
(2.5e−4, 8.0e−3)
(0.02, 0.8)
(1.25e−3, 4.0e−2)
(0.0075, 0.24)
(0.1, 3.2)
(4.0e−6, 1.2e−4)
(0.25, 8.0)
(3.0e−6, 8.0e−5)
Table 4: Learning rate and weight decay used in §5: Left: Per-model lr and wd values used for the
experiments in §5.1 and §5.2, optimized for ImageNet-1k at 50 epochs. Right: Per-model lr and wd
ranges used for the experiments in §5.3. Note that for our ﬁnal experiments in §6, we constrained the
lr and wd values further, using a single setting for all CNN models, and just two settings for all ViT
models. We recommend using this simpliﬁed set of values in §6 when comparing models for fair and
easily reproducible comparisons. All lr values are normalized w.r.t. a minibatch size of 2048 .
To mitigate this instability, we adopt two measures: (i) For both models, we lower wd from 0.28
to 0.15 as we found that it signiﬁcantly reduces the chance of error spikes. (ii) For ViTC-72GF,
we initialize its stem from the ImageNet-21k pre-trained ViTC-36GF and keep it frozen throughout
training. These modiﬁcations make training ViT-72GF models on ImageNet-21k feasible. When ﬁnetuned on ImageNet-1k, ViTP -72GF reaches 14.2% top-1 error and ViTC-72GF reaches 13.6% top-1
error, showing that ViTC still outperforms its ViTP counterpart. Increasing ﬁne-tuning resolution
from 224 to 384 boosts the performance of ViTC-72GF to 12.6% top-1 error, while signiﬁcantly
increasing the ﬁne-tuning model complexity from 72GF to 224GF.
Appendix D: Model Complexity and Runtime
In previous sections, we reported error vs. training time. Other commonly used complexity measures
include parameters, ﬂops, and activations. Indeed, it is most typical to report accuracy as a function
of model ﬂops or parameters. However, ﬂops may fail to reﬂect the bottleneck on modern memorybandwidth limited accelerators (e.g., GPUs, TPUs). Likewise, parameters are an even more unreliable
predictor of model runtime. Instead, activations have recently been shown to be a better proxy of
runtime on GPUs (see ). We next explore if similar results hold for ViT models.
For CNNs, previous studies deﬁned activations as the total size of all output tensors of the
convolutional layers, while disregarding normalization and non-linear layers (which are typically
paired with convolutions and would only change the activation count by a constant factor). In this
spirit, for transformers, we deﬁne activations as the size of output tensors of all matrix multiplications,
and likewise disregard element-wise layers and normalizations. For models that use both types of
operations, we simply measure the output size of all convolutional and vision transformer layers.
Figure 9 shows the runtime as a function of these model complexity measures. The Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient (r) conﬁrms that activations have a much stronger linear correlation with actual runtime
(r = 0.93) than ﬂops (r = 0.75) or parameters (r = 0.71), conﬁrming that the ﬁndings of for
CNNs also apply to ViTs. While ﬂops are somewhat predictive of runtime, models with a large ratio
of activations to ﬂops, such as EfﬁcientNet, have much higher runtime than expected based on ﬂops.
Finally, we note that ViTP and ViTC are nearly identical on all complexity measures and runtime.
Timing. Throughout the paper we report normalized training time, as if the model were trained on
a single 8 V100 GPU server, by multiplying the actual training time by the number of GPUs used
and dividing by 8. (Due to different memory requirements of different models, we may be required
to scale up the number of GPUs to accommodate the target minibatch size.) We use the number of
minutes taken to process one ImageNet-1k epoch as a standard unit of measure. We prefer training
time over inference time because inference time depends heavily on the use case (e.g., a streaming,
latency-oriented setting requires a batch size of 1 vs. a throughput-oriented setting that allows for
batch size ≫1) and the hardware platform (e.g., smartphone, accelerator, server CPU).
Label Smooth
Stoch Depth
100 epochs
400 epochs
300 epochs 
ViTP -18GF
Table 5: Ablation of data augmentation and regularization: We use the lr and wd from Table 4
(left), except for ViTP -18GF models with RandAugment which beneﬁt from stronger wd (we increase
wd to 0.5). Original DeiT ablation results are copied for reference in gray (last column); these
use a lr/wd of 1e−3/0.05 , which leads to some training
failures (we note our wd is 5-10× higher). Our default training setup (ﬁrst row in each set) uses
AutoAugment, mixup, CutMix, label smoothing, and model EMA. Compared to the DeiT setup
(second row in each set), we do not use erasing, stochastic depth, or repeating. Although our setup is
equally effective, it is simpler and also converges much faster (see Figure 10).
Appendix E: Additional Experimental Details
Stability experiments. For the experiments in §5.1 and §5.2, we allow each CNN and ViT model to
select a different lr and wd. We ﬁnd that all CNNs select nearly identical values, so we normalize
them to a single choice as done in . ViT models prefer somewhat more varied choices. Table 4
(left) lists the selected values. For the experiments in §5.3, we use lr and wd intervals shown in
Table 4 (right). These ranges are constructed by (i) obtaining initial good lr and wd choices for each
model family; and then (ii) multiplying them by 1/8 and 4.0 for left and right interval endpoints (we
use an asymmetric interval because models are trainable with smaller but not larger values). Finally
we note that if we were to redo the experiments, the setting used in §5.1/§5.2 could be simpliﬁed.
Peak performance on ImageNet-1k. We note that in later experiments we found tuning lr and wd
per model is not necessary to obtain competitive results. Therefore, for our ﬁnal experiments in §6,
we constrained the lr and wd values further, using a single setting for all CNN models, and just two
settings for all ViT models, as discussed in §6. We recommend using this simpliﬁed set of values
when comparing models for fair and easily reproducible comparisons. Finally, for these experiments,
when training is memory constrained (i.e., for EfﬁcientNet-{B4,B5}, RegNetZ-{4,16,32}GF), we
reduce the minibatch size from 2048 and linearly scale the lr according to .
Peak performance on ImageNet-21k. For ImageNet-21k, a dataset of 14M images and ∼21k
classes, we pretrain models for 90 (ImageNet-21k) epochs, following . We do not search for the
optimal settings for ImageNet-21k and instead use the identical training recipe (up to minibatch size)
used for ImageNet-1k. To reduce training time, we distribute training over more GPUs and use a
larger minibatch size of 4096 with the lr scaled accordingly. For simplicity and reproducibility, we
use a single label per image, unlike some prior work (e.g., ) that uses WordNet to expand
single labels to multiple labels. After pretraining, we ﬁne-tune for 20 epochs on ImageNet-1k and
use a small-scale grid search of lr while keeping wd at 0, similar to .
Appendix F: Regularization and Data Augmentation
At this study’s outset, we developed a simpliﬁed training setup for ViT models. Our goals were to
design a training setup that is as simple as possible, resembles the setup used for state-of-the-art
CNNs , and maintains competitive accuracy with DeiT . Here, we document this exploration
training epochs
top-1 error
4GF models
ViTP (DeiT)
ViTP (Ours)
ViTC (Ours)
training epochs
18GF models
ViTP (DeiT)
ViTP (Ours)
ViTC (Ours)
training epochs
top-1 error
18GF models
ViTP (DeiT)
ViTP (Ours)
ViTC (Ours)
Figure 10: Impact of training recipes on convergence: We train ViT models using the DeiT recipe
vs. our simpliﬁed counterpart. Left and middle: ∆top-1 error of 4GF and 18GF models at 50, 100
and 200 epoch schedules, and asymptotic performance at 400 epochs. Right: Absolute top-1 error of
18GF models. Removing augmentations and using model EMA accelerates convergence for both
ViTP and ViTC models while slightly improving upon our reproduction of DeiT’s top-1 error.
ImageNet-OG (error)
ImageNet-V2 (error)
EfficientNet
Figure 11: ImageNet-V2 performance: We take the models from Table 2 and benchmark them on the
ImageNet-V2 test set. Top-1 errors are plotted for the original (OG) ImageNet validation set (x-axis)
and the ImageNet-V2 test set (y-axis). Rankings are mostly preserved up to one standard deviation of
noise (estimated at ∼0.1-0.2%) and the two testing sets exhibit linear correlation (Pearson’s r = 0.99).
Marker size corresponds to model ﬂops.
by considering the baseline ViTP -4GF and ViTP -18GF models. Beyond simpliﬁcation, we also
observe that our training setup yields faster convergence than the DeiT setup, as discussed below.
Table 5 compares our setup to that of DeiT . Under their lr/wd choice, report failed
training when removing erasing and stochastic depth, as well as signiﬁcant drop of accuracy when
removing repeating. We ﬁnd that they can be safely disabled as long as a higher wd is used (our wd
is 5-10× higher). We observe that we can remove model EMA for ViTP -4GF, but that it is essential
for the larger ViTP -18GF model, especially at 400 epochs. Without model EMA, ViTP -18GF can
still be trained effectively, but this requires additional augmentation and regularization (as in DeiT).
Figure 10 shows that our training setup accelerates convergence for both ViTP and ViTC models, as
can be seen by comparing the error deltas (∆top-1) between the DeiT baseline and ours (left and
middle plots). Our training setup also yields slightly better top-1 error than our reproduction of DeiT
(right plot). We conjecture that faster convergence is due to removing repeating augmentation ,
which was shown in to slow convergence. Under some conditions repeating augmentation may
improve accuracy, however we did not observe such improvements in our experiments.
Appendix G: ImageNet-V2 Evaluation
In the main paper and previous appendix sections we benchmarked all models on the original (OG)
ImageNet validation set . Here we benchmark our models on the ImageNet-V2 , a new test
set collected following the original procedure. We take the 400-epoch or ImageNet-21k models from
Table 2, depending on which one is better, and evaluate them on ImageNet-V2 to collect top-1 errors.
Figure 11 shows that rankings are mostly preserved up to one standard deviation of noise (estimated
at ∼0.1-0.2%). The two testing sets exhibit linear correlation, as conﬁrmed by the Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient r = 0.99, despite ImageNet-V2 results showing higher absolute error. The parameters of
the ﬁt line are given by y = 1.31x + 5.0.