Reversible Work Transition State Theory:
Application to Dissociative Adsorption of Hydrogen
Gregory Mills and Hannes J´onsson
Department of Chemistry, BG-10
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
Gregory K. Schenter
Molecular Science Research Center
Paciﬁc Northwest Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
(Surface Science, in press)
A practical method for ﬁnding free energy barriers for transitions in high-dimensional classical and
quantum systems is presented and used to calculate the dissociative sticking probability of H2 on a metal
surface within transition state theory. The reversible work involved in shifting the system conﬁned to a
hyperplane from the reactant region towards products is evaluated directly. Quantum mechanical degrees
of freedom are included by using Feynman Path Integrals with the hyperplane constraint applied to the
centroid of the cyclic paths. An optimal dividing surface for the rate estimated by transition state theory
is identiﬁed naturally in the course of the reversible work evaluation. The free energy barrier is determined
relative to the reactant state directly so that an estimate of the transition rate can be obtained without
requiring a solvable reference model for the transition state. The method has been applied to calculations
of the sticking probability of a thermalized hydrogen gas on a Cu(110) surface. The two hydrogen atoms
and eight surface Cu atoms were included quantum mechanically and over two hundred atoms in the Cu
crystal where included classically. The activation energy for adsorption and desorption was determined and
found to be signiﬁcantly lowered by tunneling at low temperature. The calculated values agree quite well
with experimental estimates for adsorption and desorption. Dynamical corrections to the classical transition
state theory rate estimate were evaluated and found to be small.
Introduction
The dissociative adsorption of molecules on surfaces of solids is of central importance in surface catalysis
and has been extensively studied both experimentally and theoretically. Hydrogen adsorption on copper
surfaces has become ‘the classic example of activated dissociative adsorption of a molecule at a surface’.1
Many experimental studies have made use of molecular beams with molecules in a selected initial state
impinging on the surface. Theoretical studies have focused on classical trajectory calculations and quantum
wavepacket propagation to explore the dissociative sticking dynamics given a well deﬁned initial state of
the molecule.1 A great deal of qualitative insight has been gained, but many questions remain open. On
the theoretical side, the problem is that full quantum mechanical treatment of all six hydrogen degrees of
freedom is impractical with present computers and currently available techniques for quantum wavepacket
propagation. The theoretical work has therefore largely been conﬁned to quantum calculations on lower
dimensional model systems2−4 or mixed quantum and classical treatment.5 Not only is a six dimensional
wavepacket propagation a big order, but such a calculation would need to be repeated many times to
average over the surface vibrational degrees of freedom to get a single value of the sticking probability. Low
dimensional simulations have demonstrated clear quantum eﬀects,1,2 and calculations in higher dimensions
have indicated that dimensional eﬀects might be equally important.3,4
We report here on a fully quantum and thermally averaged simulation of the dissociative sticking of
H2 on Cu(110). The large number of degrees of freedom can be included at the expense of the amount of
information obtained about the dynamics. We apply transition state theory, a statistical theory of rates,
to this problem and study entropic and quantum eﬀects on the sticking probability. Quantum eﬀects are
included by Feynman path integrals (FPIs) which implicitly include thermal averaging over quantum states.6
The simulation mimics a thermodynamic experiment, where the impinging molecules have a thermal energy
distribution at the temperature of the substrate. This experiment has been carried out in the laboratory
of Campbell and coworkers7 who obtained the thermodynamic activation barrier for dissociative adsorption
from the temperature dependence of the sticking probability. Our simulations using a rather simple model
potential surface show a clear onset of a quantum mechanical regime as the activation energy drops at a
temperature around 400K. The experimental measurements of the sticking coeﬃcient were taken slightly
above this transition temperature.
The method we present here involves evaluation of reversible work to determine the free energy of the
system along the reaction coordinate and, in particular, the free energy barrier for the transition. Traditional
methods for evaluating free energy diﬀerences between two states, in particular a transition state and a
reactant state involve integration (using Monte Carlo sampling) over a parameter λ which smoothly converts
the potential from one state to another.8 The advantage of the present technique is that the transition state
need not be known beforehand, and since the integration is over the reaction coordinate the intermediate
states in the calculation have some physical signiﬁcance. Voter9 has presented a technique for direct Monte
Carlo calculation of free energy diﬀerences between separated, localized states by translating one to overlap
the other. This method eliminates the need for sampling intermediate states but again requires a priori
knowledge of the transition state, and can have sampling problems if the transition state potential is shaped
much diﬀerently than a slice of the reactant state potential.
The method described here has previously been applied to calculate transition rates in a model system
consisting of an Eckart barrier coupled to a harmonic oscillator10. Even in such a small system, the reversible
work evaluation was more eﬃcient than calculation of the partition function with a harmonic reference.
Here we give expressions directly applicable to large systems and apply the method to hydrogen dissociative
adsorption. Preliminary results of these calculations have been presented elsewhere.11
The organization of this paper is as follows. We ﬁrst discuss classical Transition State Theory (TST) in
section 2. Then quantum TST is discussed in section 3. In section 4 we present a derivation of the equations
required for calculating free energy barriers in classical systems by evaluation of reversible work.
application of these equations involves statistical sampling of forces acting on the system while constraints
are applied. Following Gillan,12 we then generalize these expressions to quantum systems in section 5 by
representing quantum particles by Feynman path integrals and applying the constraints to the path integral
centroids. In section 6 we discuss the hydrogen dissociative sticking problem and present our results on the
H2 −Cu(110). A summary is presented in section 7.
Classical Transition State Theory
Transition state theory is a method for estimating rate constants of transitions, for example, chemical
reactions and diﬀusion events.13−15 It is applicable to slow transitions or rare events. It is a statistical theory,
but is based on dynamics. The underlying idea is that the equilibrium density at the reaction’s transition
state – a statistical quantity – is proportional to the reaction rate – a dynamical quantity. A central aspect
of transition state theory is the identiﬁcation of a dividing surface separating the initial state (the reactants)
and the ﬁnal state (the products). Such a dividing surface is frequently referred to as the ‘transition state’.
All possible transitions from the initial state to the ﬁnal state take the system through the dividing surface.
A well-chosen dividing surface also separates the initial and ﬁnal states in terms of dynamics. A system
at such a transition state may become either reactants or products, and once it becomes one or the other,
it is likely to remain so for a much longer time than it spent near the transition state. Thus, the system’s
character in the future is strongly dependent on what it does during its brief visit to the transition state.
This makes the transition state and what happens there of central importance.
The system consists of the degrees of freedom of primary interest and all degrees of freedom to which
they are coupled. For instance, in the H2 dissociation on Cu, the system consists of both the dimer and the
Cu lattice. The hydrogens move furthest and are the primary degrees of freedom, and the reaction’s progress
- the reaction coordinate - is determined by the hydrogens’ positions. The surface degrees of freedom are
also speciﬁcally included but do not enter the reaction coordinate or the deﬁnition of the transition state;
they are eﬀectively a bath.
2.1 The Central Assumptions of TST
The ﬁrst central assumption of transition state theory is that the reactants have a Boltzmann distribution
of energy in every degree of freedom and that the rate of transition is low enough that this distribution is
maintained.
As a consequence, the system will have a Boltzmann distribution of energy at the dividing surface,
even if the system doesn’t exchange energy with a bath during its climb up the barrier. The density at the
barrier is low because the barrier turns most trajectories around. Those trajectories which do make it to
the dividing surface, however, have a momentum and spatial distribution at the barrier which is Boltzmann
at the reactant temperature except that states originating from products are missing.14,16 It is important
to reallize that TST does not need to make any assumptions about the ability of the system to achieve an
equilibrium distribution at the dividing surface.
If the reactants are speciﬁcally prepared in a non-Boltzmann distribution, for example, in a molecularbeam experiment where diﬀerent reactant modes may be at diﬀerent temperature, or the surface and adsorbate temperatures are diﬀerent, then the system – consisting of both the incident molecule and the surface
– is not at thermal equilibrium, and TST does not apply. We calculate here the sticking probability of a
thermalized gas, where the gas and surface temperature are the same.
The second central assumption of transition state theory is that the system crosses the dividing surface
only once in going between the reactant and product states.
A reactive trajectory is one which takes
the system from steady-state reactants to steady-state products. The actual reaction rate depends on the
density of reactive trajectories at the dividing surface. Transition state theory assumes that any crossing of
the dividing surface in the direction from reactants to products is a reactive trajectory. In reality, trajectories
can cross the dividing surface many times. Any trajectoriy that crosses the dividing surface an even number
of times, starting from either side, is not reactive, but is counted in TST. Further, a trajectory which crosses
several times before ultimately reacting is reactive, but is counted several times in TST while only forming
one product. As a result, the TST estimate of the rate is always an overestimate, but in favorable cases and
for a good choice of the dividing surface TST can give an estimate that is nearly exact.
The fraction of trajectories that have been overcounted in the TST estimate can be found only by
studying the dynamics of the system. Transition state theory assumes that the probability, κ, of continuing
to products, once the dividing surface is reached with a momentum directed towards products, is unity. If
the system sometimes recrosses the dividing surface, κ < 1. For a given choice of the dividing surface a
transmission coeﬃcient, κ, can be found such that the exact rate constant is kexact = κ kT ST .
For a good choice of the dividing surface, κ is as large as possible, and kT ST is as close as possible to
the actual rate constant. A dividing surface far into the reactant state would result in many crossings, most
of which would lack enough energy to cross the barrier and would soon recross it. For this dividing surface,
κ ≪1, and kT ST is a poor estimate of the rate. Similarly, a dividing surface far into the product state would
be a poor choice, because most of the density there comes not from paths that have recently reacted, but
from products that have recently tried and failed to back-react.
While TST predicts that the sticking coeﬃcient depends only on interatomic forces and not on atomic
masses, the recrossings can be mass dependent, for example, if the products re-desorb because energy is
not redistributed between diﬀerent modes on the time-scale of the reaction. This phonon coupling is massdependent, and hence can lead to kinetic isotope eﬀects that are not predicted by TST.
Below, we describe studies we have carried out of dynamical trajectories for H2 dissociative sticking
on Cu(110). We found that dynamical corrections play a minor role in this system. TST can therefore be
expected to give reliable estimates of the sticking coeﬃcient.
2.2 Variational Transition State Theory
Since classical TST gives an upper bound to the rate, and can be applied to any dividing surface between
reactants and products, it is possible to search for the dividing surface for which the estimated rate becomes
a minimum; this estimate is closest to the true rate. This dividing surface will have the fewest recrossings.
This optimization of the TST estimate is called Variational Transition State Theory (VTST)17. The
variation of the plane can be done separately at diﬀerent temperatures, or at diﬀerent initial reactant
momenta, or by making the dividing surface non-planar, any added ﬂexibility giving an improved rate
estimate. There exist hypersurfaces that separate the dynamics completely; in general, these are curved,
and diﬀerent for each reactant energy.13,18 If such a hypersurface could be found, the rate associated with
it would be the exact reaction rate: there would be no recrossings. However, for high-dimensional systems,
ﬁnding an optimal surface, even within a restricted set (such as hyperplanar surfaces), is a non-trivial
2.3 The Transition State Partition Function
Figure 1 shows a reaction path, Γ(s), between reactants and products, parameterized with reaction
coordinate s. If Np is the number of atoms of primary interest; that is, those that undergo a signiﬁcant
displacement during the transition, then Γs is a 3Np-dimensional vector pointing at position s on the path.
The reaction path is deﬁned in terms of these coordinates and is independent of all others. The dividing
surface, Z‡, is a (3Np −1) -dimensional cut through the 3Np-dimensional system. In the case of the H2/Cu
system, only the hydrogens change position signiﬁcantly during the reaction, so the dividing surface is a
5-dimensional cut through the 6-dimensional H2 system. All degrees of freedom independent of Γ comprise
the bath. In the H2/Cu system, the bath consists of all the Cu atoms. If, for instance, two of the Cu atoms
moved signiﬁcantly to enable the dissociation to happen, the reaction path would include those Cu atoms,
and all other Cu atoms would be the bath.
The dividing surface has one dimension fewer than does the reactant state. A transition state with the
same dimensionality as the reactant can be deﬁned by arbitrarily introducing a small width δ to the dividing
surface. Eventually this width is cancelled out and does not enter the ﬁnal expressions. The probability of
ﬁnding the system at the transition state is Q∗/QR. The transition state partition function can be written
as Q∗= Q‡δ, where Q‡ is the partition function, taken over the dividing surface, over all system coordinates
other than the reaction coordinate.
If the dividing surface, Z‡, is speciﬁed to be a hyperplane (see ﬁg.
1) with unit normal vector n
intersecting the path at Γ‡ and letting r be the system coordinate in the hyperplane, then the partition
function is
n · (r −Γ‡)
where V is the interaction potential, β = 1/kBT, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature of
the system. The Dirac δ−function imposes the hyperplane constraint. We will deal only with hyperplanar
dividing surfaces in this paper.
2.4 The Reaction Rate
Once a system has reached the transition region, its rate of escape is 1/t = v⊥/δ, where t is the time
it spends there; v⊥= v · n is its velocity perpendicular to the hyperplane. To ﬁnd the forward ﬂux, only
those points in the transition region that are forward-bound should be counted. These comprise half the
population there. The escape rate constant is Q∗/QR times the average of 1/t:
k = ⟨|v⊥|⟩
The factors of δ in 1/t and Q‡ have cancelled. Only positive velocities count because back reactions are
ignored. The average forward velocity is
The TST estimate for the rate constant is
Here µ is an eﬀective mass for the reaction coordinate.
Quantum Transition State Theory
Several diﬀerent extensions of classical TST to quantum systems have been proposed.12,19−27 We will
focus here on methods where the classical statistical averaging is replaced by quantum statistical averaging.
3.1 Quantum Statistical Mechanics
Feynman and Hibbs8 describe a reformulation of quantum mechanics in terms of Feynman path integrals
(FPI). This method involves integrating over all possible paths a system could take from one place to another.
If done in real time, it gives quantum dynamics. In imaginary time, it gives quantum statistics. In complex
time, it gives a combination of these.
The quantum mechanical partition function, Q, can be written as
e−Veff[x(τ)]/kBT Dx(τ),
where Dx(τ) includes P integrals over coordinates x(τ) ≈{x1, x2, . . . , xP } comprising cyclic paths. The
paths are represented to resolution P in this discrete approximation. Each path contributes to Q according
to its eﬀective potential energy, Veff 8,28
kspr(xi −xi−1)2
with the spring constant given by kspr = mP/¯h2β2 where m is the particle mass and β = 1/kBT . Eqn. (5)
becomes exact as P →∞.
The classical system has eﬀectively been replaced by P images of itself. Each image is subject to forces
1/P as strong as the classical system and interacts with its neighbors through the harmonic springs. In
the classical limit as the mass or temperature become larger, kspr →∞, and the stiﬀsprings prevent any
delocalization. The P images combine to give back the original classical system.
With P = 1 the classical approximation is recovered.
For P > 1, the springs allow the chain to
delocalize, which gives quantum statistical eﬀects. If the chain is at a barrier, it can drape down on either
side to sample a lower eﬀective potential; this represents tunnelling. If the chain is conﬁned in a small area
(as is a particle in a box), it will have fewer available arrangements, which gives it a lower entropy. This
conﬁnement entropy corresponds to zero-point energy.
3.2 Centroid Density based QTST
A rate theory for transitions in quantum systems based on FPI was introduced by Gillan.12 He calculated
the thermal equilibrium probability density of the quantum particle at various locations by introducing a
constraint on the system, ﬁxing the centroid of the FPI chain
at a given point, and taking the average over the remaining quantum degrees of freedom and classical bath
degrees of freedom. In particular, he evaluated the probability of ﬁnding the centroid at the saddle point of
the potential surface between reactants and products, relative to the probability of ﬁnding the centroid in
the reactant region. By gradually shifting the centroid constraint from the reactant region up to the saddle
point and monitoring the reversible work, he obtained a free energy diﬀerence. A rate estimate was obtained
by assuming the rate is proportional to the relative density of the centroid at the saddle point.
In one dimensional systems the classical limit of this estimate agrees with classical TST. However, in
higher dimensions it does not. The centroid in Gillan’s formulation is conﬁned to a point rather than to
a dividing surface; the transition rate is related to the centroid density at two speciﬁed points.10,12 This
estimate includes bath degrees of freedom, and various FPI chain conﬁgurations of the quantum particle
(thus it picks up some tunnelling and zero-point energy eﬀects), but it does not include averaging over
centroid degrees of freedom perpendicular to the reaction path. Thus, it does not fully include eﬀects due to
varying width of the reaction channel.
Following Gillan’s idea, Voth, Chandler, and Miller (VCM)22 provided a quantum generalization of
traditional TST by replacing the classical coordinate in eqn. (1) by the centroid coordinate of the quantum
particle. Again, a constrained FPI formalism was used, but with the centroid restricted to a multidimensional
dividing surface rather than to a point. The calculations were done by explicit evaluation of the partition
function, using an analytically solvable reference problem. This method was applied to calculations on a
restricted geometry of the reaction H + H2 →H2 + H and found to give results in good agreement with
more accurate calculations.
Messina, Schenter, and Garrett (MSG)24,25 generalized the VCM expression and allowed for variational
optimization of non-planar and momentum-dependent dividing surfaces. The dividing surface was chosen to
minimize the calculated rate obtained by direct evaluation of the dividing surface partition function. MSG
is a quantum analogue of classical VTST. In these calculations a Monte Carlo sampling procedure is used
to ﬁnd the partition functions explicitly.
These centroid density methods have been applied to various test problems and have been shown to give
good rate estimates. Transitions in three dimensional systems involving one quantum particle have also been
studied using these techniques. Gillan studied the diﬀusion of a hydrogen atom in bulk metals.12 Mattsson,
Engberg and Wahnstr¨om27 and Sun and Voth28 studied the diﬀusion of a hydrogen atom on Ni(100) and
Cu(100) surfaces, respectively.
We describe below a diﬀerent computational method, reversible work based TST, for carrying out
classical and quantum TST calculations.
For classical systems the results are equivalent to VTST. For
quantum systems, the results are equivalent to MSG. The advantage of the reversible work formulation is
that the method can more easily be applied to high dimensional systems. After describing the method and
its foundation, ﬁrst as it applies to classical systems (section 4) and then as it applies to quantum systems
(section 5), we then describe an application to H2 dissociative adsorption, a reaction path involving two
quantum particles (the H atoms) and a bath involving eight quantum particles (surface Cu atoms) and a
couple of hundred classical particles (section 6). This is by far the largest application of QTST we are aware
of. Our conclusions are given in section 7.
Reversible Work Formulation of classical TST
kT ST is written in terms of a partition function ratio, or a free energy diﬀerence. The free energy can
be calculated by the method of reversible work rather than by calculating the partition functions explicitly.
The rate constant, eqn (4), can also be written
where we have introduced QZR a partition function for the system conﬁned to a reference hyperplane ZR
in the reactant region. QZR/QR has units of inverse length.
QZR is unitless and, if there are no recrossings
of the transition state, is the reaction probability: (number of reactions)/(number of attempts). The rate
is (average positive velocity) × (average reciprocal length) × (reaction probability). For surface adsorption,
QZR is the sticking coeﬃcient.
4.1 Relative probability and free energy
The reaction probability can also be written in terms of the free energy,A, of the transition and reference
Q‡/QZR = e−β(A‡−AZR),
∆A ≡A‡ −AZR
In the reversible work evaluation the hyperplane is moved stepwise from ZR to Z‡, as indicated in ﬁgure 2,
and the free energy diﬀerence, ∆A, is accumulated at each step.
Figure 1b shows a progression of hyperplanes Zs deﬁned along the entire reaction path Γs between
reactants and products. Given a path, the sequence of hyperplanes can be constructed by choosing the
tangent vector of the path
dsΓs, at various points along the path as the normal to a hyperplane associated
with that reaction coordinate
The progression of the hyperplane has to be gradual enough that a ﬁrst order evaluation of the free energy
diﬀerence will be accurate. As the reaction coordinate is incremented by ds, where
ds = ∥Γs+ds −Γs∥,
the hyperplane intersection with the path moves from Γs to Γs+ds and the normal vector changes from ns
It is convenient to introduce a coordinate system aligned with the hyperplane. These local coordinates,
z, are obtained from the actual coordinates, r, by applying a unitary rotation matrix U:
rs −Γs = Usz,
rs+ds −Γs+ds = Us+dsz.
We choose the ﬁrst unit vector in the local coordinate system to be normal to the hyperplane. The hyperplane
constraint, (rs −Γs) · ns = 0, can then be written as z1 = 0. The ﬁrst column of Us is ns.
The free energy diﬀerence corresponding to an increment ds in the reaction coordinate is dA = −kBT ln(Qs+ds/Qs)
e−βVs(z)δ(z1)dz
e−βVs+ds(z)δ(z1)dz.
From the point of view of a system conﬁned within the hyperplane, the potential energy changes as the
reaction coordinate is incremented
Vs(z) ≡V (rs)
Vs+ds(z) ≡V (rs+ds).
This ramping of the potential energy of the system is illustrated in ﬁg. 2. Since the planes are nearby,
Vs+ds(z) = Vs(z) + δV (z),
where δV (z) is small for all values of z the system is likely to visit.
The partition function ratio is
e−βδV (z)e−βVs(z)δ(z1)dz
e−βVs(z)δ(z1)dz
which can be written as
= ⟨e−βδV (z)⟩s = e−β⟨δV (z)⟩s + O
since δV is small. The average is calculated in plane Zs. Thus, if the partition functions are written in terms
of the constant internal coordinate z, moving the hyperplane from one position to another is, in eﬀect, the
same as ramping the potential energy seen by a system conﬁned to the hyperplane by an amount δV (z).
The free energy change becomes simply the thermal average of the local internal potential ramp δV (z):
dA = ⟨δV (z)⟩s + O
The external coordinates of the system in the two hyperplane locations are related by
rs+ds −Γs+ds = Us+dsU T
s (rs −Γs).
Writing Us+ds = Us + δUs, Us+dsU T
s + δUsU T
s = I + δUsU T
s and substituting into the equation
above gives, after rearranging,
rs+ds −rs = (Γs+ds −Γs) + δUsU T
s (rs −Γs)
= nsds + δUsU T
s (rs −Γs)
using the fact that we chose the normal to be tangent to the path, eqn (10). The ﬁrst column of Us is ns.
The other columns can be assigned arbitrarily; the free energy of the plane is independent of them. These
column vectors ui comprise an orthonormal basis for the hyperplane. The geometrical diﬀerence between
the two locations of the hyperplane is entirely speciﬁed by Γs, Γs+ds, ns, and ns+ds. We will now show that
the free energy change can be expressed entirely in terms of this geometry, without explicit calculation of
the internal basis vectors.
If D is the dimensionality of the primary system (3Np in a three dimensional system), then
δUs = [ dns
Since ui · uj = δij for an orthonormal basis,
ds(ui · uj) = 0.
This property makes the matrix δUsU T
antisymmetric.
Writing, for convenience, ns as u1, and making use of the antisymmetry, this can be written as
−P dui2ui1
−P duiDui1
−P dui1ui2
−P duiDui2
−P dui1uiD
−P dui2uiD
where uij is the jth component of the ith basis vector.
Operating with this matrix on the vector R ≡rs −Γs yields, after rearrangement,
ui(dui · R).
The internal potential energy ramp is
δV (z) = V (rs+ds) −V (rs) = −F(rs) · (rs+ds −rs)
= −F(rs) · nsds −F(rs) · (δUsU T
= −F(rs) · ns(ds −dns · R) +
(F · ui)(dui · R).
The thermal average of each term in the sum over the in-plane basis vectors is zero, ⟨(F·ui)(dui·R)⟩= 0.
Since the unit basis vector ui is orthogonal to its change dui, the average of the product is the product of
the averages. ⟨(F · ui)⟩= 0 for any in-plane ui, whether or not any orthogonal coordinates are speciﬁed.
(dui · R)⟨F · ui⟩is therefore individually zero for each speciﬁed (dui · R), and the overall average vanishes.
The angle between the planes’ normal vectors, ns and ns+ds, is dθ = ∥dns∥. The ﬁrst-order curvature
of the reaction path Γ at s is κ = dθ/ds. We write for the normal component of the force, Fn ≡F(rs) · ns,
and for the turning-direction component of the distance from the reference point, Rt ≡(rs −Γs) · dns/dθ.
Then we can write the free energy diﬀerence between the planes as
dA(s) = −⟨Fn (1 −κRt)⟩s ds .
Here −⟨FnRt⟩s is the average torque opposing the rotation of the plane around the reference point Γs in the
direction dns/dθ. The amount of work required to rotate the plane by dθ in this direction is
dArot(s) = −⟨FnRt⟩s dθ = −κ⟨FnRt⟩s ds.
The free energy diﬀerence between the reference hyperplane, ZR, and a hyperplane Zs corresponding
to reaction coordinate s is
⟨Fn (1 −κRt)⟩s′ ds′.
If all coordinates are speciﬁed, the instantaneous force is the mean force.
The line integral of the
instantaneous force is the potential energy. The reversible work involved in shifting the system from one
completely speciﬁed conﬁguration to another is just the potential energy diﬀerence.
4.2 Implementation of the method
First a reaction path leading from the reactant to the product region is deﬁned. A sequence of hyperplanes intersecting the path is then deﬁned. The hyperplanes must be spaced closely enough for the ﬁrst
order expression, eqn. (26), to be accurate enough. The average force and torque acting on the system
conﬁned to the hyperplane are then statistically sampled and the results integrated according to eqn. (28).
A convenient choice for the path is the minimum energy path (MEP), but any path that does not lead to
large numerical cancellations in the force evaluation can be used. The hyperplane normals can conveniently
be chosen to be tangent to the path (as we have done here), but this is not necessary. To collect the average
force acting on the system in each of the hyperplanes, a Monte Carlo or a molecular dynamics simulation
can be carried out subject to the constraint that the system remains in the hyperplane. More speciﬁcally,
considering a primary system consisting of Np atoms in 3-dimensions, a 3Np-dimensional unit vector, the
hyperplane normal ns, is used to constrain the dynamics. At each time step the component of the force
vector normal to the hyperplane, F · ns, is collected for the evaluation of the thermal average, < Fn >. But
then, this component is projected out of the force to give a new, revised force Frev = F −F · ns which is
used in the simulation giving the statistical sampling.
We have used the velocity Verlet algorithm to carry out the molecular dynamics sampling of canonical
phase space.31 The constrained dynamics conserve energy as long as the constraint vector is constant. The
optimal dividing surface Z‡ for the TST rate estimate is the hyperplane Zs corresponding to the maximum
free energy, where force < Fn >s and the torque < FnRt >s acting on the hyperplane both vanish. It could
be necessary to adjust the orientation of the hyperplane at and near the transition state in order to zero the
torque. Alternatively, the path can be redeﬁned to construct a ‘zero torque path’ as we have done for an
Eckart barrier test problem.10 As we will show below, the torque acting on the MEP-constructed hyperplane
in the hydrogen dissociative adsorption simulation turns out to be very small, leading to negligible rotational
contribution to the free energy barrier.
Each plane has a certain free energy, ∆A(s), relative to the reference plane in the reactant state. This
free energy gives a TST estimate for the rate, treating that plane as the dividing surface:
QZR e−β∆A(s).
The plane for which this estimated rate is lowest is the planar dividing surface at which there are the
fewest recrossings. So VTST is accomplished automatically by the reversible work calculation. At some
plane crossing the reaction path, the free energy will be a maximum; this gives the VTST rate estimate.
The automatic inclusion of VTST is an advantage of the reversible work method.
The free energy barrier found this way is path-independent as long as the planes near the barrier are
good dividing surfaces.
The optimal planar dividing surface is the one corresponding to maximum free
energy, and therefore has zero average force and torque acting on it. If there is a net torque on the best
plane of the sequence, it can be rotated against the torque, picking up some additional free energy, until the
torque is zero.
The idea of using a one-parameter sequence of generalized dividing surfaces and minimizing the calculated rate constant with respect to the parameter has been implemented by Garrett and Truhlar in a
semiclassical version of variational transition state theory.17 Although their methods employ diﬀerent calculations of the rate than the current work, the idea of optimizing the rate along a path is equivalent to the
determination of the hyperplane giving the maximum free energy in the present method.
Reversible work formulation of quantum TST
The formulas derived for classical TST will now be generalized to quantum systems by using quantum
statistical mechanics instead of classical statistical mechanics to estimate the free energy barrier. The central
question is how to incorporate the constraints on the system; i.e. how to conﬁne the system to a hyperplane.
Following Gillan12 we represent each quantum particle in the system with a Feynman Path Integral and
apply the constraints to the centroids of the path integrals instead of the atom coordinates as in the classical
The hyperplane constraint then becomes
Zs = (˜r0 −Γs) · ns = 0,
where ˜r0 is a vector containing the controid coordinates of quantum atom FPIs. Using a discrete representation of the paths, the centroid for atom k is
where the sum extends over all the FPI images of atom k. The reaction’s progress is written in terms of the
FPI centroids of the quantum mechanical atoms in the primary system. Therefore, the same reaction path
can be used as in the classical calculation.
The quantum mechanical partition function for a hyperplane at s is:
e−βVeff δ [ns · (˜r0 −Γs)] Dr(τ).
with Veff given by eqn. (6). Just as in the classical case, the change in the hyperplane free energy ∆A(s)
can be evaluated. The quantum mechanical generalization of eq. (28) is
Fn(i) (1 −κRt(i))⟩s′ ds′
where the hyperplane statistical average is
⟨· · ·⟩s =
Dr(τ) e−βVeff · · · δ [ns · (˜r0 −Γs)]
Dr(τ) e−βVeff δ [ns · (˜r0 −Γs)]
In the Appendix we prove that the in-plane components of the force on the images do not contribute to
∆A(s), just as in the classical case.
The integration along the reaction path gives a free energy maximum and thereby the free energy barrier
for the transition in the quantum system. The transition rate is then obtained from the free energy barrier as
in the classical case. Again, the reversible work calculation automatically includes variational maximization
of the hypersurface free energy. The transition rate obtained by this reversible work method is exactly the
same as the variationally optimized rate for a hyperplanar dividing surface obtained in the MSG theory,24,25
but the advantage of the present method is that a solvable reference system for the transition state is not
There is no rigorous justiﬁcation for this formulation of QTST. Other formulations of a quantum generalization of TST have been proposed. The relationship between the estimate obtained from the QTST
presented here and the exact reactive ﬂux32 is unclear. The rate constant for a quantum system calculated
by this and other centroid methods has not been proven to give an upper bound to the rate in general. It
has been found that optimization of the dividing surface leads to a strict upper bound on the rate in the
harmonic limit as well as in a symmetric Eckart barrier test problem.10,24 However, kQT ST has in some other
cases been found smaller (but only slightly smaller) than kexact.
Dissociative Sticking of Hydrogen on Surfaces
We now turn to the application of the reversible work TST method to the dissociative sticking problem.
The calculation of the sticking coeﬃcient described here include all six H2 degrees of freedom quantum
mechanically as well as eight Cu surface atoms and full thermal averaging over several hundred substrate
degrees of freedom.
However, the calculations are done within TST and therefore apply to sticking of
thermalized hydrogen gas, not molecular beam experiments with selected initial states of the molecules. The
large number of degrees of freedom can be included at the expense of detailed dynamical information about
the system.
Campbell, Domagala, and Campbell9 measured the sticking coeﬃcient of thermally equilibrated hydrogen gas on Cu(110) experimentally. These measurements give an activation energy of 0.62 eV in the range
500 K to 700 K. Molecular beam experiments convolved to yield a thermal distribution give similar results.33
Also, the activation energy for thermal desorption of H2 from Cu(110) has been measured by Anger, Winkler,
and Rendulic.34 The results of our simulation are compared to these experimental measurements below.
6.1 The ‘hole model’ for sticking
While TST is most often applied to transitions involving large energy barriers, the foundation of TST
requires only that the rate of transition is slow enough to allow the remaining reactants to stay at thermal
equilibrium; and that once the dividing surface has been crossed, it will not be recrossed on the time scale
of the transition. A bottleneck in phase space involving only an entropic barrier can satisfy these conditions
– an energy barrier is not necessary.
As an example, the TST assumptions apply well to an ideal gas in a box eﬀusing through a small hole.
There is no energy barrier; just an entropy barrier. Most atoms colliding with the wall will fail to escape
because the hole is much smaller than the box’s cross-section. If the box volume is V and the hole has cross
sectional area A, then Q‡/QR = A/V and the TST estimate for the eﬀusion rate is
which is precisely the rate given by kinetic theory.
A successful model of molecular adsorption, the ‘hole model’,35,36 is analogous to the eﬀusion problem.
The assumption there is that a molecule approaching the surface with the right orientation will adsorb.
However, most orientations of the molecule are unfavorable and lead to a large potential barrier which
reﬂects the molecule back into the gas phase. The transition rate is then estimated as the ratio of the
volume of the hole relative to the total volume available to the incoming molecule. If the hole model is a
reasonable model for dissociative sticking, then TST can be expected to give a good estimate of the sticking
probability.
6.2 The H2 −Cu(110) Potential Energy Surface
A simple form for the potential function was used to speed up the calculation. An EAM-type37 potential
form was chosen and ﬁtted to data for the H2 dimer and the chemisorbed hydrogen. It was also ﬁtted to
a grid of points taken from a semi-empirical LEPS potential38, which is expected to have the right shape
qualitatively, as it includes overlap and exchange eﬀects. However, the potential barrier was adjusted to
have a much higher saddle point than in ref. 38. The potential barrier was scaled up to 0.688 eV , close to
the estimate of Hand and Harris based on ab initio calculations.39 (See table 1).
The EAM form works well for copper. With a ﬁlled d band, Cu exhibits little directional bonding. Most
of the electron density seen by a neighbor is due to the 4s electron.
The EAM potential form is:
where φ is a pair potential that represents the screened coulomb repulsion between the ion cores, including
the inner electrons, and F(ρ) is the energy of embedding an ion core into a valence electron gas of density ρ.
The electron density ρi at atom i is the sum of the contributions of all its neighbors, j:
where ρA(rij) is ﬁtted to be the Hartree-Fock atomic electron density.
We have chosen the following functional forms
φ(rij) = DAe−αArij + DBe−αBrij
ρA(rij) = Srη  e−βArij + γe−βBrij
φ(rij) is a pair potential that represents the screened coulomb repulsion between the ion cores.
parametrized as a double exponential.
Each type of pair interaction (Cu-Cu, H-H, and H-Cu) has its
own parameter set {DA, αA, DB, αB}. The parameters for the pair potential, the embedding energy and the
electron density are given in table 2.
The pair potential and the electron density are shifted in such a way that they become zero at and
beyond a cutoﬀdistance, Rcut, chosen to be 6.1˚A.
6.3 Finding Minimum Energy Path using Nudged Elastic Band method:
The MEP is deﬁned by the boundary conditions, and by the requirement that the force at any point be
parallel to it. That is, for any direction ps perpendicular to the path, ps · d
dsΓs = 0, the potential energy is
at a minimum: ps · ∇V (Γs) = 0.
The boundary conditions are that the MEP must start at the lowest-energy reactant state and ﬁnish in
the lowest-energy product state. For the H2/Cu problem, the former has the dimer distant from the surface
at its equilibrium separation; the latter has the hydrogens on neighboring sites in the same groove on the
(110) surface.
The ‘Nudged Elastic Band’ method40 was used to ﬁnd the path. This method ﬁnds the MEP variationally. An elastic band, made of beads connected by harmonic springs, is strung between the reactant
and product states. Using a set of images or replicas of the system to deﬁne a discrete transition path, the
problem is turned into a minimization problem by deﬁning an object function
F(r1, r2, . . . , rP −1) =
(ri −ri−1)2
where the sum is over the ‘true’ potential of all the intermediate images of the system, and the second sum
is an ‘elastic glue’ or ‘spring energy’ that keeps adjacent images together The end point images r0 and rP
are ﬁxed. Although this chain is in some ways analogous to the oﬀ-diagonal density matrix FPI, the MEP is
found with no reference to quantum mechanics. Here, the spring constant is arbitrary except that it should
scale as kP to ensure convergence to the MEP as more images are introduced in the chain, P →∞.27
In order to accelarate the convergence of the chain to the MEP we introduce ‘nudging’. The component
of the net spring force on a bead parallel to the local path tend to keep the bead equidistant from its
neighbors; whereas the perpendicular spring force tends to make it collinear with its neighbors. When the
MEP is curved, the chain will tend to pull the chain oﬀthe MEP by the perpendicular spring force (thereby
inducing corner cutting). We therefore zero the perpendicular component of the spring force. Each bead
also feels a force due to the gradient of the ‘real’ potential energy. The component of this gradient force
perpendicular to the path tries to pull the beads down toward the MEP; whereas its parallel component tries
to pull the beads down toward either the reactant or product state, away from the saddle point. This eﬀect
would result in reduced resolution at the saddle point. We therefore zero the parallel component of this
gradient force. Moving each bead in the direction of its adjusted force until the adjusted force becomes zero
will put the beads on the MEP (to within the chain’s resolution), equally spaced in the 3Np-dimensional
space. The technique is not a global search: if there is more than one MEP, only one will be found.
Figure 4 shows a MEP for the H2/Cu problem. The initial state is asymmetric with the ﬁnal state. Even
so, the path becomes symmetric in the vicinity of the surface, lining up with the groove on the (110) surface.
The Nudged Elastic Band method has therefore shown that the MEP is symmetric. In a six dimensional
system, this is a non-trivial result.
Because of the symmetry found for the MEP, a contour plot of the potential surface characterizes the
path quite well. Constraining the H −H axis to be parallel to the surface and aligned with a surface groove,
and ﬁxing the H2 center of mass above a long-bridge site, the two remaining variables are Z, the H2 dimer’s
height above the surface, and R, the H-H separation. Figure 5 shows a contour plot of the H2/Cu potential
energy surface, V (Z, R), with the H2 geometry restricted in this way. The surface conﬁguration is ﬁxed at
the minimum energy for a bare surface. The energies are in eV relative to the bare surface and two separated
hydrogen atoms.
6.4 Statistical sampling of the hyperplanes
The hyperplane constraints derived from the MEP become quite simple due to the symmetry. Taking
the x axis to be along the rows of atoms on the (110) surface, the y axis across the rows, and the z axis
normal to the surface, the hyperplane constraint derived from the MEP becomes ˜z1 + ˜z2 = constant in the
reactant state and ˜x1 −˜x2 = constant in the product state. Here ˜x1 is the x coordinate of hydrogen 1’s
centroid, etc. In the intermediate hyperplanes the constraint is
a(˜x1 −˜x2) + b(˜z1 + ˜z2) = 0.
where a and b are constants. This means that within the transition state hyperplane, for example, the
centroids are allowed to move closer together only if they simultaneously descend toward the surface. They
are allowed to move apart only if they ascend higher above the surface.
This constraint prevents the
atoms from either chemisorbing on adjacent lattice sites, or desorbing. The plane constraint does not aﬀect
symmetric motion along the groove (a change in ˜x1 + ˜x2), asymmetric vertical motion (˜z1 −˜z2) or the y
coordinates perpendicular to the groove. The plane also does not prevent individual images from desorbing
or adsorbing as much as the springs between them will allow.
Figure 6 shows scatterplots of the H −H orientations in the classical statistical sampling at T = 100 K.
Plotted are the angles theta and phi of the H-H orientation, relative to the surface. Theta is the polar angle,
between 0 and π. Phi is the azimuthal angle, between −π and π. Figure 6a is for a hyperplane in the
reactant region. There is no restriction on the orientation of the molecule from the hyperplane constraint.
There are fewer points at low and high values of theta because most of the surface area of a sphere is found
near the equator, at theta ≈π/2. The scatterplot, when drawn as a rectangle, is therefore not uniform. In
ﬁgure 6b is taken at the the transition state hyperplane where the rotation is highly constricted by the EAM
interaction potential. This orientational conﬁnement of the molecule in the transition state contributes to a
signiﬁcant entropy barrier for the transition.
In the quantum statistical sampling, the two H atoms and eight Cu atoms nearest to the H atoms are
included as FPI chains. We have used P = 50 images in each FPI chain in the present calculations. Figure
7 shows three snapshots of the FPI chains from the quantum statistical sampling of the transition state
hyperplane at T = 100 K. The system consists of two hydrogen atoms in the same groove of the Cu(110)
surface, across the long bridge. The great ﬂexibility available to the images in the H atom FPIs is evident.
For illustration purposes only 20 beads where included in the FPI chains in this ﬁgure.
The hyperplane constraint is a very loose constraint, allowing the system to sample a wide range of
conﬁgurations. The system slides back and forth in the groove as illustrated in ﬁg. 7. At low temperatures,
where tunneling is important, the images drape down signiﬁcantly on either side of the barrier, as illustrated
by the separation of the images corresponding to the same FPI into two groups in ﬁg 7. Few images are
actually at the barrier top. At a higher temperature, the springs are tighter and the distribution of images
remains nearly spherical even at the barrier top.
6.5 The free energy barriers
The accumulated free energy diﬀerence with respect to the reactant state as the hyperplane is moved
along the reaction path in a classical statistical sampling is shown in ﬁg. 8. The free energy rises faster than
the potential energy along the reaction path. The free energy barrier increases with temperature, indicating
a drop in entropy as the system approaches the transition state. The intercept of an Arrhenius line from
several temperatures gives ∆S = −3.4 kB.
This drop in entropy at the transition state is a result of the conﬁnement of the molecule (see ﬁg. 6)
by the interaction with the surface as well as conﬁnement of the lattice vibrations due to the presence of
the molecule. The two eﬀects were studied separately by ﬁrst holding the lattice rigid and sampling only
the degrees of freedom of the hydrogen molecule (ﬁg. 9a); and then holding the hydrogen molecule ﬁxed
on the MEP while sampling statistically over the lattice degrees of freedom (ﬁg. 9b). In the second case
the rotational-vibrational entropy in the 5 in-plane degrees of freedom of the hydrogen molecule has been
removed. The free energy becomes much closer to the MEP potential and has little temperature dependence,
corresponding to ∆S = −1.2 kB. The eﬀect of the molecular conﬁnement with the lattice rigid is much larger,
corrsponding to ∆S = −5.3 kB. The two eﬀects are not additive. The dynamics and relaxation (amounting
to ca. 0.15 ˚A displacement of the surface Cu atoms) reduce the conﬁnement of the H2 molecule in the
transition state, thereby lowering the net entropy barrier for the dissociative sticking. In other words, the
movable lattice restricts the hydrogen dimer by a smaller amount than does the rigid lattice. The lattice
dynamics therefore assist the reaction by lowering the entropic barrier.
The results of the quantum statistical sampling are shown in Figure 10 for several diﬀerent temperatures.
The low temperature curves are ﬂat-topped near the transition state. This is a tunnelling eﬀect; it is a
consequence of the chain’s delocalization. The images drape down over the barrier and manage to avoid the
barrier top. Figure 11 compares the free energy curves for quantum H2, quantum D2, and the classical H2,
at 100 K. The deuterium curve shows clear tunneling eﬀects, but smaller than hydrogen, as expected. The
accumulated free energy in the quantum statistical sampling also drops below the classical free energy even
before the tunnelling region is reached. This is evidently a zero-point energy eﬀect due to the softening of
the H −H vibration.
We have used a total of 45 hyperplanes to evaluate the free energy barrier. In the ﬁrst hyperplane the
center of the molecule is 7 ˚A above the surface. The spacing between the hyperplanes was not even as can
be seen from the data points in ﬁg. 8. Initially the spacing is large since the force is small far from the Cu
surface. The accuracy of this discretization of the hyperplane progression and the numerical integration of
the force was tested by recalculating the free energy barrier using only every other hyperplane. At 100 K,
the integrated free energy barrier diﬀered by 0.0002 eV in the classical simulation and by 0.016 eV in the
quantum simulation. The error due to ﬁnite hyperplane spacing is largest in the low-temperature quantum
calculation where tunnelling is most signiﬁcant, because the free energy curve is ﬂat-topped and has a rapidly
changing derivative at the onset of tunnelling.
A larger source of error in the free energy calculation are statistical errors due to the limited simulation
time in calculating the average force. This error is greatest in the high-temperature quantum simulations
where the timestep needs to be very small. From the standard deviation in the force acting on the hyperplanes, we estimate the standard deviation in the accumulated value of the free energy barrier to be 0.03 eV
in the quantum results at 600 K - which is the case with largest statistical ﬂuctuations.
6.6 Tunneling
In an eﬀort to separate the tunneling eﬀect from the eﬀect of changes in zero-point energy, the RMS
delocalization perpendicular to the hyperplane was evaluated. The RMS delocalization of a free atom in one
dimension, as determined by recursive Gaussian integration8 of the quantum partition function and taking
the limit as P →∞, is
⟨(x −˜x)2⟩= ¯h/
i.e., inversely proportional to the square root of both temperature and mass. For a hydrogen atom at 100
K, this is 0.2˚A.
Figure 12a shows the average RMS delocalization perpendicular to the hyperplane as a function of the
reaction coordinate for H2 at 100 K and at 300 K. At 100 K the delocalization suddenly increases, in the
space of one hyperplane, to a much higher value in the barrier region. This delocalization is the source of
the ﬂat-topped free energy barriers at low temperatures and is a clear signature of tunneling.
The temperature where tunneling becomes important can be estimated from the curvature of the potential barrier. Consider a chain with its centroid atop a one dimensional parabolic barrier. The images
will spread away from the barrier top as far as the spring constant allows. The barrier top is thus not as
unfavorable for a quantum atom as it is for a classical atom. The centroid density at the barrier top is
correspondingly increased, and any reaction that goes over the barrier will proceed faster than expected.
This corresponds to tunneling.
The eﬀective energy of a given conﬁguration x(τ), which determines the Boltzmann sampling of conﬁgurations with V (x) a parabolic barrier potential V = −kx2/2 is
Veff[x(τ)] =
kspr(xi −xi−1)2
Both the spring energy and the barrier potential scale as distance squared. Thus, if the distances of all beads
from the center are doubled (xi →2xi), both the spring energy and the barrier energy are quadrupled. If
the spring constant kspr is small compared to the barrier sharpness k, Veff is negative. Then Veff decreases
without bound as the beads move away from the barrier, and the chain delocalizes to inﬁnity in both
directions.
In practice, when the springs are weak, the chain runs away from the barrier top until the barrier starts
curving back up. The critical temperature, in terms of the imaginary barrier frequency Ω≡k/µ, turns out
to be kBTc = ¯hΩ/(2π).12 This is a reasonable estimate of the temperature at the onset of tunneling. Below
Tc, the chain delocalization near the barrier is expected to be signiﬁcantly larger than in free space.
Fig. 12b shows the diﬀerence in RMS delocalization between the reactant and transition state at a
range of temperatures, for H2 and D2. Signiﬁcant increase in the delocalization sets in at about 400 K for
hydrogen and at about 300 K for deuterium, as the temperature dependent spring constants in the FPI
become weaker than the curvature of the MEP potential barrier. Using the curvature of the MEP potential
barrier to estimated the onset of increased delocalization and the equation for Tc above, gives Tc = 400 K
for H2, and 290 K for D2, in good agreement with the observed behaviour.
The onset temperature of tunneling delocalization is well predicted from a parabolic barrier reference,
but the delocalization turns out to increases smoothly as the temperature is lowered further, while the
parabolic barrier model predicts a very sharp cutoﬀtemperature below which the delocalization goes to
inﬁnity. The gradual increase in the delocalization is due to the anharmonicity of the MEP potential. As the
FPI images start probing regions where the barrier becomes signiﬁcantly non-parabolic a balance is reached
between the downward push from the potential gradient and the upward pull from the springs connecting to
images on the other side of the barrier top. Thereby the tunneling delocalization saturates. Fig. 13 shows
the distribution of FPI images for hydrogen projected onto the MEP in typeical snapshots taken from the
statistical sampling at 100 K and 300 K. Even at 300 K where the tunneling eﬀect is small, the FPI images
already probe regions where anharmonic eﬀects are clearly signiﬁcant.
In H2 at 300 K, the change in RMS delocalization between initial and transition states (see ﬁgure
12b) is small. However, the actual delocalization is about 0.12˚A. The delocalization goes to zero at high
temperature, but very reluctantly, as an inverse square root. The quantum system therefore is not expected
to become truly classical except at extremely high temperatures.
However, the quantum system at moderate temperatures such as 300 K behaves quasi-classically: the
delocalization remains roughly constant, and the distribution of images remains roughly spherical.
system’s statistics correspond roughly to those of a classical system at the same temperature, but whose
potential energy surface has been shifted to account for the zero-point energy eﬀects seen at the non-zero
delocalization. In other words, the quantum eﬀects at moderate temperatures, though non-zero, may simply
show up as an implicit shift in the potential energy, rather than as the fundamental diﬀerences that are
observed at low temperatures.
6.7 Torque contribution to the reversible work
The rotational contribution to the reversible work turns out to be small for this system. Figure 14
shows the accumulated free energy diﬀerence due to rotation of the hyperplanes as a function of the reaction
coordinate. While the curvature of the path is quite large, the torque with respect to the MEP is small and
the net eﬀect on the free energy is small. This is unlike the Eckart barrier plus harmonic oscillator model
system, where the rotational contribution was found to be just as large as the translational contribution
when using the MEP as reaction path.10 There, tunneling caused the average density to move oﬀthe MEP
and thereby create torque on the hyperplane in a region of large path curvature. By redeﬁning the path
to coincide roughly with the average density, the torque on the hyperplane and thereby the rotational
contribution to the free energy was minimized. The net free energy barrier, however, was the same.
While the rotational contribution is small here, it is statistically signiﬁcant, and of opposite sign in the
classical and quantum case (ﬁg. 14). Quantum delocalization eﬀects result in a shift of the average density
of the system with respect to the MEP, which presumably changes the direction of the torque and thereby
the sign of the rotational contribution to the free energy.
6.8 Activation energy for adsorption and desorption
Fig. 15 shows an Arrhenius plot for the calculated free energy barriers to dissociative adsorption. The
classical statistical sampling gives a straight line corresponding to a constant activation energy of 0.73 eV .
Both H2 and D2 are observed to be classical at 600 K but below 400 K the quantum results deviate from
the classical results. The quantum statistical sampling gives signiﬁcantly lower free energy barriers below
400 K, and a correspondingly lower activation energy of 0.38 eV for H2 and 0.45 eV for D2. A near Arrhenius
behaviour is observed in the quantum regime as well as in the classical regime; the calculated points fall
close to a straight line ﬁt. The lowering of the activation energy is mainly due to tunneling, as illustrated
by the delocalization perpendicular to the hyperplane shown in ﬁg. 12b. The tunneling isotope eﬀect is
(0.73 −0.38)/(0.73 −0.45) = 1.25.
The experimental data of Campbell and coworkers is also shown in ﬁg. 15. The measured activation
energy agrees well with the calculated results, but the measured sticking probability is larger by a factor of
40, indicating the entropy barrier is too large in the simulation and the model potential should be adjusted to
have a wider reaction channel at the transition state. If we assume the in-plane vibrations are harmonic, this
can be accomplished, for example, by reducing all ﬁve frequencies by a factor of 1/401/5 ≈1/2. This takes
into account only the ﬁve non-reactive hydrogen vibrations (such as symmetric translation in the groove
of the (110) surface, symmetric and antisymmetric vibrations perpendicular to the groove, and antisymmetric vertical motion) and neglects modiﬁcations in the copper vibrations. Since the shape of our model
potential surface is quite arbitrarily derived from the LEPS potential form with no direct experimental input
determining the width of the reaction channel at the transition state, such a modiﬁcation is not unreasonable.
16 shows an Arrhenius plot for the reverse reaction, recombinative desorption.
The classical
statistical sampling gives Arrhenius type behaviour with the calculated points falling near a straight line
corresponding to a constant activation energy of 0.55 eV . The quantum statistical sampling gives signiﬁcantly lower free energy barriers below 400 K, and a correspondingly lower eﬀective activation energy. The
calculated points do not fall on a straight line, as is typical for decay of metastable states, and the eﬀective activation energy is therefore somewhat temperature dependent. At 300 K the calculated activation
energy is 0.49 eV for H2. An experimental activation energy has been reported by Anger, Winkler, and
Rendulic34 as 0.43 eV in this temperature range and in the zero coverage limit. The calculated and measured
activation energies are therefore in quite good agreement. The activation energy at 100 K is calculated to
be signiﬁcantly lower, down to 0.36 eV . Again, tunnelling through the barrier has a strong eﬀect at low
temperature.
6.8 Classical dynamical corrections
The transmission coeﬃcient, κ, can be calculated by molecular dynamics.8,16 An ensemble of points
is found at the dividing surface whose momenta are Boltzmann-distributed and initially forward-directed.
The ensemble is propagated forward and backward in time until all its members leave the vicinity of the
transition state. The fraction of these trajectories which actually started in R and ﬁnish in P is counted.
We assume that once the system leaves the vicinity of the transition state, it will remain either a reactant
or a product for a much longer time than it spent near the transition state. If, however, it spends a long
time in the intermediate region, dynamical corrections become problematic.
Classical dynamical correction calculations were carried out for H2 and D2 at 600 K, where classical
statistical sampling gave the same TST rate estimate as quantum statistical sampling. An ensemble of 144
points was taken at the transition state hyperplane; each of these was assigned a Boltzmann velocity and
each trajectory was followed forward and backward in time until it left the transition state region. TST
assumes that each crossing point will ﬁnish as products when propagated forward and as reactants when
propagated backward. If, for a given crossing point, either of these assumptions is untrue, it does not count
toward the rate. The transmission coeﬃcient was found to be κ = 0.54 ± 0.08 for H2 and κ = 0.56 ± 0.08
for D2. No kinetic isotope eﬀect was observed for this system.
A transmission coeﬃcient of 0.5 has the same eﬀect on the rate as does a free energy increase of
−kBT lnκ = 0.03 eV at 600 K. This is of the same magnitude as the error associated with calculation of
the free energy. More careful estimations of κ are therefore not called for unless the free energy diﬀerence is
also calculated signiﬁcantly more accurately.
None of the trajectories lingered in the transition region for more than a picosecond. The quantum
dynamics are expected to be similar to the classical dynamics at this high temperature, and the quantum
transmission coeﬃcient will, therefore, likely be within an order of magnitude of the classical transmission
coeﬃcient, corresponding to a few hundredths of an eV . The free energy diﬀerence would then provide
a good estimate of the sticking coeﬃcient, even without dynamical corrections.
Furthermore, since the
classical trajectories spent little time near the transition state, it may be feasible to do a quantum-dynamical
calculation for the short time required to estimate corrections to the QTST estimate. However, we expect
those corrections to be small, and conclude from the classical dynamical corrections that TST is an excellent
approximation for treating the H2 dissociative adsorption as well as associative desorption at a Cu(110)
surface. Other dissociative adsorption processes are likely to be also well approximated by TST.
7. Conclusions
We have presented a calculation of the dissociative sticking and thermal desorption of hydrogen molecules
using a statistical approach, quantum transition state theory, where the two hydrogen atoms were included
fully quantum mechanically and a thermal average was carried out over both the molecular and surface
degrees of freedom. For the model potential surface used here, the system crosses over from classical to
quantum behavior at about T = 400 K for H2 and T = 300 K for D2.
In the quantum regime, the
activation energy is signiﬁcantly reduced, the free energy barriers are ﬂat-topped, and the delocalization is
signiﬁcantly greater at the barrier than in the reactant state, indicating that tunneling becomes the dominant
transition mechanism.
A practical method for evaluating the required free energy barriers in classical and quantum systems
has also been given. This method is based on a reversible work evaluation and can be applied with relative
ease to systems of high dimensionality. Another advantage of this method is the identiﬁcation of an optimal,
hyperplanar dividing surface for the TST rate estimate in the course of the reversible work calculation.
In this appendix we show that the contributions to the free energy diﬀerence between two hyperplanes
due to the in plane forces vanishes in the quantum mechanical case, just as in the classical case. We start
with the rotational component of eqn. (25)
dArot(s) =
β¯h∇V [r(τ)] · U′
s (r(τ) −Γs)
With the transformation to local coordinates, z, given by eqn. (12), this expression may be rewritten in
terms of the rotated coordinates z as
dArot(s) =
where the average is written in terms of z as
⟨· · ·⟩s =
Dz(τ)e−S/¯h · · · δ [(˜z0)1]
Dz(τ)e−S/¯hδ [(˜z0)1]
Consider the following average where i ̸= 1 and j ̸= i
In terms of a path integral, this becomes
Dz(τ)e−S/¯h
zj(τ)δ [(˜z0)1] .
where C is a normalization constant.
Using the following relation
dτ ∂V (z(τ))
we may write
e−S/¯hzj(τ)δ [(˜z0)1]
Iij can be shown to be zero in the following way. First introduce
e−S/¯hzj(τ)δ [(˜z0)1]
so that Iij can be written as
G →0 as (˜z0)i →±∞.
By transforming to Fourier variables
dτe−iΩkτ˜z(τ)
eqn. (A6) becomes
(k,l)̸=(0,i)
where J is a constant Jacobian for the transformation
We next do the (˜z0)i integration to give
(k,l)̸=(0,i)
(G(+∞) −G(−∞)) ds
which veriﬁes
Using this result and the fact that UT
s is antisymmetric, gives
dArot(s) =
which can be rewritten as
dArot(s) = −
∂V [r(τ)]
s (r(τ) −Γs)
and with [Us]i1 = [ns]i, we recover our ﬁnal result
dArot(s) = −
∂V [r(τ)]
s · (r(τ) −Γs))
which is equivalent to eqn (27) derived for the classical case.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S.
Department of Energy under grant No. DE-FG06-91ER14224 (G.M. and H.J.) and under Contract No.
DE-AC06-76RLO 1830 with Battelle Memorial Institute which operates the Paciﬁc Northwest Laboratory
(G.S.). G.M. acknowledges support from the Hertz foundation and ARCS foundation.