Infusing Active Learning into the Large-enrollment Biology
Class: Seven Strategies, from the Simple to Complex
Deborah Allen* and Kimberly Tanner
*Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716; San Francisco State University,
San Francisco, CA 94132
The greatest single challenge to SMET pedagogical reform
remains the problem of whether and how large classes can be
infused with more active and interactive learning methods.
Elaine Seymour 
Science educators are urged to
adopt active-learning strategies and other alternatives to
uninterrupted lecture to model the methods and mindsets at
the heart of scientific inquiry, and to provide opportunities
for students to connect abstract ideas to their real-world
applications and acquire useful skills, and in doing so gain
knowledge that persists beyond the course experience in
which it was acquired. While these and other calls for reform
dangle the carrot of promised cognitive gains before us
 , the process of translating their
message into the realities of practice in given classroom
contexts remains a challenge of considerable magnitude.
Perhaps because the inquiry-oriented methods that offer the
most promise were
often developed in small-class settings, the gap between
promise and practice can seem almost impossible to close in
the large-enrollment class environment that still predominates in the introductory course offerings of many colleges
and universities. The conditions that led to creation of the
large-enrollment class, particularly in research universities,
are still with us and are not likely to change
in the foreseeable future. Thus, although the environment of
a large class is not an easy one in which to thrive—either for
the instructors who teach them or for the students who take them —it is most probably here to stay.
Unfortunately, traditional lecture-dominant methods often
fail to motivate the meaningful intellectual engagement that
is the central mission and hallmark of the college experience
 and that is a crucial factor in
students’ personal and academic development .
In fact, when large class instructors rely solely on traditional
forms of instruction, ‘‘. . . the individuals learning the most in
this classroom are the professors. They have reserved for
themselves the very conditions that promote learning:
actively seeking new information, organizing it in a meaningful way, and having the chance to explain it to others’’
 .
But moving out from behind the relative safety of the
lecture podium to adopt the types of active strategies that
shift classroom emphasis away from teachers’ teaching
toward students’ participation and learning is often an
unsettling prospect, even in the small-class setting. Everyone
has heard those real or apocryphal tales of hapless professors
who responded to ‘‘the call,’’ then were laid low by the ironic
onslaught of student anxiety, resistance, or downright anger
when the students were presented with classroom activities
that aimed to shift emphasis from memorization and recall to
the building of critical thinking skills, and the skill and ability
to conduct self-directed learning .
Added to the difficulties inherent with instructor and
student adjustment to new teaching and learning paradigms
are the cogent and interrelated issues of resources and
rewards . The faculty member
using inquiry-oriented instruction is often faced with the need
to develop new curricula to supplement or replace a reliance
on textbooks, a task for which she or he may have received
little prior training. The organizational tasks and grading
responsibilities inherent in large-class instruction may seem
multiplied by an unmanageable order of magnitude when
implementation of even the most basic of active-learning
strategies is contemplated. It is no wonder that many college
and university professors, often faced with the struggle to
achieve effective practice in both the teaching and research
arenas and thus considerable time constraints, choose the
default position of the lecture, with its predictability and
efficiency at imparting information. In effect, they may feel
caught between a rock and a hard place when confronted
with the increasingly more frequent and cogent calls for
change in the way science is taught .
Fortunately, the strategies for breaking down the roadblocks and realizing the promise of active learning and
inquiry instruction in the large class are being tested and
publicized . Educators who have
addressed the multitude of issues that underlie implementation of active-learning strategies in large-enrollment settings
are conscientiously spreading the word to the science
education community by presenting at conferences or publishing in science education journals .
In previous columns we have discussed a few of the
multitude of strategies encompassed by the term ‘‘active
DOI: 10.1187 / cbe.05-08-0113
Address correspondence to: Deborah Allen ( ).
Cell Biology Education
Vol. 4, 262–268, Winter 2005
 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology
learning.’’ In this one, we will focus on the large-class setting,
providing an overview of tried-and-true approaches for
incorporating active learning, ranging from the simple to
complex. We will highlight those that have been implemented
in the lecture classroom itself, rather than those that make use
of small-enrollment lab and discussion sections, or of virtual
environments such as electronic bulletin boards and computer-based learning modules. Although some seemingly
fearless individuals have adapted problem-based learning
(PBL) or the case study method to large-class settings
 , we will focus for the most part on strategies and
activities that typically do not require such a radical reframing
of current standard practice, and are therefore more readily
accessible to most science educators. In addition, a description
of the general practices for effective teaching in large-class
environments is beyond the scope of this column. For excellent
guides and materials for this broader set of strategies, we
invite the interested reader to consult the Web sites of the
many centers for teaching and learning that have also made
these resources available to the larger community .
‘‘BOOKENDING’’ THE LECTURE WITH
QUESTIONS THAT FOCUS STUDENT
DISCUSSION
We all ask our students questions in order to probe their
knowledge—albeit the questions are sometimes effectively
rhetorical
and Tanner, 2002) or inadvertently
addressed to a subset of the class population . Typically, when this
strategy is used in a 50-minute class period, several short
(3–4 minute) discussion sessions, prompted and focused by
questions, are evenly interspersed between three (10–12
minute) blocks of lecture, with a 5-minute period at the end
for summary of the class session. Alternatively, these
sessions can be inserted at the start and end of class (as
well as in the middle), effectively ‘‘bookending’’ a lecture
period .
A structured question-and-response period is the simplest
and shortest type of active-learning activity: one that can be
used effectively by even the most introverted of professors
 . It is also a relatively easy passage into active
learning from the perspective of organizational and preparation time—the time needed is relatively small. Additionally, there need not be any formal grading mechanism to
assess students’ work, other than to connect to the questions
posed during class sessions, and therefore reinforce their
importance, by including them on the usual course exams.
Questions that can form the basis of a short, activelearning activity can be posed directly to individual students
by asking them to write a minute-paper structure (e.g.,
following presentation of a key experiment, asking how they
might interpret the experimental data being shown),
followed by a brief whole-class processing period, or it can
be structured as the turn-to-your-partner discussion commonly known as think-pair-share .
Alternatively, various handbooks provide
ideas for dressing up these more basic focused-discussion/
active-learning frameworks in a multitude of student
attention-grabbing ways. In all cases, a brief, instructor-led,
whole-class discussion typically follows the student-centered
activity, an effective way to provide feedback to students on
their responses and make additional connections to the
lecture material. By breaking up the lecture with these short
question-processing periods, instructors can shift some of the
intellectual work to the students—during these sessions, they
offer the explanations, organize and summarize the course
material, and find ways to fit new information into their
existing conceptual frameworks.
But there is a major caveat to achieving these potential
outcomes—good outcomes require good questions, and
framing and asking good questions is hard. Close-ended
questions that probe whether students have understood the
lecture they have just heard are useful, but are not as
effective at fostering student interactivity or reflection. More
complex, open-ended questions not only can up the ante,
pushing for greater intellectual and personal growth , but have been found to be far more
effective prompts for generating small-group discussions
 . Use of small, cooperative learning groups for
processing questions can take away some of the anxiety that
students may experience on opening up their mouths in a
large class—they can try out their ideas first among a smaller
group of their peers. Reporting back as a spokesperson for a
group is less daunting than voicing a personal opinion. Even
more importantly, the increased student interactivity that
results has been found to be an important factor in affecting
students’ personal and academic development . If these groups are temporary and ad
hoc, lasting only a single class session, the impact on the
instructors’ organizational load is relatively benign.
As mentioned above, piggy-backing instructor-led discussions onto student-active, question-response sessions
can provide valuable feedback, while sparing the instructor
additional grading responsibilities. However, the downside
of this approach is that it makes it hard for the instructor
to get a sense of students’ collective response patterns. A
simple technique that requires only a minimal amount of
preparation can help. Individual students or student
groups are given a set of colored index cards, each color
responding to the ‘‘a,’’ ‘‘b,’’ ‘‘c,’’ etc., responses of a
multiple-choice question. On request, the students hold
up the card corresponding to their chosen response to the
instructor’s question. The instructor can gain a quick
impression of the pattern of student responses, or literally
count cards. If the questions are substantive, this permutation of the familiar ‘‘raise your hand if you think this is
answer’’ strategy
structure for conducting question-prompted student discussions to bookend lectures.
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning
CLASSROOM TECHNOLOGY FOR ‘‘ON-THE-
SPOT FEEDBACK’’ WITHOUT GRADING PAINS
Suppose a large-class instructor wants to have permanent
documentation of students’ individual and collective response patterns to these simplest of possible active-learning
activities, ones that are built on the foundation of a good
question? The value added by such documentation is well
known—it can help students to chart their progress and
teachers to plan future instruction, and can add variety to the
course portfolio of summative assessment strategies that
contribute to a student’s grade. Is this added value worth the
additional cost of grading time? While only the individual
course instructor knows the right answer to this question,
use of classroom technology can help tip the balance toward
a ‘‘yes’’ response.
For example, in his ‘‘team learning with informative
testing’’ approach, Michaelsen reported using multiple-choice testing of understanding of preassigned reading for
assurance of student preparation for complex active-learning
tasks, and to foster student-to-student accountability within
learning teams. He streamlined this process for large-class use
by bringing a portable scanning machine to class (one capable
of storing data on individual response patterns), and running
the scantrons through it immediately after students completed their responses. A lower-tech variation on this theme of
giving students immediate feedback is the scratchable
scantron. Students process their responses like lottery tickets,
scratching off the surface film over the bubble of their choice
to reveal whether that choice is the correct one. If it is not, they
may go on to select alternative responses with sequentially
lower point values, until they have chosen the correct one
 . These methods can be used as preludes to
complex active-learning activities or in concert with the more simple types of activelearning activities, such as those described in the previous
section, used to periodically break out of the lecture rut.
Another, more advanced classroom technology for providing instructional feedback in a large class with only minimal
grading pain, is the use of student response (clicker) systems
 . Each student or student team is given a
wireless, handheld response pad that sends student responses to a receiver at the instructor’s computer station via
an infrared or radio signal. Student response patterns can be
stored, tabulated, and graphed relatively quickly. In addition, individual (with students identified anonymously by
number) or collective class responses can be displayed nearly
instantaneously to the class for immediate feedback and
discussion. In the case of complex questions that connect
with common student misconceptions, initial responses can
be redisplayed for a side-by-side comparison with a second
round of responses to the same question . The
reasons for particular choices can become the basis for class
discussion leading to better understanding of the implications of the course material. These systems can engage
students in the material through survey, practice, review, or
pretest of course material and through personal interactions
with peers and the instructor. The instructor now has a
record of the alternate conceptions that can be used to plan
future instruction, or he or she can use the stored data on
individual responses for assigning points toward the
students’ grades (or both). For the interested reader, Knight
and Wood more fully describe how they use these
strategies in a large-enrollment developmental biology
course in this issue of Cell Biology Education.
Again, it should be noted that the cognitive benefits to be
reached using these informative testing strategies are only as
strong as the questions asked, and multiple-choice questions
are a particularly difficult format in which to pose questions
that nudge students to the realm of higher order thinking—a
potential downside for the instructor who does not have
access to a ready supply of these questions. In addition, the
records do not provide explanations of the reasons or
reasoning patterns for students’ selection of particular
choices—if this information is needed, it must be obtained
from essays or interviews of individual students or from
whole-class discussions.
STUDENT PRESENTATIONS AND PROJECTS
Another approach for the large-enrollment class is to devote
nearly the entire class meeting time to student presentations
and projects. A readily accessible variation on this type of
activity was designed for a 170-student introductory biology
course . Students (approximately 10–15 per
week) research and write reports on the ‘‘disease of the
week,’’ and must be prepared to provide short summaries to
the class as called for in the course of that week’s lectures.
Eisen reports on a more ambitious model for using
student presentations—one in which the course is almost
entirely given up to this type of learning strategy. He uses it
in a college sophomore- and junior-level course in cell
biology with an enrollment of 60–100 students. The 60- to 75minute class periods are divided into time for two student
presentations on research articles from the recent primary
literature, chosen to follow the typical topical sequence in cell
biology textbooks. Students, who work in teams of three to
four members for the presentations, also lead the follow-up
question-and-answer-type class discussions. Nonpresenting
students are held accountable for the subject matter of the
presentations on course exams. The instructor chooses the
articles, provides some resources, meets with students
outside of class as a consultant on quality-control issues,
and gives brief orienting lectures at the start of each class.
Science literacy goals are fostered because students research,
review, and present background material as well as key
features of their assigned research studies.
In courses of this type, the instructor’s role is largely
displaced to behind the scenes, outside of class activities such
as planning and coaching presentation teams. Periodic
formal and informal feedback from students on their
perceptions of the course can provide information that can
help the instructor to address any student concerns that may
result (see next section).
LEARNING-CYCLE INSTRUCTIONAL MODELS
When classroom use of more complex active-learning
activities, ones that present students with new cognitive
challenges, begin to supplant more and more of the class
time formerly devoted to the instructor’s direct explanations,
student response is often mixed. Many students, when faced
with these new academic and intellectual challenges, voice
concerns that the instructor appears to be doing less
teaching, and that the course appears unorganized by
contrast with the predictable structure and pace of lectures
Cell Biology Education
D. Allen and K. Tanner
 . Often, students will express doubts about
their ability to direct their own learning, and report a sense of
learning less course content than they did in previous
lecture-based classes ; consequently,
they are worried about success in future courses. Use of
learning-cycle instructional models is one way to address
these very real student concerns without compromising
ambitious objectives and goals for student learning .
The most common of these learning-cycle approaches in
use in the sciences is the five-phased ‘‘5E’’ instructional
model. The phases of the cycle typically play out as follows:
the first phase, engagement, aims to draw the students in
with a reading, video clip, provocative question, or other
short activities designed to connect to and perhaps organize
prior knowledge in preparation for new learning. The
content that is introduced also connects to the central topics
of the lesson. In the second phase, exploration, additional
learning tasks focus on concepts and skills necessary to
understand these central topics. The third phase, explanation, builds on the first two phases, providing additional
examples and opportunities for students to demonstrate
their understanding. The fourth phase, elaboration, seeks to
deepen student understanding by providing new applications and implications of the central concepts and processes
of the lesson. Student understanding is evaluated in the fifth
and final stage. For the interested reader, Ebert-May et al.
 provide an example (instructor teaching strategies and
student activities) of how they use this 5E model to teach
topics related to photosynthesis in their large-enrollment
introductory biology classes. In their model, students work
in cooperative learning groups throughout the cycle.
Clearly, the use of learning-cycle instructional models,
particularly in combination with cooperative learning
groups, requires a not inconsiderable investment of time
for curriculum design and organizational tasks. The major
advantage of these models in large classrooms, however, is
that they are constructed on the basis of thoughtful
consideration of how people acquire new knowledge and
build conceptual frameworks ,
and on the need to invite students to learn by connecting to
their prior experiences and ideas. They do this in a way that
provides a clear-cut mechanism for integrating a variety of
both traditional and creative instructional strategies along a
student-to-instructor-centered spectrum. The familiar terrain
of instructor-centered lectures can be visited, giving the
instructor a reassuringly visible presence when it is most
likely to be useful (e.g., in the explanation phase), without
undermining the development of students’ ability to direct
their own learning. The instructor’s grading workload,
generated during the evaluation phase, can be kept
manageable by use of peer-review strategies, formative
assessment (instructor looks over student work and offers
comments to the whole class but does not assign a grade),
and group assignments. Individual accountability among
group members can be fostered by inclusion of material from
learning-cycle activities on exams.
PEER-LED TEAM LEARNING
Another way to address student concerns when activelearning activities increase in complexity and intensity is to
enlist the help of their near peers, typically students who
have taken the course before, to help guide students’ efforts
 . In addition to working with students by serving as
facilitators of one or more cooperative-learning groups, near
peers may lead supplemental instruction sessions for
students who need additional encounters with course
content or practice with building requisite skills, or participate in aspects of course and curriculum design, or both.
They support students through moments of uncertainty with
inquiry-based learning, they can and do attest to the benefits
foreseen by the instructor’s goal setting and intents, and
often, they voluntarily assume the role of mentors in broader
aspects of the students’ undergraduate experiences. Typically, the peer facilitators efforts are in turn guided and
supported by in-service training sessions (for which course
credit can be awarded), which include topics such as group
dynamics, giving and receiving constructive feedback, and
underlying philosophies and goals of inquiry-oriented
instructional methods, as well as in the objectives and
background content of specific course activities .
MODELING INQUIRY APPROACHES IN THE
LARGE CLASS
Central to the message inherent in the various calls for action
for change in science instruction is the notion that acquisition
of science literacy is essential for all students, whether or not
they intend to become practicing scientists . If these
science literacy goals include an understanding of how
scientists organize, conduct, and interpret the results of their
investigations, they are particularly hard to achieve in largeenrollment nonmajors courses in which students are not
enrolled in a concurrent laboratory course that can provide
concrete experience. Some instructors have found a way
around this limitation by excerpting short
laboratory activities; if necessary, reframing them in inquiry-based modes, and creating ‘‘kits’’ of materials for their
implementation in the lecture classroom. By logistical
necessity, these activities need to be relatively sparing of
materials and complex instrumentation—for example, an
activity in which students explore the ecosystem-level
interactions between photosynthesis and respiration in a
series of test tube ecosystems .
Despite this necessity for simplicity, students can exercise the
intellectual power behind designing aspects of the experiment, predicting outcomes that would lend support to their
hypotheses, and analyzing and interpreting their findings.
These strategies clearly are easier to conduct in a setting in
which preparatory staff, teaching assistants, and a small
storage room annexed to the lecture classroom are available.
PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING AND CASE STUDIES
While PBL and the case study method seem easier to manage
in a small-class setting, there are some examples of their
adaptation to the large-class environment. . Briefly, in the classic model
of PBL, students use a learning-cycle approach as they work
together in small groups to resolve complex, real-world
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning
scenarios. The problems launch students’ learning, on a
need-to-know basis. As originally formulated, in the case
study method, the instructor leads a whole-class discussion
about student insights into a contextually rich dilemma or
situation requiring extensive analysis that requires application of content previously learned by other means . As these methods have been adapted to undergraduate contexts, the original distinctions between them
have become blurred. Additional adaptations for the large
class include using problems and cases that provide natural
break points for instructor guidance at 15- to 20-minute
intervals, instructor-led whole-class discussions (added to
PBL) and short lecturettes, and use of peer group facilitators
 .
PULLING IT ALL TOGETHER—WORKSHOP
In many introductory course experiences, activities designed
to teach ‘‘science as inquiry’’ are often relegated to the
concurrent laboratory meetings; the lecture meeting provides
connections to the lab mostly because the instructor attempts
to present central concepts in the same sequence as they are
likely to arise as background to deeper understanding of the
whys and wherefores of an ongoing lab activity. Workshop
Biology is an example of a largeenrollment introductory course for nonmajors in which the
science-as-inquiry theme is integrated throughout all course
components. The Workshop Biology course experience is
designed to convey the message to students that biology is a
way of knowing, rather than just a static body of knowledge.
A heavy emphasis is placed on helping students to acquire
the skills needed to make informed choices consistent with
their values on science and technology related matters and
issues that arise in their daily lives. As a result, both in lecture
(called ‘‘assemblies’’ in Workshop Biology) and lab, activities
are investigative in nature—students explore and discover
fundamental concepts through asking and answering their
own questions, or to do in-depth research and make decisions
about current and controversial issues. The activities are
often designed to help students, who work in teams, to
confront and move beyond common misconceptions in such
areas as natural selection, cell division, and cellular energy
transformation processes. In addition, the assemblies are
aimed to help students integrate this new information,
building frameworks to connect and interconnect new ideas
and examples to each other and to broader, ‘‘big ideas’’ in
biology. The Workshop Biology Web site 
provides additional information and downloadable resources
relating course format and activities, including concept tests
used to assess students’ conceptual learning.
LEARNING HOW TO DEVELOP CURRICULUM
AND TEACH IN NEW WAYS
We began this column by acknowledging the efforts of those
college and university faculty who have shared the activelearning strategies they have developed and implemented in
large-enrollment classes to the broader community by
presenting at conferences or publishing in science education
journals. We went on to illustrate seven examples, from the
simple to the complex, pulling from the science education
literature. Despite their good intent, however, journal articles
have constraints—they fall short of being ‘‘how to do it’’
manuals for the typical college-level biology instructor who
may only have experienced traditional methods of teaching,
both as an instructor and while as a student. After reading
these articles, or the synopses of them in this column, one
may still wonder, ‘‘If I’m not at the front of the room
lecturing, what will I be doing?’’ ‘‘Are there examples of good
questions—the ones that actually cause my students to care
about the subject and to talk about it with each other?’’
‘‘How do I turn a good question into an activity?’’ ‘‘What’s
the difference between a sequence of lectures and textbook
readings and a curriculum unit? Is there one?’’
Fortunately, Web sites for faculty teaching workshops and
online repositories of course materials, teaching notes, and
teaching videotapes have begun to appear that take a step
further toward helping to address these questions . Also, in acknowledgment of this need, the National
Academies of Science has begun to offer a Summer Institute,
sponsored by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute designed to bring together cross-institutional teams of
life sciences faculty for an intensive week to design
pedagogical approaches, courses, course materials (i.e.,
teachable units), and assessment strategies geared at the
large, introductory course environment. The Institute’s
sessions provide a mix of individual activities such as
reading, writing, and planning, with discussions and workshop-style presentations that model inquiry teaching. These
workshops are conducted by experienced teachers, several of
whom have authored the literature cited in this column.
Institute participants are required to document the effectiveness of their teachable unit in the upcoming academic year;
the units will be published in upcoming years.
A particular intriguing aspect of this Summer Institute is
that participants are also required to ‘‘share the word’’ in a
way aimed at breaking the cycle of ‘‘teaching as we were
taught.’’ At the Institute participants are provided with
materials to offer a seminar in mentoring for graduate
students, postdoctoral students, or faculty who will also be
teaching in these new ways and with the new materials.
Perhaps we are getting closer to a time in which teaching
efficiency and productivity will no longer be indexed to how
many students at a time we can deliver information to, but
rather, to how many students we engage in deep and
meaningful learning.