Multi-domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classification: using Multiple
Classifier Combining Methods
Shoushan LI and Chengqing ZONG
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190
{sshanli, cqzong }@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Sentiment classification is very domain-specific and
good domain adaptation methods, when the training and
testing data are drawn from different domains, are sorely
needed. In this paper, we address a new approach to
domain adaptation for sentiment classification in which
classifiers are adapted for a specific domain with training
data from multiple source domains. We call this new
approach ‘multi-domain adaptation’ and present a multiple
classifier system (MCS) framework to describe and
understand it. Under this framework, we propose a new
combining method, called Multi-label Consensus Training
(MCT), to combine the base classifiers for selecting
‘automatically-labeled’ samples from unlabeled data in the
target domain. The experimental results for sentiment
classification show that multi-domain adaptation using this
method improves adaptation performance.
Sentiment classification; domain adaptation; multiple
classifier combining.
Introduction
Sentiment classification is the task of classifying
documents according to their opinion, or sentiment,
regarding a given subject matter. Many studies have
focused on this task . Most previous studies, however,
are based on the assumption that the training data is
representative of the testing data. This assumption is
routinely incorrect when the application domain changes.
Here, ‘domain adaptation’ is proposed. This usually
involves teaching a classifier using both plentiful labeled
data from the source domain and unlabeled data from the
target domain. Blitzer et al. discuss precisely this
problem where a structural correspondence learning
(SCL) algorithm is applied to sentiment classification
and shown to be successful when an appropriate domain
is chosen to match the target domain.
Sentiment classification is a very domain-specific
problem , and adaptation algorithms successful in one
domain to another are extremely difficult. Using learning
data from only a single domain to teach adaptation for
978-1-4244-2780-2/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE
other domains is not feasible because adaptation fails
totally when the data distribution in the target domain is
very different from that in the source domain . We,
therefore, suggest improving adaptation results by using
multiple domains to source learning data. In the rest of
this paper this new approach of domain adaptation is
called multi-domain adaptation, while adaptation from
one domain to another is referred to as one-to-one
adaptation. For multi-domain adaptation, we can firstly
apply an adaptability measurement to select the domain
with the best adaptability and then use one-to-one
adaptation algorithms. Consider, for example, labeled
product reviews from three different domains: books,
DVDs, and electronics, and we want to teach a classifier
discussing
electronics domain shows the best computed adaptability
 , labeled data from the electronics domain is selected
to train a classifier. One major drawback of this method
for multi-domain adaptation is that it drops the labeled
data from the other domains that may contain helpful
information. We believe there are superior methods that
can make full use of all the available labeled data.
In this paper, we present a multiple classifier system
(MCS) framework to describe and understand the
approach of multi-domain adaptation. Constructing an
MCS generally consists of two steps: training a number
of component classifiers then using combination rules to
combine them. In the first step, classifiers can be trained
in different ways including using different learning
algorithms, training data, and feature sets. These
component classifiers are usually called the base
classifiers. In multi-domain adaptation, they can be
naturally obtained using labeled data from different
domains. There are various rules presented in the MCS
literature to combine the base classifiers in the second
step. The architecture of the MCS framework for
multi-domain adaptation is shown in Figure 1.
Labeled Data from
Source Domain 1
Labeled Data from
Source Domain 2
Labeled Data from
Source Domain m
One to One
Adaptation
Data from the Target Domain
One to One
Adaptation
Base Classifier 1
Base Classifier 2
Base Classifier m
Classifier
Combining Rule
MCS Classifier
One to One
Adaptation
Figure 1: MCS framework for multi-domain adaptation
Our Framework
In a standard classification problem, a classifier is
the predicting function that maps an input vector to the
corresponding output. Usually, the classifier is trained
using training samples and then used to predict other
label-unknown samples. In domain adaptation, the
training samples and the label-unknown samples do not
come from the same domain. In other words, the testing
(target) data and the training (source) data are drawn
from different statistical distributions. As far as
multi-domain adaptation is concerned, the training
samples themselves come from different domains while
the testing samples are from another domain which is
different from all the multiple source domains.
Labeled Data from
Source Domain 1
Labeled Data from
Source Domain 2
Labeled Data from
Source Domain m
Data from the Target Domain
One to One
Adaptation
Adaptation
Classifier
Labeled Data
Figure 2: Add-all framework for multi-domain
adaptation
Multi-domain adaptation can be simplified to
one-to-one adaptation in two straightforward ways. The
first is to simply mix the training samples from all
domains and then to train a classifier with the mixed data.
This method has been pursued by Aue and Gamon as
a baseline, and is named all-data. It is outside the scope
of our MCS framework since it only uses one classifier;
and belongs to a framework we call add-all as shown in
Figure 2. The second way is to use the samples from the
domain with the best adaptability where the adaptability
is evaluated by some measurement (e.g., to compute
A-distance between two domains using unlabeled data)
We approach this problem from a different
perspective. In multi-domain adaptation, multiple base
classifiers can be naturally obtained using labeled data
from different domains. Given these multiple classifiers,
the problem can be treated as a typical MCS problem.
Note that the second method mentioned above can be
seen as an instance of the MCS framework where the
classifier combination rule is select-best. There are some
notable advantages to treating this problem as an MCS
The idea that one can benefit from combining
multiple classifiers has been widely proposed in
including:
recognition, machine learning and natural
language processing. In particular, combining
classifiers trained naturally from different
sources is extremely effective for the overall
performance improvement.
MCS, as an important research field, has been
studied intensively over the last decade .
Many problems in this field that could help us
better understand multi-domain adaptation have
been addressed and solved. For example, an
important issue in MCS is the classifier selection
problem that states that good classifiers should
be selected for combination rather than all .
The same issue can be found in multi-domain
adaptation in terms of whether we need to select
good source domains for adaptation rather than
using all.
MCS possesses a great many well-designed
combination rules. Once a suitable MCS mode is
built, the corresponding rules can be directly
borrowed or slightly modified to deal with the
current problem.
Generally speaking, domain adaptation can be
divided into two main categories . In the first, called
fully supervised, a few labeled samples are used in the
learning process. In the second, called semi-supervised,
only unlabeled samples are available for the learning
process. In multi-domain adaptation, different categories
demand different base classifiers and methods of
combination. In accordance with the MCS framework,
let us give our methods for multi-domain adaptation in
two steps: training base classifiers and combining base
classifiers; these are described in Sections 3 and 4
respectively.
Training Base Classifiers
The first step in constructing an MCS is to train
multiple base classifiers. In the fully supervised case,
each base classifier can be directly trained with the
labeled data from both each source domain and the target
domain. In the semi-supervised case, each base classifier
is trained using labeled data from each source domain
simultaneously. To do this, a structural correspondence
learning (SCL) algorithm is used to train multiple
one-to-one adaptation classifiers. The SCL algorithm
represents the-state-of-the-art in domain adaptation and
has been shown to be very effective in sentiment
classification . We provide a basic description of this
algorithm below. For a detailed description, please see
Blitzer et al. .
The input data for SCL is labeled data from the
source domain and unlabeled data from the target
domain or both domains. Generating a classifier more
suitable for classification of data in the target domain
consists of three main steps. First, pivot features that
occur frequently in both domains are selected. Second,
correlations are modeled between the pivot features and
all other features by training with linear classifiers to
classify occurrences of each pivot in all unlabeled data.
Finally, with the help of the correlations, the classifier is
trained on the labeled source domain data that also
provides the influence of the unseen features in the
training data.
In sentiment classification, pivot features with high
mutual information (MI) are especially helpful for the
adaptation . Therefore, we select the pivot features
from the top-10% MI features in our experiments.
Classifier Combining Methods
Fully supervised methods
In the supervised case, various trained combination
rules, such as the weighted sum rule, Dempster-Shafer
and the weighted voting rule can be ‘borrowed’ .
Among these trained methods, a class of methods called
meta-learning has been shown to be very effective. The
key idea behind this class is to train a meta-classifier
with input attributes that are the output of the base
classifiers .
Aue and Gamon have considered precisely this
multi-domain
adaptation
meta-learning combination rule. Their experimental
results using small labeled samples in the target domain
show significant improvement over the all-data method
in some, but not all, domains. Since the number of
labeled samples can not be large (otherwise, the
adaptation is not necessary), meta-learning becomes
difficult. As a result, making use of a large amount of
unlabeled samples in the target domain seems to be very
promising as acquiring unlabeled samples is much easier.
Semi-supervised methods
Unlike the supervised case, there have been very
few methods proposed for semi-supervised MCS .
Didaci and Roli propose two general methods for
semi-supervised MCS using co-training and self-training,
called the extended co-training algorithm and the
ensemble-driven self-training algorithm. With the help of
their work, we propose the ensemble-driven self-training
algorithm for multi-domain adaptation shown in Figure 3.
The basic idea of this algorithm is to label some of the
unlabeled data with high classification confidence with
an MCS, and then put the ‘automatically-labeled’ data
into the training data of each source domain.
This semi-supervised algorithm is a general
algorithm. Two operations in the algorithm need to be
specified for any given task: the one-to-one adaptation
Ensemble-driven Self-training for Multi-domain
Adaptation
of labeled training samples
from m different source domains
(b) a set U of unlabeled samples from the target
Algorithm:
Create a set
U of samples by choosing
u samples at random from U
Loop for N iterations:
(1) Build m classifiers
kc using both
U with the one-to-one adaptation algorithm
(2) Create a MCS using {
(3) Run MCS on
(4) For each class j
Select the
jn samples assigned to the
class j by the MCS with the highest
confidence
(5) Add these
self-labeled samples to
(6) Randomly choose
fromU to replenish
New base classifiers { }
trained on the new
U with the one-to-one adaptation algorithm
Figure 3: The ensemble-driven self-training algorithm
applied to multi-domain adaptation
algorithm and the combining rule to construct the MCS.
For sentiment classification, the one-to-one adaptation
algorithm applied is the SCL algorithm introduced above.
With respect to the combination rule here, it must satisfy
two basic requirements: (1) it can select unlabeled
samples from the target domain; (2) these selected
samples are classified with a very high accuracy.
Accordingly, we define two functions whose input is one
sample x and corresponding output represents whether an
event related to x happens:
x is selected by MCS
x is not selected by MCS
The selected x is correctly classified
The selected x is not correctly classified
According to the definition, we have
is the class label of the sample assigned by
the MCS and the function
real x returns the real class
high-precision
‘automatically-labeled’ samples from the target domain,
we should guarantee a high probability of
and also not a too low probability of
From previous studies, we find that the best base
classifier often achieves much higher accuracy than other
base classifiers and even the MCS. One example is a
supervised case that combines all the base classifiers
using 50 training samples from the target domain. All the
adaptation results using meta-learning are worse than
using the select-best rule (comparing Table 1 with Table
5 in Aue and Gamon ). Another example is a
semi-supervised case in which it was reported that, for
any fixed amount of labeled data, it is always better to
draw from the nearest domain as a source than using
some combination of all available domains . Given
these findings, our combination rule needs to select
samples with a higher precision than the best base
classifier when using MCS. Thus we select samples
whose labels assigned by the base classifiers are the
same. That is to say, an sample is selected and assigned
to class j when the class labels assigned by all the base
classifiers are consistent, i.e.,
if and only if
il x is the class label assigned by the i-th base
classifier. For simplicity, we call this rule Multi-label
ensemble-driven
self-training
algorithm using this combining rule Multi-label
Consensus Training (MCT). Note that the outputs of this
algorithm are still multiple one-to-one adaptation
classifiers. These new classifiers are called MCT
classifiers.
The rule of Multi-label consensus has the advantage
that it guarantees that the MCS selects samples with a
higher accuracy than the best classifier. We prove this
advantage below.
Each base classifier
ic achieves accuracy
which can also be seen as the estimation of the
probability
that a test sample is
correctly classified by this classifier. For simplicity, it is
briefly denoted as
iP . We assume:
, which means each base
classifier achieves accuracy higher than a random
classification of a binary classification problem. This
assumption is easily satisfied in real applications, and;
(II) The probabilities of each
iP are independent of
each other. Although this assumption is hard to make
hold in real applications, it can be approximately
satisfied in multi-domain adaptation where the base
classifiers are trained using different features and also
different data sets.
Given the condition (2) and the assumption (I), we
According to the definition of
condition (2), we have
Since sentiment classification we care about here is
a binary classification problem, we have
Consider the conclusion that if two events are
independent from each other then their complement
events are also independent, we have
According to (3), (4), (6), and (1), we get
To guarantee that
is larger than
the probability that one test sample is correctly classified
by the best base classifier, the following formula must be
satisfied:
which can be rewritten as:
The above condition is equivalent to:
This condition is satisfied using the assumption (I).
Therefore,
assumptions,
Multi-consensus rule guarantees that MCS selects
samples with a higher accuracy than the best classifier. It
is worth pointing out that this rule is designed for
multi-domain sentiment classification when the number
of source domains is small. When the number increases,
this selecting strategy is too strict to select enough
‘automatically-labeled’ data (as
very small). Thus, the selecting strategy needs to be
modified for large numbers of source domains. For
example, we can demand that a fixed number of output
labels are consistent and also includes the label from the
best base classifier.
Let us also consider the iteration number N in MCT.
Since our base classifiers are trained using different data
sets, the diversity among these classifiers becomes
smaller when more ‘automatically-labeled’ samples are
added. As a result, the ‘automatically-labeled’ data
gradually takes the dominant place in the base classifiers.
As these are not true labeled data, classification errors
accumulate quickly as the iteration time grows.
Moreover, using the same ‘automatically-labeled’
samples in each new base classifier makes the
assumption (II) for the Multi-label consensus rule harder
to satisfy. Therefore, the selecting process is performed
only once across all unlabeled data U.
Note that there is another semi-supervised method,
the extended co-training algorithm, in Didaci and Roli
 which can also be applied to multi-adaptation. It
shares the same basic idea as the ensemble-driven
self-training algorithm, except in selecting the samples
using each base classifier rather than MCS. This
algorithm is not suitable, however, for sentiment
classification because sentiment classification is very
domain-specific and classifiers trained in one domain
may perform very badly on the target domain even given
the adaptation process. For example, to classify reviews
of books, an adaptation classifier using labeled reviews
of kitchen appliances performs much worse than one
using DVDs. Clearly, adding the ‘automatically-labeled’
samples from these bad classifiers only adds noisy
information.
Experiments
As the supervised case has been experimentally
studied using meta-learning in Aue and Gamon , we
do not consider this case in our experiments. Our
experimental studies concentrate on multi-domain
adaptation
classification
semi-supervised case.
Data Set2: our experiments are carried out on a data
set of product reviews from four domains: books, DVDs,
electronics and kitchen appliances, B, D, E and K, for
short, in the tables and figures. This data was assembled
by Blitzer et al. and used to evaluate the SCL
algorithm in sentiment classification. Each domain has
1,000 positive and 1,000 negative samples. Besides the
labeled data, large amounts of unlabeled samples are
available in this data set. The unlabeled samples are
disregarded here. Instead, the labeled samples in one
domain are used as unlabeled samples when this domain
is the target domain in the adaptation process.
Classification Algorithm: Following Blitzer et al. ,
we use linear predictors on unigram and bi-gram features,
trained to minimize Huber loss with stochastic gradient
descent . To implement adaptation for one-to-one
domains in the semi-supervised case, we apply the SCL
algorithm which has been introduced in Section 3.
Experiment Implement: For each domain, we first
split the labeled data into 5 folds. Then, we select 4 folds
for training and use the remaining one fold for testing.
As a result, 5 different distributions are obtained for each
domain. Similarly, we get 5 different distributions for the
whole data set by selecting the distribution from each
domain sequentially: selecting the first distribution of
each domain, then the second, the third and so on. All
the experiments below are run on these 5 different
distributions of the complete data set and the reported
result is the mean value of the accuracies of the 5 runs.
Baseline and Gold Standard: The baseline is a
linear classifier trained without adaptation, while the
gold standard is an in-domain classifier trained on the
same domain as it is tested. Classification accuracies are
reported in Table 1 where the first column represents the
source domains and the values in the diagonal are the
results of the gold standard domain classifiers.
First, let us consider the iteration number N in MCT.
The quality of the adaptation decreases slightly as the
2 The data set is available at
 
Source Domain
Table 1: Mean accuracy results using the baseline
and gold standard.
iteration number N increases. The reason for this
decrease was proposed in the last section. Due to a
limited space, we only give the results when N=1.
Mean accuracy
Base classifier
MCT classifier
Mean Accuracy
Base classifier
MCT classifier
Electronics
Mean Accuracy
Base classifier
MCT classifier
Mean Accuracy
Base classifier
MCT classifier
Figure 4: Mean accuracy results for domain adaptation
between all pairs using base classifiers and MCT
classifiers.
Figure 4 presents the results for all pairs of domain
adaptation. The main difference between base and MCT
classifiers
classifiers
‘automatically-labeled’ samples as additional training
data in the target domain while base classifiers do not.
‘automatically-labeled’ samples play a very important
role in the adaptation process, especially when the source
domain is very different from the target domain. Even
when the domains are similar (and the best performance
is achieved), the MCT classifier consistently shows
superior performance to the base classifiers. More
specifically, the best MCT classifiers on the target
domains B, D, E, and K reduce the error by 12.6%, 5.4%,
3.1%, and 9.3% using source domains D, B, K and E
respectively. Note that the performance from domain D
to domain B shows the most impressive error reduction
of 12.6%. We think this is mainly due to differences in
the performances of the base classifiers not being too
large, e.g., the performance of the best base classifier is
0.747 which is only 0.046 better than 0.701 for the
second best classifier. The distances are much larger
when the target domains are D, E, and K, which are 0.07,
0.08, and 0.065 respectively.
These results are encouraging because they suggest
a better adaptation approach: when training data from
multiple domains is available, combining them produces
better results than selecting only the best, especially
when the multiple domains show similar adaptabilities.
probabilities
which are estimated as
the number of selected unlabeled samples
the number of all unlabeled samples
the number of correctly classified samples
the number of selected unlabeled samples
Mean Accuracy
Figure 5: Comparison of selecting the best base classifier,
selecting the best MCT classifier, and the add-all
From Table 2, we observe that MCS achieves a
Table 2: The two probabilities estimated through testing
on unlabeled samples in the target domains: B, D, E, and K
by the multi-consensus MCS respectively.
Probability
much higher precision than any single base classifier,
which can explain why our method does work.
Besides our MCS framework, there exist other
models that can be used to describe the task of
multi-domain adaptation. One straightforward model is
to mix labeled data from all available domains,
(mentioned in Section 2 as add-all). We provide a
comparison result in Figure 5 where add-all denotes an
SCL classifier trained using both labeled samples from
all source domains and un-labeled samples from the
target domain. The result demonstrates that although this
model can sometimes outperform selecting the best base
classifiers, it is consistently worse than selecting the best
MCT classifier.
Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, there have been very
few previous studies that directly investigate the problem
of multi-domain adaptation. There are two related
studies that have discussed solutions for this task for the
fully supervised case. The first is reported by Aue and
Gamon who apply meta-learning to combine
classifiers as they are applied here. The second, from
Daumé III , is the feature augmentation method which
is proposed for one-to-one domain adaptation and is
easily extended to the multi-domain case. This method
can be seen as a special case of the all-all method that
mixes all data with augmented input features. However,
neither of these two methods is suitable for the
semi-supervised case as discussed in this paper since
they cannot deal with unlabeled data.
Conclusion and Future Work
In summary, the contribution of this paper is
twofold. First, we provide an MCS framework to
describe multi-domain adaptation. Under this framework,
we seek methods for this problem in two cases: ‘fully
supervised’ and ‘semi-supervised’. Second, we propose
an MCS driven self-training combination method called
MCT for the semi-supervised case and theoretically
prove that this method selects ‘automatically labeled’
samples with a higher accuracy than using the best base
classifier.
Experimental
demonstrate
‘automatically labeled’ samples from MCT can greatly
improve adaptation. This good performance confirms
that when data from multiple source domains is available,
its combination is an effective way to improve
adaptation performance.
It is worth pointing out that although this work is
motivated by and evaluated for adaptation of sentiment
classification, the general framework is suitable for other
classification problems. It will be interesting to
investigate this new task for other NLP problems, e.g.,
parsing, name entity recognition and so on; this will be
the subject of future work.
Acknowledgements
The research work in this paper is partially funded
by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
No. 60575043 and 60736014, the National Key
Technology
2006BAH03B02,
Development Program (863) of China under Grant No.
2006AA01Z194 and 2006AA010108-4, and Nokia
(China) Co. Ltd as well.