Disk Aware Discord Discovery: Finding Unusual Time Series in Terabyte Sized
Dragomir Yankov, Eamonn Keogh
Computer Science & Engineering Department
University of California, Riverside, USA
{dyankov,eamonn}@cs.ucr.edu
Umaa Rebbapragada
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University, Medford, USA
 
The problem of ﬁnding unusual time series has recently
attracted much attention, and several promising methods
are now in the literature. However, virtually all proposed
methods assume that the data reside in main memory. For
many real-world problems this is not be the case. For example, in astronomy, multi-terabyte time series datasets are
the norm. Most current algorithms faced with data which
cannot ﬁt in main memory resort to multiple scans of the
disk/tape and are thus intractable. In this work we show
how one particular deﬁnition of unusual time series, the
time series discord, can be discovered with a disk aware algorithm. The proposed algorithm is exact and requires only
two linear scans of the disk with a tiny buffer of main memory. Furthermore, it is very simple to implement. We use the
algorithm to provide further evidence of the effectiveness of
the discord deﬁnition in areas as diverse as astronomy, web
query mining, video surveillance, etc., and show the efﬁciency of our method on datasets which are many orders of
magnitude larger than anything else attempted in the literature.
1. Introduction
The problem of ﬁnding unusual (abnormal, novel, deviant, anomalous) time series has recently attracted much
attention. Areas that commonly explore such unusual time
series are, for example, fault diagnostics, intrusion detection, and data cleansing. There, however, are other more
uncommon yet interesting applications too. For example, a
recent paper suggests that ﬁnding unusual time series in ﬁnancial datasets could be used to allow diversiﬁcation of an
investment portfolio, which in turn is essential for reducing
portfolio volatility .
Despite its importance, the detection of unusual time series remains relatively unstudied when data reside on external storage. Most existing approaches demonstrate efﬁcient detection of anomalous examples, assuming that the
time series at hand can ﬁt in main memory. However, for
many applications this is not be the case.
For example,
multi-terabyte time series datasets are the norm in astronomy , while the daily volume of web queries logged
by search engines is even larger. Confronted with data of
such scale current algorithms resort to numerous scans of
the external media and are thus intractable. In this work, we
present an effective and efﬁcient disk aware algorithm for
mining unusual time series. The algorithm is exact and requires only two linear scans of the disk with a tiny buffer of
main memory. Furthermore, it is simple to implement and
does not require tuning of multiple unintuitive parameters.
The introduced method is used to provide further evidence
of the utility of one particular deﬁnition of unusual time series, namely, the time series discords. The effectiveness of
the discord deﬁnition is demonstrated for areas as diverse
as astronomy, web query mining, video surveillance, etc.
Finally, we show the efﬁciency of the proposed algorithm
on datasets which are many orders of magnitude larger than
anything else attempted in the literature. In particular we
show that our algorithm can tackle multi-gigabyte data sets
containing tens of millions of time series in just a few hours.
2. Related Work And Background
The time series discord deﬁnition was introduced in .
Since then, it has attracted considerable interest and followup work.
For example, provide independent conﬁrmation of the utility of discords for discovering abnormal
heartbeats, in the authors apply discord discovery to
electricity consumption data, and in the authors modify
the deﬁnition slightly to discover unusual shapes.
However, all discord discovery algorithms, and indeed
virtually all algorithms for discovering unusual time series
under any deﬁnition, assume that the entire dataset can be
loaded in main memory. While main memory size has been
rapidly increasing, it has not kept pace with our ability to
collect and store data.
There are only a handful of works in the literature that
have addressed anomaly detection in datasets of anything
like the scale considered in this work. In the authors consider an astronomical data set taken from the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey, with 111,456 records and 68 variables. They
ﬁnd anomalies by building a Bayesian network and then
looking for objects with a low log-likelihood. Because the
dimensionality is relatively small and they only used 10,000
out of the 111,456 records to build the model, all items
could be placed in main memory. They report 3 hours of
CPU time (with a 400MHz machine). For the secondary
storage case they would also require at least two scans, one
to build the model, and one to create anomaly scores. In
addition, this approach requires the setting of many parameters, including choices for discretization of real variables, a
maximum number of iterations for EM (a sub-routine), the
number of mixture components, etc.
In a sequence of papers Otey and colleagues introduce a series of algorithms for mining distance based outliers. Their approach has many advantages, including the
ability to handle both real-valued and discrete data. Furthermore, like our approach, their approach also requires only
two passes over the data, one to build a model and one to
ﬁnd the outliers. However, it also requires signiﬁcant CPU
time, being linear in the size of the dataset but quadratic in
the dimensionality of the examples. For instance, for two
million objects with a dimensionality of 128 they report
needing 12.5 hours of CPU time (on a 2.4GHz machine).
In contrast, we can handle a dataset of size two million objects with dimensionality 512 in less than two hours, most
of which is I/O time.
Jagadish et al. produced an inﬂuential paper on
ﬁnding unusual time series (which they call deviants) with
a dynamic programming approach. Again this method is
quadratic in the length of the time series, and thus it is only
demonstrated on kilobyte sized datasets.
The discord introducing work suggests a fast heuristic technique (termed HOTSAX) for pruning quickly the
data space and focusing only on the potential discords. The
authors obtain a lower dimensional representation for the
time series at hand and then build a trie in main memory to
index these lower dimensional sequences. A drawback of
the approach is that choosing a very small dimensionality
size results in a large number of discord candidates, which
makes the algorithm essentially quadratic, while choosing
a more accurate representation increases the index structure
exponentially. The datasets used in that evaluation are also
assumed to ﬁt in main memory.
In order to discover discords in massive datasets we must
design special purpose algorithms. The main memory algorithms achieve speed-up in a variety of ways, but all require
random access to the data. Random access and linear search
have essentially the same time requirements in main memory, but on disk resident datasets, random access is expensive and should be avoided where possible. As a general
rule of thumb in the database community it is said that random access to just 10% of a disk resident dataset takes about
the same time as a linear search over the entire data. In fact,
recent studies suggest that this gap is widening. For example, notes that the internal data rate of IBM’s hard disks
improved from about 4 MB/sec to more than 60 MB/sec. In
the same time period, the positioning time only improved
from about 18 msec to 9 msec. This implies that sequential
disk access has become about 15 times faster, while random
access has only improved by a factor of two.
Given the above, efﬁcient algorithms for disk resident
datasets should strive to do only a few sequential scans of
3. Notation
Let a time series T = t1, . . . , tm, be deﬁned as an ordered set of scalar or multivariate observations ti measured
at equal intervals in time. When m is very large, looking at the time series as a whole does not reveal much
useful information. Instead, one might be more interested
in subsequences C = tp, . . . , tp+n−1 of T with length
n << m (here p is an arbitrary position, such that 1 ≤
p ≤m −n + 1).
Working with time series databases there are usually two
scenarios in which the examples in the database might have
been generated. In one of them the time series are generated from short distinct events, e.g. a set of astronomical
observations (see Section 6.1.1). In the second scenario, the
database simply consists of all possible subsequences extracted from the time series of a long ongoing process, e.g.
the yearly recordings of a meteorological sensor. Knowing
whether the database is populated with subsequences of the
same process is essential when performing pattern recognition tasks. The reason for this is that two subsequences C
and M extracted from close positions p1 and p2 are very
likely to be similar to one another. This might falsely lead
to a conclusion that the subsequence C is not a rare example in the database. In these cases, when p1 and p2 are
not “signiﬁcantly” different, the subsequences C and M are
called trivial matches . The positions p1 and p2 are signiﬁcantly different with respect to a distance function Dist,
if there exists a subsequence Q starting at position p3, such
that p1 < p3 < p2 and Dist(C, M) < Dist(C, Q).
With the above notation in hand, we can now present the
formal deﬁnition of time series discords:
Deﬁnition 1. Time Series Discord: Given a database S, the
time series C ∈S is called the most signiﬁcant discord in
S if the distance to its nearest neighbor (or its nearest nontrivial match in case of subsequence databases) is largest.
I.e. for an arbitrary time series M ∈S the following holds:
min(Dist(C, Q)) ≥min(Dist(M, P)), where Q, P ∈S
(and Q, P are non-trivial matches of C and M in case of
subsequence databases).
Similarly, one could deﬁne the second-most signiﬁcant
or higher order discords in the database. To capture the case
of a small group of examples in the space that are close to
each other but far from all other examples, we might want
to generalize Deﬁnition 1 so that the distance to the k-th
instead of the ﬁrst nearest neighbor is considered:
Deﬁnition 2. Kth Time Series Discord: Given a database
S, the time series C ∈S is called the most signiﬁcant kth discord in S if the distance to its k-th nearest neighbor
(or its k-th nearest non-trivial match in case of subsequence
databases) is largest.
The generalized view of discords (Deﬁnition 2) is equivalent to another notion of unusual time series that is frequently encountered in the literature, i.e. the distance based
outliers . The deﬁnition can be generalized further to
compute the average distance to all k nearest neighbors,
which is in fact the non-parametric density estimation approach . The algorithm proposed in this work can easily
be adapted with any of these outlier deﬁnitions. We use Definition 1 because of its intuitive interpretation. Our choice
is further justiﬁed by the effectiveness of the discord deﬁnition demonstrated in Section 6.1.
Unless otherwise speciﬁed we will use as a distance measure the Euclidean distance, still the derived algorithm can
be utilized with any distance function which may not necessarily be a metric. In computing Dist(C, M) we expect
that the arguments have been normalized to have mean zero
and a standard deviation of one. Throughout the empirical
evaluation we assume that all subsequences are stored in the
database in the above normalized form. This requirement is
imposed so that the nearest neighbor search is invariant to
transformations, such as shifting or scaling .
4. Finding Discords In Secondary Storage
So far we have introduced the notion of time series discords, which is the focus of the current work. Here, we are
going to present an efﬁcient algorithm for detecting the top
discords in a dataset. Firstly, the simpler problem of detecting what we call range discords is addressed, i.e. given a
range r the presented method efﬁciently ﬁnds all discords
at distance at least r from their nearest neighbor. As providing r may require some domain knowledge, the next section
will demonstrate a sampling procedure that will solve the
more general problem of detecting the top dataset discords
without knowing the range parameter.
The discussion is limited to the case where the database
S contains |S| separate time series of length n. If instead
the database is populated with subsequences from a long
time series the fundamental algorithm remains unchanged,
with some additional minor bookkeeping to discount trivial
4.1. Discord Reﬁnement Phase
The range discord detection algorithm has two phases:
a candidate selection phase (phase1), and a discord reﬁnement phase (phase2). For clarity of exposition we ﬁrst outline the second phase of the algorithm.
The discord reﬁnement phase accepts as an input a subset C ⊂S (built in phase1), which is assumed to contain
all discords Cj at distance C.distj ≥r from their nearest
neighbor in S, and possibly some other time series from S.
If this is case, then the following simple algorithm can be
used to prune the set C to retain only the true discords with
respect to the range r:
Algorithm 1 Discord Reﬁnement Phase
procedure [C, C.dist]=DC Reﬁnement(S, C, r)
S: disk resident dataset of time series
C: discord candidates set
r: discord deﬁning range
out: C: list of discords
C.dist: list of NN distances to the discords
1: for j = 1 to |C| do
C.distj = ∞
3: end for
4: for ∀Si ∈S do
for ∀Cj ∈C do
if Si == Cj then
d = EarlyAbandon(Si, Cj, C.distj)
if (d < r) then
C = C \ Cj
C.dist = C.dist \ C.distj
C.distj = min(C.distj, d)
17: end for
Although all discords are assumed to be in C, prior to
starting Algorithm1 it is unknown which items in C are true
discords, and what their actual discord distances are. Initially, all these distance are set to inﬁnity (line 2). The above
algorithm simply scans the disk resident database, comparing the list of candidates to each item on disk. The actual
distance is computed with an optimized procedure which
uses an upper bound for early termination (line 9). For
example, in the case of Euclidean distance, the EarlyAbandon procedure will stop the summation Dist(Si, Cj) =
(sik −cjk)2 if it reaches k = p, such that 1 ≤
p ≤n for which Pp
k=1(sik −cik)2 ≥C.dist2
j. If this
happens then the new item Si obviously cannot improve on
the current nearest neighbor distance C.distj, and thus the
summation may be abandoned.
Based on the distance calculations, for each Si there are
three situations:
1. The distance between the discord candidate in C and
the item on disk is greater than the current value of
C.distj. If this is true we do nothing.
2. The distance between the discord candidate in C and
the item on disk is less that r. If this happens it means
that the discord candidate can not be a discord, it is a
false positive. We can permanently remove it from the
set C (line 11 and line 12).
3. The distance between the discord candidate in C and
the item on disk is less than the current value of
C.distj (but still greater than r, otherwise we would
have removed it). If this is true we simply update the
current distance to the nearest neighbor (line 14).
It is straightforward to see that upon completion of
Algorithm1 the subset C contains only the true discords at
range at least r, and that no such discord has been deleted
from C, provided that it has already been in it. The time
complexity for the algorithm depends critically on the size
of the subset size |C|.
In the pathological case where
|C| = |S|, it becomes a brute force search, quadratic in the
size |S|. Obviously, such candidate set could be produced
if the range parameter r is equal to 0. If, however, the candidate set C contains just one item, the algorithm becomes
essentially a linear scan over the disk for the nearest neighbor to that one item. A very interesting observation is that
if the candidate set C contains two or three items instead of
one, this will most likely not change the time for the algorithm to run. This is so, because for a very small |C| the
CPU required calculations will execute faster than the disk
reading operations, and thus the running time for the algorithm is just the time taken for a linear scan of the disk data.
To summarize, the efﬁciency of Algorithm1 depends on the
two critical assumptions that:
1. For a given value of r, we can efﬁciently build a set
C which contains all the discords with a discord distance greater than or equal to r. This set may also contain some non-discords, but the number of these “false
positives” must be relatively small.
2. We can provide a “good” value for r which allows us
to do ‘1’ above. If we choose too low of a value, then
the size of set C will be very large, and our algorithm
will become slow, and even worse, the set C might no
longer ﬁt in main memory. In contrast, if we choose
too large a value for r, we may discover that after running the algorithm above the set C is empty. This will
be the correct result; there are simply no discords with
a distance of that value. However, we probably wanted
to ﬁnd a handful of discords.
4.2. Candidates Selection Phase
In this section we address the ﬁrst of the above assumptions, i.e. given a threshold r we present an efﬁcient algorithm for building a compact set C with a small number of
false positives. A formal description of this candidate selection phase is given as Algorithm2.
Algorithm 2 Candidates Selection Phase
procedure [C]=DC Selection(S, r)
S: disk resident data set of time series
r: discord deﬁning range
out: C: list of discord candidates
1: C = {S1}
2: for i = 2 to |S| do
isCandidate = true
for ∀Cj ∈C do
if (Dist(Si, Cj) < r) then
C = C \ Cj
isCandidate = false
if (isCandidate) then
13: end for
The algorithm performs one linear scan through the
database and for each time series Si it validates the possibility for the candidates already in C to be discords (line 5). If
a candidate fails the validation, then it is removed from this
set. In the end, the new Si is either added to the candidates
list (line 11), if it is likely to be a discord, or it is omitted. To show the correctness of this procedure, and hence
of the overall discord detection algorithm, we ﬁrst point out
an observation that holds for an arbitrary distance function:
Proposition 1. Global Invariant. Let Si be a time series in
the dataset S and dsi be the distance from Si to its nearest
neighbor in S. For any subset C ⊂S the distance dci from
Si to its nearest neighbor in C is larger or equal to dsi, i.e.
Indeed, if the nearest neighbor of Si is part of C then dsi =
dci. Otherwise, as C does not contain elements outside of
S, the distance dci should be larger than dsi.
Using the above global invariant, we can now easily justify the following proposition:
Proposition 2. Upon completion of Algorithm2, the candidates list C contains all discords Si at distance dsi ≥r
from their nearest neighbors in S.
Proof. Let Si be a discord at distance dsi ≥r from its
nearest neighbor in S. From the global invariant it follows
that the distance dci from Si to its nearest neighbor in C is
larger or equal to dsi. Therefore, the condition on line 5 of
the algorithm will never be satisﬁed for Si and hence it will
be added to the candidates list (line 11).
Proposition 2 together with the analysis presented for the
reﬁnement phase demonstrate the overall correctness of the
algorithm. More formally, the following proposition holds:
Proposition 3. Correctness. The candidates selection and
the reﬁnement steps detect the discords and only the discords at distance dsi ≥r from their nearest neighbor in S.
The time complexity of the presented discord detection
algorithm is upper-bounded by the time necessary to
scan the database twice plus the time necessary to perform all distance computations, which has complexity
O(f=max(|C|)|S|). In the experimental evaluation we will
demonstrate that, for a good choice of the range parameter,
the function f is essentially linear in the database size |S|.
5. Finding a Good Range Parameter
The range discord detection algorithm presented in the
previous section is deterministic in the sense suggested by
Proposition 3, i.e. it ﬁnishes by either identifying all discords at range r, or by returning an empty set which indicates that no elements have the required property. Providing
a good value for the threshold parameter, however, may not
be very intuitive. Furthermore, it may also be the case that
the users would like to detect the top k discords regardless
of the distance to their neighbors. In those cases, specifying
a large threshold will result in an empty set, while a very
small range parameter may have high time and space complexity. With this in mind, a reasonable strategy to detect
the top k discords would be to start with a “relatively large”
r and if in the end |C| < k, to restart the algorithm with a
smaller parameter. Such iterative restarts will increase the
number of database scans, yet we argue that with a sampling
procedure we can obtain a good estimate for r that decreases
the probability of having multiple scans of the database. We
further provide a way to reevaluate the range parameter, so
that if a second run of the algorithm is required, the new
value of r with high probability will lead to a solution.
A good estimate for the range parameter can easily be
obtained by studying the nearest neighbor distance distribution (nndd) of the dataset, and more precisely the number
of elements that fall in its tail. Computing the nndd, however, is hard, especially in high dimensional spaces as is
the case with time series . The available methods
require that random portions of the space are sampled and
the nearest neighbor distances in those portions to be computed. Unfortunately, for a robust estimate, this requires
scanning the entire database once, regardless of whether an
index is available, and also involves some extensive computations . Another drawback of this approach is that
the nndd is also dependent on the number of elements in
the data, which means that if new sequences are added to
the dataset the whole evaluation procedure should be performed again. Consider for example the graphs in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Points sampled from the same normal distribution produce different nearest neighbor distance distributions. The mean
and the volume of the tail cut by r decrease with adding more data.
Both graphs show the nndd for a normally distributed
two dimensional dataset S ∈N(0, 1). Graph A represents
the probability density function when |S| = 103, while
graph B shows the function when |S| = 104. Intuitively,
the mean of the distribution shifts to zero as new points are
added, because for larger percentage of the points their nearest neighbors are likely to be found in close proximity to
them. For inﬁnite tail data distributions though (as the normal), increasing the sample size also increases the chance
of having elements sampled from its tail. These elements
will be outliers and are likely to be far from the other examples. Therefore, their nearest neighbor distances will fall in
the tail of the corresponding distance distribution too.
Using the above intuition, rather than sampling from the
distance distribution, we perform the less expensive sampling from the data distribution and compute the nndd of
this sample. The exact steps of the sampling procedure are:
1. Select a uniformly random sample S′ from S. In the
evaluation, for datasets of size |S| ≥106 we choose
|S′| = 104. For the smaller datasets we use |S′| = 103.
2. If the user requires that k discords are detected in their
data, then using a fast memory based discord detection
method (e.g. ) detect the top k discords in S′. Order the nearest neighbor distances di, i = 1..k for these
discords in S′. I.e. we have d1 ≥d2 ≥. . . ≥dk.
3. Set r = dk.
Note that S′ is an unbiased sample from the data and it
can be used if new examples generated by the same underlying process are added to the database. This means that we
do not need to run the sampling procedure every time that
the dataset is updated.
It is relatively easy to see that the above procedure is
unlikely to overﬂow the available memory, regardless of
the data distribution. To demonstrate this, consider for example the case when |S| = 106 and |S′| = 104.
probability that none of the top 103 discords fall in S′ is
, which using Stirling’s approximation
gives ˆp ∼e−10. This implies that S′ almost certainly contains one of the top 103 discords. If that discord is Si, from
the global invariant in Section 4.2 it follows that its nearest
neighbor distance ds′
i in S′ is larger or equal to its nearest
neighbor distance dsi in S. But we also have that d1 ≥ds′
which leads to d1 ≥dsi. This means that if we set r to d1
(or equivalently to dk, for small k), it is very likely that r
will be larger than the nearest neighbor distance of the 103th discord in S. As will be demonstrated in the experimental
evaluation, the majority of the time series that are not discords and enter C during the candidate selection phase get
removed from the list very quickly which restricts its maximum size to at most several orders of magnitude the size
of the ﬁnal discord set. Therefore, for the above example
the maximum amount of memory required will be linear in
the amount of memory necessary to store 103 time series.
Slightly relaxed, but still reasonable, upper bounds can be
demonstrated even when S contains an order of 108 examples.
The more challenging case is the one when at the end of
the discord detection algorithm we have |C| < k. In this situation we will need to restart the whole algorithm, yet this
time a better estimate for the threshold r can be computed,
so that no other restarts are necessary. For the purpose, prior
to running the algorithm, a second sample S′′ of size 100 is
drawn uniformly at random from S′. During the candidates
selection phase, for every element Si in the database, apart
of updating the candidates list C, we also update the nearest neighbor distances S′′.distq, q = 1..100. As the size of
S′′ is relatively small, this will not increase signiﬁcantly the
computational time of the overall algorithm. At the same
time, the list S′′.dist will now contain an unbiased estimate
of the true nearest neighbor distance distribution. Selecting
a threshold r′ = maxq=1..100(S′′.distq) will lead to C having on average 1% of the examples. Finally, if k is much
smaller than 1% the size of S, but still larger than the size
|C| obtained for the initial parameter r, we might further
consider an intermediate value r′′, such that r′ < r′′ < r
and one that will increase sufﬁciently the initial size |C|.
6. Empirical Evaluation
In this section we conduct two kinds of experiments. Although the utility of discords has been noted before, e.g.
in , we ﬁrst provide additional examples
of its usefulness for areas where large time series databases
are traditionally encountered. Then we empirically demonstrate the scalability of our algorithm.
6.1. The Utility of Time Series Discords
Star Light-Curve Data
Globally there are myriads of telescopes covering the entire
sky and constantly recording massive amounts of valuable
astronomical data. Having humans to supervise all observations is practically impossible .
The goal for this evaluation was to see to what extent
the notion of discords, as speciﬁed in Deﬁnition 1, agrees
with the notion of astronomical anomalies as suggested by
methods used in the ﬁeld. The data used in the evaluation
are light-curve time series from the Optical Gravitational
Lensing Experiment . A light-curve is a real-valued time
series of light magnitude measurements. The series are derived from telescopic images of the night sky taken over
time. Astronomers identify each star in the image and convert the star’s manifestation of light into a light magnitude
measurement. The set of measurements from all images for
a given star results in a light-curve. The light-curves that
we obtained for this study are pre-processed (containing a
uniform number of points) by domain experts.
The entire dataset contains 9236 light-curves of length
1024 points.
The curves are produced by three classes
of star objects: Eclipsed Binaries - EB (2580 examples);
Cepheids - Ceph (1329), and RR Lyrae variables - RRL
(5326) (see Figure 2). Both Ceph and RRL stars have very
similar pulsing pattern which explains the similarity in their
light-curve shape.
Figure 2: Typical examples from the three classes of lightcurves:
Left) Eclipsed Binary, Right Top) Cepheid, Bottom) RR Lyrae.
For each of the three classes we also compute the ranking of their examples for being anomalous. For instance,
the topmost anomaly in every class has ranking 0, the second anomaly has ranking 1, and so on. This ordering is
based on the results of the ﬁrst method presented in .
The method is an O(n2) algorithm that exhaustively computes the similarity (via cross correlation) between each pair
of light-curves. The anomaly score for each light-curve is
simply the weighted average of its n −1 similarity scores.
We further compute the top ten discords in each of the
three classes and compare them with the top ten anomalies
inferred with the above ranking. The sampling procedure
described in Section 5 is performed with a set S′ of size
103 elements and the threshold r is selected so that at least
ten elements from each class fall in the tail of the distance
distribution computed on S′ (we obtained r = 6.22 using
Euclidean distance). Running the discord ﬁnding algorithm
produces a discord set C of size 1161. Figure 3 shows several examples of the most signiﬁcant discords in each class.
Top light-curve discords in each class.
time series on the top right corner are indicated its discord rank
: anomaly rank.
One of the top ten EB discords is also among the top
ten EB anomalies, three of the top ten RRL discords are
among the top ten RRL anomalies and six of the CEPH discords are among the corresponding anomalies. The poor
consensus between the one nearest neighbor discords and
the anomalies for the EB class results from the fact that
the Euclidean distance does not account well for the small
amount of warping that is present between the two magnitude spikes. Substituting the Euclidean distance with a
phase invariant or a dynamic time warping distance function
may improve on this problem. For the other two classes the
discord deﬁnition is more consistent with the expert opinion
on the outliers. Even for elements where they disagree signiﬁcantly, the discord algorithm still returns some intuitive
results. For example, the second most signiﬁcant RRL discord (see Figure 3, bottom right) deviates greatly from the
expected RRL shape.
Web Query Data
Another domain where large scale time series datasets are
observed daily are the search engines query logs. For example, we studied a dataset consisting of MSN web queries
made in 2002. A casual inspection reveals that most web
query logs seem to fall into a handful of patterns. Most
have a ”background” periodicity of seven days, which re-
ﬂects the fact that many people only have access to the web
during the workweek. This background weekly pattern is
sometimes augmented by seasonal effects or bursts due to
news stories. The two curves labeled ”Stock Market” and
”Germany” in Figure 4 are such examples. Another common type of pattern we call the anticipated burst; it consists
of a gradual build up, a climax and a fall off. This is commonly seen for seasonally related items (”Easter”, ”Tour de
France”, ”Hanukkah”) and for movie releases as in ”Spiderman” and ”Star Wars”.
Figure 4: Some examples of typical patterns in web query logs in
2002. Most patterns are dominated by a weekly cycle, as in ”stock
market” or ”Germany”, with seasonal deviations and bursts in response to news stories. The ”anticipated burst” is seen for movie
releases such as ”Spiderman/Star Wars”, or for seasonal events.
Also common is the unanticipated burst, which is seen
after an unexpected event, such as the death of a celebrity.
This pattern is characterized by a near instantaneous burst,
followed by a tapering off. Given that both anticipated and
unanticipated bursts can happen at any point in the year, we
use phase invariant Euclidian distance as discord distance
measure. The number one discord is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: The number one discord in the web query log dataset
is ”Full Moon”. The ﬁrst full moon of 2002 occurred on January
28th at 22:50 GMT. The periodicity of the subsequent spikes is
about 29.5 days, which is the length of the synodic month.
This discord makes perfect sense with a little hindsight.
Unlike weather or cultural events which are intrinsically local, the phases of the moon are perhaps the only changing
phenomena that all human beings can observe. While some
other queries have a weak periodicity corresponding to calendar months, this query has a strong periodicity of 29.5
days, corresponds to the synodic month.
Trajectory Data
We obtained two trajectory datasets used in and 
respectively, which have been purposefully created to test
anomaly detection in video sequences. The time series are
two dimensional (comprised of the x and y coordinates for
each data point), and are further normalized to have the
same length. In both datasets several deliberately anomalous sequences are created to have a ground truth.
datasets contain 156 and 239 trajectories, with
4 and 2 annotated anomalous sequences respectively. Figure 6 shows the number one discord (2D version of the Euclidean distance has been used) found in the dataset of .
It is one of the labeled anomalies too.
Figure 6: Left) The number one discord found in a trajectory
data (bold line) with 50 trajectories. It is difﬁcult to see why the
discord is singled out unless we cluster all the non-discord trajectories and compare the discord to the clustered sets. Right) When
the discord is shown with the clustered trajectories, its unusual behavior becomes apparent (just one cluster is shown here).
On both datasets the discord deﬁnition achieves perfect
accuracy, as do the original authors. Since all the data can
easily ﬁt in main memory our algorithm takes much less
than one second. We do not compare efﬁciency directly
with the original works, but note that requires building a SOM, which are generally noted for being lethargic,
while is faster, requiring O(m log(m)n) time, with m
being the number of time series and n their dimensionality.
Neither algorithm considers the secondary storage case.
6.2. Scalability of the Discord Algorithm
We test the scalability of the method on a large heterogeneous dataset of real-world time series and on three synthetically generated datasets of size up to a third of a terabyte.
Two aspects of the algorithm were the focus of this evaluation. Firstly, whether the threshold selection criterion from
Section 5 can be justiﬁed empirically (at least for certain underlying distributions) for data of such scale. Secondly, we
were interested on how efﬁcient our algorithm is, provided
that a good threshold is selected.
For both, the synthetic and the real time series datasets,
the data are organized in pages of size 104 examples each.
All pages are stored in text format on an external Seagate
FreeAgent hard drive of size 0.5Tb with 7200 RPM and a
USB2.0 connection to a computer using Pentium D 3.0 GHz
processor. Our implementation of the algorithm loads one
page for 8.2 secs.: 0.31 secs. for reading the data and 7.89
secs. for parsing the text matrices.
Random Walk Data. We generated three datasets with
random walk time series. The datasets contain 106, 107 and
108 examples respectively. The length of the time series is
set to 512 points. Additionally, six non-random walk time
series are planted in each of the datasets (see Figure 7).
Figure 7: Planted non-random walk time series with their nearest
neighbors. The top two time series are among the top discords, the
bottom two time series fail the range threshold. |S| = 106
To compute the threshold a sample of size |S′| = 104 is
used. We set the threshold to the nearest neighbor distance
of the tenth discord, hoping to detect some of the planted
anomalies among the top ten discords in the entire datasets.
Thus it was obtained r = 21.45. The time series in the
three datasets come from the same distribution and therefore, as mentioned in Section 5, the same sample S′ (and
hence the same threshold r) can be used for all of them.
Note that this threshold selection procedure requires less
than a minute. After the discord detection algorithm ﬁnishes, the set C contains 24 discords for the dataset of size
106, 40 discords for the dataset of size 107 and 41 discords
for the dataset of size 108. The running time for the three
cases is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Randomwalk data. Time efﬁciency of the algorithm.
Total time
10 million
100 million
In all cases the list C contains the required number of
10 discords, so no restart is necessary. From the planted
time series three are among the top 10 discords and for the
other three a random walk nearest neighbor is found that is
relatively close (see Figure 7 for examples). This does not
decrease the utility of the discord deﬁnition, and is expected
as the random walk time series exhibit some extreme properties with respect to the discord detection task, i.e. they
cover almost the entire data space that can be occupied by
all possible time series of the speciﬁed length.
We further note, that the time necessary to ﬁnd the nearest neighbor for an arbitrary example is 15.4 minutes for the
dataset of size one million and approximately 25 hours for
the dataset of size 100 million. This means that our algo-
Figure 8: Randomwalk Data (|S| = 106). Number of examples
in C after processing each of the 100 pages during the two phases
of the algorithm. The method remains stable even if we select a
slightly different threshold r during the sampling procedure.
rithm detects the most signiﬁcant discords in less than four
times the time necessary to ﬁnd the nearest neighbor of a
single example only.
Figure 8 demonstrates the size |C| after processing each
database page. The graphs also show how the size varies
when changing the threshold. The plots demonstrate that
with a 2% −5% change in its values we still detect the required 10 discords with just two scans, while the maximum
memory and the running time do not increase drastically.
It is interesting to note how quickly the memory drops after the reﬁnement step is initiated. This implies that most
of the non-discord elements in the candidates list get eliminated after scanning just a few pages of the database. From
this point on the algorithm performs a very limited number
of distance computation to update the nearest neighbor distances for the remaining candidates in C. Similar behavior
was observed throughout all datasets studied.
Heterogeneous Data. Finally we check the efﬁciency
of the discord detection algorithm on a large dataset of realworld time series coming from a mixture of distributions.
To generate such dataset we combined three datasets each
of size 4x105 (1.2 million elements in total). The time series have length of 140 points. The three datasets are: motion capture data, EEG recordings of a rat, and meteorological data from the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project
(TAO) .
Table 2: Heterogeneous data. Time efﬁciency of the algorithm.
Time(Phase1)
Time(Phase2)
Table 2 lists the running time of the algorithm on the
heterogeneous dataset. Again we are looking for the top 10
discords in the dataset. On the sample the threshold is estimated as r = 12.86. After the candidate selection phase the
set C contains 690 elements, and at the end of the reﬁnement phase there are 59 elements that meet the threshold r.
No restarts of the algorithm were necessary for this dataset
either. The discords detected are mostly from the TAO class
as its time series exhibit much larger variability compared
to the time series for the other two classes.
7. Discussion
In a sense, the approach taken here may appear surprising. Most data mining algorithms for time series use
some approximation of the data, such as DFT, DWT, SVD
etc. Previous (main memory) algorithms for ﬁnding discords have used SAX , or Haar wavelets . However, we are working with just the raw data. It is worth
explaining why. Most time series data mining algorithms
achieve speed-up with the Gemini framework (or some variation thereof) . The basic idea is to approximate the full
dataset in main memory, approximately solve the problem
at hand, and then make (hopefully few) accesses to the disk
to conﬁrm or adjust the solution. Note that this framework
requires one linear scan just to create the main memory approximation, and our algorithm requires a total of two linear scans. So there is at most a factor of two possibility
of improvement. However, it is clear that even this cannot be achieved. Even if we assume that some algorithm
can be created to approximately solve the problem in main
memory. The algorithm must make some access to disk to
check the raw data. Because such random accesses are ten
times more expensive than sequential accesses , if the
algorithm must access more that 10% of the data it can no
longer be competitive. In fact, it is difﬁcult to see how any
algorithm could avoid retrieving 100% of the data in the
second phase. For all time series approximations, it is possible that two objects appear arbitrarily close in approximation space, but be arbitrarily far apart in the raw data space.
Most data mining algorithms exploit lower bound pruning
to ﬁnd the nearest neighbor, but here upper bounds are required to prune objects that cannot be the furthest nearest
neighbor. While there has been some work on providing upper bounds for time series, these bounds tend to be exceptionally weak . Intuitively this makes sense, there are
only so many ways two time series can be similar to each
other, hence the ability to tightly lower bound. However,
there is a much larger space of possible ways that two time
series could be different, and an upper bound must somehow capture all of them. In the same vein, it is worth discussing why we do not attempt to index the candidate set C
in main memory, to speed up both the phase one and phase
two of our algorithm. The answer is simply that it does not
improve performance. The many time series indexing algorithms that exist are designed to reduce the number
of disk accesses, they have little utility when all the data
resides in main memory (as with the candidate set C). For
high dimensional time series in main memory it is impossible to beat a linear scan; especially when the linear scan
is highly optimized with early abandoning. Furthermore, in
phase one of our algorithm every object seen in the disk resident data set is either added to the candidate set C or causes
an object to be ejected from C, this overhead in maintaining
the index more than nulliﬁes any possible gain.
8. Conclusions
The work introduced a highly efﬁcient algorithm for
mining range discords in massive time series databases. The
algorithm performs two linear scans through the database
and a limited amount of memory based computations. It is
intuitive and very simple to implement. We further demonstrated, that with a suitable sampling technique the method
can be adapted to robustly detect the top k discords in the
data. The utility of the discord deﬁnition combined with
the efﬁciency of the method suggest it as a valuable tool
across multiple domains, such as astronomy, surveillance,
web mining, etc. Experimental results from all these areas
have been demonstrated.
We are currently exploring adaptive approaches that allow for the efﬁcient detection of statistically signiﬁcant discords when the time series are generated by a mixture of
different processes. In these cases alternating the range parameter according to the distribution of each example turns
out to be essential when looking for the top discords with
respect to the individual classes.
9. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. M. Vlachos for providing us
the web query data, Dr. P. Protopapas for the light-curves,
Dr. A. Naftel and Dr. L. Latecki for the trajectory datasets.