UC Davis Previously Published Works
PET Image Reconstruction Using Kernel Method
 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 34(1)
Wang, Guobao
Publication Date
10.1109/tmi.2014.2343916
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
PET Image Reconstruction Using Kernel Method
Guobao Wang [Senior Member, IEEE] and Jinyi Qi [Fellow, IEEE]
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
Guobao Wang: ; Jinyi Qi: 
Image reconstruction from low-count PET projection data is challenging because the inverse
problem is ill-posed. Prior information can be used to improve image quality. Inspired by the
kernel methods in machine learning, this paper proposes a kernel based method that models PET
image intensity in each pixel as a function of a set of features obtained from prior information.
The kernel-based image model is incorporated into the forward model of PET projection data and
the coefficients can be readily estimated by the maximum likelihood (ML) or penalized likelihood
image reconstruction. A kernelized expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm is presented to
obtain the ML estimate. Computer simulations show that the proposed approach can achieve better
bias versus variance trade-off and higher contrast recovery for dynamic PET image reconstruction
than the conventional maximum likelihood method with and without post-reconstruction
denoising. Compared with other regularization-based methods, the kernel method is easier to
implement and provides better image quality for low-count data. Application of the proposed
kernel method to a 4D dynamic PET patient dataset showed promising results.
Index Terms
PET; image reconstruction; image prior; kernel method; expectation maximization
I. Introduction
Positron emission tomography (PET) can image biochemical processes in vivo using
radioactive tracers. To monitor rapid change in tracer distribution, short scan durations must
be used, which often results in low counting statistics (i.e., high noise). Image reconstruction
from low-count PET projection data is challenging because the inverse problem is ill-posed
and the resultant image is usually very noisy. To improve the quality of reconstructed
images, it is desirable to incorporate prior information in PET image reconstruction .
Such information can be obtained either from a composite time frame of a dynamic PET
scan that has a longer scan duration, or from a co-registered anatomical image that has good
tissue contrasts1.
Copyright (c) 2010 IEEE.
1The term “prior” used here refers to any information that is obtained before image reconstruction and may not follow the strict
statistical definition.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2015 January ; 34(1): 61–71. doi:10.1109/TMI.2014.2343916.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A common way to incorporate prior knowledge in PET image reconstruction is through the
use of edge-preserving regularization. A recent review on using anatomical prior
information for PET image reconstruction can be found in . Among different
regularization methods – , – , the Bowsher method , which adaptively
chooses neighboring pixels for each pixel in the image estimate using information from a
prior image, was found to utilize anatomical prior information better than others in terms of
performance and computational complexity . The nonlocal regularization can
incorporate anatomical weights through a methodology similar to the neighborhood
selection in the Bowsher method , to improve emission reconstruction – .
Alternatively, the prior image constrained compressive sensing (PICCS, – ), an
iterative reconstruction approach introduced in the context of dynamic computed
tomography (CT), explores sparsity on the difference image between the image estimate and
a composite image. PICCS can be adapted for use in PET image reconstruction .
Besides the regularized image reconstruction methods, post-reconstruction denoising
methods can also incorporate prior information to improve PET image quality , ,
 , . The highly constrained back-projection (HYPR, , ), which was originally
developed in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for image reconstruction from undersampled data, is a method of using a composite image prior and has been applied to
denoising dynamic PET images . Nonlocal means (NLM, ) is another method that
incorporates prior knowledge into image denoising , . Post-reconstruction denoising
is usually easier to implement than regularization-based reconstruction methods.
In this paper, we propose a new way to incorporate image derived prior information in PET
image reconstruction. We directly model the PET image intensity at pixel j, xj, as a function
Γ of a set of features, fj, which is derived from available prior information at pixel j. The
function xj = Γ(fj) can be very complex. Inspired by the kernel methods in machine learning
 , we model the complex function Γ(fj) as a linear function in a higher-dimensional
transformed space of {fj} that is implicitly determined by a kernel function. The kernelized
image model can then be incorporated into the forward projection model of PET to perform
maximum likelihood (ML) image reconstruction without an explicit regularization function.
The expectation-maximization (EM) , algorithm with and without ordered subsets
 can be directly applied to obtain the ML estimate.
The proposed kernelized EM method has the same simplicity as the conventional ML EM
reconstruction followed by post-reconstruction denoising. We expect the former method to
result in better performance than the latter for low-count data because it models noise in the
projection domain where PET data are well modeled by independent Poisson random
variables. The latter method requires a noise model in the image domain where noise is
highly correlated and the covariance matrix is very difficult to estimate. The benefit of
modeling noise in the projection domain over that in the image domain can become
significant when the count level of PET data is low. Compared to regularization-based
methods, the advantage of the proposed kernel-based EM reconstruction is its simplicity in
implementation and readiness to be merged into the OSEM algorithm that is already
available in commercial clinical PET scanners.
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Part of this work was presented at the 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging . Zhou et al also presented a kernel-based method for compressive sensing (CS)
dynamic MRI image reconstruction at the same conference . Both methods share the
same spirit of using the kernel trick but the technical aims are different. The kernel-based
CS , employs explicit mapping functions, such as kernel principal components or
polynomial functions, to transform the projection data into a higher dimensional feature
space where the projection data are nonlinearly sparse. A reverse estimation is required to
convert the reconstructed coefficients back to the original image. In comparison, this paper
uses an implicit mapping function through kernels to model PET image intensity as a linear
function in the kernel space determined by prior images. Our work provides a novel method
of using prior image information for improving image reconstruction.
This paper is organized as follows. We start with a brief description of PET image
reconstruction in Section II and then describe the kernel model for image representation and
kernel-based PET image reconstruction. Section III presents computer simulation studies
comparing the kernel method with other regularization methods. An application of the
proposed method to a dynamic PET patient data set is given in Section V. Finally
conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. Theory
A. PET Image Reconstruction
PET projection data y are well modeled as independent Poisson random variables with the
log-likelihood function 
where M is the total number of lines of response and the expectation ȳ is related to the
unknown emission image x through
with P being the detection probability matrix and r the expectation of random and scattered
The maximum likelihood (ML) estimate of the image x is found by maximizing the Poisson
log likelihood
The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm is derived to find the solution by the
following iterative update
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where 1M is a vector of length M with all elements being 1, n denotes iteration number and
the superscript “T” denotes matrix transpose. The vector multiplication and division are
element-wise operations.
While the ML estimate can be very noisy at convergence, penalized likelihood (PL) methods
seek an image estimate by maximizing the penalized Poisson log likelihood
where β is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the regularization and U(x) is an
image roughness penalty that can take the following anisotropic form
where the weighting factor wjk is inversely proportional to the distance between pixel j and
pixel k in the neighborhood . The second order neighborhood is usually used that consists
of 8 nearest pixels in 2D and 26 nearest voxels in 3D. ψδ(t) is the penalty function, e.g.
, and δ is a parameter that controls the smoothness of the penalty function. N
is the total number of pixels in the image. U(x) can also take the isotropic total variation
(iTV) form
Information from a prior image can be incorporated in U(x). For example, the Bowsher
method and nonlocal regularization approach set the weighting factor wjk in each
neighborhood adaptively based on a prior image , . PICCS includes a regularization
on the difference image between x and a prior image, instead of regularizing x itself .
Compared to the EM update equation (4) for ML reconstruction, optimization algorithms for
PL reconstruction (5) are more complicated, depending on the complexity of the
regularization function U(x).
B. Image Representation by Kernels
Inspired by the kernel machines in machine learning , we propose a kernel based image
representation for PET images.
We first identify a set of low-dimensional features fj for each pixel j. The “label” value for fj
is the image intensity value at j, denoted as xj, and can be described as a function of fj by
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A linear form Γ(f) = wTf is the simplest model but may represent image intensity poorly
when Γ(f) is actually nonlinear and complex.
While Γ(f) cannot be accurately described as linear in the low-dimensional space spanned by
, it is possible to describe Γ(f) linearly in a transformed space
of veryhigh dimension,
where ϕ(f) is a mapping function and w is a weight vector which also sits in the transformed
with α being the coefficient vector. By substituting (10) into (9), the kernel representation
for the image intensity at pixel j is written as
where κ(fj, fl) ≜ ϕ(fl)T ϕ(fj) is a kernel2. The equivalent matrix-vector form of (11) is
where the (j, l)th element of the kernel matrix K is κ(fj, fl). In (12), each column of K can be
considered as a basis function for image representation.
The image intensity xj at pixel j is thus a linear function in the kernel space but is nonlinear
in the original space of feature points
. Note that the mapping function ϕ is implicitly
defined by the kernel κ(·, ·) and is not required to be known. Typical kernels include the
radial Gaussian kernel
which has a mapping function ϕ of infinite dimension , and the polynomial kernel
2Note that the kernel defined here should not be confused with image basis functions, which sometime are also called “kernels”.
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
σ, c and d are the kernel parameters in the respective kernels. The polynomial kernel reduces
to the linear kernel when d = 1.
C. Kernel Method for Image Reconstruction
Substituting the kernel-based image model (12) into the PET forward model (2), we obtain
the following kernel based forward projection model:
The forward model in (2) is a special case of the kernelized model (15) with
where I denotes the identity matrix. The advantage of (15) is that prior knowledge from
other resources (e.g. whole dynamic frames in dynamic PET, or multi-modality images) can
be incorporated into the forward projection model, which consequently improves the
reconstruction of the low-count scan.
Combining the kernel based projection model (15) and the Poisson likelihood function (1),
the kernel coefficient image α can be estimated by
where V(α) is an optional penalty function and β is the regularization parameter. Once the
coefficient image α is estimated, the reconstructed emission image is calculated by
Because the reconstructed image is already regularized by the kernels, we set β = 0 in this
work to obtain the maximum likelihood estimate of α by
The standard ML EM algorithm given in Eq. (4) can be directly applied to find the ML
estimate of α because (15) is in a linear form and PK can be treated as single matrix. The
resulting kernelized EM update of α at iteration (n + 1) is
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Alternatively, one can decouple P and K using the nested EM algorithm .
Compared with using an edge-preserving penalty function to incorporate prior information,
the above kernel-based ML EM algorithm is easier to implement.
D. Practical Construction of Kernel Matrix
A full kernel matrix K of an image is usually too large to be used in practice. We adopt the
k-nearest neighbors (kNN, ) that is widely used for graph construction in machine
learning to construct a sparse matrix. The kNN method finds k similar neighbors for each
pixel and defines the (j, l)th element of the kernel matrix K by
where kNN is sought based on the Euclidean distance between fj and fl. Since a constant-k
neighboring pixels are used, this above method may oversmooth a small target that has far
less than k actual neighbors. An alternative to kNN is the ε-ball method, which assigns 0 to
the neighbors that are outside the ε-ball of a pixel:
Each pixel thus can find an adaptive number of neighbors.
The computation cost of the kNN and ε-ball method can be expensive when the total number
of pixels, N, is large. Alternatively, the kernel matrix can be defined only using a local
neighborhood by
where denotes the neighborhood of pixel j. These three strategies stated above can be
combined to improve the robustness of the kernel method as we will demonstrate later.
The feature set
is required for constructing the kernel matrix. A general requirement
is that the feature set should be large enough so that the PET image intensity can be
determined uniquely by the features. For data acquired on a multi-modality scanner, such as
PET/CT or PET/MR, the features can be obtained from co-registered anatomical images.
For dynamic PET data, the feature vector fj associated with a pixel j can be derived from an
initial reconstruction of later frames or of the summed sinogram of different time frames.
In order to make it easy to choose a kernel parameter (e.g. σ in the Gaussian kernel), the
feature points {fj} can be first normalized by its standard derivation using
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where σm(f) is the standard deviation of the mth element of fj over all of the pixels.
Instead of K, the normalized matrix K̄,
can be used. We found K̄ resulted in higher image quality than K in our simulation.
While the use of a kernel matrix in the kernel method requires extra memory and
computation, the kernel matrix is very sparse so the extra memory and computation cost are
relatively small compared with the large size of the system matrix and computation time of
forward and back projections. In our simulation and real data studies, we observed that the
additional computation cost of the kernel matrix was only 10% of the total image
reconstruction time.
III. Simulation Studies
The proposed kernel method applies spatial-adaptive smoothing based on prior images and
has applications in both anatomical-prior guided PET image reconstruction and dynamic
PET reconstruction. Here we apply the method to frame-by-frame image reconstruction of
dynamic PET data.
A. Dynamic PET Simulation Setup
Dynamic PET scans were simulated for a GE DST whole-body PET scanner using a Zubal
head phantom (Fig. 1(a)). The scanning schedule consisted of 24 time frames: 4×20 s, 4×40
s, 4×60 s, 4×180 s and 8×300 s. Regional time activity curves shown in Fig. 1(b) were
assigned to different brain regions. Dynamic activity images were first forward projected to
generate noise-free sinograms. Poisson noise was then introduced. Scatters were simulated
using the SimSET package . We also included 20% uniform random events. Attenuation
map, mean scatters and randoms were used in all reconstruction methods to obtain
quantitative images. The expected total number of events over 60 minutes was 8 million.
Ten noisy realizations were simulated and each was reconstructed independently for
comparison.
We compared the proposed kernelized EM (KEM) algorithm with the conventional ML-EM
reconstruction , PL reconstruction using total variation (TV) regularization , ML-
EM followed by post-reconstruction denoising methods (HYPR and NLM ), PL
reconstruction using the Bowsher method and PICCS to incorporate the image prior.
All regularization-based methods used the De Pierro’s EM algorithm with 200
iterations. All the aforementioned methods, except the ML-EM, make use of spatial
smoothing to improve image quality. We note that temporal regularization methods have
also been developed to improve dynamic image reconstruction, such as the temporal
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
filtering methods – and reconstruction using smooth temporal basis functions ,
 . Readers are referred to – for detailed reviews on the development of temporal
smoothing techniques. Two temporal-based methods were included here for comparisons.
The first one is the EM reconstruction followed by a temporal filtering based on the
principal component analysis (PCA) . The second method is the penalized weighted
least squares reconstruction in the Karhunen-Loeve (KL) transform domain (KL-PWLS)
developed by Wernick et al , which essentially models the dynamic sinogram in the KL
transform domain and reconstructs each coefficient image separately from the corresponding
transformed sinogram. These two PCA-based methods share similar simplicity as the
proposed kernel method.
B. Use of Composite Images
To construct the kernel matrix, we propose to obtain the prior images from composite
frames in dynamic PET. Multiple short time frames are summed together to improve the
counting statistics and reduce noise. Although temporal information is lost, common spatial
information shared by different time frames is well preserved in the summed frames and can
be used to aid the reconstruction of short time frames. Choosing a proper number of
composite frames is important for reconstructing high-quality images. On one hand, a small
number of composite frames reduces noise in composite images, but is at the risk of losing
important spatial information in the kernel matrix. On the other hand, a large number of
composite frames can preserve spatial information but may be ineffective in suppressing
noise. We found that using three composite frames provided a good balance between
preserving spatial information and reducing noise in the composite images.
The rebinned sinograms
, each with 20 minutes, were reconstructed using the
conventional ML EM algorithm with 100 iterations. The reconstructed images
the three rebinned frames, shown in Fig. 2, were used as the prior images in all spatial
smoothing reconstruction methods, except the ML-EM and PL with TV regularization,
which do not use any composite image prior information from dynamic data.
For the proposed KEM method, the reconstructed activities of the three rebinned frames
were used to form the feature points
is the image intensity value at pixel j in the rebinned time frame m, m = 1, 2, 3. k
= 48 nearest neighbors of each f̄j were then sought by knnsearch in MATLAB using the
scaled Euclidean distance. A sparse kernel matrix K was then calculated using {f̄j } by Eq.
(21). We used the radial Gaussian kernel (13) with σ = 1.
Each column j of K̄ can be seen as a basis image function with αj the corresponding basis
coefficient. Fig. 3 shows the basis images obtained by reshaping the columns of K̄ that
correspond to the locations “A”, “B”, “C” and “D” indicated in Fig. 1(a). These four pixels
are located in the blood region, the gray matter boundary, the white matter and the tumor
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
region, respectively. The basis images are sparse and self-adapt to the corresponding pixel
locations.
The same kernel matrix K̄ employed in KEM was also used as the weighting matrix in the
NLM denoising method . The HYPR method used the sum of the three rebinned
images as the composite image and a 7 × 7 window for Gaussian smoothing. In the PICCS
method , the three prior images were used as the reference image for the individual
frames in the early, middle and late 20 minutes, respectively. TV regularization was
used in PICCS with the parameter α that balances spatial smoothness and prior image
constraint set to 0.7. The Bowsher method used a quadratic penalty function and used the
radial Gaussian distance of {fj} in (13) to choose pixels in the local neighborhoods. The
neighborhood size in the Bowsher method was set to 7×7 and 20 pixels were selected for
each neighborhood. These parameters in different methods were chosen to minimize the
image MSE.
C. Comparison of Different Reconstruction Methods
For quantitative comparison between different reconstruction methods, we computed the
ensemble mean squared bias, variance, and mean squared error (MSE), which are defined by
where x̄ is the ensemble mean of the image estimates and Ns is the total number of noisy
realizations (Ns = 10 in this simulation). Furthermore, we computed the contrast recovery
coefficient (CRC) of the blood pool and tumor. The CRC is calculated by
where S̄i denotes the mean activity of the region of interest and B̄i denotes the mean activity
of the white matter region (background) in the ith reconstructed image.
Figure 4 shows the true image of time frame 2 and reconstructed image samples by different
methods. This frame has a scan duration of 20 seconds and a total of 26k events (very low
counts). For each method, the reconstructed image is shown with the minimum MSE, which
was minimized by varying either the iteration number in the EM-based methods or the
regularization parameter β in the regularization-based methods. The results of a high-count
frame (frame 24, 727k events) are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 compares the ensemble mean
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
squared bias versus ensemble variance tradeoff achieved by different reconstruction
methods by varying either the iteration number or the regularization parameter in each
method for frame 2 and frame 24. We can see that by using the kernel matrix obtained from
the composite images, the kernelized EM (KEM) substantially improved the image quality
over the conventional ML-EM for both the low-count and high-count frames. For the very
low count frame, the KEM also achieved substantially less bias at a fixed variance than any
other method in the study. In Fig. 7(a) we plot the minimum MSE achieved by different
methods for all time frames. The error bars represents plus and minus one standard
deviation, which was estimated by bootstrapping the 10 noisy realizations. The
corresponding scan duration and count level of each frame are given in Fig. 7(b). In general,
the proposed kernel method achieved the lowest MSE for nearly all frames and substantially
outperformed all other methods for low-count frames.
Figure 8 compares the contrast recovery coefficient (CRC) versus background noise tradeoff achieved by different methods for two regions of interest (ROI). The blood pool was the
ROI in frame 2 and the tumor was the ROI in frame 24. The white matter region was chosen
as background to calculate the noise standard deviation (SD). Again, the plots showed that
the proposed method achieved a higher CRC with a lower background noise than other
methods, especially for the low-count frame.
D. Effect of Kernel Parameters
Fig. 9(a) shows the image MSE values of different frames as functions of k, the number of
nearest neighbors in the kernel method. The image MSE generally decreases as the k value
becomes larger because more pixels are correlated in the kernel matrix to reduce noise.
However, an overly large k may lead to an increase in MSE if the image contains some
objects that are of small size but high target-to-background contrast, such as the image of
frame 2 in Fig. 4. This is because correlating the pixels in these high-contrast small objects
to pixels in other flat regions can result in many small weights in the kernel matrix which in
turn lead to underestimation of the high contrast object. A large k also results in a dense K
matrix and higher computation cost for reconstruction. Overall, the kernelized
reconstruction achieved a relatively stable MSE with a value of k between 20 and 100 for
the two selected frames.
The radial Gaussian was found to be generally better than the polynomial kernel in terms of
MSE in our simulations. Here we focus on investigating the σ parameter in the Gaussian
kernel. Fig. 9(b) shows the effect of σ on MSE. A small σ can differentiate feature points
more easily, but is less effective to suppress noise. As σ grows larger, kernels become
smoother and significant noise reduction is achieved. When σ becomes too large, the kernel
value by the radial Gaussian function approaches 1 and the resulting MSE also remains
constant. Since the features points {fj} are normalized, we found that σ value between 0.1
and 10 provides good results.
E. Reconstruction of a Small Target
Reconstruction of a small target in the presence of background activity can be a challenge in
PET imaging, as small targets may either be visually obstructed by noise in an unregularized
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
reconstruction or be over-smoothed by regularization. The latter occurs in KEM if the k
number in kNN is far greater than the size of a small target. Many false neighbors may be
included in the kNN search, which in turn will over-smooth the small target. To address this
problem, we can modify the kNN strategy in Eq. (21) by thresholding the nonzero weights in
the kernel matrix by a threshold τ to remove false neighbors. We validated this modified
strategy using a new stimulation study with a smaller brain tumor (6 mm in diameter) (Fig.
10(a)). All the other settings in the simulation remained the same. Since most weighting
factors in the kernel matrix by kNN are between 0.9 and 1.0, we set the threshold τ to 0.96 in
the modified strategy.
We compare the reconstructed images by the MLEM, EM-NLM and proposed KEM in Fig.
10. All reconstruction methods were run for 100 iterations. The MLEM image has a tumor
CRC of 0.70 but with a high background noise SD=28.4%. The post-smoothed image by
NLM reduces noise but also decreases the contrast (CRC=0.54). In comparison, the KEM
preserves the tumor contrast (CRC=0.67) while reducing noise in the background by more
than a factor of 2 (SD=12.6%). A more complete comparison of the tumor CRC versus
background noise SD using 10 realizations is shown in Fig. 11(a). A temporal-smoothing
method, EM-PCA, is also included. The curves are plotted by varying the iteration number
in each method. The KEM demonstrates a more robust performance of CRC versus noise
than other methods. Fig. 11(b) shows the CRC vs. SD plots for the blood pool region in
frame 2. Clearly, the improvement achieved by the proposed KEM is much more
pronounced for the low-count frame. These results demonstrate that the kNN with
thresholding for constructing kernel matrix can work robustly for reconstruction of both
large and small targets.
F. Incomplete Composite Image Prior
The kernel method works best when the structures in each frame are all embedded in the
composite images. If a region cannot be identified in the composite images, the
reconstruction accuracy of the region may suffer. To address this potential problem, we can
combine the kNN approach defined in Eq. (21) with the local window approach in Eq. (23)
to avoid introducing long-range correlations. An application example of the local kNN in
MR-guided PET image reconstruction is reported in . Here we applied the method to
dynamic PET reconstruction.
Fig. 12 shows the reconstructed images of frame 2 by the KEM and EM-NLM using either
the complete composite images (all three composite frames in Fig. 2) or the middle 20minute frame only (incomplete prior case). In both cases, the kernel matrix was constructed
using the local kNN approach that selects 20 nearest neighbors from each 9×9
neighborhood. Although it shows that the local kNN results in a slightly higher MSE for
both the KEM and EM-NLM methods than the global kNN results in Fig. 4, the modified
KEM, when using the complete composite images, still outperforms all other reconstructions
shown in Fig. 4. When the kernel matrix was constructed using only the middle 20-minute
composite image, the boundary of the blood pool become blurrier in reconstructed images.
Nonetheless, the KEM still achieved lower MSE than the EM-NLM that uses the same
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
kernel matrix, and other reconstructions shown in Fig. 4 that do not use the composite
IV. Application to Dynamic PET Patient Scan
We have applied the proposed kernel method to a dynamic PET scan of a real patient. The
data set was acquired using a GE Discovery PET/CT 690 scanner with the patient in the
prone position. The PET scan started right at the injection and lasted 60 minutes. The
dynamic PET data were divided into 18 time frames: 3 × 20 s, 3 × 40 s, 3 × 60 s, 3 × 180 s,
3 × 300 s, 3 × 600 s. A CT scan was acquired to provide the attenuation map for attenuation
correction. Attenuation factors, detector efficiencies and dead time correction factors were
incorporated in the forward model. Randoms and scatters were estimated using the
manufacturer software and were modeled as an additive background.
To derive the composite image prior, the 60-minute dynamic data were rebinned into three
20-minute frames. Each rebinned frame was reconstructed using the OSEM with 30 subsets
and 2 iterations. The kernel matrix was then derived using the same procedure as described
in Section III-B. For each voxel, k=50 nearest neighbors in a 7 × 7 × 7-voxel local region
were used. The use of the local window is to reduce the computation time. The σ value of
the radial Gaussian kernel function was set to 1. The original 18 time frames of the dynamic
PET scan were then reconstructed individually by the kernelized EM algorithm with 100
iterations.
The kernelized reconstruction was compared with the traditional EM reconstruction that
contains no prior and the EM followed by a NLM post-filtering that uses the same kernel
matrix. In our previous simulation, the EM-NLM method was found to outperform other
existing methods. Fig. 13 shows the 3D reconstructions of two different time frames by the
three methods at iteration 50. Frame 3 has a 20-second scan duration and frame 18 has a 10minute scan duration. The reconstructed images by MLEM have good contrast in the blood
pool and myocardium regions (indicated by “A” and “B” respectively) but contain high
noise in uniform regions. By using the composite image prior, the EM-NLM reduces noise
but at the expense of reducing contrast of the blood and myocardium. In comparison, the
kernelized EM not only smooths out noise in uniform regions but also preserves the
boundary and intensity of the blood and myocardium very well.
Quantitative comparisons are shown in Fig. 14. The mean values of two regions of interest
(blood pool and myocardium in frame 3 and frame 18, respectively) are plotted as functions
of background noise standard deviation by varying the iteration number of each method
from 20 to 100. A uniform region inside the liver was chosen as the background and the
standard deviation (SD) of the voxel intensity values in the region was calculated. The
results show that at the same ROI mean value, the kernelized EM reconstruction always has
a lower background noise than the MLEM. The NLM post-filtering removed noise as
effectively as the kernelized EM does, but the intensities in the regions of interest were
substantially reduced.
Wang and Qi
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
V. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a kernel method to model PET image intensity as a function of
feature points obtained from prior knowledge. The kernelized image model can incorporate
prior information in the forward projection model. The maximum likelihood estimate can be
easily obtained using the popular EM algorithm. Dynamic PET simulation results show that
the proposed reconstruction method can achieve better performance than the conventional
ML-EM reconstruction and TV regularization, and also outperforms the ML-EM with post
filtering (e.g. EM-HYPR and EM-NLM), other prior-image-based regularization methods
(the Bowsher method and PICCS) and temporal-smoothing methods (EM-PCA and KL-
PWLS) for low-count frames. The proposed kernelized EM algorithm has been applied to
reconstruct the dynamic PET images of a breast cancer patient and has achieved promising
The kernel method is suitable for applications where prior images can be obtained to
represent accurately the spatial structures of the image to be reconstructed. Such cases
include dynamic PET, dynamic contrast-enhanced CT and MRI, as well as static image
reconstruction with a matched anatomical prior. We note that the kernel method mainly
explores the spatial correlations embedded in data and can be combined with temporal
smoothing techniques (e.g. direct reconstruction methods ) to obtain more improvement
on dynamic image reconstruction. One thing that needs further study is the framing of
composite frames which can be chosen to provide optimized composite image priors for
specific applications. In addition, patient motion, if not corrected, may result in mismatches
between the composite images and the dynamic images to be reconstructed, which will
affect performance of the kernel method. Therefore, incorporation of motion compensation
in the kernel method will be part of our future investigations.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NIH grant no. R01 EB000194.
The authors thank Dr. Jian Zhou for generating the forward and back projectors for the 3D patient data, and Li
Yang for the assistance in the processing of the patient data. The authors also thank Will Hutchcroft for
proofreading the manuscript.