Fully Convolutional Networks
for Semantic Segmentation
Evan Shelhamer∗, Jonathan Long∗, and Trevor Darrell, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Convolutional networks are powerful visual models that yield hierarchies of features. We show that convolutional networks
by themselves, trained end-to-end, pixels-to-pixels, improve on the previous best result in semantic segmentation. Our key insight is to
build “fully convolutional” networks that take input of arbitrary size and produce correspondingly-sized output with efﬁcient inference
and learning. We deﬁne and detail the space of fully convolutional networks, explain their application to spatially dense prediction
tasks, and draw connections to prior models. We adapt contemporary classiﬁcation networks (AlexNet, the VGG net, and GoogLeNet)
into fully convolutional networks and transfer their learned representations by ﬁne-tuning to the segmentation task. We then deﬁne a
skip architecture that combines semantic information from a deep, coarse layer with appearance information from a shallow, ﬁne layer
to produce accurate and detailed segmentations. Our fully convolutional network achieves improved segmentation of PASCAL VOC
 , NYUDv2, SIFT Flow, and PASCAL-Context, while inference takes one tenth of
a second for a typical image.
Index Terms—Semantic Segmentation, Convolutional Networks, Deep Learning, Transfer Learning
INTRODUCTION
ONVOLUTIONAL networks are driving advances in
recognition. Convnets are not only improving for
whole-image classiﬁcation , , , but also making
progress on local tasks with structured output. These include advances in bounding box object detection , , ,
part and keypoint prediction , , and local correspondence , .
The natural next step in the progression from coarse to
ﬁne inference is to make a prediction at every pixel. Prior
approaches have used convnets for semantic segmentation
 , , , , , , , in which each pixel is
labeled with the class of its enclosing object or region, but
with shortcomings that this work addresses.
We show that fully convolutional networks (FCNs)
trained end-to-end, pixels-to-pixels on semantic segmentation exceed the previous best results without further
machinery. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to
train FCNs end-to-end (1) for pixelwise prediction and (2)
from supervised pre-training. Fully convolutional versions
of existing networks predict dense outputs from arbitrarysized inputs. Both learning and inference are performed
whole-image-at-a-time by dense feedforward computation
and backpropagation. In-network upsampling layers enable
pixelwise prediction and learning in nets with subsampling.
This method is efﬁcient, both asymptotically and absolutely, and precludes the need for the complications in
other works. Patchwise training is common , , ,
 , , but lacks the efﬁciency of fully convolutional
training. Our approach does not make use of pre- and postprocessing complications, including superpixels , ,
proposals , , or post-hoc reﬁnement by random ﬁelds
∗Authors contributed equally
E. Shelhamer, J. Long, and T. Darrell are with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science (CS Division), UC Berkeley. E-mail:
{shelhamer,jonlong,trevor}@cs.berkeley.edu.
or local classiﬁers , . Our model transfers recent
success in classiﬁcation , , to dense prediction by
reinterpreting classiﬁcation nets as fully convolutional and
ﬁne-tuning from their learned representations. In contrast,
previous works have applied small convnets without supervised pre-training , , .
Semantic segmentation faces an inherent tension between semantics and location: global information resolves
what while local information resolves where. What can be
done to navigate this spectrum from location to semantics?
How can local decisions respect global structure? It is not
immediately clear that deep networks for image classiﬁcation yield representations sufﬁcient for accurate, pixelwise
recognition.
In the conference version of this paper , we cast
pre-trained networks into fully convolutional form, and
augment them with a skip architecture that takes advantage
of the full feature spectrum. The skip architecture fuses
the feature hierarchy to combine deep, coarse, semantic
information and shallow, ﬁne, appearance information (see
Section 4.3 and Figure 3). In this light, deep feature hierarchies encode location and semantics in a nonlinear local-toglobal pyramid.
This journal paper extends our earlier work through
further tuning, analysis, and more results. Alternative
choices, ablations, and implementation details better cover
the space of FCNs. Tuning optimization leads to more accurate networks and a means to learn skip architectures all-atonce instead of in stages. Experiments that mask foreground
and background investigate the role of context and shape.
Results on the object and scene labeling of PASCAL-Context
reinforce merging object segmentation and scene parsing as
uniﬁed pixelwise prediction.
In the next section, we review related work on deep
classiﬁcation nets, FCNs, recent approaches to semantic segmentation using convnets, and extensions to FCNs. The folarXiv:1605.06211v1 [cs.CV] 20 May 2016
backward/learning
forward/inference
pixelwise prediction
segmentation g.t.
Fig. 1. Fully convolutional networks can efﬁciently learn to make dense
predictions for per-pixel tasks like semantic segmentation.
lowing sections explain FCN design, introduce our architecture with in-network upsampling and skip layers, and describe our experimental framework. Next, we demonstrate
improved accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2011-2, NYUDv2,
SIFT Flow, and PASCAL-Context. Finally, we analyze design
choices, examine what cues can be learned by an FCN, and
calculate recognition bounds for semantic segmentation.
RELATED WORK
Our approach draws on recent successes of deep nets for
image classiﬁcation , , and transfer learning ,
 . Transfer was ﬁrst demonstrated on various visual
recognition tasks , , then on detection, and on both
instance and semantic segmentation in hybrid proposalclassiﬁer models , , . We now re-architect and
ﬁne-tune classiﬁcation nets to direct, dense prediction of
semantic segmentation. We chart the space of FCNs and
relate prior models both historical and recent.
Fully convolutional networks To our knowledge, the
idea of extending a convnet to arbitrary-sized inputs ﬁrst
appeared in Matan et al. , which extended the classic
LeNet to recognize strings of digits. Because their net
was limited to one-dimensional input strings, Matan et al.
used Viterbi decoding to obtain their outputs. Wolf and
Platt expand convnet outputs to 2-dimensional maps
of detection scores for the four corners of postal address
blocks. Both of these historical works do inference and
learning fully convolutionally for detection. Ning et al. 
deﬁne a convnet for coarse multiclass segmentation of C.
elegans tissues with fully convolutional inference.
Fully convolutional computation has also been exploited
in the present era of many-layered nets. Sliding window
detection by Sermanet et al. , semantic segmentation by
Pinheiro and Collobert , and image restoration by Eigen
et al. do fully convolutional inference. Fully convolutional training is rare, but used effectively by Tompson et al.
 to learn an end-to-end part detector and spatial model
for pose estimation, although they do not exposit on or
analyze this method.
Dense prediction with convnets Several recent works
have applied convnets to dense prediction problems, including semantic segmentation by Ning et al. , Farabet et al.
 , and Pinheiro and Collobert ; boundary prediction
for electron microscopy by Ciresan et al. and for natural
images by a hybrid convnet/nearest neighbor model by
Ganin and Lempitsky ; and image restoration and depth
estimation by Eigen et al. , . Common elements of
these approaches include
• small models restricting capacity and receptive ﬁelds;
• patchwise training , , , , ;
• reﬁnement by superpixel projection, random ﬁeld regularization, ﬁltering, or local classiﬁcation , , ;
• “interlacing” to obtain dense output , , ;
• multi-scale pyramid processing , , ;
• saturating tanh nonlinearities , , ; and
• ensembles , ,
whereas our method does without this machinery. However,
we do study patchwise training (Section 3.4) and “shift-andstitch” dense output (Section 3.2) from the perspective of
FCNs. We also discuss in-network upsampling (Section 3.3),
of which the fully connected prediction by Eigen et al. 
is a special case.
Unlike these existing methods, we adapt and extend
deep classiﬁcation architectures, using image classiﬁcation
as supervised pre-training, and ﬁne-tune fully convolutionally to learn simply and efﬁciently from whole image inputs
and whole image ground thruths.
Hariharan et al. and Gupta et al. likewise adapt
deep classiﬁcation nets to semantic segmentation, but do so
in hybrid proposal-classiﬁer models. These approaches ﬁnetune an R-CNN system by sampling bounding boxes
and/or region proposals for detection, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation. Neither method is learned
end-to-end. They achieve the previous best segmentation
results on PASCAL VOC and NYUDv2 respectively, so we
directly compare our standalone, end-to-end FCN to their
semantic segmentation results in Section 5.
Combining feature hierarchies We fuse features across
layers to deﬁne a nonlinear local-to-global representation
that we tune end-to-end. The Laplacian pyramid is a
classic multi-scale representation made of ﬁxed smoothing
and differencing. The jet of Koenderink and van Doorn 
is a rich, local feature deﬁned by compositions of partial
derivatives. In the context of deep networks, Sermanet et
al. fuse intermediate layers but discard resolution in
doing so. In contemporary work Hariharan et al. and
Mostajabi et al. also fuse multiple layers but do not learn
end-to-end and rely on ﬁxed bottom-up grouping.
FCN extensions Following the conference version of
this paper , FCNs have been extended to new tasks and
data. Tasks include region proposals , contour detection
 , depth regression , optical ﬂow , and weaklysupervised semantic segmentation , , , .
In addition, new works have improved the FCNs presented here to further advance the state-of-the-art in semantic segmentation. The DeepLab models raise output
resolution by dilated convolution and dense CRF inference.
The joint CRFasRNN model is an end-to-end integration of the CRF for further improvement. ParseNet 
normalizes features for fusion and captures context with
global pooling. The “deconvolutional network” approach
of restores resolution by proposals, stacks of learned
deconvolution, and unpooling. U-Net combines skip
layers and learned deconvolution for pixel labeling of microscopy images. The dilation architecture of makes
thorough use of dilated convolution for pixel-precise output
without a random ﬁeld or skip layers.
FULLY CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS
Each layer output in a convnet is a three-dimensional array
of size h×w×d, where h and w are spatial dimensions, and
d is the feature or channel dimension. The ﬁrst layer is the
image, with pixel size h × w, and d channels. Locations in
higher layers correspond to the locations in the image they
are path-connected to, which are called their receptive ﬁelds.
Convnets are inherently translation invariant. Their basic components (convolution, pooling, and activation functions) operate on local input regions, and depend only on
relative spatial coordinates. Writing xij for the data vector at
location (i, j) in a particular layer, and yij for the following
layer, these functions compute outputs yij by
yij = fks ({xsi+δi,sj+δj}0≤δi,δj<k)
where k is called the kernel size, s is the stride or subsampling factor, and fks determines the layer type: a matrix
multiplication for convolution or average pooling, a spatial
max for max pooling, or an elementwise nonlinearity for an
activation function, and so on for other types of layers.
This functional form is maintained under composition,
with kernel size and stride obeying the transformation rule
fks ◦gk′s′ = (f ◦g)k′+(k−1)s′,ss′.
While a general net computes a general nonlinear function,
a net with only layers of this form computes a nonlinear
ﬁlter, which we call a deep ﬁlter or fully convolutional network.
An FCN naturally operates on an input of any size, and
produces an output of corresponding (possibly resampled)
spatial dimensions.
A real-valued loss function composed with an FCN
deﬁnes a task. If the loss function is a sum over the spatial
dimensions of the ﬁnal layer, ℓ(x; θ) = P
ij ℓ′(xij; θ), its parameter gradient will be a sum over the parameter gradients
of each of its spatial components. Thus stochastic gradient
descent on ℓcomputed on whole images will be the same as
stochastic gradient descent on ℓ′, taking all of the ﬁnal layer
receptive ﬁelds as a minibatch.
When these receptive ﬁelds overlap signiﬁcantly, both
feedforward computation and backpropagation are much
more efﬁcient when computed layer-by-layer over an entire
image instead of independently patch-by-patch.
We next explain how to convert classiﬁcation nets into
fully convolutional nets that produce coarse output maps.
For pixelwise prediction, we need to connect these coarse
outputs back to the pixels. Section 3.2 describes a trick used
for this purpose (e.g., by “fast scanning” ). We explain
this trick in terms of network modiﬁcation. As an efﬁcient,
effective alternative, we upsample in Section 3.3, reusing our
implementation of convolution. In Section 3.4 we consider
training by patchwise sampling, and give evidence in Section 4.4 that our whole image training is faster and equally
effective.
Transforming fully connected layers into convolution layers
enables a classiﬁcation net to output a spatial map. Adding differentiable
interpolation layers and a spatial loss (as in Figure 1) produces an
efﬁcient machine for end-to-end pixelwise learning.
Adapting classiﬁers for dense prediction
Typical recognition nets, including LeNet , AlexNet ,
and its deeper successors , , ostensibly take ﬁxedsized inputs and produce non-spatial outputs. The fully
connected layers of these nets have ﬁxed dimensions and
throw away spatial coordinates. However, fully connected
layers can also be viewed as convolutions with kernels that
cover their entire input regions. Doing so casts these nets
into fully convolutional networks that take input of any
size and make spatial output maps. This transformation is
illustrated in Figure 2.
Furthermore, while the resulting maps are equivalent
to the evaluation of the original net on particular input
patches, the computation is highly amortized over the
overlapping regions of those patches. For example, while
AlexNet takes 1.2 ms (on a typical GPU) to infer the classi-
ﬁcation scores of a 227 × 227 image, the fully convolutional
net takes 22 ms to produce a 10 × 10 grid of outputs from a
500 × 500 image, which is more than 5 times faster than the
na¨ıve approach1.
The spatial output maps of these convolutionalized
models make them a natural choice for dense problems
like semantic segmentation. With ground truth available at
every output cell, both the forward and backward passes are
straightforward, and both take advantage of the inherent
computational efﬁciency (and aggressive optimization) of
convolution. The corresponding backward times for the
AlexNet example are 2.4 ms for a single image and 37 ms
for a fully convolutional 10 × 10 output map, resulting in a
speedup similar to that of the forward pass.
While our reinterpretation of classiﬁcation nets as fully
convolutional yields output maps for inputs of any size, the
output dimensions are typically reduced by subsampling.
The classiﬁcation nets subsample to keep ﬁlters small and
computational requirements reasonable. This coarsens the
output of a fully convolutional version of these nets, reducing it from the size of the input by a factor equal to the pixel
stride of the receptive ﬁelds of the output units.
1. Assuming efﬁcient batching of single image inputs. The classiﬁcation scores for a single image by itself take 5.4 ms to produce, which is
nearly 25 times slower than the fully convolutional version.
Shift-and-stitch is ﬁlter dilation
Dense predictions can be obtained from coarse outputs by
stitching together outputs from shifted versions of the input.
If the output is downsampled by a factor of f, shift the input
x pixels to the right and y pixels down, once for every (x, y)
such that 0 ≤x, y < f. Process each of these f 2 inputs, and
interlace the outputs so that the predictions correspond to
the pixels at the centers of their receptive ﬁelds.
Although this transformation na¨ıvely increases the cost
by a factor of f 2, there is a well-known trick for efﬁciently
producing identical results , . (This trick is also used in
the algorithme `a trous , for wavelet transforms and
related to the Noble identities from signal processing.)
Consider a layer (convolution or pooling) with input
stride s, and a subsequent convolution layer with ﬁlter
weights fij (eliding the irrelevant feature dimensions). Setting the earlier layer’s input stride to one upsamples its
output by a factor of s. However, convolving the original
ﬁlter with the upsampled output does not produce the same
result as shift-and-stitch, because the original ﬁlter only sees
a reduced portion of its (now upsampled) input. To produce
the same result, dilate (or “rarefy”) the ﬁlter by forming
 fi/s,j/s
if s divides both i and j;
otherwise,
(with i and j zero-based). Reproducing the full net output
of shift-and-stitch involves repeating this ﬁlter enlargement
layer-by-layer until all subsampling is removed. (In practice, this can be done efﬁciently by processing subsampled
versions of the upsampled input.)
Simply decreasing subsampling within a net is a tradeoff: the ﬁlters see ﬁner information, but have smaller receptive ﬁelds and take longer to compute. This dilation trick
is another kind of tradeoff: the output is denser without
decreasing the receptive ﬁeld sizes of the ﬁlters, but the
ﬁlters are prohibited from accessing information at a ﬁner
scale than their original design.
Although we have done preliminary experiments with
dilation, we do not use it in our model. We ﬁnd learning
through upsampling, as described in the next section, to
be effective and efﬁcient, especially when combined with
the skip layer fusion described later on. For further detail
regarding dilation, refer to the dilated FCN of .
Upsampling is (fractionally strided) convolution
Another way to connect coarse outputs to dense pixels
is interpolation. For instance, simple bilinear interpolation
computes each output yij from the nearest four inputs by
a linear map that depends only on the relative positions of
the input and output cells:
|1 −α −{i/f}| |1 −β −{i/j}| x⌊i/f⌋+α,⌊j/f⌋+β,
where f is the upsampling factor, and {·} denotes the
fractional part.
In a sense, upsampling with factor f is convolution with
a fractional input stride of 1/f. So long as f is integral,
it’s natural to implement upsampling through “backward
convolution” by reversing the forward and backward passes
of more typical input-strided convolution. Thus upsampling
is performed in-network for end-to-end learning by backpropagation from the pixelwise loss.
Per their use in deconvolution networks (esp. ), these
(convolution) layers are sometimes referred to as deconvolution layers. Note that the convolution ﬁlter in such a layer
need not be ﬁxed (e.g., to bilinear upsampling), but can
be learned. A stack of deconvolution layers and activation
functions can even learn a nonlinear upsampling.
In our experiments, we ﬁnd that in-network upsampling
is fast and effective for learning dense prediction.
Patchwise training is loss sampling
In stochastic optimization, gradient computation is driven
by the training distribution. Both patchwise training and
fully convolutional training can be made to produce any
distribution of the inputs, although their relative computational efﬁciency depends on overlap and minibatch size.
Whole image fully convolutional training is identical to
patchwise training where each batch consists of all the
receptive ﬁelds of the output units for an image (or collection of images). While this is more efﬁcient than uniform
sampling of patches, it reduces the number of possible
batches. However, random sampling of patches within an
image may be easily recovered. Restricting the loss to a randomly sampled subset of its spatial terms (or, equivalently
applying a DropConnect mask between the output and
the loss) excludes patches from the gradient.
If the kept patches still have signiﬁcant overlap, fully
convolutional computation will still speed up training. If
gradients are accumulated over multiple backward passes,
batches can include patches from several images. If inputs
are shifted by values up to the output stride, random
selection of all possible patches is possible even though the
output units lie on a ﬁxed, strided grid.
Sampling in patchwise training can correct class imbalance , , and mitigate the spatial correlation of
dense patches , . In fully convolutional training, class
balance can also be achieved by weighting the loss, and loss
sampling can be used to address spatial correlation.
We explore training with sampling in Section 4.4, and do
not ﬁnd that it yields faster or better convergence for dense
prediction. Whole image training is effective and efﬁcient.
SEGMENTATION ARCHITECTURE
We cast ILSVRC classiﬁers into FCNs and augment them
for dense prediction with in-network upsampling and a
pixelwise loss. We train for segmentation by ﬁne-tuning.
Next, we add skips between layers to fuse coarse, semantic
and local, appearance information. This skip architecture
is learned end-to-end to reﬁne the semantics and spatial
precision of the output.
For this investigation, we train and validate on the PAS-
CAL VOC 2011 segmentation challenge . We train with a
per-pixel softmax loss and validate with the standard metric
of mean pixel intersection over union, with the mean taken
over all classes, including background. The training ignores
pixels that are masked out (as ambiguous or difﬁcult) in the
ground truth.
We adapt and extend three classiﬁcation convnets. We compare
performance by mean intersection over union on the validation set of
PASCAL VOC 2011 and by inference time (averaged over 20 trials for a
500 × 500 input on an NVIDIA Titan X). We detail the architecture of
the adapted nets with regard to dense prediction: number of parameter
layers, receptive ﬁeld size of output units, and the coarsest stride within
the net. (These numbers give the best performance obtained at a ﬁxed
learning rate, not best performance possible.)
FCN-AlexNet FCN-VGG16 FCN-GoogLeNet3
forward time 16 ms
conv. layers
parameters
max stride
From classiﬁer to dense FCN
We begin by convolutionalizing proven classiﬁcation architectures as in Section 3. We consider the AlexNet2 architecture that won ILSVRC12, as well as the VGG nets
 and the GoogLeNet3 which did exceptionally well
in ILSVRC14. We pick the VGG 16-layer net4, which we
found to be equivalent to the 19-layer net on this task. For
GoogLeNet, we use only the ﬁnal loss layer, and improve
performance by discarding the ﬁnal average pooling layer.
We decapitate each net by discarding the ﬁnal classiﬁer
layer, and convert all fully connected layers to convolutions.
We append a 1 × 1 convolution with channel dimension 21
to predict scores for each of the PASCAL classes (including
background) at each of the coarse output locations, followed
by a (backward) convolution layer to bilinearly upsample
the coarse outputs to pixelwise outputs as described in
Section 3.3. Table 1 compares the preliminary validation
results along with the basic characteristics of each net. We
report the best results achieved after convergence at a ﬁxed
learning rate (at least 175 epochs).
Our training for this comparison follows the practices for
classiﬁcation networks. We train by SGD with momentum.
Gradients are accumulated over 20 images. We set ﬁxed
learning rates of 10−3, 10−4, and 5−5 for FCN-AlexNet,
FCN-VGG16, and FCN-GoogLeNet, respectively, chosen by
line search. We use momentum 0.9, weight decay of 5−4 or
2−4, and doubled learning rate for biases. We zero-initialize
the class scoring layer, as random initialization yielded neither better performance nor faster convergence. Dropout is
included where used in the original classiﬁer nets (however,
training without it made little to no difference).
Fine-tuning from classiﬁcation to segmentation gives
reasonable predictions from each net. Even the worst model
achieved ∼75% of the previous best performance. FCN-
VGG16 already appears to be better than previous methods
at 56.0 mean IU on val, compared to 52.6 on test .
Although VGG and GoogLeNet are similarly accurate as
classiﬁers, our FCN-GoogLeNet did not match FCN-VGG16.
We select FCN-VGG16 as our base network.
2. Using the publicly available CaffeNet reference model.
3. We use our own reimplementation of GoogLeNet. Ours is trained
with less extensive data augmentation, and gets 68.5% top-1 and 88.4%
top-5 ILSVRC accuracy.
4. Using the publicly available version from the Caffe model zoo.
Comparison of image-to-image optimization by gradient accumulation,
online learning, and “heavy” learning with high momentum. All methods
are trained on a ﬁxed sequence of 100,000 images (sampled from a
dataset of 8,498) to control for stochasticity and equalize the number of
gradient computations. The loss is not normalized so that every pixel
has the same weight no matter the batch and image dimensions.
Scores are the best achieved during training on a subset5 of PASCAL
VOC 2011 segval. Learning is end-to-end with FCN-VGG16.
FCN-online
Image-to-image learning
The image-to-image learning setting includes high effective
batch size and correlated inputs. This optimization requires
some attention to properly tune FCNs.
We begin with the loss. We do not normalize the loss, so
that every pixel has the same weight regardless of the batch
and image dimensions. Thus we use a small learning rate
since the loss is summed spatially over all pixels.
We consider two regimes for batch size. In the ﬁrst,
gradients are accumulated over 20 images. Accumulation
reduces the memory required and respects the different
dimensions of each input by reshaping the network. We
picked this batch size empirically to result in reasonable
convergence. Learning in this way is similar to standard
classiﬁcation training: each minibatch contains several images and has a varied distribution of class labels. The nets
compared in Table 1 are optimized in this fashion.
However, batching is not the only way to do image-wise
learning. In the second regime, batch size one is used for
online learning. Properly tuned, online learning achieves
higher accuracy and faster convergence in both number of
iterations and wall clock time. Additionally, we try a higher
momentum of 0.99, which increases the weight on recent
gradients in a similar way to batching. See Table 2 for the
comparison of accumulation, online, and high momentum
or “heavy” learning (discussed further in Section 6.2).
Combining what and where
We deﬁne a new fully convolutional net for segmentation
that combines layers of the feature hierarchy and reﬁnes the
spatial precision of the output. See Figure 3.
While fully convolutionalized classiﬁers ﬁne-tuned to semantic segmentation both recognize and localize, as shown
in Section 4.1, these networks can be improved to make
direct use of shallower, more local features. Even though
these base networks score highly on the standard metrics,
their output is dissatisfyingly coarse (see Figure 4). The
stride of the network prediction limits the scale of detail
in the upsampled output.
We address this by adding skips that fuse layer
outputs, in particular to include shallower layers with ﬁner
strides in prediction. This turns a line topology into a DAG:
edges skip ahead from shallower to deeper layers. It is natural to make more local predictions from shallower layers
since their receptive ﬁelds are smaller and see fewer pixels.
32x upsampled
prediction (FCN-32s)
16x upsampled
prediction (FCN-16s)
8x upsampled
prediction (FCN-8s)
Fig. 3. Our DAG nets learn to combine coarse, high layer information with ﬁne, low layer information. Pooling and prediction layers are shown
as grids that reveal relative spatial coarseness, while intermediate layers are shown as vertical lines. First row (FCN-32s): Our single-stream net,
described in Section 4.1, upsamples stride 32 predictions back to pixels in a single step. Second row (FCN-16s): Combining predictions from both
the ﬁnal layer and the pool4 layer, at stride 16, lets our net predict ﬁner details, while retaining high-level semantic information. Third row (FCN-8s):
Additional predictions from pool3, at stride 8, provide further precision.
Once augmented with skips, the network makes and fuses
predictions from several streams that are learned jointly and
end-to-end.
Combining ﬁne layers and coarse layers lets the model
make local predictions that respect global structure. This
crossing of layers and resolutions is a learned, nonlinear
counterpart to the multi-scale representation of the Laplacian pyramid . By analogy to the jet of Koenderick and
van Doorn , we call our feature hierarchy the deep jet.
Layer fusion is essentially an elementwise operation.
However, the correspondence of elements across layers is
complicated by resampling and padding. Thus, in general,
layers to be fused must be aligned by scaling and cropping.
We bring two layers into scale agreement by upsampling the
lower-resolution layer, doing so in-network as explained in
Section 3.3. Cropping removes any portion of the upsampled layer which extends beyond the other layer due to
padding. This results in layers of equal dimensions in exact
alignment. The offset of the cropped region depends on
the resampling and padding parameters of all intermediate
layers. Determining the crop that results in exact correspondence can be intricate, but it follows automatically from the
network deﬁnition (and we include code for it in Caffe).
Having spatially aligned the layers, we next pick a fusion
operation. We fuse features by concatenation, and immediately follow with classiﬁcation by a “score layer” consisting
of a 1 × 1 convolution. Rather than storing concatenated
features in memory, we commute the concatenation and
subsequent classiﬁcation (as both are linear). Thus, our skips
are implemented by ﬁrst scoring each layer to be fused by
1 × 1 convolution, carrying out any necessary interpolation
and alignment, and then summing the scores. We also considered max fusion, but found learning to be difﬁcult due
to gradient switching. The score layer parameters are zeroinitialized when a skip is added, so that they do not interfere
with existing predictions of other streams. Once all layers
have been fused, the ﬁnal prediction is then upsampled back
to image resolution.
Skip Architectures for Segmentation We deﬁne a skip
architecture to extend FCN-VGG16 to a three-stream net
with eight pixel stride shown in Figure 3. Adding a skip
from pool4 halves the stride by scoring from this stride
sixteen layer. The 2× interpolation layer of the skip is
initialized to bilinear interpolation, but is not ﬁxed so that it
can be learned as described in Section 3.3. We call this twostream net FCN-16s, and likewise deﬁne FCN-8s by adding
a further skip from pool3 to make stride eight predictions.
(Note that predicting at stride eight does not signiﬁcantly
limit the maximum achievable mean IU; see Section 6.3.)
We experiment with both staged training and all-at-once
training. In the staged version, we learn the single-stream
FCN-32s, then upgrade to the two-stream FCN-16s and
continue learning, and ﬁnally upgrade to the three-stream
FCN-8s and ﬁnish learning. At each stage the net is learned
end-to-end, initialized with the parameters of the earlier net.
The learning rate is dropped 100× from FCN-32s to FCN-
16s and 100× more from FCN-16s to FCN-8s, which we
found to be necessary for continued improvements.
Learning all-at-once rather than in stages gives nearly
equivalent results, while training is faster and less tedious.
However, disparate feature scales make na¨ıve training prone
to divergence. To remedy this we scale each stream by a
ﬁxed constant, for a similar in-network effect to the staged
learning rate adjustments. These constants are picked to approximately equalize average feature norms across streams.
(Other normalization schemes should have similar effect.)
With FCN-16s validation score improves to 65.0 mean
IU, and FCN-8s brings a minor improvement to 65.5. At
this point our fusion improvements have met diminishing
returns, so we do not continue fusing even shallower layers.
Ground truth
Fig. 4. Reﬁning fully convolutional networks by fusing information from
layers with different strides improves spatial detail. The ﬁrst three images
show the output from our 32, 16, and 8 pixel stride nets (see Figure 3).
To identify the contribution of the skips we compare
scoring from the intermediate layers in isolation, which
results in poor performance, or dropping the learning rate
without adding skips, which gives negligible improvement
in score without reﬁning the visual quality of output. All
skip comparisons are reported in Table 3. Figure 4 shows
the progressively ﬁner structure of the output.
Comparison of FCNs on a subset5 of PASCAL VOC 2011 segval.
Learning is end-to-end with batch size one and high momentum, with
the exception of the ﬁxed variant that ﬁxes all features. Note that
FCN-32s is FCN-VGG16, renamed to highlight stride, and the
FCN-poolX are truncated nets with the same strides as FCN-32/16/8s.
FCN-8s at-once
FCN-8s staged
FCN-32s ﬁxed
Experimental framework
Fine-tuning
We ﬁne-tune all layers by backpropagation
through the whole net. Fine-tuning the output classiﬁer
alone yields only 73% of the full ﬁne-tuning performance
as compared in Table 3. Fine-tuning in stages takes 36 hours
on a single GPU. Learning FCN-8s all-at-once takes half the
time to reach comparable accuracy. Training from scratch
gives substantially lower accuracy.
More training data The PASCAL VOC 2011 segmentation training set labels 1,112 images. Hariharan et al. 
collected labels for a larger set of 8,498 PASCAL training
images, which was used to train the previous best system,
SDS . This training data improves the FCN-32s validation score5 from 57.7 to 63.6 mean IU and improves the FCN-
AlexNet score from 39.8 to 48.0 mean IU.
Loss The per-pixel, unnormalized softmax loss is a natural choice for segmenting images of any size into disjoint
classes, so we train our nets with it. The softmax operation
5. There are training images from included in the PASCAL VOC
2011 val set, so we validate on the non-intersecting set of 736 images.
iteration number
full images
50% sampling
25% sampling
relative time (num. images processed)
Training on whole images is just as effective as sampling
patches, but results in faster (wall clock time) convergence by making
more efﬁcient use of data. Left shows the effect of sampling on convergence rate for a ﬁxed expected batch size, while right plots the same by
relative wall clock time.
induces competition between classes and promotes the most
conﬁdent prediction, but it is not clear that this is necessary
or helpful. For comparison, we train with the sigmoid crossentropy loss and ﬁnd that it gives similar results, even
though it normalizes each class prediction independently.
Patch sampling As explained in Section 3.4, our whole
image training effectively batches each image into a regular
grid of large, overlapping patches. By contrast, prior work
randomly samples patches over a full dataset , , ,
 , , potentially resulting in higher variance batches
that may accelerate convergence . We study this tradeoff
by spatially sampling the loss in the manner described
earlier, making an independent choice to ignore each ﬁnal
layer cell with some probability 1−p. To avoid changing the
effective batch size, we simultaneously increase the number
of images per batch by a factor 1/p. Note that due to the
efﬁciency of convolution, this form of rejection sampling is
still faster than patchwise training for large enough values
of p (e.g., at least for p > 0.2 according to the numbers
in Section 3.1). Figure 5 shows the effect of this form of
sampling on convergence. We ﬁnd that sampling does not
have a signiﬁcant effect on convergence rate compared to
whole image training, but takes signiﬁcantly more time due
to the larger number of images that need to be considered
per batch. We therefore choose unsampled, whole image
training in our other experiments.
Class balancing Fully convolutional training can balance classes by weighting or sampling the loss. Although
our labels are mildly unbalanced (about 3/4 are background), we ﬁnd class balancing unnecessary.
Dense Prediction The scores are upsampled to the input
dimensions by backward convolution layers within the net.
Final layer backward convolution weights are ﬁxed to bilinear interpolation, while intermediate upsampling layers are
initialized to bilinear interpolation, and then learned. This
simple, end-to-end method is accurate and fast.
Augmentation We tried augmenting the training data
by randomly mirroring and “jittering” the images by translating them up to 32 pixels (the coarsest scale of prediction)
in each direction. This yielded no noticeable improvement.
Implementation All models are trained and tested with
Caffe on a single NVIDIA Titan X. Our models and code
are publicly available at 
We test our FCN on semantic segmentation and scene
parsing, exploring PASCAL VOC, NYUDv2, SIFT Flow, and
PASCAL-Context. Although these tasks have historically
distinguished between objects and regions, we treat both
uniformly as pixel prediction. We evaluate our FCN skip
architecture on each of these datasets, and then extend it
to multi-modal input for NYUDv2 and multi-task prediction for the semantic and geometric labels of SIFT Flow.
All experiments follow the same network architecture and
optimization settings decided on in Section 4.
Metrics We report metrics from common semantic segmentation and scene parsing evaluations that are variations
on pixel accuracy and region intersection over union (IU):
• pixel accuracy: P
• mean accuraccy: (1/ncl) P
• mean IU: (1/ncl) P
j nji −nii
• frequency weighted IU: or 286× (overall).
NYUDv2 is an RGB-D dataset collected using the
Microsoft Kinect. It has 1,449 RGB-D images, with pixelwise
labels that have been coalesced into a 40 class semantic segmentation task by Gupta et al. . We report results on the
standard split of 795 training images and 654 testing images.
Table 5 gives the performance of several net variations. First
we train our unmodiﬁed coarse model (FCN-32s) on RGB
images. To add depth information, we train on a model
upgraded to take four-channel RGB-D input (early fusion).
This provides little beneﬁt, perhaps due to similar number
of parameters or the difﬁculty of propagating meaningful
gradients all the way through the net. Following the success
of Gupta et al. , we try the three-dimensional HHA
encoding of depth and train a net on just this information.
To effectively combine color and depth, we deﬁne a “late
fusion” of RGB and HHA that averages the ﬁnal layer scores
from both nets and learn the resulting two-stream net endto-end. This late fusion RGB-HHA net is the most accurate.
SIFT Flow is a dataset of 2,688 images with pixel labels
for 33 semantic classes (“bridge”, “mountain”, “sun”), as
well as three geometric classes (“horizontal”, “vertical”, and
“sky”). An FCN can naturally learn a joint representation
that simultaneously predicts both types of labels. We learn
a two-headed version of FCN-32/16/8s with semantic and
geometric prediction layers and losses. This net performs as
well on both tasks as two independently trained nets, while
learning and inference are essentially as fast as each independent net by itself. The results in Table 6, computed on
the standard split into 2,488 training and 200 test images,6
show better performance on both tasks.
6. Three of the SIFT Flow classes are not present in the test set. We
made predictions across all 33 classes, but only included classes actually
present in the test set in our evaluation.
Our FCN gives a 30% relative improvement on the previous best
PASCAL VOC 11/12 test results with faster inference and learning.
VOC2011 test
VOC2012 test
Results on NYUDv2. RGB-D is early-fusion of the RGB and depth
channels at the input. HHA is the depth embedding of as horizontal
disparity, height above ground, and the angle of the local surface
normal with the inferred gravity direction. RGB-HHA is the jointly
trained late fusion model that sums RGB and HHA predictions.
Gupta et al. 
FCN-32s RGB
FCN-32s RGB-D
FCN-32s HHA
FCN-32s RGB-HHA
Results on SIFT Flow6 with semantics (center) and geometry (right).
Farabet is a multi-scale convnet trained on class-balanced or natural
frequency samples. Pinheiro is the multi-scale, recurrent convnet
RCNN3 (◦3). The metric for geometry is pixel accuracy.
Liu et al. 
Tighe et al. transfer
Tighe et al. SVM
Tighe et al. SVM+MRF
Farabet et al. natural
Farabet et al. balanced
Pinheiro et al. 
Results on PASCAL-Context for the 59 class task. CFM is convolutional
feature masking and segment pursuit with the VGG net. O2P is the
second order pooling method as reported in the errata of .
PASCAL-Context provides whole scene annotations
of PASCAL VOC 2010. While there are 400+ classes, we
follow the 59 class task deﬁned by that picks the most
frequent classes. We train and evaluate on the training and
val sets respectively. In Table 7 we compare to the previous
best result on this task. FCN-8s scores 39.1 mean IU for a
relative improvement of more than 10%.
Ground Truth
Fig. 6. Fully convolutional networks improve performance on PASCAL.
The left column shows the output of our most accurate net, FCN-8s. The
second shows the output of the previous best method by Hariharan et al.
 . Notice the ﬁne structures recovered (ﬁrst row), ability to separate
closely interacting objects (second row), and robustness to occluders
(third row). The ﬁfth and sixth rows show failure cases: the net sees
lifejackets in a boat as people and confuses human hair with a dog.
We examine the learning and inference of fully convolutional networks. Masking experiments investigate the role of
context and shape by reducing the input to only foreground,
only background, or shape alone. Deﬁning a “null” background model checks the necessity of learning a background
classiﬁer for semantic segmentation. We detail an approximation between momentum and batch size to further tune
whole image learning. Finally, we measure bounds on task
accuracy for given output resolutions to show there is still
much to improve.
Given the large receptive ﬁeld size of an FCN, it is natural
to wonder about the relative importance of foreground and
background pixels in the prediction. Is foreground appearance sufﬁcient for inference, or does the context inﬂuence
the output? Conversely, can a network learn to recognize a
class by its shape and context alone?
Masking To explore these issues we experiment with
masked versions of the standard PASCAL VOC segmentation challenge. We both mask input to networks trained on
normal PASCAL, and learn new networks on the masked
PASCAL. See Table 8 for masked results.
The role of foreground, background, and shape cues. All scores are the
mean intersection over union metric excluding background. The
architecture and optimization are ﬁxed to those of FCN-32s (Reference)
and only input masking differs.
Reference-FG
Reference-BG
Masking the foreground at inference time is catastrophic.
However, masking the foreground during learning yields
a network capable of recognizing object segments without
observing a single pixel of the labeled class. Masking the
background has little effect overall but does lead to class
confusion in certain cases. When the background is masked
during both learning and inference, the network unsurprisingly achieves nearly perfect background accuracy; however
certain classes are more confused. All-in-all this suggests
that FCNs do incorporate context even though decisions are
driven by foreground pixels.
To separate the contribution of shape, we learn a net
restricted to the simple input of foreground/background
masks. The accuracy in this shape-only condition is lower
than when only the foreground is masked, suggesting that
the net is capable of learning context to boost recognition.
Nonetheless, it is surprisingly accurate. See Figure 7.
Background modeling It is standard in detection and
semantic segmentation to have a background model. This
model usually takes the same form as the models for the
classes of interest, but is supervised by negative instances.
In our experiments we have followed the same approach,
learning parameters to score all classes including background. Is this actually necessary, or do class models sufﬁce?
To investigate, we deﬁne a net with a “null” background
model that gives a constant score of zero. Instead of training with the softmax loss, which induces competition by
normalizing across classes, we train with the sigmoid crossentropy loss, which independently normalizes each score.
For inference each pixel is assigned the highest scoring class.
In all other respects the experiment is identical to our FCN-
32s on PASCAL VOC. The null background net scores 1
point lower than the reference FCN-32s and a control FCN-
32s trained on all classes including background with the
sigmoid cross-entropy loss. To put this drop in perspective,
note that discarding the background model in this way
reduces the total number of parameters by less than 0.1%.
Nonetheless, this result suggests that learning a dedicated
background model for semantic segmentation is not vital.
Momentum and batch size
In comparing optimization schemes for FCNs, we ﬁnd that
“heavy” online learning with high momentum trains more
accurate models in less wall clock time (see Section 4.2).
Here we detail a relationship between momentum and batch
size that motivates heavy learning.
Ground Truth
Fig. 7. FCNs learn to recognize by shape when deprived of other input
detail. From left to right: regular image (not seen by network), ground
truth, output, mask input.
By writing the updates computed by gradient accumulation as a non-recursive sum, we will see that momentum
and batch size can be approximately traded off, which
suggests alternative training parameters. Let gt be the step
taken by minibatch SGD with momentum at time t,
∇θℓ(xkt+i; θt−1) + pgt−1,
where ℓ(x; θ) is the loss for example x and parameters θ,
p < 1 is the momentum, k is the batch size, and η is the
learning rate. Expanding this recurrence as an inﬁnite sum
with geometric coefﬁcients, we have
ps∇θℓ(xk(t−s)+i; θt−s).
In other words, each example is included in the sum with
coefﬁcient p⌊j/k⌋, where the index j orders the examples
from most recently considered to least recently considered.
Approximating this expression by dropping the ﬂoor, we see
that learning with momentum p and batch size k appears
to be similar to learning with momentum p′ and batch
size k′ if p(1/k) = p′(1/k′). Note that this is not an exact
equivalence: a smaller batch size results in more frequent
weight updates, and may make more learning progress for
the same number of gradient computations. For typical FCN
values of momentum 0.9 and a batch size of 20 images, an
approximately equivalent training regime uses momentum
0.9(1/20) ≈0.99 and a batch size of one, resulting in online
learning. In practice, we ﬁnd that online learning works well
and yields better FCN models in less wall clock time.
Upper bounds on IU
FCNs achieve good performance on the mean IU segmentation metric even with spatially coarse semantic prediction. To better understand this metric and the limits of
this approach with respect to it, we compute approximate
upper bounds on performance with prediction at various
resolutions. We do this by downsampling ground truth
images and then upsampling back to simulate the best
results obtainable with a particular downsampling factor.
The following table gives the mean IU on a subset5 of
PASCAL 2011 val for various downsampling factors.
Pixel-perfect prediction is clearly not necessary to
achieve mean IU well above state-of-the-art, and, conversely, mean IU is a not a good measure of ﬁne-scale accuracy. The gaps between oracle and state-of-the-art accuracy
at every stride suggest that recognition and not resolution is
the bottleneck for this metric.
CONCLUSION
Fully convolutional networks are a rich class of models that
address many pixelwise tasks. FCNs for semantic segmentation dramatically improve accuracy by transferring pretrained classiﬁer weights, fusing different layer representations, and learning end-to-end on whole images. End-toend, pixel-to-pixel operation simultaneously simpliﬁes and
speeds up learning and inference. All code for this paper is
open source in Caffe, and all models are freely available in
the Caffe Model Zoo. Further works have demonstrated the
generality of fully convolutional networks for a variety of
image-to-image tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by DARPA’s MSEE and
SMISC programs, NSF awards IIS-1427425, IIS-1212798, IIS-
1116411, and the NSF GRFP, Toyota, and the Berkeley
Vision and Learning Center. We gratefully acknowledge
NVIDIA for GPU donation. We thank Bharath Hariharan
and Saurabh Gupta for their advice and dataset tools. We
thank Sergio Guadarrama for reproducing GoogLeNet in
Caffe. We thank Jitendra Malik for his helpful comments.
Thanks to Wei Liu for pointing out an issue wth our SIFT
Flow mean IU computation and an error in our frequency
weighted mean IU formula.