Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the
company's public news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre
remains active.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Business Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jbusres
Eﬀects of COVID-19 on business and research
A B S T R A C T
The COVID-19 outbreak is a sharp reminder that pandemics, like other rarely occurring catastrophes, have happened in the past and will continue to happen in the
future. Even if we cannot prevent dangerous viruses from emerging, we should prepare to dampen their eﬀects on society. The current outbreak has had severe
economic consequences across the globe, and it does not look like any country will be unaﬀected. This not only has consequences for the economy; all of society is
aﬀected, which has led to dramatic changes in how businesses act and consumers behave. This special issue is a global eﬀort to address some of the pandemic-related
issues aﬀecting society. In total, there are 13 papers that cover diﬀerent industry sectors (e.g., tourism, retail, higher education), changes in consumer behavior and
businesses, ethical issues, and aspects related to employees and leadership.
1. Introduction
There has been a long history of fear of pandemic outbreaks. The
discussion has not focused on whether there will be an outbreak, but
when new outbreaks will happen . The events
leading to inﬂuenza pandemics are recurring biological phenomena and
cannot realistically be prevented. Pandemics seem to occur at 10–50year intervals as a result of the emergence of new virus subtypes from
virus re-assortment . As the global population increases
and we need to live closer to animals, it is likely that the transfer of new
viruses to the human population will occur even more frequently. All
our society can do is take preventive measures so that we are able to act
quickly once we suspect an outbreak. We should also make an eﬀort to
learn from the consequences of pandemic outbreaks to prepare our
societies for if—and, more likely, when—this happens again.
As we are in the middle of a pandemic outbreak, it is very diﬃcult to
estimate its long-term eﬀects. Although society has been hit by several
pandemics in the past, it is diﬃcult to estimate the long-term economic,
behavioral, or societal consequences as these aspects have not been
studied to a great extent in the past. The limited studies that do exist
indicate that the major historical pandemics of the last millennium have
typically been associated with subsequent low returns on assets . For a period after a pandemic, we tend to become less interested in investing and more interested in saving our
capital, resulting in reduced economic growth. Given the current situation, in which saving capital means negative returns, it is not at all
certain that we will be as conservative as we have been in the past.
Behavioral changes related to pandemic outbreaks seem to be connected with personal protection , such as the use of face masks, rather than general behavior
changes. Our lives, as humans in a modern society, seem to be more
centered around convenience than around worrying about what might
happen in the future.
On a societal level, we seem to be completely unprepared for largescale of outbreaks. Our societies are more open than ever; we rely on
the importing of important products, such as food, energy, and medical
equipment, rather than sourcing them from close to where they are
needed; and there are limited eﬀorts to prepare for pandemic outbreaks. The guiding principle of our society seems to be eﬃciency and
economic gain rather than safety. This may change after the current
outbreak. It is also important to point out that the principles (eg.
openness and global trade) on which society is based have lifted a large
number of countries around the globe out of poverty and produced
well-developed economies. It is not unlikely that our societies will backoﬀsome of them leading to more poverty in the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic outbreak has forced many businesses to
close, leading to an unprecedented disruption of commerce in most
industry sectors. Retailers and brands face many short-term challenges,
such as those related to health and safety, the supply chain, the
workforce,
marketing.
However, successfully navigating these challenges will not guarantee a
promising future, or any future at all. This is because once we get
through this pandemic, we will emerge in a very diﬀerent world compared to the one before the outbreak. Many markets, especially in the
ﬁelds of tourism and hospitality, no longer exist. All organizational
functions are intended to prioritize and optimize spending or postpone
tasks that will not bring value in the current environment. Companies,
especially start-ups, have implemented an indeﬁnite hiring freeze. At
the same time, online communication, online entertainment, and online
shopping are seeing unprecedented growth.
2. Interesting research themes
As research indicates that pandemics are reoccurring events, it is
very likely that we will see another outbreak in our lifetime. It is apparent to anyone that the current pandemic has had enormous—but
hopefully short-term—eﬀects on all our lives. Countries have closed
their borders, limited the movement of their citizens, and even conﬁned
citizens in quarantine within their homes for weeks. This is a rather
unique occurrence, as we are used to freedom of movement, but in the
midst of the pandemic outbreak, people have been ﬁned just for being
outside. Although our societies seem to be very accepting of these
limitations and condemn people that do not follow the rules, but we
need to ask ourselves how this will aﬀect the views of our society 284–289
Available online 09 June 2020
0148-2963/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
views regarding freedom, healthcare, government intervention). We
should also be aware that infrastructure and routines to monitor citizens in order to limit the spread of the virus have been rolled out, and
so we should ask ourselves how accepting we will be of monitoring in
the future. We must realize that once these systems are in place, it is
highly unlikely that they will be rolled back. Furthermore, in some
countries, the ruling politicians have taken advantage of this situation
and increased their control over the state, suppressing opposing opinions and thus jeopardizing democratic systems. Some of the worst
examples are Turkmenistan, which has banned the use of the word
“corona,” and Hungary, which is letting Viktor Orbán rule by decree
indeﬁnitely.
As previously mentioned, people have been conﬁned to their homes.
There has also been a constant stream of news on this invisible external
threat from which we cannot protect ourselves. We have been occupied
trying to ﬁgure out how best to protect ourselves and our loved ones.
On top of that, many feel pressure due to losing their jobs or due to
working in close proximity to potentially infected people, as society
depends on them fulﬁlling their duty. The consequences of the pandemic outbreak have hit various sectors of society in diﬀerent ways.
People that are working in sectors connected to healthcare must endure
endless tasks and very long working days. Additionally, people are
losing their jobs at rates we have not seen since the Great Depression of
the 1930s. The sectors that have seen the largest increases in unemployment are those that are hedonic in nature and require the
physical presence of the customer (e.g., hospitality, tourism, and entertainment), as demand for these services has ceased to exist. The
employees in these sectors tend to be younger and female. Past experience also indicates that once someone is outside the job market, it is
very diﬃcult to get back in as they will face more competition that may
be more competent.
All countries that can are trying to stimulate their economies to
keep as much as possible of their necessary infrastructure intact and to
keep citizens productive or ready to become productive once the pandemic has been overcome. In order to keep society from deteriorating,
people not only need jobs or a way to support themselves but also need
access to what they view as necessary products and services. If this
infrastructure does not exist, people start to behave in what is considered uncivil behavior (e.g., hording or looting). Countries around the
globe have adopted very diﬀerent approaches to handle the current
stress on the job markets and infrastructure. Some countries have
chosen to support businesses in order to help them keep the workforce
intact, but others with less ﬁnancial strength cannot do the same.
Countries also have directly supported their citizens in various ways.
There is an enormous body of rich information that researchers can
collect to determine the best approaches for when when and if a major
disaster happens in the future.
3. Consumer behavior during COVID-19
Around the globe, societies are in lockdown, and citizens are asked
to respect social distance and stay at home. As we are social beings,
isolation may be harmful for us . Feelings
of loneliness have, among other things, been connected to poorer
cognitive performance, negativity, depression, and sensitivity to social
threats. There are indications that this is happening during the current
pandemic, as there has been an increase in domestic violence, quarrels
among neighbors, and an increase in the sales of ﬁrearms . However, we have also seen an increase in other, more positive
types of behavior caused by social distancing that have not been researched. People have started to nest, develop new skills, and take
better care of where they live. For instance, they may learn how to
bake, try to get ﬁt, do a puzzle, or read more. There has also been an
increase in purchases of cleaning products, and more trash is being
recycled. At the same time, we are eating more junk food and cleaning
ourselves less. People are also stockpiling essentials, panic buying, and
escaping to rural areas. This is an indication that what is happening to
us and our behaviors is complex, and it would be interesting to study
this phenomenon further.
Another consequence of the lockdowns is the extreme increase in
the usage of Internet and social media. Previous research has indicated
that humans who feel lonely tend to use social media more and, in some
cases, even prefer social media over physical interaction . Social media also may bring out the worst in
us through trolling or sharing of fake news. This is, to some degree, not
as damaging as the “real life” is lived in the physical world and the
Internet is an “add on” with, in most cases, limited impact on the
physical world. By this, we are able to compartmentalize and distinguish what matters and what does not matter. However, the current
situation has made social media the main mode of contacting or socializing with others. In many cases, the Internet is at present also the
main way to get essential supplies and receive essential services, like
seeing a doctor. The question, then, is what happens to us when the
“real life” is lived online and becomes a way to escape the physical
As humans, we rely to a large degree on our senses; we are built to
use them in all situations of life. Thus, we rely on them heavily when
making decisions. However, the current isolation is depriving us of our
senses, as we are not exposed to as many stimuli as normal situation.
Thus, we are, in a sense, being deprived of stimulation. We are also
being told by authorities not to use our senses; we should not touch
anything, wear a mask, or get close to other humans. Thus, what happens once our societies open up? How long will this fear of using our
senses linger, and will we be over-cautious for a while or may we try to
compensate as we have to some degree been deprived of using them?
These are just some aspects of consumer behavior; many more are
covered by this special issue.
4. Markets during COVID-19
The COVID-19 outbreak is likely to cause bankruptcy for many wellknown brands in many industries as consumers stay at home and
economies are shut down . In the US, famous companies
such as Sears, JCPenney, Neiman Marcus, Hertz, and J. Crew are under
enormous ﬁnancial pressure. The travel industry is deeply aﬀected;
80% of hotel rooms are empty , airlines cut
their workforce by 90%, and tourism destinations are likely to see no
proﬁts in 2020. Furthermore, expos, conferences, sporting events, and
other large gatherings as well as cultural establishments such as galleries and museums have been abruptly called oﬀ. Consulting in general
and personal services, like hairdressers, gyms, and taxis, have also come
to a standstill due to lockdowns. Finally, important industries like the
car, truck, and electronics industries have abruptly closed (although
they started to open up two months after their closure). There are an
endless number of questions we could ask ourselves in connection to
this rather abrupt close-down. For instance, how do we take care of
employees in such situations? Why are companies not better prepared
to handle such situations (e.g., putting aside earnings or thinking of
alternative sources of income)? How are the companies and even
countries using the current situation to enhance their competitive situation? One of the countries that seem to be using the situation is
China that is buying European based infrastructure and technology
 .
While some businesses are struggling, some businesses are thriving.
This is true for a number of Internet-based businesses, such as those
related to online entertainment, food delivery, online shopping, online
education, and solutions for remote work. People have also changed
their consumption patterns, increasing the demand for takeout, snacks,
and alcohol as well as cleaning products as we spend more time in our
homes. Other industries that are doing well are those related to
healthcare and medication as well as herbs and vitamins. Typically,
when studying markets, it is assumed that they are static, a natural
Journal of Business Research 117 284–289
conclusion since they tend to change slowly. However, if there is one
thing the COVID-19 outbreak has shown us, it is that markets are dynamic and can move rapidly. Furthermore, a market is not just a ﬁrm; it is a network of actors (i.e., ﬁrms,
customers, public organizations) acting in accordance with a set of
norms. These systems are sometimes referred to as dynamic ecosystems
that exist to generate value . The COVID-19
outbreak poses a unique opportunity to study how markets are created
and how they disappear within a very limited time span. It would also
be interesting to explore whether the disappearance of one solution for
a market may be replaced by another (e.g., combustion engines for
electric or physical teaching for online teaching).
5. Predicted lasting eﬀects
Based on past experiences, we have become more conservative and
protective after a pandemic outbreak. We save resources in order to be
prepared if the unthinkable happens again. Countries are starting to
stockpile things like food, equipment, and medicine or prepare to
produce them locally. It is also essential for larger global ﬁrms to have
reliable supply chains that do not break. Consequently, it is very likely
that this pandemic will make these ﬁrms rethink their supply chains
and, probably, move supply chains closer to where they are needed in
order to avoid stopping production in the future. Furthermore, authorities have implied that other humans from other countries are dangerous as they may carry the virus. A closed border implies that the
threat is from the outside. In addition, international ﬂights are not
likely to be an option for many in the coming years. Together, these
circumstances mean that countries may become more nationalistic and
less globalized. This may be a dangerous development, as long-term
protection from the consequences of a pandemic outbreak is likely to
require global eﬀort and sharing of resources. Such cooperation is also
key to tackle other global challenges that we may face in the future.
6. This special issue
In this special issue, we have invited scholars from diﬀerent areas of
business and management to write brief papers on various aspects of
the eﬀects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In total, there are 12 articles in
the special issue, which are summarized below.
The ﬁrst contribution, by Jagdish Sheth, is titled “Impact of COVID-
19 on Consumer Behavior: Will the Old Habits Return or Die?” It explores how the current pandemic has aﬀected several aspects of consumers’ lives, ranging from personal mobility to retail shopping, attendance at major life events like marriage ceremonies, having
children, and relocation. The author investigates four contexts of construed consumer behavior, namely social context, technology, coworking spaces, and natural disasters. Additionally, the author foresees
eight immediate eﬀects of the pandemic on consumer behavior and
consumption. Hoarding—the mad scramble observed at the start of the
COVID-19 outbreak—applies not only to consumers but also to unauthorized middlemen who buy products in excess to sell at increased
Consumers learn to adapt quickly and take an improvised approach
to overcome constraints that have been imposed by governments. Pentup demand may lead to a signiﬁcant rebound in sales of durable products, like automobiles, houses, and large appliances, and some of the
realities of COVID-19 will put consumers in a buying mood soon.
Embracement of digital technology, either through online services
or information-sharing platforms like Zoom, has kept people connected
around the world. Digital savviness will become a necessity, rather than
an alternative, for schools, businesses, and healthcare providers. With
the onset of lockdowns in many countries, online shopping, including
grocery shopping, has become more prevalent.
The desire to do everything in-home has impacted consumers’ impulse buying habits. Slowly but surely, work–life boundaries will be
blurred when both tasks are carried out from home. There should be
eﬀorts to compartmentalize the two tasks to make this a more eﬃcient
way of life.
Reunions with friends and family are now restricted to digital interactions, especially for people who work and live away from their
families. We can expect a dramatic change in consumers’ behavior
because of sophisticated technology. In addition, consumers may discover new talents as they spend less time on the road and more at home.
They may experiment with cooking, learn new skills, and, soon, become
producers with commercial possibilities. In the end, most consumer’s
habits will return to normal, while some habits may die due to adaptation to the new norm.
The second contribution, “Interventions as Experiments: Connecting
the Dots in Forecasting and Overcoming Pandemics, Global Warming,
Corruption, Civil Rights Violations, Misogyny, Income Inequality, and
Guns,” written by Arch G. Woodside, discusses whether there is an
association between public health interventions, national and state/
provincial governments interventions, and improved control of the
COVID-19 outbreak in certain countries. The paper suggests “ultimate
broadening of the concept of marketing” in order to design and implement interventions in public laws and policy, national and local
regulations, and the everyday lives of individuals. It also lays out effective mitigating strategies by examining designs, implementations,
and outcomes of COVID-19 interventions by examining deaths as a
natural experiment.
While COVID-19 eradication intervention tests are being run for
promising vaccines, these are considered true experiments, and analyzing the data from these interventions may involve examination of the
success of each vaccine for diﬀerent demographic subgroups in treatment and placebo groups in randomized control trials. Comparing the
designs and impact of the current COVID-19 mitigation interventions
across nations and states within the U.S. provides useful information for
improving these interventions, even though they are not “true experiments.”
The third contribution, “Employee Adjustment and Well-Being in
the Era of COVID-19: Implications for Human Resource Management” is
written by Joel B. Carnevale and Isabella Hatak. They claim that
COVID-19 is becoming the accelerator for one of the most drastic
workplace transformations in recent years. How we work, socialize,
shop, learn, communicate, and, of course, where we work will be
changed forever. Person–environment (P-E) ﬁt theories highlight that
employee–environment value congruence is important because values
inﬂuence outcomes through motivation. However, given the current
environment, in which the fulﬁllment of needs and desires like greater
satisfaction, higher engagement, and overall well-being is drastically
altered, there is an increased likelihood of misﬁts working in organizations.
In response to this, organizations need to use virtual forms of recruitment, training, and socialization in lieu of face-to-face interactions.
Increasing job autonomy will alleviate the family-related challenges
that may arise within remote work environments by providing employees with the right resources to manage conﬂicting work and family
demands. Human resource leaders within the organization must enhance relationship-oriented human resources systems in order to
combat the risk of unforeseen and prolonged isolation among single,
independent employees and to better prepare them for situations like
the current crisis. The ﬁeld of entrepreneurship can oﬀer insights that
organizations
Entrepreneurs’ struggles are largely caused by the lack of work-related
social support in comparison to salaried employees. Nevertheless, some
entrepreneurs are known to overcome these limitations by leveraging
alternative, domain-speciﬁc sources of social support, such as positive
feedback from customers, which ultimately enhances their well-being.
Recycling such approaches to identify overlooked or untapped sources
of social support is likely to be beneﬁcial for employees given the
current work environment dynamic.
Journal of Business Research 117 284–289
The fourth contribution, written by Hongwei He and Lloyd C.
Harris, is titled “The Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on Corporate Social
Responsibility and Marketing Philosophy.” The worldwide demand for
hand sanitizers, gloves, and other hygiene products has risen because of
the COVID-19 pandemic. And, in some countries, there has been a surge
in complaints about proﬁteering and opportunism. As doctors combat
the virus, prosecutors are pursuing the opportunistic proﬁteers who
prey on the fearful. Many large corporations have a social purpose and
set of values that indicate how much they appreciate their customers,
employees, and stakeholders. This is the time for these corporations to
make good on that commitment. Some organizations strive to set great
examples. For example, Jack Ma, the co-founder of Alibaba, donated
coronavirus test kits and other medical supplies to many countries
around the world through the Jack Ma Foundation and Alibaba
Foundation. Large corporations have often written oﬀthe costs of
product failures, restructuring, or acquisitions. When writing oﬀlosses
due to the coronavirus pandemic, it is understandable to pursue the
bond established between the brand and consumer. This gesture can
turn out to be more meaningful and lasting than when implemented
during “normal” times.
On the bright side, the COVID-19 pandemic oﬀers great opportunities for companies to actively engage with their corporate social responsibility (CSR) strategies and agenda. The post-COVID-19 marketplace is going to be irrecoverably diﬀerent. Organizations will need to
re-evaluate their visions, missions, and objectives to account for
changes to their customers and competitors, amongst other shifts. A key
facet of this is the exponential increase in digital communications and
Professors T. Y. Leung, Piyush Sharma, Pattarin Adithipyangkul,
and Peter Hosie wrote “Gender Diversity and Public Health Outcomes:
The COVID-19 Experience.” Public health is an interdisciplinary subject
that involves the social sciences, public policy, public education, economics, and management. Failure to implement a proper public health
policy may not only lead to a huge loss of human lives but also shatter
the economy; expose the incompetence of public bodies, including
governments and political leaders; and weaken the conﬁdence of the
general public. We are used to hearing that women are more otherdirected and emotionally intelligent, but it has been proven that women
are just as good, if not better, in terms of what we think of as male
qualities, like being decisive and making tough calls, during a crisis.
Prevalent issues like under-representation of women in leadership positions, mismanagement of public health systems, and inaccurate or
inconsistent reporting of public health outcomes in the context of the
recent pandemic need to be addressed by involving women at all stages
of public health management, including planning, decision-making,
and emergency response systems. This is important not only for a quick
economic recovery in the aftermath of the COVID-19 crisis but also to
prevent and manage such disasters in future.
The sixth paper in the special issue, “Managing Uncertainty during a
Global Pandemic: An International Business Perspective,” was written
by Piyush Sharma, T. Y. Leung, Russel P. J. Kingshott, Nebojsa S.
Davcik, and Silvio Cardinali. Pandemics like that caused by COVID-19
are not just passing tragedies of sickness and death. The ubiquity of
such a threat, and the uncertainty and fear that accompany it, lead to
new consumer trends and norms. People become both more suspicious
and less susceptible. The crisis also shines a light on the importance of
international business research, which has been overlooked in the years
leading up to this crisis. Social and informational uncertainty are likely
to have economic repercussions.
As pointed out by the author, successful outcomes of social distancing and other restrictions are highly dependent upon societal acceptance and following through with restrictions. Social uncertainty and
unrest among consumers due to being under lockdown for months
could lead to a huge stiﬂed demand for the products they missed. In this
context, Samsung, a South Korean giant in consumer electronics and
home appliances, may be a great case study during the ongoing COVID-
19 crisis. Samsung established a huge manufacturing network over the
years, with factories in multiple locations. This was done due to foresight of the risk of single sourcing, the need to fulﬁll large production
demand, and the desire to reduce its dependence on China. This
strategy has helped Samsung shift its production from one location to
another during the ongoing COVID-19 crisis, thereby facing just a
slowdown and not a complete shutdown of production. Similarly, to
compensate for the closure of retail stores, Samsung has leveraged its
contracts with mobile phone retailers and Benow (a payment and EMI
technology ﬁrm) to create an e-commerce platform so that its retail
business can continue to sell and deliver products directly to customers.
contribution,
“Competing
Retailers Ups and Downs During the COVID-19 Outbreak,” was written
by Eleonora Pantano, Gabriele Pizzi, Daniele Scarpi, and Charles
Dennis. The authors note that retailers who were not quick to adapt and
factor COVID-19 into their operations are currently facing an existential
crisis. The authors also highlight that retailers can minimize current
and future business impacts by addressing four major emergencies.
First, retailers can identify and execute controllable activities. They
must identify, optimize, and re-access existing technologies and business models. Speciﬁcally, they must understand how their stakeholders
operate and interact to reduce response time and optimize communication channels. Second, all retailers, but especially grocery stores,
are revisiting their business continuity plans to reassure customers that
their needs will be met and manage the inevitable supply chain constraints and highs and lows caused by volatile demand. These retailers
are prioritizing critical business activities and creating contingency
plans for disruption. Third, retailers need to have an understanding of
their ﬁnancial needs as well as the essential role they play in their
communities. For some regular customers, an open and well-stocked
supermarket will reassure them that they are being cared for. Fourth,
messages that retailers spread online during emergencies need to include information about products’ availability on the shelves and at
digital outlets; control panic buying by restricting the quantity that
customers can purchase; devise and implement protection plans for
consumers and employees; contribute to overall public health; and use
surveillance measures to limit the spread of the virus. To these ends,
retailers need to improve their customer relationship management
systems and promote safe interactions with customers (e.g., through
online chats with employees) to provide real-time customer assistance.
In Fabian Eggers’ contribution, “Masters of Disasters? Challenges
and Opportunities for SMEs in Times of Crisis,” he identiﬁes small- to
medium-sized businesses with low or unstable cashﬂow as particularly
vulnerable during crises, as they are currently struggling for proﬁtability. Studies reveal the interconnectedness between ﬁnance and
strategy, particularly entrepreneurial orientation and market orientation in strategies. The paper highlights that a combination of entrepreneurial orientation and market orientation can lead to lean and
ﬂexible marketing eﬀorts, which are particularly valuable in times of
crisis. In addition, entrepreneurial orientation and market orientation
can be combined into an entrepreneurial marketing post-disaster business recovery framework that highlights that seeking opportunities,
organizing resources, creating customer value, and accepting risk are
markedly diﬀerent in a post-disaster context.
Sandeep Krishnamurthy contributed with “The Future of Business
Education: A Commentary in the Shadow of the Covid-19 Pandemic.”
The paper highlights that social distancing is prompting educational
institutions to rethink how they are connecting with their student
bodies. Spatial interaction is becoming the new norm, and the blurring
of physical and virtual communication is likely to continue until the
pandemic is overcome. Globally, the higher education system will undergo a decade of radical technology-led transformation, according to
the author. The author identiﬁed ﬁve trends that will revolutionize how
we educate after COVID-19:
1. The Algorithm as Professor – Rather than taking a traditional route
Journal of Business Research 117 284–289
and learning from a human professor in classrooms, students will
learn remotely from an algorithm. The AI-enabled algorithm will
provide customized personal learning experiences. Students will be
able to quickly master rudimentary and routinized tasks. Then, the
algorithm will prepare them for an in-person experience, where a
“warm body” will engage them in Socratic dialogue.
2. The University as a Service – Traditionally, we have followed a linear
formulation of society. Students go through K-12 education, some
get an undergraduate degree, and some go on to further studies.
However, the current and future environment is too volatile to
sustain this educational structure. Students will need to learn what
they need when they need it. Personalized, continuing education
will become the norm.
3. The University as Assessment Powerhouse – In a world characterized
by AI and automation, learning can come from many sources.
Students will learn from each other, algorithmic systems, and public
information. However, universities will continue to have a powerful
place as assessors of learning. Students will come to universities to
credentials
assessments
4. Learning Personalization to Support Diversity – Students of the future
will have access to multiple pathways to learn the same content. For
example, a course may be available through algorithmic engagement, animation/video/augmented reality, face-to-face instruction,
or any mixture thereof. Using assessment data, the university of the
future will be able to pinpoint the learning needs of each student
and provide a personalized experience.
5. Problem Solving Through Ethical Inquiry - As the inﬂuence of artiﬁcial
intelligence and automation grow exponentially in our lives, there
will be a great need for students to become problem solvers through
ethical inquiry. Clearly, the future will not simply be about what the
answers are; it will be about which problems we wish to solve, given
what we know. Students will need to become more comfortable with
the need to evaluate AI algorithms based on their eﬃcacy and their
ethical foundation.
Contribution
Adapting Behaviors in the COVID-19 Pandemic,” is written by Colleen
P. Kirk and Laura S. Rifkin. In it, the authors explore numerous consumer insights during a major pandemic outbreak. Mainly, they examine consumer behaviors across three phases: reacting (e.g., hoarding
and rejecting), coping (e.g., maintaining social connectedness, do-ityourself behaviors, and changing views of brands), and longer-term
adapting (e.g., potentially transformative changes in consumption and
individual and social identity). The authors also identify a number of
negative aspects of the pandemic that will likely impact consumer behavior. As they state, given the mandatory close quarters people must
keep due to stay-at-home requirements, domestic abuse may be on the
rise. In addition, throughout history, pandemics provide an excuse for
increased racial and anti-immigrant biases.
Exploratory Study of Marketing Innovation Strategies,” written by
Yonggui Wang, Aoran Hong, Xia Li, and Jia Gao, the authors explore
how ﬁrms in China worked to make their marketing strategies a success. They do so by identifying the typology of ﬁrms’ marketing innovations based on two dimensions: the motivation for innovations and
the level of collaboration in innovations.
The authors outline four innovative strategies to combat crises for
businesses. The responsive strategy works predominantly for ﬁrms that
involve physical contact, but it can easily be transferred from oﬄine
marketing channels to online channels. A collective strategy can be
implemented by ﬁrms that are highly aﬀected by the crisis, which need
to develop new business by collaborating with other ﬁrms during the
crisis. A proactive strategy is for ﬁrms that are less aﬀected by the
COVID-19 crisis (mostly online businesses) to develop new businesses
to meet the special demands of existing customers during the COVID-19
crisis. Firms that are less aﬀected during the COVID-19 crisis can take
an alternative approach: a partnership strategy. Firms should usually
develop new oﬀerings through collaboration with other ﬁrms.
Professors Amalesh Sharma, Anirban Adhikary, and Sourav Bikash
Borah contributed with “Covid-19 Impact on Supply Chain Decisions:
Strategic Insights for NASDAQ 100 Firms using Twitter Data.” During
black swan events like the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have severe
long-term consequences, a deep understanding of business risks can
help organizations establish the right plan. In this article, the authors
identiﬁed supply chain challenges faced by companies using their
Twitter data. To develop insights from the ﬁndings, the authors constructed unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams that revealed the supplychain-related aspects that gain attention on Twitter.
A topic analysis was performed to identify keywords used in discussions about COVID-19. The obtained insights show that the greatest
challenge for the organizations was accessing realistic customer demands. A pandemic may increase or decrease demand for speciﬁc
products, making estimation of realistic ﬁnal customer demand more
diﬃcult and more urgent to address. Some user accounts suggested that
organizations are still lacking in terms of technological readiness and
that companies are looking to gain visibility across value chains. There
are growing discussions about building supply chain resilience by
identifying risks. Many organizations are not only focusing on social
sustainability but also turning their attention toward environmental
sustainability.
To deal with the challenges brought on by unprecedented times, the leaders of organizations must reimagine and
redesign the supply chain; rely on technology such as artiﬁcial intelligence, the Internet of Things, and blockchain in their supply chain
designs; and focus on sustainable supply chain.
Finally, Marianna Sigala wrote “Tourism and COVID-19: Impacts
and Implications for Advancing and Resetting Industry and Research.”
Tourism is experiencing a rapid and steep drop in demand during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the tourism industry’s proven resilience in
other unprecedented times, the impact of the current pandemic will
likely last longer for international tourism than for other aﬀected industries. However, the tourism industry should not only recover but
also reimagine and reform the next normal economic order. Currently,
there is a lack of research on how crises can alter the industry, how the
industry adapts to changes with innovative techniques, and how research that can establish the next norms can be conducted. To study the
needs and gaps in research work, the author reviews past and emerging
literature to capture its impacts and impart some ideas from diﬀerent
research ﬁelds that will allow tourism to grow and evolve.