Boosting Image Retrieval
Kinh Tieu and Paul Viola
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
 
We present an approach for image retrieval using a very
large number of highly selective features and efﬁcient online learning. Our approach is predicated on the assumption that each image is generated by a sparse set of visual “causes” and that images which are visually similar
share causes. We propose a mechanism for computing a
very large number of highly selective features which capture some aspects of this causal structure (in our implementation there are over 45,000 highly selective features). At
query time a user selects a few example images, and a technique known as “boosting” is used to learn a classiﬁcation
function in this feature space. By construction, the boosting procedure learns a simple classiﬁer which only relies
on 20 of the features. As a result a very large database of
images can be scanned rapidly, perhaps a million images
per second. Finally we will describe a set of experiments
performed using our retrieval system on a database of 3000
1. Introduction
In the image retrieval task a user must search a database
of many thousands, or millions, of images. User goals vary,
in some cases the task is to ﬁnd a particular image, in other
cases any image from a class will do. The optimal interface
would provide a very ﬂexible query mechanism, perhaps
through a natural language interface. In fact, many “stock
photo houses” currently provide such an interface to their
collections. Advertisers and publishers present a description of their requirements: “an image of the beach with athletic people playing volleyball”. Human clerks then scan
many images by hand using keywords.
Recently a large number of automated image retrieval
systems have appeared . Rather than describe
an image using text, in these systems an image query is described using a set of example images. In some of these
systems a user’s only interaction with the retrieval engine
is through example images, in others the user is also asked
to weight a set of “intuitive” features, such as color, texture
and shape.
Image retrieval differs from the more common task of
classiﬁcation which includes tasks such as face detection
and character recognition. In retrieval the number of potential image classes is extremely large and the number of
example images is very small. For example, a user may
wish to retrieve example images of “cars on the road” using perhaps three example images. Conventional machine
learning methods, such as neural networks or support vector
machines, are not well suited to this task because they often
require a small number of classes and a large set of labeled
data (see for example).
An effective solution to this problem hinges on the discovery of a simplifying structure in the distribution of images. A learning algorithm can then take advantage of this
structure to learn an image class from a small number of
When a human clerk is shown three example images containing “a car on the road”, he concludes that other images
must contain both “car” and “road”. A photograph chosen
at random from the Web might contain a “car”, a “road”,
the “Eiffel Tower”, the “Taj Mahal”, or any one of a thousand other objects. But, while there are a very large number
of objects which might be present in any one image, any
particular image will contain at most a few of these objects.
This is not unlike the structure of English text: there are
over 100,000 possible English words, but any given sentence will contain roughly six words. The clerk’s actions in
the above example are justiﬁed because the probability of
a car and a road appearing by random chance in all three
images is quite low.
The distribution of natural images is simpliﬁed by the
fact that the objects which cause images are rare. In other
words the causal structure of images is sparse.
Placed in this context, previous feature based retrieval
approaches face a daunting task. There are usually just a
few types of features used in such schemes, such as color,
and oriented edges. These features are likely to appear in
a large percentage of images. Since both the Eiffel Tower
and the Taj Mahal have vertical edges, these features clearly
cut across the boundaries of the causal structure. Learning
the concept of “Eiffel Tower” from example images using
these features will require the learning algorithm to stake
out a complex region in this feature space. Many systems
attempt to learn conjunctive concepts, such as a histogram.
Stated simply a histogram encodes the relative frequencies
of primitive properties (e.g., there are 1.3 times as many vertical edges than there are horizontal edges). Since it is likely
that the background of an image will also contain vertical
edges, these ratios are sensitive to changes in background.
In contrast we will deﬁne a very large set of highly selective visual features. A highly selective feature will respond
to only a small percentage of images in the database – such
a feature might return a large numerical value for only 5%
of images. One could not hope to deﬁne such a large set
of features by hand, instead an algorithm for automatically
generating plausible features is given. Because these features are so rare, they are also very unlikely to occur at random in the background of an image.
Given a set of highly selective features query learning
can be greatly simpliﬁed.
Only a few features will respond to the set of example images. A learning algorithm
which can rapidly select a set of 20–50 features which distinguishes these images is presented. The algorithm is an
adaptation of “AdaBoost” . After query learning, each
image in the database can be evaluated rapidly by examining only 20–50 features. As a result over one million images
can be scanned per second.
2. Creating Highly Selective Features
Highly selective features are a natural extension of the
simple features used in other image database systems.
Given a set of “ﬁrst order” features such as oriented edges
or color (see Figure 1), highly selective features measure
how these ﬁrst order features are geometrically related. By
ﬁnding arrangements of ﬁrst order features, a set of second order features can be deﬁned. Arrangements of second
order features form third order features. Our approach is
based on earlier work by and, is similar in spirit to the
features used by .
The process starts out by extracting a feature map for
each type of simple feature (there are 25 simple linear
features including “oriented edges”, “center surround” and
“bar” ﬁlters shown in Figure 1). Each features map is then
rectiﬁed and down-sampled by two. The 25 feature maps
are then used as the input to another round of feature extraction (yielding 25 x 25 = 625 feature maps). The process
is repeated again to yield 15,625 feature maps (over the red,
green, and blue color channels, this yields 46,875 feature
Figure 1. The 25 primitive ﬁlters used in computing the feature maps.
In practice, these
are efﬁciently computed with separable horizontal and vertical convolutions.
maps). Three levels of ﬁltering were possible for the resolution of our images. Finally each feature map is summed
to yield a single feature value.
Each level of processing discovers arrangements of features in the previous level. Thus a second order feature
might be sensitive to diagonal arrangements of horizontal
features – a feature visible as a staircase pattern. One example feature is shown in Figure 2. It might be called a tiger
stripe feature. The ﬁrst low-pass ﬁlter smoothes the image
and removes high-frequency noise. The second order feature ﬁnds vertical edges. The third order feature detects a
horizontal arrangement of these vertical edges. The feature
map demonstrates the selectivity of a particular feature on
the image of a tiger and a waterfall. Notice that the response
in the ﬁnal feature map is peaked over the tiger’s stripes,
while there is no discernible peak in the waterfall image.
Figure 3 shows another ﬁltering sequence that is more dif-
ﬁcult to explain intuitively. Nevertheless it is selective for
images of churches and responds very weakly to the image
of the ﬁeld.
More formally these features are computed from an image as:
gi,j,k,c =
where Mi,j,k,c is the feature map associated with primitive
ﬁlters i, j and k, and c is the color channel. The deﬁnition
input image
Figure 2. Responses of an image of a tiger
and a waterfall to a particular ﬁlter sequence.
The ﬁnal feature map has a strong peak at the
arrangement of the stripes on the body of the
tiger, whereas there is a weak response to the
waterfall image.
of Mi,j,k is:
↓2 (|fk ⊗Mi,j|)
↓2 (|fj ⊗Mi|)
↓2 (|fi ⊗X|)
where X is the image, f is a primitive ﬁlter and ↓2 is the
down-sample by two operation. Because the feature maps
are down-sampled before the next level of ﬁltering, the support of the ﬁlters on the image plane are effectively enlarged. This enables the features to capture complex arrangements of low-level features (i.e. global structure).
We conjecture that these features do in fact reﬂect some
of the sparse causal structure of the image formation process. One piece of evidence which supports this conclusion is the statistical distribution of the highly selective feature values. Evaluated across an image database containing
3000 images, these features are very sparse. The average
kurtosis is approximately 8 and some of the features have a
kurtosis as high as 120 (the Gaussian has a kurtosis of 3).
Observing this type of distribution in a ﬁlter is extremely
unusual and hence highly meaningful. It is well known that
the response of certain linear ﬁlters (such as Laplacian or
input image
Figure 3. Responses of an image of a church
and a ﬁeld to a particular ﬁlter sequence.
The ﬁnal feature map selectively responds
strongly to the church image and weakly to
the ﬁeld image.
wavelet ﬁlters) are somewhat sparse and have higher kurtosis than Gaussian . The sparse response of the highly
selective features is much more signiﬁcant. Recall that each
highly selective feature response is a summation across the
entire image, and that the sum of a number of independent
random variables tends quickly toward Gaussian. The pixelwise kurtosis of the feature maps, before this summation,
can be as high as 304 1 . In contrast, the distribution of the
summation of a rectiﬁed Laplacian ﬁlter across the image
database is Gaussian.
Figure 4 shows a histogram of the tiger stripe feature’s
response to 500 images.
Notice that observation of the
tiger’s strong response (light dot) would be considered
much more statistically signiﬁcant than observation of the
waterfall’s weak response (dark dot). Figure 5 shows the
histogram of a more kurtotic feature that responds strongly
to images of churches and weakly to images of ﬁelds.
Further evidence for the signiﬁcance of these highly selective features is a theorem from the projection pursuit literature, which states that random projections of a high dimensional random variable are almost always Gaussian .
This holds even when the high dimensional random variable does in fact have signiﬁcant statistical structure, as is
the case for natural images.
1It is not unusual to observe high kurtosis in the distribution of a nonlinear feature. For example one could easily square a variable with Gaussian distribution in order to yield a higher kurtosis. The highly selective
features do not contain these sorts of non-linearities. At each level only the
absolute value of the feature map is computed.
Figure 4. A histogram of the tiger stripe feature responses to a set of 500 images. The response for the tiger image (light dot) is more
than twice that of the waterfall image (dark
Figure 5. A histogram of feature responses
to a set of 500 images. One particular image
of a church has a strong response (light dot),
while an image of a ﬁeld has a weak response
(dark dot). The histogram is super-Gaussian
with a kurtosis of 7.8.
2.1. Relationship to Wavelets
There is a superﬁcial similarity between the highly selective feature approach and retrieval based upon a set of
wavelet coefﬁcients . In a wavelet approach images are
represented and retrieved using their wavelet coefﬁcients.
Like our features, many of the wavelet coefﬁcients of an
image are close zero. But unlike our approach, these coefﬁcients are very sensitive to changes in the image. For example, wavelet coefﬁcients are very sensitive to a small shift in
the image plane. A wavelet based approach is best thought
of as a very efﬁcient approximation to template matching
(because distance in the image space is a simple function of
the distance in wavelet feature space).
Query Learning with Boosting
At ﬁrst it might seem that the introduction of tens of
thousands of features could only make the query learning
process infeasible. How can a problem which is difﬁcult
given 10–20 features become tractable with 10,000? Two
recent results in machine learning argue that this is not necessarily a terrible mistake: support vector machines (SVM)
 and boosting . Both approaches have been shown
to generalize well in very high dimensional spaces because
they maximize the margin between positive and negative
examples. Boosting provides the closer ﬁt to our problem
because we can use it to greedily select a small number of
features from a very large number of potential features.
In its original form, the AdaBoost learning algorithm
is used to boost the classiﬁcation performance of a simple learning algorithm (e.g., it might be used to boost the
performance of a simple perceptron). It does this by combining a collection of weak classiﬁcation functions to form
a stronger classiﬁer. In the language of boosting the simple
learning algorithm is called a weak learner. So, for example the perceptron learning algorithm searches over the set
of possible perceptrons and returns the perceptron with the
lowest classiﬁcation error. The learner is called weak because we do not expect any single perceptron to classify the
training data well (perhaps the perceptron may only classify the training data correctly 51% of the time). In order
for the weak learner to be boosted, it is called upon to solve
a sequence of learning problems. In each subsequent problem examples are reweighted in order to emphasize those
which were incorrectly classiﬁed by the previous weak classiﬁer. The ﬁnal strong classiﬁer is a weighted combination
of weak classiﬁers.
One important goal for image database query learning is
that the ﬁnal classiﬁer depend only on a small number of
features. A classiﬁer which depends on few features will
be more efﬁcient to evaluate on a very large database. In
addition, a simple classiﬁer which depends on few features
will be more likely to generalize well.
In support of this goal, we design our weak learning algorithm to select the single highly selective feature along
which the positive examples are most distinct from the negative examples. For each feature, the weak learner computes a Gaussian model for the positives and negatives, and
returns the feature for which the two class Gaussian model
is most effective.
In practice no single feature can perform the classiﬁcation task with 100% accuracy. Subsequent weak learners are forced to focus on the remaining
errors through example reweighting. In the experiments below, the algorithm is typically run for 20 iterations, yielding
a strong classiﬁer which depends upon 20 features. Table 1
shows the learning algorithm.
• Given example images (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn) where
yi = 0, 1 for negative and positive examples respectively.
• Initialize weights w1,i =
2l for yi = 0, 1 respectively, where m and l are the number of negatives and
positives respectively.
• For t = 1, . . . , T:
1. Train one hypothesis hj for each feature j using
wt, with error ϵj = Prwt
i [hj(xi) ̸= yi].
2. Choose ht(·) = hk(·) such that ∀j ̸= k, ϵk < ϵj
(i.e., the hypothesis with the lowest error). Let
3. Update:
wt+1,i = wt,iβ1−ei
where ei = 0, 1 for example xi classiﬁed correctly or incorrectly respectively, and βt =
Normalize wt+1,i ←
j=1 wt+1,j so that wt+1 is
a distribution.
• The ﬁnal hypothesis is:
αtht(x) ≥1
where αt = log 1
Table 1. The boosting algorithm for learning a
query online. T hypotheses are constructed
each using a single feature. The ﬁnal hypothesis is a linear combination of the T hypotheses where the weights are inversely proportional to the training errors.
4. Query Speciﬁcation
The user interface of our query engine has two phases:
an initial browsing phase, and a relevance feedback stage.
The user begins a new query by browsing the database
to select a few positive examples. Users found that it was
somewhat tedious to hand pick negative examples. Instead
we randomly choose 100 images from the database to form
a set of generic negative examples. This is a reasonable
policy because the the number of images which satisfy any
particular query is very small. Nevertheless, this policy for
selecting negatives is somewhat risky because it is possible that the negative set may contain true positives. Typically we run AdaBoost for 20 iterations which is usually
sufﬁcient to achieve zero training error2. Since the number of positive training examples is typically smaller than
the number of negative examples, we initially weight them
higher so that the sum of the weights of the positives and
negatives are equal. This encourages correct classiﬁcation
of the positive examples at the outset.
Each image in the database can then be classiﬁed by the
strong classiﬁer. Alternatively, since the strong classiﬁer
is itself a perceptron, the images can be ranked by their
margin. The ﬁrst goal of an image retrieval program is to
present the user with useful images which are related to the
query. Since the learning algorithm is most certain about
images with a large positive margin, a set of these images
are presented. Without further reﬁnement this set of images
often contains many false positives.
Retrieval results can be improved greatly if the user
is given the opportunity to select new training examples
 . Recall that images are classiﬁed as positive if the
ﬁnal hypothesis (i.e., weighted combination of the weak
learners) exceeds the AdaBoost threshold (i.e., decision
boundary):
t=1 αt (see Table 1). This deﬁnes a margin such that images highly above threshold are considered
most positive while images well below threshold are labeled
most negative.
Following a query, three sets of images are presented to
the user: (i) test set images with large positive margin; ii)
the randomly selected negative images which are close to
the decision boundary; and (iii) test set images which are
close to the boundary. The ﬁrst set is intended to allow the
user to select new negative training examples which are currently labeled as strongly positive. The landscape and leopard image in Figure 7 are obvious false positives that the
user can add as negative examples. The second set allows
the user to discard randomly chosen negatives which are not
true negatives. The third set allows the user to reﬁne the de-
2One might be concerned that attaining zero training error would lead
to poor performance on the test set. In fact for the boosting algorithm this is
usually not the case, since the margin between the negatives and positives
typically increases even after there is zero error on the training set .
cision boundary by labeling examples which determine the
margin. In Figure 7, the last row contains three images of
cars which are close to the decision boundary. The user can
add these as positive examples to update the query.
In every case the ﬁnal query is produced by running
AdaBoost for 20 iterations. This yields a strong classiﬁer
which is a simple function of 20 discriminating features.
Since image databases are very large, the computational
complexity of the ﬁnal classiﬁer is a critical aspect of retrieval performance.
5. Results
Experimental veriﬁcation of image retrieval systems is a
very difﬁcult task. There are few if any standard datasets,
and there are no widely agreed upon evaluation metrics.
To test the retrieval performance of the system we constructed ﬁve classes of natural images (sunsets, lakes, waterfalls, ﬁelds, and mountains) using the Corel Stock Photo 3
image sets 1, 26, 27, 28, and 114 respectively . Each
class contains 100 images.
Figure 6 shows the average recall and average precision
for the ﬁve classes of natural images. Recall is the ratio of
the number of relevant images returned to the total number
of relevant images. Precision is the ratio of the number of
relevant images returned to the total number of images returned.
Figures 7–9 show results from queries for race cars,
ﬂowers, and waterfalls, cloudy skies, and jet planes in a
3000 image data set (using Corel image sets 1–30).
Empirically we have found that using different sets of
primitive ﬁlters gives comparable results as long as they
are used to create highly selective features in the manner
described. Using a Mahalanobis distance as in instead
of boosting is also possible but requires computations with
many more features. This slows down the entire retrieval
process especially when the database is large. Boosting also
provides a more natural method for relevance feedback.
6. Summary
We have presented a framework for image retrieval based
on representing images with a very large set of highly selective features. Queries are interactively learned online with
a simple boosting algorithm. The selectivity of the features
allow effective queries to be formulated using just a small
set of features and a small number of training examples.
This supports our observation of the “sparse” causal structure of images. It also makes training the classiﬁer simple,
and retrieval on a large database efﬁcient.
3This publication includes images from the Corel Stock Photo images
which are protected by the copyright laws of the U.S., Canada and elsewhere. Used under license.
Figure 7. Race cars: The top row shows the
positive examples followed by the top twenty
retrieved images in the middle portion. The
ﬁrst row of the bottom portion shows the negative images in the training set which are
close to the decision boundary. The second
row shows images in the test set which are
near the boundary.
number of images
number of images
Figure 6. Average recall and average precision for the ﬁve classes of natural images. Essentially
perfect performance was achieved on the mountains (mt) class. Closer inspection shows that the
images in this class are fairly homogeneous especially when compared to images in the ﬁelds (fd)
and lakes (lk) classes. These results were averaged over ﬁve trials, each using ﬁve randomly selected
positive and four negative training examples (one from each negative class).
Acknowledgments
Thanks to John Fisher for helpful discussions. This work
was supported in part by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone.