EIE: Efﬁcient Inference Engine on Compressed Deep Neural Network
Song Han∗Xingyu Liu∗Huizi Mao∗Jing Pu∗Ardavan Pedram∗
Mark A. Horowitz∗William J. Dally∗†
∗Stanford University, †NVIDIA
{songhan,xyl,huizi,jingpu,perdavan,horowitz,dally}@stanford.edu
Abstract—State-of-the-art deep neural networks (DNNs)
have hundreds of millions of connections and are both computationally and memory intensive, making them difﬁcult to deploy on embedded systems with limited hardware resources and
power budgets. While custom hardware helps the computation,
fetching weights from DRAM is two orders of magnitude more
expensive than ALU operations, and dominates the required
Previously proposed ‘Deep Compression’ makes it possible
to ﬁt large DNNs (AlexNet and VGGNet) fully in on-chip
SRAM. This compression is achieved by pruning the redundant
connections and having multiple connections share the same
weight. We propose an energy efﬁcient inference engine (EIE)
that performs inference on this compressed network model and
accelerates the resulting sparse matrix-vector multiplication
with weight sharing. Going from DRAM to SRAM gives EIE
120× energy saving; Exploiting sparsity saves 10×; Weight
sharing gives 8×; Skipping zero activations from ReLU saves
another 3×. Evaluated on nine DNN benchmarks, EIE is
189× and 13× faster when compared to CPU and GPU
implementations of the same DNN without compression. EIE
has a processing power of 102 GOPS/s working directly on
a compressed network, corresponding to 3 TOPS/s on an
uncompressed network, and processes FC layers of AlexNet at
1.88×104 frames/sec with a power dissipation of only 600mW.
It is 24,000× and 3,400× more energy efﬁcient than a CPU
and GPU respectively. Compared with DaDianNao, EIE has
2.9×, 19× and 3× better throughput, energy efﬁciency and
area efﬁciency.
Keywords-Deep Learning; Model Compression; Hardware
Acceleration; Algorithm-Hardware co-Design; ASIC;
I. INTRODUCTION
Neural networks have become ubiquitous in applications
including computer vision – , speech recognition ,
and natural language processing . In 1998, Lecun et
al. classiﬁed handwritten digits with less than 1M parameters , while in 2012, Krizhevsky et al. won the ImageNet
competition with 60M parameters . Deepface classiﬁed
human faces with 120M parameters . Neural Talk 
automatically converts image to natural language with 130M
CNN parameters and 100M RNN parameters. Coates et
al. scaled up a network to 10 billion parameters on HPC
systems .
Large DNN models are very powerful but consume large
amounts of energy because the model must be stored in
external DRAM, and fetched every time for each image,
Relative Index
Virtual weight
Real weight
Absolute Index
Encoded Weight
Relative Index
Sparse Format
Compressed
Prediction
Efﬁcient inference engine that works on the compressed deep
neural network model for machine learning applications.
word, or speech sample. For embedded mobile applications,
these resource demands become prohibitive. Table I shows
the energy cost of basic arithmetic and memory operations
in a 45nm CMOS process . It shows that the total energy
is dominated by the required memory access if there is
no data reuse. The energy cost per fetch ranges from 5pJ
for 32b coefﬁcients in on-chip SRAM to 640pJ for 32b
coefﬁcients in off-chip LPDDR2 DRAM. Large networks do
not ﬁt in on-chip storage and hence require the more costly
DRAM accesses. Running a 1G connection neural network,
for example, at 20Hz would require (20Hz)(1G)(640pJ) =
12.8W just for DRAM accesses, which is well beyond the
power envelope of a typical mobile device.
Previous work has used specialized hardware to accelerate
DNNs – . However, these efforts focus on accelerating dense, uncompressed models - limiting their utility
to small models or to cases where the high energy cost
of external DRAM access can be tolerated. Without model
compression, it is only possible to ﬁt very small neural
networks, such as Lenet-5, in on-chip SRAM .
Efﬁcient implementation of convolutional layers in CNN
has been intensively studied, as its data reuse and manipulation is quite suitable for customized hardware – .
However, it has been found that fully-connected (FC) layers,
widely used in RNN and LSTMs, are bandwidth limited
on large networks . Unlike CONV layers, there is no
parameter reuse in FC layers. Data batching has become
an efﬁcient solution when training networks on CPUs or
GPUs, however, it is unsuitable for real-time applications
with latency requirements.
Network compression via pruning and weight sharing
 makes it possible to ﬁt modern networks such as
AlexNet (60M parameters, 240MB), and VGG-16 (130M
parameters, 520MB) in on-chip SRAM. Processing these
 
ENERGY TABLE FOR 45NM CMOS PROCESS . DRAM ACCESS USES
THREE ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE MORE ENERGY THAN SIMPLE
ARITHMETIC AND 128X MORE THAN SRAM.
Energy [pJ]
Relative Cost
32 bit int ADD
32 bit ﬂoat ADD
32 bit int MULT
32 bit ﬂoat MULT
32 bit 32KB SRAM
32 bit DRAM
compressed models, however, is challenging. With pruning,
the matrix becomes sparse and the indicies become relative.
With weight sharing, we store only a short (4-bit) index for
each weight. This adds extra levels of indirection that cause
complexity and inefﬁciency on CPUs and GPUs.
To efﬁciently operate on compressed DNN models, we
propose EIE, an efﬁcient inference engine, a specialized
accelerator that performs customized sparse matrix vector
multiplication and handles weight sharing with no loss of
efﬁciency. EIE is a scalable array of processing elements
(PEs) Every PE stores a partition of network in SRAM and
performs the computations associated with that part. It takes
advantage of dynamic input vector sparsity, static weight
sparsity, relative indexing, weight sharing and extremely
narrow weights (4bits).
In our design, each PE holds 131K weights of the
compressed model, corresponding to 1.2M weights of the
original dense model, and is able to perform 800 million
weight calculations per second. In 45nm CMOS technology,
an EIE PE has an area of 0.638mm2 and dissipates 9.16mW
at 800MHz. The fully-connected layers of AlexNet ﬁt into
64PEs that consume a total of 40.8mm2 and operate at
1.88 × 104 frames/sec with a power dissipation of 590mW.
Compared with CPU (Intel i7-5930k) GPU (GeForce TITAN
X) and mobile GPU (Tegra K1), EIE achieves 189×, 13×
and 307× acceleration, while saving 24, 000×, 3, 400× and
2, 700× energy, respectively.
This paper makes the following contributions:
1) We present the ﬁrst accelerator for sparse and weight
sharing neural networks. Operating directly on compressed networks enables the large neural network models to ﬁt in on-chip SRAM, which results in 120× better
energy savings compared to accessing from external
2) EIE is the ﬁrst accelerator that exploits the dynamic
sparsity of activations to save computation. EIE saves
65.16% energy by avoiding weight references and arithmetic for the 70% of activations that are zero in a
typical deep learning applications.
3) We describe a method of both distributed storage and
distributed computation to parallelize a sparsiﬁed layer
across multiple PEs, which achieves load balance and
good scalability.
4) We evaluate EIE on a wide range of deep learning
models, including CNN for object detection and LSTM
for natural language processing and image captioning.
We also compare EIE to CPU, GPU, FPGA, and other
ASIC accelerators.
In Section II we describe the motivation of accelerating
compressed networks. Section III reviews the compression
technique that EIE uses and how to parallelize the workload.
The hardware architecture in each PE to perform inference
is described in Section IV. In Section V we describe our
evaluation methodology. Then we report our experimental
results in Section VI, followed by discussions, comparison
with related work and conclusions.
II. MOTIVATION
Matrix-vector multiplication (M×V) is a basic building
block in a wide range of neural networks and deep learning
applications. In convolutional neural network (CNN), fully
connected layers are implemented with M×V, and more
than 96% of the connections are in the FC layers . In
object detection algorithms, an FC layer is required to run
multiple times on all proposal regions, taking up to 38%
computation time . In recurrent neural network (RNN),
M×V operations are performed on the new input and the
hidden state at each time step, producing a new hidden state
and the output. Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) is
a widely used structure of RNN cell that provides more
complex hidden unit computation. Each LSTM cell can
be decomposed into eight M×V operations, two for each:
input gate, forget gate, output gate, and one temporary
memory cell. RNN, including LSTM, is widely used in
image captioning , speech recognition and natural
language processing .
During M×V, the memory access is usually the bottleneck especially when the matrix is larger than the
cache capacity. There is no reuse of the input matrix, thus
a memory access is needed for every operation. On CPUs
and GPUs, this problem is usually solved by batching, i.e.,
combining multiple vectors into a matrix to reuse the parameters. However, such a strategy is unsuitable for real-time
applications that are latency-sensitive, such as pedestrian
detection in an autonomous vehicle , because batching
substantially increases latency. Therefore it is preferable to
create an efﬁcient method of executing large neural networks
without the latency cost of batching.
Because memory access is the bottleneck in large layers,
compressing the neural network offers a solution. Though
compression reduces the total number of operations, the
irregular pattern caused by compression hinders the effective
acceleration on CPUs and GPUs, as illustrated in Table IV.
A compressed network is not efﬁcient on previous accelerators either. Previous SPMV accelerators can only exploit
the static weight sparsity. They are unable to exploit dynamic
activation sparsity . Previous DNN accelerators cannot
exploit either form of sparsity and must expand the network
to dense form before operation . Neither is able to
exploit weight sharing. This motivates building a special
engine that can operate on a compressed network.
III. DNN COMPRESSION AND PARALLELIZATION
A. Computation
A FC layer of a DNN performs the computation
b = f(Wa + v)
Where a is the input activation vector, b is the output
activation vector, v is the bias, W is the weight matrix, and
f is the non-linear function, typically the Rectiﬁed Linear
Unit(ReLU) in CNN and some RNN. Sometimes v
will be combined with W by appending an additional one
to vector a, therefore we neglect the bias in the following
paragraphs.
For a typical FC layer like FC7 of VGG-16 or AlexNet,
the activation vectors are 4K long, and the weight matrix is
4K × 4K (16M weights). Weights are represented as singleprecision ﬂoating-point numbers so such a layer requires
64MB of storage. The output activations of Equation (1) are
computed element-wise as:
Deep Compression describes a method to compress
DNNs without loss of accuracy through a combination of
pruning and weight sharing. Pruning makes matrix W sparse
with density D ranging from 4% to 25% for our benchmark
layers. Weight sharing replaces each weight Wij with a fourbit index Iij into a shared table S of 16 possible weight
With deep compression, the per-activation computation of
Equation (2) becomes
Where Xi is the set of columns j for which Wij ̸= 0, Y
is the set of indices j for which aj ̸= 0, Iij is the index
to the shared weight that replaces Wij, and S is the table
of shared weights. Here Xi represents the static sparsity of
W and Y represents the dynamic sparsity of a. The set Xi
is ﬁxed for a given model. The set Y varies from input to
Accelerating Equation (3) is needed to accelerate a compressed DNN. We perform the indexing S[Iij] and the
multiply-add only for those columns for which both Wij
and aj are non-zero, so that both the sparsity of the matrix
and the vector are exploited. This results in a dynamically irregular computation. Performing the indexing itself involves
w0,4 w0,5 w0,6
w13,0w13,2
w14,2w14,3w14,4w14,5
w15,2w15,3
Matrix W and vectors a and b are interleaved over 4 PEs.
Elements of the same color are stored in the same PE.
W0,0 W8,0 W12,0 W4,1 W0,2 W12,2 W0,4 W4,4 W0,5 W12,5 W0,6 W8,7 W12,7
Memory layout for the relative indexed, indirect weighted and
interleaved CSC format, corresponding to PE0 in Figure 2.
bit manipulations to extract four-bit Iij and an extra load
(which is almost assured a cache hit).
B. Representation
To exploit the sparsity of activations we store our encoded
sparse weight matrix W in a variation of compressed sparse
column (CSC) format .
For each column Wj of matrix W we store a vector v
that contains the non-zero weights, and a second, equallength vector z that encodes the number of zeros before
the corresponding entry in v. Each entry of v and z is
represented by a four-bit value. If more than 15 zeros appear
before a non-zero entry we add a zero in vector v. For
example, we encode the following column
 
as v = , z = . v and z of all columns
are stored in one large pair of arrays with a pointer vector p
pointing to the beginning of the vector for each column. A
ﬁnal entry in p points one beyond the last vector element so
that the number of non-zeros in column j (including padded
zeros) is given by pj+1 −pj.
Storing the sparse matrix by columns in CSC format
makes it easy to exploit activation sparsity. We simply
multiply each non-zero activation by all of the non-zero
elements in its corresponding column.
Pointer Read
Sparse Matrix Access
Arithmetic Unit
Absolute Address
Even Ptr SRAM Bank
Odd Ptr SRAM Bank
Nzero Index
Act0,1,2,3
(a) The architecture of Leading Non-zero Detection Node. (b) The architecture of Processing Element.
C. Parallelizing Compressed DNN
We distribute the matrix and parallelize our matrix-vector
computation by interleaving the rows of the matrix W over
multiple processing elements (PEs). With N PEs, PEk holds
all rows Wi, output activations bi, and input activations ai
for which i (mod N) = k. The portion of column Wj in
PEk is stored in the CSC format described in Section III-B
but with the zero counts referring only to zeros in the subset
of the column in this PE. Each PE has its own v, x, and p
arrays that encode its fraction of the sparse matrix.
Figure 2 shows an example multiplying an input activation
vector a (of length 8) by a 16×8 weight matrix W yielding
an output activation vector b (of length 16) on N = 4 PEs.
The elements of a, b, and W are color coded with their PE
assignments. Each PE owns 4 rows of W, 2 elements of a,
and 4 elements of b.
We perform the sparse matrix × sparse vector operation
by scanning vector a to ﬁnd its next non-zero value aj
and broadcasting aj along with its index j to all PEs.
Each PE then multiplies aj by the non-zero elements in
its portion of column Wj — accumulating the partial sums
in accumulators for each element of the output activation
vector b. In the CSC representation these non-zeros weights
are stored contiguously so each PE simply walks through its
v array from location pj to pj+1 −1 to load the weights.
To address the output accumulators, the row number i
corresponding to each weight Wij is generated by keeping
a running sum of the entries of the x array.
In the example of Figure 2, the ﬁrst non-zero is a2 on
PE2. The value a2 and its column index 2 is broadcast
to all PEs. Each PE then multiplies a2 by every nonzero in its portion of column 2. PE0 multiplies a2 by
W0,2 and W12,2; PE1 has all zeros in column 2 and so
performs no multiplications; PE2 multiplies a2 by W2,2
and W14,2, and so on. The result of each product is summed
into the corresponding row accumulator. For example PE0
computes b0 = b0 + W0,2a2 and b12 = b12 + W12,2a2.
The accumulators are initialized to zero before each layer
computation.
The interleaved CSC representation facilitates exploitation
of both the dynamic sparsity of activation vector a and
the static sparsity of the weight matrix W. We exploit
activation sparsity by broadcasting only non-zero elements
of input activation a. Columns corresponding to zeros in a
are completely skipped. The interleaved CSC representation
allows each PE to quickly ﬁnd the non-zeros in each column
to be multiplied by aj. This organization also keeps all of the
computation except for the broadcast of the input activations
local to a PE. The interleaved CSC representation of matrix
in Figure 2 is shown in Figure 3.
This process may suffer load imbalance because each PE
may have a different number of non-zeros in a particular
column. We will see in Section IV how this load imbalance
can be reduced by queuing.
IV. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 4 shows the architecture of EIE. A Central Control
Unit (CCU) controls an array of PEs that each computes one
slice of the compressed network. The CCU also receives
non-zero input activations from a distributed leading nonzero detection network and broadcasts these to the PEs.
Almost all computation in EIE is local to the PEs except
for the collection of non-zero input activations that are
broadcast to all PEs. However, the timing of the activation
collection and broadcast is non-critical as most PEs take
many cycles to consume each input activation.
Activation Queue and Load Balancing. Non-zero elements of the input activation vector aj and their corresponding index j are broadcast by the CCU to an activation queue
in each PE. The broadcast is disabled if any PE has a full
queue. At any point in time each PE processes the activation
at the head of its queue.
The activation queue allows each PE to build up a backlog
of work to even out load imbalance that may arise because
the number of non zeros in a given column j may vary
from PE to PE. In Section VI we measure the sensitivity of
performance to the depth of the activation queue.
Pointer Read Unit. The index j of the entry at the head
of the activation queue is used to look up the start and end
pointers pj and pj+1 for the v and x arrays for column j.
To allow both pointers to be read in one cycle using singleported SRAM arrays, we store pointers in two SRAM banks
and use the LSB of the address to select between banks. pj
and pj+1 will always be in different banks. EIE pointers are
16-bits in length.
Sparse Matrix Read Unit. The sparse-matrix read unit
uses pointers pj and pj+1 to read the non-zero elements (if
any) of this PE’s slice of column Ij from the sparse-matrix
SRAM. Each entry in the SRAM is 8-bits in length and
contains one 4-bit element of v and one 4-bit element of x.
For efﬁciency (see Section VI) the PE’s slice of encoded
sparse matrix I is stored in a 64-bit-wide SRAM. Thus eight
entries are fetched on each SRAM read. The high 13 bits
of the current pointer p selects an SRAM row, and the low
3-bits select one of the eight entries in that row. A single
(v, x) entry is provided to the arithmetic unit each cycle.
Arithmetic Unit. The arithmetic unit receives a (v, x)
entry from the sparse matrix read unit and performs the
multiply-accumulate operation bx = bx + v × aj. Index
x is used to index an accumulator array (the destination
activation registers) while v is multiplied by the activation
value at the head of the activation queue. Because v is stored
in 4-bit encoded form, it is ﬁrst expanded to a 16-bit ﬁxedpoint number via a table look up. A bypass path is provided
to route the output of the adder to its input if the same
accumulator is selected on two adjacent cycles.
Activation Read/Write. The Activation Read/Write Unit
contains two activation register ﬁles that accommodate the
source and destination activation values respectively during
a single round of FC layer computation. The source and
destination register ﬁles exchange their role for next layer.
Thus no additional data transfer is needed to support multilayer feed-forward computation.
Each activation register ﬁle holds 64 16-bit activations.
This is sufﬁcient to accommodate 4K activation vectors
across 64 PEs. Longer activation vectors can be accommodated with the 2KB activation SRAM. When the activation
vector has a length greater than 4K, the M×V will be
completed in several batches, where each batch is of length
4K or less. All the local reduction is done in the register
ﬁle. The SRAM is read only at the beginning and written at
the end of the batch.
Distributed Leading Non-Zero Detection. Input activations are hierarchically distributed to each PE. To take
advantage of the input vector sparsity, we use leading nonzero detection logic to select the ﬁrst non-zero result. Each
group of 4 PEs does a local leading non-zero detection on
their input activation. The result is sent to a Leading Nonzero Detection Node (LNZD Node) illustrated in Figure 4.
Each LNZD node ﬁnds the next non-zero activation across
its four children and sends this result up the quadtree. The
quadtree is arranged so that wire lengths remain constant as
we add PEs. At the root LNZD Node, the selected non-zero
activation is broadcast back to all the PEs via a separate
wire placed in an H-tree.
Central Control Unit. The Central Control Unit (CCU)
is the root LNZD Node. It communicates with the master,
for example a CPU, and monitors the state of every PE by
setting the control registers. There are two modes in the
Layout of one PE in EIE under TSMC 45nm process.
THE IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF ONE PE IN EIE AND THE
BREAKDOWN BY COMPONENT TYPE (LINE 3-7), BY MODULE (LINE
8-13). THE CRITICAL PATH OF EIE IS 1.15 NS
clock network
combinational
ﬁller cell
ArithmUnit
ﬁller cell
Central Unit: I/O and Computing. In the I/O mode, all of
the PEs are idle while the activations and weights in every
PE can be accessed by a DMA connected with the Central
Unit. This is one time cost. In the Computing mode, the
CCU repeatedly collects a non-zero value from the LNZD
quadtree and broadcasts this value to all PEs. This process
continues until the input length is exceeded. By setting the
input length and starting address of pointer array, EIE is
instructed to execute different layers.
V. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
Simulator, RTL and Layout. We implemented a custom
cycle-accurate C++ simulator for the accelerator aimed to
model the RTL behavior of synchronous circuits. Each
hardware module is abstracted as an object that implements
two abstract methods: propagate and update, corresponding
to combination logic and the ﬂip-ﬂop in RTL. The simulator
is used for design space exploration. It also serves as a
checker for RTL veriﬁcation.
To measure the area, power and critical path delay, we
implemented the RTL of EIE in Verilog. The RTL is veriﬁed
against the cycle-accurate simulator. Then we synthesized
EIE using the Synopsys Design Compiler (DC) under the
TSMC 45nm GP standard VT library with worst case PVT
corner. We placed and routed the PE using the Synopsys IC
compiler (ICC). We used Cacti to get SRAM area and
CPU Dense (Baseline)
CPU Compressed
GPU Compressed
mGPU Dense
mGPU Compressed
Speedups of GPU, mobile GPU and EIE compared with CPU running uncompressed DNN model. There is no batching in all cases.
Energy Efficiency
CPU Dense (Baseline)
CPU Compressed
GPU Compressed
mGPU Dense
mGPU Compressed
Energy efﬁciency of GPU, mobile GPU and EIE compared with CPU running uncompressed DNN model. There is no batching in all cases.
energy numbers. We annotated the toggle rate from the RTL
simulation to the gate-level netlist, which was dumped to
switching activity interchange format (SAIF), and estimated
the power using Prime-Time PX.
Comparison Baseline. We compare EIE with three different off-the-shelf computing units: CPU, GPU and mobile
1) CPU. We use Intel Core i-7 5930k CPU, a Haswell-E
class processor, that has been used in NVIDIA Digits Deep
Learning Dev Box as a CPU baseline. To run the benchmark
on CPU, we used MKL CBLAS GEMV to implement the
original dense model and MKL SPBLAS CSRMV for the
compressed sparse model. CPU socket and DRAM power
are as reported by the pcm-power utility provided by Intel.
2) GPU. We use NVIDIA GeForce GTX Titan X GPU,
a state-of-the-art GPU for deep learning as our baseline
using nvidia-smi utility to report the power. To run
the benchmark, we used cuBLAS GEMV to implement
the original dense layer. For the compressed sparse layer,
we stored the sparse matrix in in CSR format, and used
cuSPARSE CSRMV kernel, which is optimized for sparse
matrix-vector multiplication on GPUs.
3) Mobile GPU. We use NVIDIA Tegra K1 that has
192 CUDA cores as our mobile GPU baseline. We used
cuBLAS GEMV for the original dense model and cuS-
PARSE CSRMV for the compressed sparse model. Tegra K1
doesn’t have software interface to report power consumption,
so we measured the total power consumption with a powermeter, then assumed 15% AC to DC conversion loss, 85%
regulator efﬁciency and 15% power consumed by peripheral
components , to report the AP+DRAM power for
Benchmarks. We compare the performance on two sets
of models: uncompressed DNN model and the compressed
DNN model. The uncompressed DNN model is obtained
from Caffe model zoo and NeuralTalk model zoo ;
The compressed DNN model is produced as described
BENCHMARK FROM STATE-OF-THE-ART DNN MODELS
Description
Compressed
AlexNet for
large scale image
classiﬁcation
Compressed
VGG-16 for
large scale image
classiﬁcation and
object detection
Compressed
NeuralTalk 
with RNN and
image captioning
in , . The benchmark networks have 9 layers in total
obtained from AlexNet, VGGNet, and NeuralTalk. We use
the Image-Net dataset and the Caffe deep learning
framework as golden model to verify the correctness of the
hardware design.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 5 shows the layout (after place-and-route) of
an EIE processing element. The power/area breakdown is
shown in Table II. We brought the critical path delay down
to 1.15ns by introducing 4 pipeline stages to update one
activation: codebook lookup and address accumulation (in
parallel), output activation read and input activation multiply
(in parallel), shift and add, and output activation write. Activation read and write access a local register and activation
bypassing is employed to avoid a pipeline hazard. Using
64 PEs running at 800MHz yields a performance of 102
GOP/s. Considering 10× weight sparsity and 3× activation
sparsity, this requires a dense DNN accelerator 3TOP/s to
have equivalent application throughput.
WALL CLOCK TIME COMPARISON BETWEEN CPU, GPU, MOBILE GPU AND EIE. UNIT: µS
(Tegra K1)
Theoretical Time
Actual Time
Load Balance
Load efﬁciency improves as FIFO size increases. When FIFO deepth>8, the marginal gain quickly diminishes. So we choose FIFO depth=8.
The total SRAM capacity (Spmat+Ptr+Act) of each EIE
PE is 162KB. The activation SRAM is 2KB storing activations. The Spmat SRAM is 128KB storing the compressed weights and indices. Each weight is 4bits, each
index is 4bits. Weights and indices are grouped to 8bits and
addressed together. The Spmat access width is optimized
at 64bits. The Ptr SRAM is 32KB storing the pointers in
the CSC format. In the steady state, both Spmat SRAM
and Ptr SRAM are accessed every 64/8 = 8 cycles. The
area and power is dominated by SRAM, the ratio is 93%
and 59% respectively. Each PE is 0.638mm2 consuming
9.157mW. Each group of 4 PEs needs a LNZD unit for
nonzero detection. A total of 21 LNZD units are needed for
64 PEs (16+4+1 = 21). Synthesized result shows that one
LNZD unit takes only 0.023mW and an area of 189um2,
less than 0.3% of a PE.
A. Performance
We compare EIE against CPU, desktop GPU and the
mobile GPU on 9 benchmarks selected from AlexNet, VGG-
16 and Neural Talk. The overall results are shown in Figure 6. There are 7 columns for each benchmark, comparing
the computation time of EIE on compressed network over
CPU / GPU / TK1 on uncompressed / compressed network.
Time is normalized to CPU. EIE signiﬁcantly outperforms
the general purpose hardware and is, on average, 189×, 13×,
307× faster than CPU, GPU and mobile GPU respectively.
EIE’s theoretical computation time is calculated by dividing workload GOPs by peak throughput. The actual computation time is around 10% more than the theoretical computation time due to load imbalance. In Fig. 6, the comparison
with CPU / GPU / TK1 is reported using actual computation
time. The wall clock time of CPU / GPU / TK1/ EIE for all
benchmarks are shown in Table IV.
EIE is targeting extremely latency-focused applications,
which require real-time inference. Since assembling a batch
adds signiﬁcant amounts of latency, we consider the case
when batch size = 1 when benchmarking the performance
and energy efﬁciency with CPU and GPU as shown in
Figure 6. As a comparison, we also provided the result for
batch size = 64 in Table IV. EIE outperforms most of the
platforms and is comparable to desktop GPU in the batching
The GOP/s required for EIE to achieve the same application throughput (Frames/s) is much lower than competing
approaches because EIE exploits sparsity to eliminate 97%
of the GOP/s performed by dense approaches. 3 TOP/s on
an uncompressed network requires only 100 GOP/s on a
compressed network. EIE’s throughput is scalable to over
256 PEs. Without EIE’s dedicated logic, however, model
compression by itself applied on a CPU/GPU yields only
3× speedup.
In Figure 7, we report the energy efﬁciency comparisons
of M×V on different benchmarks. There are 7 columns
for each benchmark, comparing the energy efﬁciency of
EIE on compressed network over CPU / GPU / TK1 on
uncompressed / compressed network. Energy is obtained by
multiplying computation time and total measured power as
described in section V.
EIE consumes on average, 24, 000×, 3, 400×, and
2, 700× less energy compared to CPU, GPU and the mobile
GPU respectively. This is a 3-order of magnitude energy sav-
128 bit 256 bit 512 bit
Read Energy (pJ)
SRAM Width
Energy per Read (pJ)
Energy (nJ)
SRAM width
Left: SRAM read energy and number of reads benchmarked on AlexNet. Right: Multiplying the two curves in the left gives the total energy
consumed by SRAM read.
Mul Energy (pJ)
Arithmetic Precision
Multiply Energy (pJ)
Prediction Accuracy
Figure 10.
Prediction accuracy and multiplier energy with different
arithmetic precision.
ing from three places: ﬁrst, the required energy per memory
read is saved (SRAM over DRAM): using a compressed
network model enables state-of-the-art neural networks to ﬁt
in on-chip SRAM, reducing energy consumption by 120×
compared to fetching a dense uncompressed model from
DRAM (Figure 7). Second, the number of required memory
reads is reduced. The compressed DNN model has 10% of
the weights where each weight is quantized by only 4 bits.
Lastly, taking advantage of vector sparsity saved 65.14%
redundant computation cycles. Multiplying those factors
120×10×8×3 gives 28, 800× theoretical energy saving. Our
actual savings are about 10× less than this number because
of index overhead and because EIE is implemented in 45nm
technology compared to the 28nm technology used by the
Titan-X GPU and the Tegra K1 mobile GPU.
C. Design Space Exploration
Queue Depth. The activation FIFO queue deals with
load imbalance between the PEs. A deeper FIFO queue can
better decouple producer and consumer, but with diminishing returns, as shown in our experiment in Figure 8. We
varied the FIFO queue depth from from 1 to 256 in powers
of 2 across 9 benchmarks using 64 PEs, and measured
the load balance efﬁciency. This efﬁciency is deﬁned as:
1 −bubble cycles (due to starvation) divided by total
computation cycles. At FIFO size = 1, around half of the
total cycles are idle and the accelerator suffers from severe
load imbalance. Load imbalance is reduced as FIFO depth
is increased but with diminishing returns beyond a depth of
8. Thus, we choose 8 as the optimal queue depth.
Notice the NT-We benchmark has poorer load balance
efﬁciency compared with others. This is because that it has
only 600 rows. Divided by 64 PEs and considering the 11%
sparsity, each PE on average gets a single entry, which is
highly susceptible to variation among PEs, leading to load
imbalance. Such small matrices are more efﬁciently executed
on 32 or fewer PEs.
SRAM Width. We choose an SRAM with a 64-bit
interface to store the sparse matrix (Spmat) since it minimized the total energy. Wider SRAM interfaces reduce the
number of total SRAM accesses, but increase the energy
cost per SRAM read. The experimental trade-off is shown
in Figure 9. SRAM energy is modeled using Cacti 
under 45nm process. SRAM access times are measured by
the cycle-accurate simulator on AlexNet benchmark. As the
total energy is shown on the right, the minimum total access
energy is achieved when SRAM width is 64 bits. For larger
SRAM widths, read data is wasted: the typical number of
activation elements of FC layer is 4K , so assuming
64 PEs and 10% density , each column in a PE will
have 6.4 elements on average. This matches a 64-bit SRAM
interface that provides 8 elements. If more elements are
fetched and the next column corresponds to a zero activation,
those elements are wasted.
Arithmetic Precision. We use 16-bit ﬁxed-point arithmetic. As shown in Figure 10, 16-bit ﬁxed-point multiplication consumes 5× less energy than 32-bit ﬁxed-point and
6.2× less energy than 32-bit ﬂoating-point. At the same
time, using 16-bit ﬁxed-point arithmetic results in less than
0.5% loss of prediction accuracy: 79.8% compared with
80.3% using 32-bit ﬂoating point arithmetic. With 8-bits
ﬁxed-point, however, the accuracy dropped to only 53%,
which becomes intolerable. The accuracy is measured on
ImageNet dataset with AlexNet , and the energy is
obtained from synthesized RTL under 45nm process.
‘Deep Compression’ does not affect accuracy 
 , but using 16-bit arithmetic degrades accuracy by
only 0.5%. In order to have absolute no loss of accuracy,
switching to 32 bit arithmetic would not substantially affect
the power or area of EIE. Only the 16-entry codebook,
the arithmetic units, and the activation register ﬁles would
change in width. The index stored in SRAM would remain
4-bits. The majority of power/area is taken by SRAM, not
arithmetic. The area used by ﬁller cells (used to ﬁll blank
area) is sufﬁcient to double the area of the arithmetic units
and activation registers (Table II).
Figure 11.
System scalability. It measures the speedups with different numbers of PEs. The speedup is near-linear.
VII. DISCUSSION
Many engines have been proposed for Sparse Matrix-
Vector multiplication (SPMV) and the existing trade-offs
on the targeted platforms are studied , . There
are typically three approaches to partition the workload
for matrix-vector multiplication. The combination of these
methods with storage format of the Matrix creates a design
space trade-off.
A. Workload Partitioning
The ﬁrst approach is to distribute matrix columns to PEs.
Each PE handles the multiplication between its columns of
W and corresponding element of a to get a partial sum
of the output vector b. The beneﬁt of this solutions is that
each element of a is only associated with one PE — giving
full locality for vector a. The drawback is that a reduction
operation between PEs is required to obtain the ﬁnal result.
A second approach (ours) is to distribute matrix rows to
PEs. A central unit broadcasts one vector element aj to all
PEs. Each PE computes a number of output activations bi by
performing inner products of the corresponding row of W,
Wj that is stored in the PE with vector a. The beneﬁt of this
solutions is that each element of b is only associated with
one PE — giving full locality for vector b. The drawback is
that vector a needs to be broadcast to all PEs.
A third approach combines the previous two approaches
by distributing blocks of W to the PEs in 2D fashion.
This solution is more scalable for distributed systems where
communication latency cost is signiﬁcant . This way
both of the collective communication operations ”Broadcast”
and ”Reduction” are exploited but in a smaller scale and
hence this solution is more scalable.
The nature of our target class of application and its
sparsity pattern affects the constraints and therefore our
choice of partitioning and storage. The density of W is
≈10%, and the density of a is ≈30%, both with random
distribution. Vector a is stored in normal dense format and
contains 70% the zeros in the memory, because for different
input, aj’s sparsity pattern differs. We want to utilize the
sparsity of both W and a.
The ﬁrst solution suffers from load imbalance given that
vector a is also sparse. Each PE is responsible for a column.
PEj will be completely idle if their corresponding element
aj is zero. On top of the Idle PEs, this solution requires
across-PE reduction and extra level of synchronization.
Since the SPMV engine, has a limited number of PEs,
there won’t be a scalability issue to worry about. However,
the hybrid solution will suffer from inherent complexity and
still possible load imbalance since multiple PEs sharing the
same column might remain idle.
We build our solution based on the second distribution
scheme taking the 30% density of vector a into account. Our
solution aims to perform computations by in-order look-up
of nonzeros in a. Each PE gets all the non-zero elements of
a in order and performs the inner products by looking-up
the matching element that needs to be multiplied by aj, Wj.
This requires the matrix W being stored in CSC format so
the PE can multiply all the elements in the j-th column of
B. Scalability
As the matrix gets larger, the system can be scaled up by
adding more PEs. Each PE has local SRAM storing distinct
rows of the matrix without duplication, so the SRAM is
efﬁciently utilized.
Wire delay increases with the square root of the number of
PEs, however, this is not a problem in our architecture. Since
EIE only requires one broadcast over the computation of the
entire column, which takes many cycles. Consequently, the
broadcast is not on the critical path and can be pipelined
because FIFOs decouple producer and consumer.
Figure 11 shows EIE achieves good scalability on all
benchmarks except NT-We. NT-We is very small (4096 ×
600). Dividing the columns of size 600 and sparsity 10% to
64 or more PEs causes serious load imbalance.
Figure 12 shows the number of padding zeros with
different number PEs. Padding zero occur when the jump
between two consecutive non-zero element in the sparse
matrix is larger than 16, the largest number that 4 bits can
encode. Padding zeros are considered non-zero and lead
to wasted computation. Using more PEs reduces padding
zeros, because the distance between non-zero elements get
smaller due to matrix partitioning, and 4-bits encoding a
max distance of 16 will more likely be enough.
Figure 13 shows the load balance with different number
of PEs, measured with FIFO depth equal to 8. With more
PEs, load balance becomes worse, but padding zero overhead
decreases, which yields efﬁciency for most benchmarks
remain constant. The scalability result is plotted in ﬁgure
Real Work /
Total Work
Figure 12.
As the number of PEs goes up, the number of padding zeros decreases, leading to less padding zeros and less redundant work, thus better
compute efﬁciency.
Load Balance
Figure 13.
Load efﬁciency is measured by the ratio of stalled cycles over total cycles in ALU. More PEs lead to worse load balance, but less padding
zeros and more useful computation.
C. Flexibility
EIE is designed for large neural networks. The weights
and input/ouput of most layers can be easily ﬁt into EIE’s
storage. For those with extremely large input/output sizes
(for example, FC6 layer of VGG-16 has an input size of
25088), EIE is still able to execute them with 64PEs.
EIE can assist general-purpose processors for sparse neural network acceleration or other tasks related to SPMV. One
type of neural network structure can be decomposed into
certain control sequence so that by writing control sequence
to the registers of EIE, a network could be executed.
EIE has the potential to support 1x1 convolution and 3x3
Winograd convolution by turning the channel-wise reduction
into an M ×V . Winograd convolution saves 2.25× multiplications than naive convolution , and for each Winograd
patch the 16 M × V can be scheduled on an EIE.
VIII. COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORK
We compare the results of performance, power and area
on M × V in Table V. The performance is evaluated on
the FC7 layer of AlexNet1. We compared six platforms
for neural networks: Core-i7 (CPU), Titan X (GPU), Tegra
K1 (mobile GPU), A-Eye (FPGA), DaDianNao (ASIC),
TrueNorth (ASIC). All other four platforms suffer from lowefﬁciency during matrix-vector multiplication. A-Eye is optimized for CONV layers and all of the parameters are fetched
from the external DDR3 memory, making it extremely sensitive to bandwidth problem. DaDianNao distributes weights
on 16 tiles, each tile with 4 eDRAM banks, thus has a peak
memory bandwidth of 16 × 4 × (1024bit/8) × 606MHz =
4964GB/s. Its performance on M×V is estimated based on
the peak memory bandwidth because M × V is completely
memory bound. In contrast, EIE maintains a high throughput
for M × V because after compression, all weights ﬁt in
on-chip SRAM, even for very large-scale networks. With
1Except for TrueNorth where FC7 result is not provided, using TIMIT
LSTM result for comparison instead (different benchmarks differ < 2×).
256PEs, EIE has 3.25× more throughput than 64PEs and
can hold 336 million parameters, even larger than VGGnet.
The right column projected EIE to the same technology
(28nm) as the other platforms, with 256PEs, EIE has 2.9×
throughput, 3× area efﬁciency and 19× power efﬁciency
than DaDianNao.
Model Compression. DNN model compression is widely
used to reduce the storage required by DNN models. In early
work, network pruning proved to be a promising approach to
reducing the network complexity and over-ﬁtting – .
Recently Han et al. pruned connections in large scale
neural networks and achieved 9× and 13× pruning rate for
AlexNet and VGG-16 with no loss of accuracy on ImageNet.
The followup work ‘Deep Compression’ compressed
DNN by pruning, weight sharing and Huffman coding,
pushing the compression ratio to 35-49×. SqueezeNet 
further pushes this ratio to 510×: it combines new ConvNet
architecture and Deep Compression, its model size is only
470KB-660KB and has the same prediction accuracy as
AlexNet. SqueezeNet makes it easy to ﬁt DNN model fully
in SRAM and is available online2. SVD is frequently used
to reduce model size . Minerva also uses data
quantization to save memory energy.
Model compression is crucial for reducing memory energy. However, model compression by itself applied on
a GPU yields only 3× energy savings , while EIE
increases this to 3000× by tailoring an architecture to exploit
the irregularity and decoding created by model compression.
DNN accelerator. Many custom accelerators have been
proposed for DNNs. DianNao implements an array of
multiply-add units to map large DNN onto its core architecture. Due to limited SRAM resource, the off-chip DRAM
trafﬁc dominates the energy consumption. DaDianNao 
and ShiDianNao eliminate the DRAM access by having
all weights on-chip (eDRAM or SRAM).
2The 660KB version of SqueezeNet model trained on Imagenet is
available at: 
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING HARDWARE PLATFORMS FOR DNNS.
Platform Type
Technology
Clock (MHz)
Memory type
Max DNN model size (#Params)
Quantization Stategy
Area (mm2)
M×V Throughput (Frames/s)
Area Efﬁciency ( Frames/s/mm2)
Energy Efﬁciency (Frames/J)
In both architectures, the weights are uncompressed and
stored in the dense format. As a result, ShiDianNao can
only handle very small DNN models up to 64K parameters,
which is 3 orders of magnitude smaller than the 60 Million parameter AlexNet by only containing 128KB on-chip
RAM. Such large networks are impossible to ﬁt on chip on
ShiDianNao without compression.
DaDianNao stores the uncompressed model in eDRAM
taking 6.12W memory power and 15.97W total power. EIE
stores compressed model in SRAM taking only 0.35W
memory power and only 0.59W total power; DaDianNao
cannot exploit the sparsity from weights and activations
and they must expand the network to dense form before
operation. It can not exploit weight sharing either. Using just
the compression (and decompressing the data before computation) would reduce DaDianNao total power to around
10W in 28nm, compared to EIEs power of 0.58W in 45nm.
Previous DNN accelerators targeting ASIC and FPGA
platforms used mostly CONV layer as benchmarks,
but have few dedicated experiments on FC layers, which
has signiﬁcant bandwidth bottlenecks, and is widely used
in RNN and LSTMs. Loading weights from the external
memory for the FC layer may signiﬁcantly degrade the
overall performance of the network .
Matrix-Vector
Multiplication
Accelerator.
There is research effort on the implementation of sparse
matrix-vector multiplication (SPMV) on general-purpose
processors. Monakov et al. proposed a matrix storage
format that improves locality, which has low memory footprint and enables automatic parameter tuning on GPU. Bell
et al. implemented data structures and algorithms for
SPMV on GeForce GTX 280 GPU and achieved performance of 36 GFLOP/s in single precision and 16 GFLOP/s
in double precision. developed SPMV techniques that
utilizes large percentages of peak bandwidth for throughputoriented architectures like the GPU. They achieved over an
order of magnitude performance improvement over a quadcore Intel Clovertown system.
To pursue a better computational efﬁciency, several recent
works focus on using FPGA as an accelerator for SPMV.
Zhuo et al. proposed an FPGA-based design on Virtex-
II Pro for SPMV. Their design outperforms general-purpose
processors, but the performance is limited by memory bandwidth. Fowers et al. proposed a novel sparse matrix
encoding and an FPGA-optimized architecture for SPMV.
With lower bandwidth, it achieves 2.6× and 2.3× higher
power efﬁciency over CPU and GPU respectively while
having lower performance due to lower memory bandwidth.
Dorrance et al. proposed a scalable SMVM kernel on
Virtex-5 FPGA. It outperforms CPU and GPU counterparts
with>300× computational efﬁciency and has 38-50× improvement in energy efﬁciency.
For compressed deep networks, previously proposed
SPMV accelerators can only exploit the static weight sparsity. They are unable to exploit dynamic activation sparsity (3×), and they are unable to exploit weight sharing (8×),
altogether 24× energy saving is lost.
IX. CONCLUSION
Fully-connected layers of deep neural networks perform a
matrix-vector multiplication. For real-time networks where
batching cannot be employed to improve re-use, these layers
are memory limited. To improve the efﬁciency of these
layers, one must reduce the energy needed to fetch their
parameters.
This paper presents EIE, an energy-efﬁcient engine optimized to operate on compressed deep neural networks. By
leveraging sparsity in both the activations and the weights,
and taking advantage of weight sharing and quantization,
EIE reduces the energy needed to compute a typical FC
layer by 3,400× compared with GPU. This energy saving
comes from four main factors: the number of parameters is
pruned by 10×; Weight-sharing reduced the weights to only
4 bits. Then the smaller model can be fetched from SRAM
and not DRAM, giving a 120× energy advantage; and since
the activation vector is also sparse, only 30% of the matrix
columns need to be fetched for a ﬁnal 3× savings. These
savings enable an EIE PE to do 1.6 GOPS in an area of
0.64mm2 and dissipate only 9mW. 64 PEs can process FC
layers of AlexNet at 1.88×104 frames/sec. The architecture
is scalable from one PE to over 256 PEs with nearly linear
scaling of energy and performance. On 9 fully-connected
layer benchmarks, EIE outperforms CPU, GPU and mobile
GPU by factors of 189×, 13× and 307×, and consumes
24, 000×, 3, 400× and 2, 700× less energy than CPU, GPU
and mobile GPU, respectively.