Learning to Detect A Salient Object
Nan-Ning Zheng1
Xiaoou Tang2
Heung-Yeung Shum2
1Xi’an Jiaotong University
2Microsoft Research Asia
Xi’an, P.R. China
Beijing, P.R. China
Abstract We study visual attention by detecting a salient
object in an input image. We formulate salient object detection as an image segmentation problem, where we separate
the salient object from the image background. We propose
a set of novel features including multi-scale contrast, centersurround histogram, and color spatial distribution to describe
a salient object locally, regionally, and globally. A Conditional Random Field is learned to effectively combine these
features for salient object detection. We also constructed a
large image database containing tens of thousands of carefully labeled images by multiple users. To our knowledge, it
is the ﬁrst large image database for quantitative evaluation of
visual attention algorithms. We validate our approach on this
image database, which is public available with this paper.
1. Introduction
“Everyone knows what attention is...”
—William James, 1890
The human brain and visual system pay more attention
to some parts of an image. Visual attention has been studied
by researchers in physiology, psychology, neural systems,
and computer vision for a long time.
There are many
applications for visual attention, for example, automatic
image cropping , adaptive image display on small devices , image/video compression, advertising design ,
and image collection browsing. Recent studies 
demonstrated that visual attention helps object recognition,
tracking, and detection as well.
Most existing visual attention approaches are based on
the bottom-up computational framework because visual attention is in general unconsciously
driven by low-level stimulus in the scene such as intensity,
contrast, and motion. These approaches consist of the following three steps. The ﬁrst step is feature extraction, in
which multiple low-level visual features, such as intensity,
color, orientation, texture and motion are extracted from the
image at multiple scales. The second step is saliency computation.
The saliency is computed by a center-surround
operation , self-information , or graph-based random
Figure 1. Salient map. From top to bottom: input image, salient map
computed by Itti’s algorithm ( and
salient map computed by our approach.
walk using multiple features. After normalization and
linear/non-linear combination, a master map or a salient
map is computed to represent the saliency of each image pixel. Last, a few key locations on the saliency map are
identiﬁed by winner-take-all, or inhibition-of-return, or other
non-linear operations. While these approaches have worked
well in ﬁnding a few ﬁxation locations in both synthetic and
natural images, they have not been able to accurately detect
where visual attention should be.
For instance, the middle row in Figure 1 shows three
salient maps computed using Itti’s algorithm . Notice
that the saliency concentrates on several small local regions
with high contrast structures, e.g., the background grid in (a),
the shadow in (b), and the foreground boundary in (c). Although the leaf in (a) commands much attention, the saliency
for the leaf is low. Therefore, these salient maps computed
from low-level features are not a good indication for where a
user’s attention is while perusing these images.
In this paper, we incorporate the high level concept of
salient object into the process of visual attention computation.
In Figure 1, the leaf, car, and woman attract the most visual
attention in each respective image. We call them salient objects, or foreground objects that we are familiar with. As can
1-4244-1180-7/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE
Figure 2. Sample images in our salient object image database.
be observed in Figure 2, people naturally pay more attention
to salient objects in images such as a person, a face, a car, an
animal, or a road sign. Therefore, we formulate salient object
detection as a binary labeling problem that separates a salient
object from the background. Like face detection, we learn
to detect a familiar object; unlike face detection, we detect a
familiar yet unknown object in an image.
We present a supervised approach to learn to detect a
salient object in an image. First, we construct a large image database with 20,000+ well labeled images for training
and evaluation. To our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time a large
image database is available for quantitative evaluation. The
user labeled information is used to supervise the salient object detection. It can be viewed as top-down information in
the training phase. Second, to overcome the challenge that we
do not know what a speciﬁc object or object category is, we
propose a set of novel local, regional, and global features to
deﬁne a generic salient object. These features are optimally
combined through Condition Random Field (CRF) learning.
Moreover, the segmentation is also incorporated into the CRF
to detect a salient object with unknown size and shape. The
last row in Figure 1 shows the salient maps computed by our
2. Image Database
People may have different ideas about what a salient object in an image is. To address the problem of “what is the
most likely salient object in a given image”, we take a voting
strategy by labeling a “ground truth” salient object in the image by multiple users. And in this paper, we focus on the case
of a single salient object in an image.
Salient object representation. Formally, we represent the
salient object as a binary mask A = {ax} in a given image
I. For each pixel x, ax ∈{1, 0} is a binary label to indicate
whether or not the pixel x belongs to the salient object. For
labeling and evaluation, we ask the user to draw a rectangle to
specify a salient object. Our detection algorithm also outputs
Figure 3. Labeled images from 3 users. Top: two consistent labeling
examples. Bottom: three inconsistent labeling examples.
a rectangle.
Image source. We have collected a very large image database
with 130,099 high quality images from a variety of sources,
mostly from image forums and image search engines. Then
we manually selected 60,000+ images each of which contains
a salient object or a distinctive foreground object. We further
selected 20,840 images for labeling. In the selection process,
we excluded any image containing a very large salient object
so that the performance of detection can be more accurately
evaluated.
Labeling consistency.
For each image to be labeled, we
ask the user to draw a rectangle which encloses the most
salient object in the image according to his/her own understanding. The rectangles labeled by different users usually
are not the same. To reduce the labeling inconsistency, we
vote a “ground truth” labeling from the rectangles drawn by
multiple users.
In the ﬁrst stage, we asked three users to label all 20,840
images individually. On average, each user took 10-20 seconds to draw a rectangle on an image. The whole process
took about three weeks. Then, for each labeled image, we
compute a saliency probability map G = {gx|gx ∈ } of
the salient object using the three user labeled rectangles:
where M is the number of users and Am ={am
x } is the binary
mask labeled by the mth user. Figure 3 shows two highly consistent examples and three inconsistent examples. The inconsistent labeling is due to multiple disjoint foreground objects
for the ﬁrst two examples at the bottom row. The last example
at the bottom row shows that an object has hierarchical parts
that are of interest. We call this image set A. In this paper,
we focus on consistent labeling of a single salient object for
each image.
To measure the labeling consistency, we compute statistics
Ct for each image:
x∈{gx>t} gx
Ct is the percentage of pixels whose saliency probabilities
are above a given threshold t. For example, C0.5 is the per-
Figure 4. Labeling consistency. (a) (b) C0.9 (agreed by all 3 users)
and C0.5 on image set A. (c) (d) C0.9 (agreed by at least 8 of 9
users) and C0.5 on image set B.
centage of the pixels agreed on by at least half of the users.
C0.9 ≈1 means that the image is consistently labeled by all
the users. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show the histograms of C0.9
and C0.5 on the image set A. As we can see, the labeled results are quite consistent, e.g., 92% of the labeling results are
consistent between at least two users (Figure 4 (b)) and 63%
of the labeling results are highly consistent among all three
users (Figure 4 (a)).
In the second stage, we randomly selected 5000 highly
consistent images (i.e., C0.9 > 0.8) from the image set A.
Then, we asked nine different users to label the salient object
rectangle. Figures 4(c) and 4(d) show the histograms of C0.9
and C0.5 on these images. Compared with the image set A,
this set of images has less ambiguity of what the salient object
is. We call these images as image set B.
After the above two-stage labeling process, the salient object in our image database is deﬁned based on the “majority
agreement” of multiple users and represented as a saliency
probability map.
Evaluation. With the saliency probability map G, for any
detected salient object mask A, we deﬁne region-based and
boundary-based measurements.
We use the precision, recall, and F-measure for regionbased measurement.
Precision/Recall is the ratio of correctly detected salient region to the detected/“ground truth”
salient region: Precision = P
x ax, Recall =
x gx. F-measure is the weighted harmonic mean
of precision and recall, with a non-negative α:
(1+α)×Precision×Recall
α×Precision+Recall
. We set α = 0.5 following . The
F-measure is an overall performance measurement.
For the boundary-based measurement, we use boundary
displacement error (BDE) , which measures the average
displacement error of corresponding boundaries of two rectangles. The displacement is averaged over the different users.
3. CRF for Salient Object Detection
We formulate the salient object detection problem as a binary labeling problem by separating the salient object from
the background. In the Conditional Random Field (CRF)
framework , the probability of the label A = {ax} given
the observation image I is directly modeled as a conditional
distribution P(A|I) = 1
Z exp(−E(A|I)), where Z is the partition function. To detect a salient object, we deﬁne the energy E(A|I) as a linear combination of a number of K salient
features Fk(ax, I) and a pairwise feature S(ax, ax′, I):
λkFk(ax, I) +
S(ax, ax′, I),
where λk is the weight of the kth feature, and x, x′ are
two adjacent pixels. Compared with Markov Random Field
(MRF), one of advantages of CRF is that the feature functions Fk(ax, I) and S(ax, ax′, I) can use arbitrary low-level
or high-level features extracted from the whole image. CRF
also provides an elegant framework to combine multiple features with effective learning.
Salient object feature. Fk(ax, I) indicates whether or not a
pixel x belongs to the salient object. In next section, we propose a set of local, regional, and global salient object features
to detect the salient object. Each kind of salient object feature provides a normalized feature map fk(x, I) ∈ for
every pixel. The salient object feature Fk(ax, I) is deﬁned as
Fk(ax, I) =
1 −fk(x, I)
Pairwise feature. S(ax, ax′, I) models the spatial relationship between two adjacent pixels. Following the contrastsensitive potential function in interactive image segmentation , we deﬁne S(ax, ax′, I) as:
S(ax, ax′, I) = |ax −ax′| · exp(−βdx,x′),
where dx,x′ = ||Ix −Ix′|| is the L2 norm of the color difference. β is a robust parameter that weights the color contrast,
and can be set as β = (2⟨||Ix−Ix′||2⟩)−1 , where ⟨·⟩is the
expectation operator. This feature function is a penalty term
when adjacent pixels are assigned with different labels. The
more similar the colors of the two pixels are, the less likely
they are assigned different labels. With this pairwise feature
for segmentation, the homogenous interior region inside the
salient object can also be labeled as salient pixels.
3.1. CRF Learning
To get an optimal linear combination of features, the goal
of CRF learning is to estimate the linear weights −→λ
k=1 under the Maximized Likelihood (ML) criteria.
Given N training image pairs {In, An}N
n=1, the optimal parameters maximize the sum of the log-likelihood:
−→λ ∗= arg max
log P(An|In; −→λ ).
The derivative of the log-likelihood with respect to the parameter λk is the difference between two expectations:
d log P(An|In; −→λ )
< Fk(An, In) >P (An|In;−
λ ) −< Fk(An, In) >P (An|Gn) .
Then, the gradient descent direction is:
x, In)p(an
x|In; −→λ )
x, In)p(an
where p(an
x|In; −→λ ) =
x|In; −→λ ) is the marginal
distribution and p(an
x) is from the labeled ground-truth:
Exact computation of marginal distribution p(an
x|In; −→λ ) is
intractable. However, the pseudo-marginal (belief) computed
by belief propagation can be used as a good approximation . The tree-reweighted belief propagation can
be run under the current parameters in each step of gradient
descent to compute an approximation of the marginal distribution p(an
x|In; −→λ ).
4. Salient Object Features
In this section, we introduce local, regional, and global
features that deﬁne a salient object. Since scale selection is
one of the fundamental issues in feature extraction, we resize
all images so that the max(width,height) of the image is 400
pixels. In the following, all parameters are set with respect to
this basic image size.
4.1. Multi-scale contrast
Contrast is the most commonly used local feature for attention detection because the contrast operator
simulates the human visual receptive ﬁelds. Without knowing the size of salient object, contrast is usually computed at
multiple scales. In this paper, we simply deﬁne the multiscale contrast feature fc(x, I) as a linear combination of contrasts in the Gaussian image pyramid:
fc(x, I) =
||Il(x) −Il(x′)||2
where Il is the lth-level image in the pyramid and the number
of pyramid levels L is 6. N(x) is a 9×9 window. The feature
map fc(·, I) is normalized to a ﬁxed range . An example
is shown in Figure 5. Multi-scale contrast highlights the high
contrast boundaries by giving low scores to the homogenous
regions inside the salient object.
Figure 5. Multi-scale contrast. From left to right: input image, contrast maps at multiple scales, and the feature map from linearly combining the contrasts at multiple scales.
4.2. Center-surround histogram
As shown in Figure 2, the salient object usually has a
larger extent than local contrast and can be distinguished from
its surrounding context. Therefore, we propose a regional
salient feature.
Suppose the salient object is enclosed by a rectangle R.
We construct a surrounding contour RS with the same area
of R, as shown in Figure 6 (a). To measure how distinct
the salient object in the rectangle is with respect to its surroundings, we can measure the distance between R and RS
using various visual cues such as intensity, color, and texture/texton. In this paper, we use the χ2 distance between
histograms of RGB color: χ2(R, RS) =
We use histograms because they are robust global description of appearance. They are insensitive to small changes in
size, shape, and viewpoint. Another reason is that the histogram of a rectangle with any location and size can be very
quickly computed by means of integral histogram introduced
recently . Figure 6 (a) shows that the salient object (the
girl) is most distinct using the χ2 histogram distance. We
have also tried the intensity histogram and oriented gradient
histogram. We found that the former is redundant with the
color histogram and the latter is not a good measurement because the texture distribution in a semantic object is usually
not coherent.
To handle varying aspect ratios of the object, we use
ﬁve templates with different aspect ratios {0.5, 0.75, 1.0,
1.5, 2.0}. We ﬁnd the most distinct rectangle R∗(x) centered
at each pixel x by varying the size and aspect ratio:
R∗(x) = arg max
R(x) χ2(R(x), RS(x)).
The size range of the rectangle R(x) is set to [0.1, 0.7] ×
min(w, h), where w, h are image width and height. Then,
the center-surround histogram feature fh(x, I) is deﬁned as a
sum of spatially weighted distances:
fh(x, I) ∝
{x′|x∈R∗(x′)}
wxx′χ2(R∗(x′), R∗
where R∗(x′) is the rectangle centered at x′ and containing
the pixel x. The weight wxx′ = exp(−0.5σ−2
x′ ||x−x′||2) is a
Gaussian falloff weight with variance σ2
x′, which is set to one
Figure 6. Center-surround histogram. (a) center-surround histogram
distances with different locations and sizes. (b) top row are input
images and bottom row are center-surround histogram feature maps.
Figure 7. The average center-surround histogram distance on the image set A. 1. a randomly selected rectangle. 2. a rectangle centered
at the image center with 55% ratio of area to image. 3-5. rectangles
labeled by three users.
third of the size of R∗(x′). Finally, the feature map fh(·, I)
is also normalized to the range .
Figure 6 (b) shows several center-surround feature maps.
The salient objects are well located by the center-surround
histogram feature. Especially, the last image in Figure 6 (b) is
a difﬁcult case for color or contrast based approaches but the
center-surround histogram feature can capture the “objectlevel” salient region.
To further verify the effectiveness of this feature, we compare the center-surround histogram distance of a randomly selected rectangle, a rectangle centered at the image center, and
three user-labeled rectangles in the image. Figure 7 shows
the average distances on the image set A. It is no surprise
that salient object has a large center-surround histogram distance.
4.3. Color spatial-distribution
The center-surround histogram is a regional feature. Is
there a global feature related to the salient object? We observe from Figure 2 that the wider a color is distributed in the
image, the less possible a salient object contains this color.
The global spatial distribution of a speciﬁc color can be used
to describe the saliency of an object.
To describe the spatial-distribution of a speciﬁc color,
the simplest approach is to compute the spatial variance of
the color. First, all colors in the image are represented by
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) {wc, µc, Σc}C
c=1, where
{wc, µc, Σc} is the weight, the mean color and the covariance matrix of the cth component. Each pixel is assigned to a
color component with the probability:
wcN(Ix|µc, Σc)
c wcN(Ix|µc, Σc).
Then, the horizontal variance Vh(c) of the spatial position for
each color component c is:
p(c|Ix) · |xh −Mh(c)|2,
p(c|Ix) · xh,
where xh is x-coordinate of the pixel x, and |X|c
x p(c|Ix).
The vertical variance Vv(c) is similarly de-
The spatial variance of a component c is V (c) =
Vh(c) + Vv(c). We normalized {V (c)}c to the range 
(V (c) ←(V (c) −minc V (c))/(maxc V (c) −minc V (c))).
Finally, the color spatial-distribution feature fs(x, I) is de-
ﬁned as a weighted sum:
fs(x, I) ∝
p(c|Ix) · (1 −V (c)).
The feature map fs(·, I) is also normalized to the range .
Figure 8 (b) shows color spatial-distribution feature maps of
several example images. The salient objects are well covered
by this global feature. Note that the spatial variance of the
color at the image corners or boundaries may be also small
because the image is cropped from the whole scene. To reduce this artifact, a center-weighted, spatial-variance feature
is deﬁned as:
fs(x, I) ∝
p(c|Ix) · (1 −V (c)) · (1 −D(c)),
where D(c) = P
x p(c|Ix)dx is a weight which assigns less
importance to colors nearby image boundaries and is also normalized to , similar to V (c). dx is the distance from
pixel x to the image center. As shown in Figure 8 (c), centerweighted, color spatial variance shows a better prediction of
the saliency of each color.
To verify the effectiveness of this global feature, we plot
the color spatial-variance versus average saliency probability
curve on the image set A, as shown in Figure 9. Obviously,
the smaller a color variance is, the higher probability the color
belongs to the salient object.
5. Evaluation
We randomly select 2,000 images from image set A and
1,000 images from image set B to construct a training set,
Figure 8. Color spatial-distribution feature. (a) input images. (b)
color spatial variance feature maps. (c) center-weighted, color spatial variance feature maps.
Figure 9. Color spatial variance (x-coordinate) v.s. average saliency
probability (y-coordinate) on the image set A. The saliency probability is computed from the “ground truth” labeling.
which are excluded from the testing phase. To output a rectangle for the evaluation, we exhaustively search for a smallest
rectangle containing at least 95% salient pixels in the binary
label map produced by the CRF.
Effectiveness of features and CRF learning. To evaluate
the effectiveness of each salient object feature, we trained
four CRFs: three CRFs with individual features and one CRF
with all three features. Figure 10 shows the precision, recall,
and F-measure of these CRFs on the image sets A and B.
As can be seen, the multi-scale contrast feature has a high
precision but a very low recall. The reason is that the inner
homogenous region of a salient object has low contrast. The
center-surround histogram has the best overall performance
(on F-measure) among all individual features. This regional
feature is able to detect the whole salient object, although
the background region may contain some errors. The color
spatial-distribution has slightly lower precision but has the
highest recall. Later, we will discuss that for attention detection, recall rate is not as important as precision. It demonstrates the strength and weakness of the global feature. After
CRF learning, the CRF with all three features produces the
best result, as shown in the last bars in Figure 10. The best
linear weights we learnt are: −→λ = {0.24, 0.54, 0.22}.
Figure 11 shows the feature maps and labeling results of
several examples. Each feature has its own strengths and limitations. By combining all features with the pairwise feature,
the CRF successfully locates the most salient object.
Comparison with other approaches.
We compare our
(a) image set A
(b) image set B
Figure 10. Evaluation of salient object features. 1. multi-scale contrast. 2. center-surround histogram. 3. color spatial distribution. 4.
combination of all features.
Figure 11. Examples of salient features. From left to right: input
image, multi-scale contrast, center-surround histogram, color spatial
distribution, and binary salient mask by CRF.
algorithm with two leading approaches.
One is the contrast and fuzzy growing based method , which we call
This approach directly outputs a rectangle.
Another approach is the salient model presented in , and
we call it “SM” (We use a matlab implementation from
 Because the output of this
approach is a salient map, we convert the salient map to a
rectangle containing 95% of the ﬁxation points, which are
determined by the winner-take-all algorithm .
Figure 12 shows the evaluation results of three algorithms
on both image set A and B. On image set A, our approach
reduced 42% and 34% overall error rates on F-measure, and
39% and 31% boundary displacement errors (BDEs), compared with FG and SM. Similarly, 49% and 38% overall error
rates on F-measure, and 48% and 37% BDEs are reduced on
the image set B.
Notice that as show in Figure 10 and 12, the individual features (center-surround histogram and color spatialdistribution), FG, and SM all have higher recall rates than
our ﬁnal approach. In fact, recall rate is not much of a useful
measure in attention detection. For example, a 100% recall
rate can be achieved by simply select the whole image. So
algorithm trying to achieve a high recall rate tends to select
as large an attention region as possible sacriﬁcing the precision rate. The key objective of attention detection should be
to locate position of a salient object as accurately as possible, i.e. with high precision. However, for images with a
large salient object, a high precision is also not too difﬁcult to
achieve. Again, for example, for an image with a salient ob-
(a) preci./recall, image set A
(b) preci./recall, image set B
(c) BDE, image set A
(d) BDE, image set B
Figure 12. Comparison of different algorithms. (a-b) and (c-d) are
region-based (precision, recall, and F-measure) and boundary-based
(BDE - boundary displacement error) evaluations. 1. FG. 2. SM. 3.
our approach.
(a) preci./recall
Figure 13. Comparison on a small object (object/image ratio ∈
[0, 0.25]) dataset from image set A. 1. a rectangle centered at the
image center and with 0.6 object/image ratio. 2. FG. 3. SM. 4. our
ject occupying 80% of the image area, just select the whole
image as attention area will give 80% precision with 100%
recall rate. So the real challenge for attention detection is to
achieve high precision on small salient objects. To construct
such a challenge data set, we select a small object subset with
object/image ratio in the range [0, 0.25] from the image set
A. The results on this small object dataset are shown in Figure 13, where we also show the performance of a rectangle
ﬁxed at the image center with 0.6 object/image ratio. Notice
that both this center rectangle and FG achieve high recall rate
but with very low precision and large BDE. Our method is
signiﬁcantly better than FG and SM in both precision (97%
and 37% improvement) and BDE (55% and 33% reduction).
Figure 14 shows several examples with ground truth rectangles from one user for a qualitative comparison. We can see
that FG and SM approaches tend to produce a larger attention
rectangle and our approach is much more precise.
Figure 15 shows our detection results on the images in Figure 2. The whole labeled database and our results are public
available from: 
Figure 14. Comparison of different algorithms. From left to right:
FG, SM, our approach, and ground-truth.
Figure 15. Our detection result on the images in Figure 2.
Figure 16. Multiple salient object detection. (a) Two birds are detected at the same time. (b) The toy car is detected ﬁrstly, and using
the updated feature maps, the boy is detected secondly.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a supervised approach for
salient object detection, which is formulated as an image seg-
Figure 17. Failure cases. From left to right: FG, SM, our approach,
and ground-truth.
mentation problem using a set of local, regional, and global
salient object features. A CRF was learnt and evaluated on a
large image database containing 20,000+ well-labeled images
by multiple users.
Salient object detection has wider applications. For example, a more semantic, object-based image similarity can be
deﬁned with salient object detection for content-based image
retrieval. Manually collecting and labeling training images in
object recognition is very costly. With salient object detection, it is possible to automatically collect and label a substantial number of images.
There are several important remaining issues for further
investigation of salient object detection.
In future work,
we plan to experiment with non-rectangular shapes for
salient objects, and non-linear combination of features.
More sophisticated visual features will further improve the
performance.
In particular, we are extending our single
salient object detection framework to detect multiple salient
objects or no salient object at all. Figure 16 shows two initial
In Figure 16 (a), our current CRF approach can
directly output two disjoint connected components so that we
can easily detect them simultaneously. In Figure 16 (b), we
use the inhibition-of-return strategy to detect the salient
objects one-by-one.
Finally, Figure 17 shows two failure
cases, which demonstrate one of the challenges in the salient
object detection — hierarchical salient object detection.
Acknowledgments This work is performed when Tie Liu visited Microsoft Research Asia. Tie Liu and Nan-Ning Zheng
were supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation of China (No.60021302).