An Empirical Study on the Implementation and Evaluation of a
Goal-driven Software Development Risk Management Model
Shareeful Islama, Haralambos Mouratidisb, Edgar R Weipplc, Jan Jürjensd
aSchool of School of Architecture, Computing, and Engineering, 4-6 University Way London E16 2RD, University
of East London, United Kingdom
 
bSchool of Architecture, Computing, and Engineering, 4-6 University Way London E16 2RD, University of East
London, United Kingdom
 
cSecure Business Austria, Sommerpalais Harrach, Favoritenstrasse 16, 1040 Wien, Austria
 
dChair for Software Engineering(14), Technische Universität Dortmund, Baroper Straße 301, 44227 Dortmund,
 
Context: Building a quality software product in the shortest possible time to satisfy the global
market demand gives an enterprise a competitive advantage. However, uncertainties and
risks exist at every stage of a software development project. These can have an extremely
high inﬂuence on the success of the ﬁnal software product. Early risk management practice
is effective to manage such risks and contributes effectively towards the project success.
Objective:Despite risk management approaches, a detailed guideline that explains where
to integrate risk management activities into the project is still missing. Little effort has been
directed towards the evaluation of the overall impact of a risk management method. We
present a Goal-driven Software Development Risk Management Model (GSRM) and its explicit integration into the requirements engineering phase and an empirical investigation result of applying GSRM into a project.
Method:We combined case study method with action research. This allows to guide the development team for managing risks and to attain goals as well as to identify ways to improve
the proposed methodology. The data is from multiple sources and analysed both qualitative
and quantitative way.
When risk factors are beyond the control of the project manager and project environment then it is difﬁcult to control these risks. Project scope affects all dimensions of
risk. GSRM is a reasonable risk management method that can be employed in an industrial
context. The study results compare with other existing study results, to generalize ﬁndings
and to identify contextual factors.
Conclusion: A formal early stage risk management practice provides early warning related
to the problems that exists in the project and contributes to the overall project success. It is
not necessary to always consider budget and schedule constraints top priority. There exist
issues such as requirements, change management, and user satisfaction inﬂuence these
constraints.
Keywords: software risk management, goal modeling language, requirements
engineering,goal-driven software development risk management model, empirical study,
and goal-risk model
1. Introduction
Software projects, by inherent nature, contain a signiﬁcant number of uncertainties related to time-to-market, budget and schedule estimation, technology evolution, and stakeholders expectations.
Failure to control these uncertainties imposes potential risks to a
project. Software risk management can be used as a tool to manage these risks and to
reason under high degree of the uncertainties involved. There exist several risk management methods for managing risks in software projects . However, practitioners
and researchers agree that for a risk management practice to be effective, it needs to be
included at the early phase of the development process , since requirement problems are
one of the main causes of project failure . An advantage of considering risk management
during the requirements engineering phase is that such integration enables the identiﬁcation
of expensive and persistent requirement problems , early in the development process and
the development of robust requirements free of such problems. However, the literature fails
to provide comprehensive and detailed guidelines and clear evidence of how to integrate risk
management activities at the early development stages . Moreover, although several study results exist in the literature on identifying risk factors in software project, only few
reports are available on evaluating the impact of an overall risk management method into a
software project . Research studies indicate that risk management is not well applied in
practice and practitioners are more concerned on the tangible development cost, which
provides direct beneﬁts in terms of project deliverables . For a successful project, it is
difﬁcult to prove that any part of the resulting product is inﬂuenced by software risk management . Therefore, it is necessary to integrate risk management approaches into the
early development and to create awareness among the practitioners about the impact of risk
management practice on software project.
Within the above context, the novel contributions of this paper are i) a goal-driven risk
management method ; ii) explicit integration of the risk management method into the requirements engineering phase; and iii) an empirical evaluation of the impact of the risk management method into a software development project.
The presented risk management
method is based on the KAOS goal modelling language . In particular, GSRM adopts
goal and obstacle concepts from the KAOS goal modelling language and extends it with risk
assessment and treatment . We have decided to build our work on existing research on
goal modelling because goals and risks are complementary entities of a software project. A
risk is usually deﬁned as negation to single or multiple goals or loss of attainment of corresponding objectives . As such, the goal-driven approach anchors the risk management
activities and allows to trace and rationalize the risk factors, events and control actions with
respect to the goals. Furthermore, Goal-orient Requirements Engineering(GORE) has long
been recognised in requirements engineering community as an important paradigm to elicit,
analyse, and document requirements. As such, the decision to build on KAOS allows us to
explicitly integrate risk management into the early development phase.
The methodology is explained with the aid of a carefully designed case study for the
development of an automation system in a public sector organisation (Ministry of Planning
Commission) in Bangladesh under the e-governance project. The main goal of empirical
 
October 17, 2012
investigation is to evaluate the effectiveness of GSRM and in particular the impact of an early
risk management practice on a software development project. Our work, combines a case
study method with action research so that identiﬁed treatment actions can be used to control
the potential project risks. The results from the case study outline the impact of GSRM on
the project and compare the identiﬁed results with other literature results. Such comparison
demonstrates the impact of risk management, at requirements engineering level, to software
project development projects.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the state of the
art about risk management methods and risk factors. Section 3 provides an overview of
the goal-driven risk management model. Section 4 outlines the integration of GSRM into
requirements engineering. Section 5 demonstrates the evaluation results on the implementation of the GSRM into a software project. This section discusses the evaluation approach,
study context, GSRM process and lessons learned from the study context by implementing
GSRM. Section 7, provides a critical discussion of the various parts of GSRM and it outlines
some of our experiences from the studied project. Section 8 provides validity of the study
results. Finally Sect. 9 concludes the paper and presents directions for future work.
2. Related works
This section focuses on existing work that relates to our approach. We ﬁrst discuss the
risk management framework then study results on identifying risk factors and their impact on
software project and barriers in risk management practice.
2.1. Risk Management Framework
The theoretical foundation of putting risk management into a single framework is initially
contributed by Boehm risk-driven Spiral model. Later on, Boehm extended the original
Spiral model using the theory W (Win-Win) model to satisfy the objectives and concerns
of the stakeholders. The model also supports risk identiﬁcation, resolution and continuous
monitoring of risks. However the approach requires intensive active involvement of project
customer/user, which is difﬁcult to attain in real on-going project situation.
The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) provides a comprehensive framework to support a continuous risk management activities . The approach concerns identiﬁcation, analysis, communication and mitigation strategies for software risk management. It
depends on risk taxonomy and consists of constructs used for organizing risk information. The taxonomy covers 194 questions of several areas including requirements, designing, coding, testing, integration, and engineering specialties under product engineering,
development process, development system, management process, management methods,
work environment under development environment and resources, contracts and program
interfaces under program constraints. SEI also developed a process improvement model,
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), provides close correlation between quality of
software product and quality of the software development process . CMMI make it compatible with ISO standard for software process assessment, i.e., SO/ IEC 15504 . CMMI
considers continuous risk management as an important feature with concepts like risk management strategy, identify and analyse risks and risk control. ISO 31000:2009 provides process, framework and a number of principles for an effective risk management practice .
Risk management is considered as an integral part of all organizational processes, including
strategic planning and all project and change management processes.
Karolak proposed the Software Engineering Risk Model (SERIM) by considering the
Just-In-Time (JIT) software approach. SERIM attempts to minimize the amount of risks involved, while optimizing the contingency strategies for problematic situations. The approach
considers three main risk elements, technology, cost and schedule from technological and
business perspectives. These elements are interconnected with 81 risk factors. The risk
factors are inﬂuenced by organization, estimation, monitoring, development methodology,
tools, risk culture and usability. However, no empirical validation reports are available of
the SERIM approach and it does not show when and where the risk management initiates
during the development process and who will be involved into the process. Kontio proposed
the Riskit methodology , which provides a complete conceptual framework for risk management using a goal/expectation approach from the stakeholders and risks which threaten
the goals. It provides precise and unambiguous deﬁnitions of risks and aims at modelling
and documenting risks qualitatively. At the heart of the approach, is the visual formalism of
the risk by analyzing risk factors, risk events, risk reactions, risk effect sets and utility loss
that would occur due to risk events. Riskit has some important limitations. There are no
clear sources speciﬁed from where the goals are originated and how the identiﬁed goals
are modeled.
Risks are analyzed and prioritized by deriving scenarios, which is a nontrivial task when a scenario depends upon more than one probabilistic element. Moreover,
it is always hard to formulate a scenario from factors and attempt to perform a comparison
amongst them. Foo et al. make use of a comprehensive questionnaire to construct the
Software Risk Assessment Model(SRAM). A set of questions are chosen for nine critical risk
elements, i.e. complexity, staff, targeted reliability, requirements, method of estimation, monitoring, process, usability and tools. However, the main limitations of this approach is the
lack of a detailed implementation of the model and the lack of a set rule for common weight
value, which means that practitioners need to determine a risk probability for each element.
Determining element probability is a difﬁcult task, which depends on project speciﬁc context
and involved practitioner’s belief. Roy’s pro risk management framework is an extension
of the AS/NZS standard 4360:1999 . The main attention of the framework is on business
component in which the project is created and the operational domain where the project is
actually carried out. Prikaldnicki et al. proposed an integrated risk management process
across three different organizational levels i.e., strategic, tactical and operational, in particular for the global software development (GSD) projects. It follows a reference model that
focuses on two different dimensions, i.e., organizational and project and consists of four different phases including new project, project allocation, project development, evaluation and
2.2. Study Results
Several survey studies were performed on identifying risk factors and assessing their
impact on software development projects and barriers to implement a formal risk management practice. The participants of these surveys are mostly experienced practitioners who
express their view about risk factors and their impact in the software development. Some
studies also focus on the challenges for implementation of risk management in software
development projects.
2.2.1. Risk Factors
A well known "top-ten" list of risk factors is provided by Boehm . After that several
lists of risk factors have been published . Among these contributions,
Barki and Schmidt composed the most comprehensive ones. Barki et al. compiled a
list of 35 risk variables which were represented in the form of a questionnaire consisting of
144 items based on the review of the existing Information System (IS) literature. The results
of their survey are based on the questionnaire showing ﬁve inﬂuential factors: technological
newness, application size, lack of expertise, application complexity and organizational environment for the most interpretable solution of software risk. Moynihan focuses on the
project constructs, i.e., personal constructs and application, which need to be considered by
the project manager. The study observed that risk variables identiﬁed by Barki et al. 
lack client’s apparent knowledge. Schmidt et al. published a comprehensive list of risk
factors by conducting Delphi survey study with the experienced project practitioners through
three different panels located in three different countries. The study categorized the risk
factors into several different areas such as corporate environment, sponsorship, relationship
management, project management, scope, requirements, funding, scheduling, development
process, stafﬁng, technology, and external dependencies. Arshad et al. published a
list of important risk factors and ranked them by following the survey response. Iacovou et
al. summarized a risk proﬁle by the top ten risk factors for offshore-outsourced development projects. The risk factors are ranked as very important, important and less important
by focusing on three main areas: communication, client’s internal management and vendor
capabilities. Nakatsu et al. further investigated and compared the risk factors between
offshore and domestic outsourcing. The results showed that many risk factors related to
project management commonly appeared on the top of both domestic and offshore risk lists
such as lack of top management commitment, inadequate user involvement and failure to
manage end user expectation. Some are unique for the offshore context such as lack of
communication, poor change controls, lack of business know-how and failure to consider all
costs. Aspray et al. provided an ACM task force report that considers risk related to both
technical and nontechnical issues.
2.2.2. Risk Factors Impact
Some works have been undertaken to investigate the potential effects of risk factors on
software development projects. Wallace et al. focused on risk factors from six different
dimensions and their effect on a project. The study considered low, medium and high risk
projects and observed the impact of risk dimensions on the projects. The six risk dimensions
are, user, team, requirements, planning and control, complexity and organizational environment. The results showed that risks associated with requirements, planning and control
and organizational environment are more obvious for the high risk projects. Ropponen et
al. identiﬁed six components of software development risk which are scheduling and
timing, system functionality, subcontracting, requirement management, resource usage and
performance, and personnel management. The result showed that awareness of the risk
management impact and systematic risk management practice has an effect on schedule,
requirements and personal management risk. Jiang et al. examined the risk impact on
different system development aspects ,in particular, the study looked at the 12 most common
software development risks proposed by Barki . Empirical evidence on the relationship
between risk and project effectiveness was considered. Two common risks observed were
lack of expertise and clear role deﬁnition. According to that work, Practitioner expertise is
further reﬁned with the ability to work with uncertain objectives, top management and as a
team, and ability to carry out tasks effectively. Member selection for the project must comprise clear deﬁnition of speciﬁc tasks, expected outcomes, rewards, timing, responsibilities,
and reporting relationship. The research concluded that controlling these two risk dimensions can effectively contribute to the project success.
2.2.3. Software Risk Management Barriers
Ropponen et al. showed that 75 % of the project managers did not follow any detailed risk management practice and did not have adequate knowledge about software risk
management. However for a successful project, it is difﬁcult to prove that any part of the
resulting product was inﬂuenced by the software risk management . Kwak et al observed that project managers and practitioners perceive risk management activities as extra
work and expenses. Nyfjord et al. in a survey study outline several problems to integrate
risk management into the development. They categorise them as resource problems (i.e.,
expensive training cost, lack of resource and time), organizational problems (i.e., different
roles, lack of competence, overloaded work), scope problems, and process problems (i.e.,
lack of coordination, integration and planning). Another recent survey study of experienced
project managers on their perception of software risk management outlines tangible development cost, lack of resources and efforts from organization or process change due to
risk mitigation are top three identiﬁed barriers of software risk management. The result also
emphasizes other barriers such as too much risk to control, reward for problem solving not
for risk mitigation, overconﬁdence on individual measurements that pose challenges for the
implementation of risk management in the development. Pﬂeeger emphasizes false precision (i.e., lack of risk probability distribution data and obscure value), questionable science
(i.e., relevancy and quality of the data being studied, ignorance or giving less credence to
qualitative data), and confusion of facts with value (i.e., risk quantiﬁcation without knowing
the consequence).
Risk management frameworks, standard and study results discussed above are important but they also demonstrate a number of limitations. For instance, No empirical validation
reports are available to understand how applicable Karolak’s SERIM approach is in a real
project context. Similar to GSRM, Kontio’s Riskit is also a goal-driven approach but it is
not clear from where the goal can originate and risk analysis is based on scenario which
is difﬁcult to formulate. Considering the risk management standard ISO 31000:2009, it provides generic high level guidelines for implementing risk management into organizational
process using process, framework and principals. But how risk management should integrate into organization process and what techniques need to follow for performing the risk
management activities are not clear from the standard. The existing risk management frameworks, standards, and survey results from practitioners emphasize on the integration of risk
management from the early development process. However details to integrate risk management activities into software project are still missing. A little work has been undertaken
to understand the impact of overall risk management framework into software development.
In contrast, our work improves the current states of the art by i) introducing a goal-driven
approach for risk management; we demonstrate the source for goal and risk factors and
categorise the identiﬁed goals and risks factors using component-element-factor hierarchy;
ii) explicitly integrating risk management activities into early development; we use artefact
and process oriented view to systematically integrate GSRM into requirements engineering phase; iii) deﬁning operationalised activities for the risk management process; GSRM
precisely deﬁnes textual and visual artefacts under the activities. The process initially determines how risky the project is before starting the risk management activities; iv) empirically
evaluating impact of a risk management method in particular GSRM into an active ongoing
software project.
3. Overview of the Goal-driven Software Development Risk Management Model
The Goal-driven Software Development Risk Management Model (GSRM) is a framework that supports assessment and and management of risks from the early requirements
engineering phase. It is an extension of the KAOS goal modelling language with concepts
related to risk management. It is worth stating that the focus of this paper is not to present
in detail the GSRM framework but rather to present its applicability and its empirical usage
in a case study. GSRM has partially been presented in other publications . This
section presents a brief overview of GSRM, which demonstrates some distinguished characteristics, i.e., i) the explicit integration of risk management into the early development stages,
ii) the involvement of project stakeholders as an active contributor to the risk management
process, and iii) the usage and modelling of goals to rationalize risk management.
For an effective and efﬁcient software development and project success, we categorise
development components into ﬁve dimensions : project execution, development process,
product, human, and environment (internal & external) . Individual components provide an abstract view that is generally comprised of single or multiple elements.
Elements are the essential parts that describe a component. The elements may further be
characterized by single or multiple factors, and if necessary, also reﬁned into sub-factors.
Therefore, factors are the lowest level reﬁnement of the development component and represent a concrete aspect of the development. Elements and factors together represent the
components, by following development activities, project execution, product speciﬁcation
and quality, human and environmental issues, and the resulting artefacts. For example,
the project execution component is described by elements, such as planning and control,
project scope and tool support; where planning and control are further reﬁned into factors
such as budget, schedule and milestones, monitor, complexity and change management.
GSRM deﬁnes this as a component-element-factor hierarchy. Generally, the elements are
intertwined, interdependent, and contribute to attain single or multiple development goals.
This hierarchy includes both technical and non-technical development issues, which support
the consideration of a holistic view on software risk management.
3.1. Levels of Abstraction
The model supports different levels of abstraction from goal to obstacle and ﬁnally to
treatment. Figure 1 gives an overview of the different levels of abstraction, depicting exemplary questions that symbolize the characteristics of the proposed model. We divide the
levels of abstraction into three main areas. These levels build the bridge from the goals of
a software project to the risks that obstruct these goals, and ﬁnally, the treatments that reduce the risks to satisfy these goals. On the top level, there are the goals, i.e., objectives,
expectations, and constraints from the development components. These goals map with the
project success indicators. In the middle two levels the risk factors, which directly or indirectly
obstruct the fulﬁllment of the goals, are shown. The risk factors cause undesirable events
that bring negative consequences to the goals. Risk events are then assessed to estimate
the severity of the risk. At the bottom level, there are the control actions that obstruct the
risks and associated consequences to attain the goals. This abstraction supports reﬁnement
of goals and obstacles and establishment of the obstruction and contribution links amongst
What are the issues relating to the project success?
What are the goals, expectations, constraints of the development componentelement-factor from the perspective of project success ?
Overview of Goals
How are risk factors related with each other and contribute for the risk event
occurence?
How severe are the risks within the projectt?
What are the important risks for the project ?
What are the risk factors that obstruct the goals ?
What are the risk factors that create problems within the development?
Treatment and monitor
What are the control actions that countermeasure the risks?
How effective are the control actions?
Are there any new risks that arise within the development environment ?
Risks specification
Consequence
Levels of abstraction
Obstacle model
Causal relationship model
Figure 1: Overview of Risk Abstraction Levels
them. The reﬁnement is fulﬁlled through vertical abstraction so that goals are traced
by the control action for their satisfaction. The more goals and risks are reﬁned, the better the support of risk management at an early stage. The Risk speciﬁcation is the main
artefact produced by the model as shown in the right hand side of Figure 1. On the left
side, the ﬁgure shows different models,i.e., goal model, obstacle model and causal relationship model. A goal model reﬁnes higher level goals to lower level ﬁnely grained sub-goals
through AND or OR reﬁnement so that sub-goals contribute to the main goals. An obstacle
model is the reﬁnement of risk factors to the risk event and obstruction link from obstacle to
the goals. Therefore, an obstacle model is a goal-risk model as it links from the obstacles to
the goals. Finally, a causal relationship model visualises the factors that are responsible for
the occurence of a risk event.
3.2. Framework
The framework consists of four layers to support software development risk management.
The advantage of a layer based modelling framework is that it includes suitable tasks, methods and techniques for performing speciﬁc activities under any layer.This section provides a
brief overview of the layers.
Goal Layer. The concept of a Goal is the core concept of this approach. The goal layer focuses on the factors that contribute effectively to complete the project activities and directly
link to the project success. Such goals are important as they describe what needs to be done
for a successful project and who will be responsible for achieving the goal. Goals are project
speciﬁc and focus on the economic beneﬁt, project success criteria and boundary, knowledge gathering and reuse, user satisfaction, quality, vendor reputation, successful delivery,
and other critical issues of the product. Goals can be stated at different levels of abstraction
from higher level coarsely grained to lower level ﬁnely-grained goal assertions. The more the
various goals are reﬁned, the easier it is to identify and analyze the risk factors that obstruct
these goals. Goal reﬁnement results in the construction of the goal model. Goals in software
project can be of several types such as information , satisfaction, maintain, improve, and
Obstacle Layer. Obstacles are the main causes that reduce the ability to achieve a single
or multiple goals. We treat risk factors as obstacles that directly or indirectly lead to a goal
negation and create problems in the project. Obstacle categories should be aligned with
and derived from the goal categories and model the situation about how several obstacles
violate the identiﬁed goals. The obstacle layer identiﬁes the potential software development
risk factors and it formulates the obstruction to the goal dissatisfaction. Similar to the goal
model, the obstacle model aims to provide a complete overview of the risk factors that exist
in the project. The risk obstacle layer establishes the obstruction link from risk factors to subgoals and from events to the main goal. Different software development risk factors support
different categories of obstacles such as dissatisfaction, lack of adequacy, misinformation,
wrong assumption and inaccuracy.
Assessment Layer. The Assessment Layer quantiﬁes the risk events as a consequence
of single or multiple risk factors. Risk quantiﬁcation is an important ﬁrst step in risk assessment . This task is non-trivial due to the inherent subjective nature of the risks in the
software engineering domain . This layer precisely annotates individual risk events and
it establishes the causal relationship model between risk factors and related risk events. It
also focuses on the severity of the risk events’ impact to goals. For high prioritized goals,
obstacle identiﬁcation and reﬁnement should be extensive. It is worth stating that the same
risk factor may lead to more than one risk event and the same risk event can obstruct more
than one goal. Conversely, a goal is obstructed by multiple obstacles that relate risk events
and associate factors. This representation allows us to model situations where an event is
inﬂuenced by more than one risk factor and impacts on single or multiple goals. An obstruction link is established from the risk event to the speciﬁc goal that it obstructs. This approach
supports the construction of a goal-risk model by reﬁning risk factors to risk events and their
combined obstruction to goals.
Treatment Layer. The treatment layer focuses on the control actions to counter the risks
so that goals can be attained. It also monitors the effectiveness of the implemented control
actions and identiﬁes any new risks throughout the development. The main aim is to gain
control of the risks as early as possible and preferable during the requirements engineering
phase. Generally, there exists an alternative countermeasure to the obstacles but one should
select the most cost effective one for the risk mitigation. This layer includes two different links:
contribution link from the control action to the goal that it fulﬁlls and obstruction link from the
control action to the speciﬁc obstacle that it obstructs. The treatment layer allows modelling,
reasoning, and tracing the adopted control action for the risk mitigation and goal satisfaction.
It also includes a responsibility link from the control action to the agent so that the speciﬁc
active agent would be responsible for implementing the control action in order to mitigate the
Figure 2 shows the modelling framework of GSRM. GSRM uses the same notations for
goals (parallelogram) and obstacles (reverse parallelogram) as used in the KAOS model.
Goals are reﬁned through AND and OR reﬁnement into sub-goals. Obstacles are linked to
$1'UHILQHPHQW
7UHDWPHQW
$VVHVVPHQW
&RQWULEXWLRQ
2EVWUXFWLRQ
Figure 2: Framework of GSRM
the goals through obstruction links. The Treatment layer includes the agent who has the
responsibility to implement selected actions to control risks. The framework is initiated with
a goal in terms of project success and it ends with goals in terms of risks mitigation.
3.3. GSRM activities
The activities describe all the tasks and steps that are required for goal-driven risk management and create the risk speciﬁcation artefact. In the literature several contributions and
risk management standards agreed that to be successful, risk management must be run as
an iterative process involving repeated risk assessment and project speciﬁc risk mitigation
activities throughout the system life cycle. We follow these guidelines in order to describe
the activities and tasks for GSRM. The goal-driven risk management activities are performed
sequentially for the ﬁrst iteration and continue further, if required are tailored, depending on
the project context. Figure 3 gives an overview of the activities, tasks, and steps involved
within the process model.
The ﬁrst activity initialises goal-driven risk management during the requirements engineering phase. This activity deﬁnes the risk management scope, threshold & boundary, it
allocates schedule and formulates risk management team. A Project’s inherent riskiness
management
Initialise
goal-driven
management
Identify &
model goals
Identify & categorise
Construct the goal
Identify &
Assess risks
monitor risks
Identify & categorise
the risk factor
Estimate risk
Construct the goalrisk model
identify possible
countermeasures
Monitor risks
throughout the
development
Select the most
countermeasures
Assign agent
responsibility
Prioritize risks
Assess risk event
likelihood
Assess impact
Plan risk treatment
Determine riskiness
nature of the project
Figure 3: The Activities and Tasks for Goal-driven Risk Management
nature is important for this activity. In particular how risky is the project guides the treatment
of the risks related to the project. Once the risk management plan is initialised, the next
activity iinvolves the identiﬁcation and modelling of goals, by focusing on the state of the
development components and mapping them with the project success indicators. It mainly
identiﬁes and categorises goals and reﬁnes high level goals to provide more concrete meaning in terms of their contribution to the project success. The Goal reﬁnement activity results
in the construction of a goal model from a parent goal to the sub-goals. Goal details is the
artefact, produced by this activity, which triggers subsequent risk assessment and management activities. The next activity involves the identiﬁcation and modelling of obstacles. Risk
factors are identiﬁed as main causes of obstacles and responsible for the occurrence of risk
event. We need to identify as many likely obstacles as possible so that the development
team are aware of the problems from the beginning. Obstacle identiﬁcation extends the goal
model by including obstruction links from obstacles to goals. This extension support the
construction of goal-risk models that visualize inﬂuential risk factors, which obstruct multiple
goals. The following activity assesses risk by estimating the risk level and relevant priority. We start with the causal relationship model by following risk factors and associated risk
events as a consequence. This allows us to focus on the relevant risk events for the risk
level estimation, rather than considering all raw risk factors. Risk estimation considers risk
event likelihood and its severity of impact on goal negation. The impact assessment builds
the cause-consequence relationship from the risk event to the obstructed goals. The risk
assessment ﬁnally prioritizes the risk so that high prioritized ones get immediate attention.
The ﬁnal activity of GSRM aims to control risks as early as possible and to monitor the effectiveness of the control action throughout the project. Risk treatment needs to be planned and
mapped with the risk management scope. There may have been multiple control actions but
depending on the project context, only potential ones should be selected. Once the selected
control actions are implemented then this activity monitors risks throughout the project life
cycle. The GSRM process constructs artefact type risk speciﬁcation, which includes concepts such as risk management plan, goal details, risk details and risk status report and
model elements such as goal-risk model and causal relationship model.
4. Integration of GSRM into requirements engineering
Risk management should be an inherent component of a software project and it
needs to be considered as early as possible. We advocate to consider it during the early
requirements engineering phase.
However, requirements engineering and software risk
management are two different processes. The integration endeavor requires to consider
the interactions among the underlying activities, tasks, methods, roles, and dependencies
amongst the artefacts that are involved between the two processes . To begin with, we
examine two different perspectives, i.e. artefact and process oriented view, that allow to understand rationale in terms of the integration. We consider several integration points from
the artefact and process oriented views. By Integration point, we mean anything that explicitly connects risk management into requirements engineering as criteria to integrate between
two different processes. For instance, an artefact oriented view focuses on the dependencies
among the requirements engineering or risk artefact types, its content items, and associated
concepts . The process oriented view focuses on the interaction and dependencies
among activities, tasks, and techniques along with the roles and responsibilities of requirements engineering and risk management .
4.1. Artefact Oriented View
Artefact oriented requirements engineering is a systematic methodology that describes
the problem space of the system-as-is as comprehensively as possible towards complete requirements speciﬁcation documents . It combines both structure and content of the artefacts, expressed by the domain-speciﬁc concept model . The structure is described
with a taxonomy reﬂecting the hierarchical structure of produced speciﬁcation documents.
The included content (the underlying concept model) reﬂects the concepts of an application
domain in terms of precisely deﬁning the used elements and their relations for speciﬁc description techniques . In the business information system domain, generally two artefacts
types are considered: business and requirements speciﬁcation. These artefact types formulate goals, capabilities, constraints, system vision, and requirements (information system, organizational and integrational) . Similar to the requirement speciﬁcation artefact, GSRM
also provides artefact type risk speciﬁcation. The risk speciﬁcation encompasses content
item such as goals, obstacles, and treatment, which in turn consist of concept types such as
risk management plan, goals details, risks details, and risk status report. Among the requirement and risk concepts, goals are one of the fundamental ones to support the integration.
Thus, goals provide background foundation to elicit and analyze requirements and risks.
The elicited requirement artefacts, in particular, business, user, and system requirements
support the identiﬁcation of risk factors. In fact, requirements are amongst one of the elementary inputs for risk identiﬁcation. Quality of the elicited requirements is a highly inﬂuential
factor in attaining project goals related to schedule, budget, product quality, and error free
requirements. Reducing project risks is one of the critical requirements of a software project.
Risk concepts contribute to reduce errors from the elicited requirement. Attributes such as
risk level, priority, control action, and risk status help to reduce requirement errors. Commonly in requirements engineering, the elicited requirements are prioritized. Higher priority
requirements get immediate attention. Attributes like requirements acceptance, time constraint and design decision are also supported by the risk status report. Figure 4 shows the
interaction between requirement and risk artefact concept. We conclude that requirements
and risk artefacts depend upon each other. One of the main focuses for integrating risk
management into requirements engineering is to create and manage an error free, complete
and robust requirement speciﬁcation document and to control the human and organizational
issues related to the project success.
4.2. Process Oriented View
The activities, tasks, and methods of the requirements engineering and risk management
process are coherent and interrelated. Both the requirements engineering and risk management processes consist of sequence of activities, tasks, and steps in order to construct the
artefact concepts. Requirements engineering is mainly comprised of eliciting, analysing,
validating, and managing activities, which further contain ﬁne-grained tasks and sub-tasks
within these activities. These activities begin nearly in parallel to the activities of business
modelling. As mentioned before, GSRM process consists of activities, tasks, and steps to
support the risk speciﬁcation artefact type. Activities of both requirements engineering and
risk management are sequential and techniques used within the activities are partially similar. For instance, requirement elicitation commonly relies on the background study of speciﬁc
type of artefacts, including pre-existing documents about the system as-is, such as organizational charts, policies, work procedure, business rules, data samples and scenario analysis
Business Goals
- statement of intent
Business Restriction
- description
Requirement
- description
- rationale
- acceptance criteria
- time constraint
- priority
Risk Details
- risk factor
- description
- category
- likelihood
Goal Details
- description
- category
- sub-goals
- priority
Risk Status Report
- risk name
- risk priority
- potential countermeasure
- selected countermeasures
- responsible agent
- time frame
- action status
- risk status
Business & Requirement Specification
Risk Specification
Figure 4: Attributes Dependency of Requirements and Risk Artefacts
of the interaction among the systems . The method also focuses on the stakeholder-driven
elicitation through structured and unstructured interviews and joint workshops. Goals and
risks identiﬁcation of the GSRM focus on the preliminary analysis of the system-as-is, such
as project information, project domain analysis and requirement artefacts. The taxonomy
based questionnaires and brainstorming sessions with stakeholders are very effective techniques for the risk identiﬁcation . Therefore the techniques used and input artefacts
required for the goal, requirement, and risk identiﬁcation are similar. The activities and tasks
under the process couple to one or more roles, which take the responsibilities for producing
the related artefacts. Typical roles for the requirements engineering are customer/user representative, business analyst and requirement engineer. Requirement engineer is the key
responsible person, who creates and manages the requirement speciﬁcation by aligning the
business needs to the software-to-be. He establishes the bridge among business analyst,
architect, project manager, and customer/user. Risk manager is the person mainly responsible for performing risk assessment and management activities. He should have adequate
knowledge of the project domain and sufﬁcient skills to handle the risks in a speciﬁc project
situation. Generally in small and medium projects, the project manager is concerned with the
overall project execution and takes the additional role as risk manager. A successful project
manager is always a good risk manager . The requirement engineer active participation
is more important within this context.
5. Evaluation and Data Collection
5.1. Study Design
We have chosen to employ an empirical research method to evaluate GSRM. Software
development projects are a multidimensional undertaking, and validating a single method
from a complex set of activities is a difﬁcult task. Hence there exist a number of challenges
when performing an empirical study within the software risk management domain. Firstly,
software development projects generally contain long durations and always put the focus
on time, budgetary, and quality control. In such setting, a comprehensive risk management
practice is not always possible. Secondly, project managers and practitioners lack motivation
to perform comprehensive risk management activities into software projects, as risk management is usually consider extra work. Lack of practitioners’ motivation and involvement
reduce the validity threats and reliability of the overall study. Finally, every project is unique
and evolves due to changes of the project scope, market demand, and technology. A project
may contain too many risks in various dimensions and it is not possible to control all of these
risks. Risks are subjective by nature and past project risk values may not provide accurate
estimation in the running project context. These challenges make it difﬁcult to assess the
precise effectiveness of a comprehensive risk management method in the project.
Nevertheless, despite all of these challenges, there exist a limited number of study results such as about the impact of risk management on the overall software project. We
previously conducted a case study for evaluating GSRM and its integration into requirements
engineering . However, the study has focused on identifying the issues related to integration of risk management into requirements engineering and GSRM was not fully employed
due to tight budget and schedule pressure. However the obtained results provide important
conclusions about the integration of risk management into requirements engineering phase.
the current study focuses on further investigating GSRM by implementing it into an active
on-going software development project. In this study, we combined case study methods with
action research. Generally, an action research makes an effort to provide practical value
to the study subject while simultaneously contributing to the acquisition of new theoretical
knowledge . This allows us on one hand to guide the development team for managing
risks and to attain goals during the development and on the other hand to identify ways to
improve the GSRM methodology. For our case, GSRM follows project documents and artefacts and interviews team members to identify goals and risks. Risk management results are
effectively used to control the identiﬁed risks and to contribute to meet the project goals in
order to improve the overall studied project situation. Our study combines theory, practice,
case study, and action research so that in-depth understanding of the GSRM impact into the
software projects can be demonstrated.
5.2. Data Collection and Analysis
Figure 5 depicts the details of the study. The study used project speciﬁc documents
as input and carried out kick-off, brainstorming, and interview sessions to execute the various risk management activities. Closed questions were used during the interview session.
Feedback about GSRM through a set of open questions used to evaluate the applicability of
GSRM in a subjective way. The studied company’s management was convinced to integrate
a comprehensive risk management practice in the project due to the project inherent risky
nature. Furthermore the ﬁrst author has a long standing relationship with the company’s
Initialise
project scope, business goals, business and system specification,
information about development team, user , and management, quality,
development process, development environment
Identify &
model goals
Identify &
model risk
Assess risk
monitor risk
activities
Brainstorming session and input analyze
Kick-off workshop
Interview offline/online
Risk details
Control action&
goal-risk-control
activities
about GSRM
Usefulness
Figure 5: Case Study Details
management which has made it easier to obtain consent from management to implement
GSRM into one of the running projects of the company.
We collected data mainly through interview and brainstorming sessions with the project
participants, users, and sponsor representatives and by analyzing the project documents
and development artefacts. The kick-off session was used amongst the members of the risk
management and project team. Both qualitative and quantitative data were collected and
analyzed to meet the study constructs( mentioned in the next section). Two different sets
of questionnaires (closed and open questions) were used for data collection. Closed questions focused on the existance and frequency of problems and their causal dependencies to
the risk events and consequences. The questions were arranged by following componentelement-factor hierarchy and answers contained three possible values.
The open questions are mainly descriptive and comparative questions used to identify participants’ perception about the goal-driven risk management approach and its integration into requirements
engineering. Open questions also answered speciﬁc practitioners’ beliefs about risk management and its importance during the development process. In the beginning, a kick-off
workshop was carried out amongst the members of the development team to provide an
overview of GSRM, risk artefacts, and its integration into requirements engineering. The
open and closed question responses and project artefacts were input to the brainstorming
session. Three Master of Information Technology (MIT) students of the Institute of Information Technology (IIT), University of Dhaka, Bangladesh, former students of the ﬁrst author,
were employed for the implementation of GSRM. The students had adequate knowledge and
experience working in software projects. The collected data was analysed both qualitative
and quantitative. In particular, quantitative analysis considered information like effort spent
for performing the risk management activities, the number of risks factors and risk events,
and the number of controlling actions and their effectiveness. Therefore, the responses and
observations from the closed question sessions were used as input to analyse the data.
Qualitative analysis considered issues like using goal-driven approach for risk management,
risk management impact to the project, integration of risk management into requirements
engineering, and adequacy of activities and artefacts of GSRM. Participant open questions
responses, in addition to other observations, were used on this occasion.
6. Case Study
This section explains the implementation of GSRM into a software project. The activities
of GSRM are systematically implemented in the studied project to evaluate the approach.
6.1. Study Context
6.1.1. Company Proﬁle
The study reports on our empirical work of a software development project at Domain
Software Technologies Ltd. (Domain Tech), a subsidiary company of Domain Technologies
Ltd, (London, UK) and Domain Consulting (M) Sdn. Bhd. (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia - Sister
Company) . Domain Tech started its operation, in 2002, in Bangladesh with multi dimension lines of business, such as software development, global IT support, and consultancy.
Since then, several projects were successfully completed for clients located in UK, USA,
and Malaysia. The company obtained adequate experience of offshore as well as inshore
software projects. Currently the company has a total of 72 employees at the Bangladesh
6.1.2. Project Context
The project, considered in the case study, aimed to automate the Planning Commission
Campus of the Ministry of Planning, as a part of the e-Governance project of the government of People’s Republic of Bangladesh. The project was ofﬁcially initiated Nov 2009 once
Domain Tech obtained the work order from the ministry. The project context was the development of an application software that contained ten separate modules to automate day
to day ministry operational activities. The modules were: Project Planning, Personnel Management, Payroll Management, Budgeting, Auditing and Accounting, File Tracking, Letter
Dispatching, Meeting minutes, Library Management, Inventory and Vehicle Management.
Every module have its own features, constrains and requirements and it relates with other
modules. For instance, the personnel management system managed proﬁles of all planning
commission employees including individual job records, leave management, and transfer
records. The Personal management system features were: conﬁguration, staff proﬁle, leave
management, and reports. The Payroll management system features were conﬁguration,
salary structure, festival bill, loan/advance, increment and reports, and budget system features are conﬁguration, budget, bill, audit and reports. Two features were common to every
module, i.e., conﬁguration and reports. Conﬁguration allowed users to customize individual
modules for effective use of the software with minimum change. The purpose of the reports
was to produce documented output such as ofﬁce order and notice. Thus, the main project
goals were:
• Automate the whole planning commission campus;
• Digitize old and new data and dynamic report generation;
• Interconnect with existing software in the commission campus;
• Train employees for the new system.
6.1.3. Project riskiness
This was the ﬁrst government project by Domain Tech, where the main users were government employees. Initially a high level technical speciﬁcation about the different project
modules was developed by a consultant company on behalf of the ministry. Based on the
speciﬁcation, Domain Tech similar to other vendors, submitted an expression of interest and
successfully obtained the work order. Apart from the ofﬁce automation application softwareto-be developed, project context also included a comprehensive user training. The development team consisted of 15 members with duration of 13 months. A total of around 1150
users were located in the main campus. The Domain Tech management and main project
team members considered the project as high risk even though practitioners have experience
to work in the similar project. The reasons were:
• Lack of experience to handle government employees;
• High level initial speciﬁcation;
• Large numbers of users training who are government ofﬁcials;
• Effective usage of the product and user satisfaction;
• High reputation regarding successfully completion of the project.
Despite the project being considered as a high risk project, the management decided
to undertake it in order to accomplish the vision. The management vision is to successfully
develop the ofﬁce application and customize it for other government ministries and agencies.
High reputation and user satisfaction may give Domain Tech a competitive advantage on the
market as recently the local government decided to digitialize its ministry ofﬁces under the
Digital Bangladesh Vision 2021 project . The project was important for the Domain Tech
to capture the market for future business opportunities.
6.1.4. Study Construct
The main focus of this study was to specify the impact of goal-driven risk management
model on the software development project. Study goals are to
1. Evaluate the advantages and limitations of goal-driven risk management in software
development projects;
2. Improve our understanding of the issues involved in integration of risk management
activities into requirements engineering
Project participants’ positive and negative observations, risk management results, performance of the activities, and process integration were mainly used to evaluate the beneﬁts
and weaknesses of GSRM. Furthermore, as mentioned before, quantitative metrics, such as
effort spent on GSRM in requirements engineering, number of risks and treatment actions
over time were also considered to support the study goals.
6.2. Introduction of GSRM Process
6.2.1. Activity:1 Initialise Goal-driven Risk Management
A kick-off workshop by the risk management team was initially carried out to provide
an overview of GSRM. The ﬁnal part of the workshop was used for the GSRM initialization activity. The Project Manager (PM) elaborated the factors which brought the project
as a risky one. The ﬁrst task under this activity (i.e., determine the riskiness nature of the
project) was considered and the main factors for high risky project were noted.
scope, success criteria, business goals, and initial high level system speciﬁcation were used
to deﬁne the risk management context. The risk management scope was to control risks
related to the application development from a holistic perspective, speciﬁcally project execution, user, product speciﬁcation, quality, and user training. The risk management scope
was biased by the project inherent challenges and project scope. However, risks related to
project sponsor, fund support, and user internal organizational problems were not considered within the scope. The Risk Management(RM) team consisted of a PM as the team
leader along with 3 students and 2 development team members. Therefor the PM was the
main authority responsible for the successful implementation of risk management activities
and for the communication of the results to management and user representatives. The risk
management was scheduled at the ﬁrst deliverable phase, i.e., requirements speciﬁcation
and design phase. The interview participants from both users and sponsor representatives
were identiﬁed and schedules were also planned. However no schedule was considered for
risk monitor and the PM categorised it as a demand-basis activity.
6.2.2. Activity 2: Identify and Model Goals
This activity was carried out by a brainstorming session amongst the members of the
RM team. A Risk management plan was considered as input for this activity. Furthermore,
project artefacts, such as project scope and execution, business scope, system speciﬁcation,
human and overall development environment and Domain Tech business vision were also
considered for the identiﬁcation and modeling of the goals. Four prioritized high level goals
were agreed for the project. These were: complete project within estimated budget and
schedule, complete user’s training, obtain positive reputation, and generalize the application
for other government ministries. The ﬁrst two goals were considered through focusing on
the project contract and needed to be achieved before the system goes to operation. The
remaining two goals were critical for the future business vision of Domain Tech. It needed
user positive feedback, overall product quality, and successfull deployment and maintenance
of the software. High vendor reputation could give a competitive advantage to obtain a work
order of a similar government project. Generalizing application by gathering knowledge from
this project could signiﬁcantly reduce the development cost from the vendor’s perspective.
These goals were reﬁned during the session. Table 1 outlines the goals and sub-goals which
were agreed by the RM team. The goals were related to each other and same sub-goal linked
to more than one parent goal.
6.2.3. Activity 3:Identify and Model Obstacles
Initially interviews were carried out by student members with the selected practitioners of
development team. The interviews continued further with 12 users and 1 sponsor member of
the United Nations Development Program(UNDP). However it took more time than expected
with the user members as they did not follow the agreed schedule and they demonstrated
Table 1: Identiﬁed Goals and Sub-goals
Complete project in estimated
maintain estimated budget in development
budget and schedule
maintain estimated schedule in development
maintain realistic estimation
clear milestones
competence practitioner
reduce errors from requirements
user active participation
user positive motivation
Complete user’s training
adequate training budget
professional and competence training
complete training and user manual
user active participation
user positive motivation
improve effective communication & coordination
improve practitioner motivation& productivity
reduce user and practitioner conﬂict
Obtain positive reputation,
user satisfaction
Generalize the application
complete project in estimated budget
and schedule
quality product
successful training
details understanding of business process
successful system usage
complete elimination of existing manual system
complete speciﬁcation
lack of IT and project domain knowledge. The RM team also needed to provide an overview
of goals, risks, and the main purpose of the interview before the actual interviews took place.
200 closed questions were used for the interview. A sample set of the questions is included
in the appendix. Interview responses were complied to generate a raw list of risk factors. The
raw list was very large and was reﬁned by following the identiﬁed goals and brainstorming
Most of the identiﬁed risks were related to the project execution, product, and human
perspectives. The development team only had a high level initial speciﬁcation. As such, it
was difﬁcult to fully understand the necessary requirements. The Domain Tech management
agreed to accept any user change at any stage and believed it will increase the company
reputation, but it was indeed a great mistake. Users could not provide detailed information
and lately numerous gaps were identiﬁed that needed to be considered. Users added several
new things compared to the initial speciﬁcation based on which schedule and effort estimation was calculated. Numerous changes were requested by the users, such as change of
staff proﬁle and lay out and addition of more functionalities under a speciﬁc module related
to personal and payroll management, budgeting, auditing, and accounting. The collected
Table 2: Identiﬁed Risk Factors and Events
Risk factor
Numerous change request
Budget overruns
Users passive involvement
Erroneous requirements
Users lack of project domain knowledge
Schedule overruns
User lack of IT competence
Ineffective training
Inadequate training budget
Unclear system vision
Large number of users requiring training
Ineffective communication
High training cost
User dissatisfaction
Incomplete & incorrect initial speciﬁcation
Poor system use
Over-promise & Inaccurate estimation
Poor reputation
Error in project contract
Incomplete information
Lack of experience of handle government ofﬁcials
Unable to generalize product
Bureaucracy nature of organization
Poor feedback
User lack of motivation
Deployment problems
Data conversion difﬁculties
High variation
Unwilling to sign interview document
Complex interactions among the modules
Political biasness
information was sometimes ambiguous due to different interpretation of the same context as
well as incomplete information. It was difﬁcult to obtain appointments from the high ofﬁcials
and several meetings were needed to collect relevant information. But their remarks were
important for the project acceptance. Some of the users had not adequate knowledge of the
software application but played important roles to support the key business process. There
were ambiguities in describing the key operational process and roles involved within the process. Once an interview was completed no user agreed to sign the interview documents. At
the end, the requirements analysis consumed much more time than estimated.
Another problem appeared concerning the number of users who participated in the training. Initially Domain Tech agreed to train 500 users. However, during the requirements
identiﬁcation and on site observation, there were about 800 users identiﬁed who needed
training for the new system environment. But the planning ministry and UNDP refused to
increase the training budget as total project budget was already approved and there was
no room for revision because several donor agencies supported the project fund. Domain
Tech also had inadequate experience to handle the government ofﬁcials. Existing data was
documented with dissimilar structure, which made it difﬁcult to convert the manual data into
new electronic formats. Risk factors were summarized from the raw list. These factors were
mainly due to unavailable, wrong and incomplete information, poor participation, errors from
the existing system, and data conversion difﬁculties which resulted in incomplete speciﬁcation and inaccurate estimation. Table 2 shows the risk factors.
6.2.4. Activity 4: Assess Risk
The RM team considered interview responses of the selected risk factors as initial input for the risk assessment. Moreover PM’s and other members’ experience and the pre-
Erroneous req.
User passive
involvement
Inaccurate
estimation
User lack of
change request
Incomplete
specification
information
estimated budget
High training
Budget overrun
Figure 6: BBN Network for Budget Overruns
assumptions provided by GSRM about the causal link of the risk factors to the risk events and
consequence to the goals were also considered for the estimation of the risk event likelihood
and risk impact. Table 2 includes risk events caused by the identiﬁed risk factors. These
events directly obstruct the goals, for example, budget overruns, erroneous requirements,
poor training, and system use obstruct the goals like complete project in estimated budget
and schedule or vendor high reputation. To construct a causal relationship model, risk factor,
event, and priority were considered as target, observable, and decision nodes of BBN. The
RM team agreed that budget overrun is the highest prioritized risk factor. Risk factors, such
as inaccurate estimation, high training cost, erroneous requirements, and schedule over
runs casually link to the budget overruns as shown in Figure 6. These factors are the most
inﬂuential for the project context and some of them were beyond the control of the project
manager and the project environment. The identiﬁed factors resulted in complete obstruction
of the goal to maintain estimated budget in the development. Erroneous requirements and
schedule overruns were considered as risk factors but these factors were again treated as
risk events in different context. Finally, risk events were prioritized into the three scales, i.e.,
very important, important, and less important, so that severe ones get immediate attention.
However for conﬁdentiality reasons we cannot provide the detailed results.
6.2.5. Activity 5:Treat and Monitor Risk
The RM team initially planned to control the high and medium prioritized risks by completely eliminating or reducing the likelihood of risk event occurences and severity of the
impacts. The session identiﬁed the possible countermeasures and potential ones were selected so that the goals could be attained.
Erroneous requirements were one of the main events which negatively affect the possible outcome of goals such as complete project in estimated budget and schedule, reduce
erroneous requirements, improve completeness in requirement speciﬁcation, quality product, and generalize application. Users’ factors were one of the main reasons for the risk
events and a large number of users increased the overall total training cost and as a result
the overall project budget. But these factors were beyond the PM’s controls and difﬁcult to
eliminate completely. The RM team identiﬁed possible countermeasures: i.e., train selected
representatives from user groups, extensive user involvement, signed frozen requirements,
complete understanding of users business processes and dependencies among the modules, obtain and incorporate key users feedback, and include a J2EE expert into the project.
The identiﬁed countermeasures were potential and would not incur additional cost except of
the integration of a J2EE expert. However it was difﬁcult to involve the key users even though
they were available in the commission campus. And user lack of project domain knowledge
and lack of IT competency could not be addressed by any means during the duration of the
project. However, selected users training would reduce the overall training cost signiﬁcantly.
The RM team emphasized the professional and competence training and preparation of a
comprehensive training manual before physically deploying the system. Still, there was no
effective way to address the numerous change requests but the PM decided that once the
feedback was integrated then the frozen requirements of a speciﬁc module would be signed
by the key user. But at that stage, the project experienced a huge number of user change
requests and several new things were added compared to the initial speciﬁcation. The PM
agreed that it was not be possible to maintain the estimated budget and schedule and management decided to accept 15% budget overrun. The management decided to keep their
reputation high by any means and a complete understanding of the business processes was
essential for the project as well as for the future customization. Domain Tech planned to arrange workshop sessions with the high government ofﬁcials to inform them about the status
of the project and the necessary further action. These sessions were effective to develop
and implement the application into the planning commission campus.
6.2.6. Goal-risk model
Figure 7 illustrates the goal-risk model for the complete project in the estimated budget. The goal was reﬁned into several sub-goals, such as maintain estimated budget and
schedule, realistic estimation, clear milestones, user active participation and motivation, and
reduce errors from requirements. Risk factors, such as numerous change requests, user
passive involvement & lack of knowledge, high training costs, inaccurate estimation, errors
in contract, and incomplete speciﬁcation obstructed the sub-goals and lead to risk events
such as erroneous requirements, schedule overruns and budget overruns. The bottom part
of Figure 7 shows the treatment actions and the associated agents responsible for implementing the actions. E.g., comprehensive and competence training.
Figure 8 shows the model for obtaining positive reputation. The goal was rather subjective and reﬁned into the user satisfaction, quality product, successful training, and system
usage. Risk factors,such as poor training, ineffective communication, incomplete and complex product, and retain existing system obstructed the goal and lead to user dissatisfaction
and low reputation as the main risk events. User motivation for the new system, effective
cooperation between users and practitioners, complete and competence training are control
Figure 7: Goal-risk model for project completion
strategies, which can mitigate the risk factors. The Elimination of old manual systems was
considered as a requirement within the control action. Project contracts did not cover the
maintenance part which seemed to be an important issue for this project. The PM decided
to convince the project sponsor to allocate the maintenance budget for the project. Domain
Tech management also decided to arrange 2 or 3 common workshop sessions apart from
training to motivate the users for the system-to-be deployed.
The difﬁcult part regarding risk management was to convince the key government ofﬁcials
about the implementation of the selected control actions. The PM communicated the agreed
control actions to the management and management planned a meeting with the planning
commission secretary. The visual representation of the goal-risk model effectively helped
to communicate the risk information with the management. In the meeting, the secretary
of planning ministry agreed on the recommended actions and assigned 20 key users to be
extensively involved during the development to help the development team. The secretary
also circulated an ofﬁce order at joint, deputy and assistant secretary level to collaborate with
the project by giving necessary information. Furthermore, only 58 users were selected as
champions for the training session conducted by Domain Tech. The PM decided to arrange
a risk monitor meeting, initially twice a month and less frequently at the later stages of the
development. At the end, student members carried out the interview session with the open
goal_risk_reputation
Figure 8: Goal-risk model for positive reputation
questions to obtain feedback about GSRM. The interview participants were the PM and other
members of the RM team, three practitioners of the development team, one management
representative of Domain Tech and two users.
7. Discussion
In this section, we report on the ﬁndings based on the observations from the project.
Moreover, we compare our case study ﬁndings with other study results to generalize our
ﬁndings. We also include a summary of the overall impact of GSRM into the software project.
7.1. Lessons Learned
7.1.1. Usefulness of the GSRM
Goal-driven approach for risk management. A Goal-driven approach for risk management is reasonably beneﬁcial during the early development. A project contains goals. Goals
make it easy to communicate with the users, project sponsors, and development team members.
Goal identiﬁcation and modelling: The main users of the project were government ofﬁcials who did not have adequate knowledge of the purpose of automation due to lack of IT
expertise. However, they were able to demonstrate their expectations from the project. From
the user perspective, several goals were identiﬁed such as user satisfaction, successful training, and system usage. From the project team perspective, goals were emphasized more
on issues related to project completion, training, user participation and reputation. However,
some participants observed that goal modelling was difﬁcult to perform and required more
experience.
Integration of GSRM into requirements engineering. Based on the open question responses, the PM and practitioners appreciated the integration of risk management into requirements engineering. It provided them with early warnings about the problems that existed in the project.
Artefact oriented view: There were dependencies among the requirements and risks
speciﬁcation artefacts. In particular goals were one of the fundamentals ones to support the
integration. For instance, in the studied project, positive reputation was considered one of
the high prioritised goals. Several risk factors such as poor training and ineffective communication were directly obstructing the goals. Elicited requirements were considered to identify
risk factors, thus requirements were the input for the risk identiﬁcation. Risk artefacts, such
as risk level, priority and list of erroneous requirements directly contributed to reduce errors
from the requirements. Therefore both the requirements and risks artefacts were dependent
upon each other and supported the integration of two different processes.
Process oriented view: In the project, brainstorming was used to identify the goals, requirements and risk factors. The Project Manager and other members of the risk management team played main roles for risk management and requirements analysis. Furthermore,
user active participation observed inﬂuential factors for both requirements engineering and
risk management.
Therefore, roles like project manager, requirements engineering, risk
management, and user participation can effectively support activities under requirements
engineering and risk management.
GSRM process. The activities and tasks under the GSRM process were considered as
systematic and adequate to produce the risk speciﬁcation artefact.
Activity deﬁnition: Based on the open questions response, the activities under the GSRM
process were identiﬁed as fully operational as the approach provided adequate techniques to
identify and analyse goals, risks and treatment actions. The initial activity explicitly allocated
schedule and resource for risk management within the project. The composition of the risk
management team from different roles was beneﬁcial as different views of the goals and
risks were identiﬁed and combined. Understanding the riskiness nature of the project at
early stages was appreciated by the project manager and other members of the development
team as it allowed them to understand the necessity of the risk management activities in the
Goals and risks identiﬁcation and analysis: The GSRM process provides three techniques,(i.e., structured interviews with closed questions, brainstorming sessions, and analysis of project documents) to identify and analyse goals and risks. The information gained
from the project brainstorming session was veriﬁed during the interview session. The combination of these techniques was treated as being systematic, reasonably applicable and
reducing the bias, in particular, for the risk identiﬁcation. The component-element-factor hierarchy allowed the categorization of goals and risk factors and guided the structure of the
interview.
Artefacts: GSRM provides both textual and graphical representation of artefacts produced by its activities. In particular, visual presentation is provided through goal-risk models
and causal relationship models, which made it easy to communicate the risk information with
the project team and management as we observed during the studied project. The central
textual artefact of GSRM is a risk status report, which is the ﬁnal output of the activities.
Thus the risk status report provides complete information about the goals, risk factors, risk
events and treatment actions and status of the risks.
Applicability of GSRM into the studied software project. Two kick-off workshops and
ﬁve brainstorming sessions, each approximately 4 and 6 hours respectively, and interview
sessions (2 hours for the closed questions by the practitioner and 3 hours and 30 minutes
by the users and 1 hour and 30 minutes for open questions by the practitioner) were used
to perform the activities of the GSRM process. Furthermore, the student members along
with the other member of the risk management team analyzed, as input data for the risk
management process, the project documents and in particular artefacts, such as the initial
speciﬁcation, the nature of change requests, the detailed requirements speciﬁcation, the
project scope, and the success criteria.
They also compiled the interview responses to
identify risks and to obtain feedback about GSRM. Among the top 7 risk events and 15
inﬂuential risk factors only 3 risk events and 11 risk factors were fully or partially controlled
through 8 potential countermeasures. It took approximately four complete working days for
the analysis. Goals and risks identiﬁcation and modelling activities consumed the highest
effort. Project complexity and a large number of goals certainly increased the overall risk
management effort. A total of approximately 26% effort of initial deliverable phase including
the student memebers effort used for risk management.
The effort estimation excludes
the risk monitor activity but the PM agreed that it was reasonable enough within the ﬁrst
deliverable phase of the project.
Limitations of GSRM. The studied project also allowed us to identify limitations of GSRM.
The information about the limitations was collected based on the participants observations
about GSRM during the interview with open questions and the feedback from the risk management team. First, when the project focuses on a large number of goals, then efforts
for developing and maintaining the artefacts are considered too high. In particular, GSRM
needs more effort for analysing the goals and constructing goal-risk and causal relationship
model. Secondly, constructing a casual relationship model through BBN is a complex undertaking, speciﬁcally when several risk factors are considered as intermediate nodes, which
increase the size of the probability density table. Thirdly, from the studied project, the risk
monitoring activity was not properly performed at later stages due to the pressure to handle
user changes and later deliverables. Finally, based on the studied project observation, it was
difﬁcult to answer some of the closed questions, in particular, quantify the state of the factors under the development components into three different scales at an early development
stage. Despite of the implementation of GSRM into the studied project, not all identiﬁed
risks were controlled. Risks related to the control budget and schedule overruns, i.e., requirements changes, user motivation for the system-to-be, and inadequate user knowledge,
severely impacted the project. This was because most of the risk factors originated from the
user perspectives, which were beyond the project manager’s control. Some risk factors were
fully or partially controlled, such as high training cost, overall budget overruns, erroneous
requirements, users participation, and detailed system speciﬁcation. It is therefore always
important in a software development project to have the risk factors and/or relevant potential
treatments under the control of the project manager and project environment.
7.2. Comparison with Other Study Results
We compare the result of our study with other study results found in the literature, specifically those concerned with software development risk factors and their inﬂuence to the
project outcomes.
Such comparison allows us to generalize our ﬁndings and to identify
contextual factors from the current study context.
Commonality in risk factors. There is a substantial commonality fully or partially amongst
our results and those discussed in existing literature. For instance, Schmidt et al. identi-
ﬁed a comprehensive list of risk factors and top factors such as lack of adequate user involvement and cooperation, lack of frozen requirements, change scope, and unclear/misunderstood scope/objective are similar to our ﬁndings. The most noticeable areas, which included
distinctive risk factors by our study, are user, user’s organizational, and requirements context, which match important risk components such as schedule and budget, requirements
management, and personnel management demonstrated by Ropponen et al. . Our results also show similarities with the Wallance et al. ﬁndings on requirements, user,
and complexity risk dimensions. Procaccino et al. study results emphasized the factors
related to the customer/user and requirements, such as user involvement, realistic expectation, complete and accurate requirements, and well deﬁned project scope, which highly
inﬂuences project success. Linberg also summarized factors such as effective leaders,
technologically realistic requirements, and realistic schedule and effort estimation relevant
to the project success. Keil identiﬁed a changing project scope and the lack of frozen
requirements as critical risk factors of IS projects. Our results fully or partially match with
these ﬁndings.
Risk management barriers. In the case study, the PM realized the need for risk management and he was the main authority for the task. However, practitioners were not motivated
to implement a complete risk management process. A similar situation is observed by other
study results. this situatio is treated as the main barrier that obstructs the implementation of
a formal risk management practice. Our interview responses summarized a large number of
risk factors from the project. A recent survey study result shows, that intangible beneﬁt, lack
of resource, and too many risks to control are the main perceived barriers by the experienced
project manager to a successful implementation of software risk management . Nyfjord
et al. and Kwak et al. emphasize the organizational problems, such as variation of
risk perception by different roles, lack of competence and process problems, such as lack
of plan and coordination are additional barriers besides resource problems to integrate risk
management into development. We observed that formal risk management practice was
missing in the Domain Tech case study. However, implementation of GSRM and its result
certainly advocate for a formal risk management practice in the upcoming projects.
Factors related to current study context. It is worth mentioning that some important factors derived from case studies found in the literature, were not applicable to the Domain
Tech case study. These included no planning or inadequate planning, lack of management
support, problems related to the development process, and development team. Moreover,
several risk factors, seem to have a partial or no match compared to the other studies,
such as user unwillingness to provide information and sign the interview document, bureaucracy nature of the organization, political biasness, user lack of IT knowledge, numerous
change/update requests, errors in contracts, training for large number of users, and over
promise made by the vendor. These factors dominate our case and mostly originate from
the user context.
7.3. Overall Observation
Our experience indicates that GSRM is reasonably suitable for any complex project. The
studied project was complex, where GSRM was well-integrated to identify and control the
software development risks. The project manager agreed that by using GSRM it was possible
to identify and tackle the problems in a structured way from the beginning of the development.
Analyzing the observations from the studied project helps us to better integrate our goaldriven risk management method into requirements engineering. The process and artefact
oriented views allow explicitly integration of risk management activities into the requirements
engineering phase. In general a project does not have a risk manager except in large or
complex cases. We have seen that a project manager or requirements engineer having basic knowledge of risk management are able to perform the risk management activities. A
tutorial session about goal modelling and risk management helps to understand the basic
concepts of GSRM. Our observation is that when treatment of risk factors is beyond the
control of the project manager and development environment then it is difﬁcult to control the
risk. The studied project failed to be completed within the estimated budget and schedule.
The project suffered approximately 25% budget overruns even though some of the risk factors were mitigated. the risk management team agreed on 15% acceptable limits for budget
overruns, which was also exceeded. The project users were government ofﬁcials and the
project was funded by UNDP, therefore there was no room for budget increase. The Domain
Tech management considered the project as a loss project. But Domain Tech obtained the
next work order from the planning ministry, which implied that the government ofﬁcials were
happy with the ﬁnal outputs from the project. The project manager believed that without
integration of risk management, budget overruns could be even more, government ofﬁcials
would not consider to signiﬁcantly participate in the project and the requirement errors would
not be contollable from the early stage. The project is planned to be deployed in ministry
campus and selected users are currently under training. Domain Tech already obtained the
phase 2 of the project, which includes three more modules in the existing application software. Therefore, one goal is attained i.e., obtain good reputation. The upcoming project
concerns the annual development program, project and foreign aid monitor systems of the
planning ministry, and maintenance. The Domain Tech management hopes that phase 2 will
compensate the loss suffered by the developed project.
One further observation is that it is not necessary to always consider budget and schedule factors at the highest priority. Software development projects are complex undertakings.
There exist other issues such as requirements, users, change management, user satisfaction, and system usage, which directly or indirectly inﬂuence the budget and schedule
constraints. These factors need early attention in the development. Early determination
of the nature of project riskiness is very effective to plan the risk management activities.
Our studied concluded that the project scope affects all dimensions of risk but for high risk
projects, risks associated to requirements speciﬁcation, users, change management, project
execution are more obvious.
8. Study Validity
Case studies are generally criticized for being biased, less valuable, or unable to generalize the ﬁndings . Threats to case studies are related to the difﬁculties of collecting reliable
results and on generalising the ﬁndings. We systematically planned the study, considered
study goals, and addressed the issues related to the threat from the beginning of the study.
Data was collected and analyzed in a consistent way from multiple sources to overcome the
study validity threats.
8.1. Internal Validity
We tried to reduce the expectation bias on the case study result. The interview responses
were commonly analyzed in the brainstorming session by the risk management team. None
of the principle investigators of GSRM and related research were directly involved in the case
study, in order to reduce the bias of the ﬁndings. Data was collected not only from the development team but also from the customer and project sponsor representatives. Furthermore,
project documents were also analyzed to understand the goals and risk factors. Therefore,
several sources were used to collect data and this limits the effects of the interpretation of
one single data source. Interview responses and results of the project documents inspection were further analyzed and discussed in the brainstorming sessions. The PM and other
team members were not fully motivated for a formal risk management practice in the project.
This attitude changed later in the project by observing the outcome of GSRM activities. This
demonstartes the importance of GSRM and the fact that it assisted in quickly creating visual
and critical insights. Maturation effects also intimidate the internal validity, in particular, when
the participants react differently about the perception of risk during the course of development. However, in our work activities of GSRM took place at the requirement engineering
phase, and therefore that threat can not signiﬁcantly affect our study.
8.2. External Validity
The case study context is located in a single geographical region, and as such there
is possibility for cultural bias. Our ﬁndings are from multiple data sources which allow for
stronger conclusions. The study results are compared with other results from the literature
in order to generalize our ﬁndings. The comparisons conﬁrmed several commonalities in
terms of goals and risk factors, however there are also some unique factors from the local
context. Therefore, factors related to goals and risks are inﬂuenced by the local context.
8.3. Construct Validity
We considered beneﬁts and limitations of the GSRM and correctly measured quantitative
metrics, such as effort required to undertake risk management activities into software project.
The quality of the case study questionnaires was improved by following the feedback from
our previous study. The participants answered most of the questions apart from some which
are observed as difﬁcult at an early stage. The threat of the questions being the wrong
ones to ask was mitigated. The project manager and the development team members had
adequate experience on several software development projects. User representatives also
had adequate experience in the government service. The student members conducted a
kick-off workshop for the practitioners and explained details about the interview purpose to
the users. We believe that the participants understood the terms being used.
9. Conclusion
In this paper, we presented the GSRM method and reported our experience from its usefulness through an empirical evaluation by combining a case study with action research. Our
results show that a goal-driven approach is suitable for risk management and risk management is well integrated into the requirements engineering. The results indicate that GSRM is
a practical and reasonable risk management method that can be employed in an industrial
context. The goal oriented view made easy to understand and communicate the concepts of
GSRM and a tutorial session was adequate for this purpose. We have noted our experience
and insight gained and lessons learned from the case study. To generalize our result we
compared the study results with similar study results. We believe this study is useful to improve GSRM and to inform and motivate practitioners about the effectiveness of integrating
risk management activities from the early phase of the development. However developing
more case studies is necessary so that the validity of the results can be more generalized
and the risk management method can be further improved based on the case study observation. We are currently working on deﬁning comprehensive application guidelines for the
GSRM, so that it can provide better support for risk analysis into a software project. We are
also planning to develop a goal-risk taxonomy. A goal-risk taxonomy identiﬁes and classiﬁes
goals and risks that are associated with certain project characteristics and links with possible
potential control actions in controlling speciﬁc types of risks. Project managers can reuse the
taxonomy for any upcoming project. Some factors within the course of the product life cycle
such as deployment, operation, and maintenance do not get adequate attention at an early
stage. But later these factors can cause a real danger for the project. These factors need
further investigation. We would like to integrate continuous risk management activities for
analysing these factors.
Appendix: Sample Set of Closed Questions
Project Planning, Control and project scope
(Q1) Are all project deliverables and related schedule realistically estimated & agreed with
the customer?
□Not fully realistic
□Estimated & agreed
(Q2) How frequent are both estimated schedule and cost planned to be revised?
□End of every deliverable
□Monthly or more frequent basis
(Q3) Are the essential technical issues (e.g. tools, language & hardware) identiﬁed, available and familiar for the project?
□More than some
□Yes all of them
(Q4) Is the project success criteria realistic and achievable?
□Partially
□Yes but not all
(Q5) How risky is the project by considering scope, users, complexity, constraints, reusability, speciﬁcation, resource, expertise and knowledge?
Development Process
(Q6) Does the development process support adequate activities, steps and methods?
□Partially
□More than partially
□Completely
(Q7) Are the current development processes suitable and adequate for the project?
□Partially
□More than partially
□Completely
(Q8) Is there any coding standard followed for the project?
□Partially
Speciﬁcation
(Q9) Are the business goals and objectives identiﬁed for the project?
□Partially
□More than partially
□Completely
(Q10) Does the project scope clearly support the business needs and add business value to
the overall customer’s business environment?
□Partially but not sure
Requirements Faults
(Q11) Do the requirements provide different ambiguous interpretations or lack of support for
rationale?
□Partially
(Q12) Are requirements traceable to its source such as business speciﬁcation, project scope
and user expectation?
□Some of them
(Q13) Are the right customer or user representatives involved in the RE process?
(Q14) Do you follow any standard (template, notations and checklist) for the speciﬁcation?
□Partially
Quality and Testing
(Q15) Is quality assurance and management planned and implemented for the project?
□Partially
□Completely
(Q16) Is the overall product performance (i.e., throughput, real time response, recovery time
and access) identiﬁed, quantiﬁed and agreed with the user?
□Partially
□More than partially
(Q17) Does the project consider a complete user manual with the software?
□Incomplete user manual
□Un-veriﬁed user manual
□User manual will be
developed, tested & delivered
(Q18) Do the users maintain any documented process to implement and deploy the software
into their premises?
□Partially
(Q19) Are there any acceptance criteria for the system operation?
□Yes but not clearly
(Q20) Will the technical or operational documentation and supporting training manual planned
to be available before the actual training takes place?
(Q21) Do there any checklist plan to assess the proper implementation of the system within
the user’s operating environment?
□Partially
Maintenance
(Q22) Does the project scope include maintenance?
□Partially
(Q23) Will the overall complexity of the software be increased (i.e., more complex structure
of individual component, or several new components) due to the maintenance?
(Q24) Will the project document and user manual be updated once the maintenance operation is being completed?
□Partially
Motivation & Domain Knowledge
(Q25) How is the overall relevant domain knowledge of the development team?
□Less than adequate
(Q26) What is the level of technical expertise between the development team and user?
□Lower by development team
□Almost same
□Higher by development team
Customer/user
(Q27) What is the level of involvement of customer / user until now?
□Occasional
(Q28) What is the level of conﬁdence of customer/user over the development team?
(Q29) Do you think customers/ users have realistic expectations about the project?
□Partially
Management
(Q30) How much capable is the project manager to lead the project successfully?
□Unreliable
□Partially reliable
(Q31) Does the management support the continual improvement of the development processes and development facilities?
□Less frequently
□Frequently
(Q32) Does the management always try to achieve customer satisfaction goal?
□Not always
□Yes always
Organizational Stability
(Q33) Does the management agree to trade additional budget and adequate support for handling project risks?
□Not willingly
(Q34) Is the organization always change its operational environment?
□Change in certain interval
□Yes but for effective output
(Q35) Does the organization support the project?
□Partially
(Q36) Is the organization highly politically biased ?