Scaled-YOLOv4: Scaling Cross Stage Partial Network
Chien-Yao Wang
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
 
Alexey Bochkovskiy
 
Hong-Yuan Mark Liao
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
 
We show that the YOLOv4 object detection neural network based on the CSP approach, scales both up and down
and is applicable to small and large networks while maintaining optimal speed and accuracy. We propose a network
scaling approach that modiﬁes not only the depth, width,
resolution, but also structure of the network.
YOLOv4large model achieves state-of-the-art results: 55.5% AP
(73.4% AP50) for the MS COCO dataset at a speed of ∼16
FPS on Tesla V100, while with the test time augmentation, YOLOv4-large achieves 56.0% AP (73.3 AP50). To
the best of our knowledge, this is currently the highest accuracy on the COCO dataset among any published work.
The YOLOv4-tiny model achieves 22.0% AP (42.0% AP50)
at a speed of ∼443 FPS on RTX 2080Ti, while by using TensorRT, batch size = 4 and FP16-precision the YOLOv4-tiny
achieves 1774 FPS.
1. Introduction
The deep learning-based object detection technique has
many applications in our daily life. For example, medical image analysis, self-driving vehicles, business analytics,
and face identiﬁcation all rely on object detection. The computing facilities required for the above applications maybe
cloud computing facilities, general GPU, IoT clusters, or
single embedded device. In order to design an effective object detector, model scaling technique is very important, because it can make object detector achieve high accuracy and
real-time inference on various types of devices.
The most common model scaling technique is to change
the depth (number of convolutional layers in a CNN) and
width (number of convolutional ﬁlters in a convolutional
layer) of the backbone, and then train CNNs suitable for
different devices. For example among the ResNet series, ResNet-152 and ResNet-101 are often used in cloud
server GPUs, ResNet-50 and ResNet-34 are often used in
personal computer GPUs, and ResNet-18 and ResNet-10
can be used in low-end embedded systems. In , Cai et
Figure 1: Comparison of the proposed YOLOv4 and other
state-of-the-art object detectors.
The dashed line means
only latency of model inference, while the solid line include
model inference and post-processing.
al. try to develop techniques that can be applied to various device network architectures with only training once.
They use techniques such as decoupling training and search
and knowledge distillation to decouple and train several
sub-nets, so that the entire network and sub-nets are capable of processing target tasks. Tan et al. proposed
using NAS technique to perform compound scaling, including the treatment of width, depth, and resolution on
EfﬁcientNet-B0. They use this initial network to search for
the best CNN architecture for a given amount of computation and set it as EfﬁcientNet-B1, and then use linear scaleup technique to obtain architectures such as EfﬁcientNet-
B2 to EfﬁcientNet-B7. Radosavovic et al. summarized
and added constraints from the vast parameter search space
AnyNet, and then designed RegNet. In RegNet, they found
that the optimal depth of CNN is about 60. They also found
when the bottleneck ratio is set to 1 and the width increase
rate of cross-stage is set to 2.5 will receive the best performance. In addition, recently there are NAS and model
 
scaling methods speciﬁcally proposed for object detection,
such as SpineNet and EfﬁcientDet .
Through analysis of state-of-the-art object detectors , we found that CSPDarknet53, which
is the backbone of YOLOv4 , matches almost all optimal architecture features obtained by network architecture
search technique. The depth of CSPDarknet53, bottleneck
ratio, width growth ratio between stages are 65, 1, and 2,
respectively. Therefore, we developed model scaling technique based on YOLOv4 and proposed scaled-YOLOv4.
The proposed scaled-YOLOv4 turned out with excellent
performance, as illustrated in Figure 1. The design procedure of scaled-YOLOv4 is as follows. First, we re-design
YOLOv4 and propose YOLOv4-CSP, and then based on
YOLOv4-CSP we developed scaled-YOLOv4. In the proposed scaled-YOLOv4, we discussed the upper and lower
bounds of linear scaling up/down models, and respectively
analyzed the issues that need to be paid attention to in
model scaling for small models and large models. Thus,
we are able to systematically develop YOLOv4-large and
YOLOv4-tiny models.
Scaled-YOLOv4 can achieve the
best trade-off between speed and accuracy, and is able to
perform real-time object detection on 16 FPS, 30 FPS, and
60 FPS movies, as well as embedded systems.
We summarize the contributions of this paper : (1) design a powerful model scaling method for small model,
which can systematically balance the computation cost and
memory bandwidth of a shallow CNN; (2) design a simple
yet effective strategy for scaling a large object detector; (3)
analyze the relations among all model scaling factors and
then perform model scaling based on most advantageous
group partitions; (4) experiments have conﬁrmed that the
FPN structure is inherently a once-for-all structure; and (5)
we make use of the above methods to develop YOLOv4-tiny
and YOLO4v4-large.
2. Related work
2.1. Real-time object detection
Object detectors is mainly divided into one-stage object
detectors and two-stage object detectors . The output of one-stage object detector
can be obtained after only one CNN operation. As for twostage object detector, it usually feeds the high score region
proposals obtained from the ﬁrst-stage CNN to the secondstage CNN for ﬁnal prediction. The inference time of onestage object detectors and two-stage object detectors can
be expressed as Tone = T1st and Ttwo = T1st + mT2nd,
where m is the number of region proposals whose conﬁdence score is higher than a threshold.
In other words,
the inference time required for one-stage object detectors
is constant, while the inference time required for two-stage
object detectors is not ﬁxed. So if we need real-time object
detectors, they are almost necessarily one-stage object detectors. Today’s popular one-stage object detectors mainly
have two kinds: anchor-based and anchor-free
 . Among all anchor-free approaches, CenterNet is very popular because it does not require complicated post-processing, such as Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS). At present, the more accurate real-time onestage object detectors are anchor-based EfﬁcientDet ,
YOLOv4 , and PP-YOLO . In this paper, we developed our model scaling methods based on YOLOv4 .
2.2. Model scaling
Traditional model scaling method is to change the depth
of a model, that is to add more convolutional layers. For
example, the VGGNet designed by Simonyan et al.
stacks additional convolutional layers in different stages,
and also uses this concept to design VGG-11, VGG-13,
VGG-16, and VGG-19 architectures. The subsequent methods generally follow the same methodology for model scaling. For the ResNet proposed by He et al., depth scaling can construct very deep networks, such as ResNet-50,
ResNet-101, and ResNet-152. Later, Zagoruyko et al. 
thought about the width of the network, and they changed
the number of kernel of convolutional layer to realize scaling. They therefore design wide ResNet (WRN) , while
maintaining the same accuracy. Although WRN has higher
amount of parameters than ResNet, the inference speed is
much faster. The subsequent DenseNet and ResNeXt
 also designed a compound scaling version that puts
depth and width into consideration. As for image pyramid
inference, it is a common way to perform augmentation at
run time. It takes an input image and makes a variety of different resolution scaling, and then input these distinct pyramid combinations into a trained CNN. Finally, the network
will integrate the multiple sets of outputs as its ultimate outcome. Redmon et al. use the above concept to execute
input image size scaling. They use higher input image resolution to perform ﬁne-tune on a trained Darknet53, and the
purpose of executing this step is to get higher accuracy.
In recent years, network architecture search (NAS) related research has been developed vigorously, and NAS-
FPN has searched for the combination path of feature
We can think of NAS-FPN as a model scaling technique which is mainly executed at the stage level.
As for EfﬁcientNet , it uses compound scaling search
based on depth, width, and input size. The main design
concept of EfﬁcientDet is to disassemble the modules
with different functions of object detector, and then perform scaling on the image size, width, #BiFPN layers, and
#box/class layer. Another design that uses NAS concept is
SpineNet , which is mainly aimed at the overall architecture of ﬁsh-shaped object detector for network architecture
search. This design concept can ultimately produce a scale-
permuted structure. Another network with NAS design is
RegNet , which mainly ﬁxes the number of stage and
input resolution, and integrates all parameters such as depth,
width, bottleneck ratio and group width of each stage into
depth, initial width, slope, quantize, bottleneck ratio, and
group width. Finally, they use these six parameters to perform compound model scaling search. The above methods
are all great work, but few of them analyze the relation between different parameters. In this paper, we will try to ﬁnd
a method for synergistic compound scaling based on the design requirements of object detection.
3. Principles of model scaling
After performing model scaling for the proposed object
detector, the next step is to deal with the quantitative factors
that will change, including the number of parameters with
qualitative factors. These factors include model inference
time, average precision, etc. The qualitative factors will
have different gain effects depending on the equipment or
database used. We will analyze and design for quantitative
factors in 3.1. As for 3.2 and 3.3, we will design qualitative
factors related to tiny object detector running on low-end
device and high-end GPUs respectively.
3.1. General principle of model scaling
When designing the efﬁcient model scaling methods,
our main principle is that when the scale is up/down,
the lower/higher the quantitative cost we want to increase/decrease, the better. In this section, we will show and
analyze various general CNN models, and try to understand
their quantitative costs when facing changes in (1) image
size, (2) number of layers, and (3) number of channels. The
CNNs we chose are ResNet, ResNext, and Darknet.
For the k-layer CNNs with b base layer channels, the
computations of ResNet layer is k∗[conv(1 × 1, b/4) →
conv(3 × 3, b/4) →conv(1 × 1, b)], and that of ResNext
layer is k∗[conv(1 × 1, b/2) →gconv(3 × 3/32, b/2) →
conv(1 × 1, b)]. As for the Darknet layer, the amount of
computation is k∗[conv(1 × 1, b/2) →conv(3 × 3, b)]. Let
the scaling factors that can be used to adjust the image size,
the number of layers, and the number of channels be α, β,
and γ, respectively. When these scaling factors vary, the
corresponding changes on FLOPs are summarized in Table
Table 1: FLOPs of different computational layers with different model scalng factors.
r = 17whkb2/16
ResX layer
x = 137whkb2/128
Dark layer
d = 5whkb2
It can be seen from Table 1 that the scaling size, depth,
and width cause increase in the computation cost. They respectively show square, linear, and square increase.
The CSPNet proposed by Wang et al. can be applied
to various CNN architectures, while reducing the amount
of parameters and computations. In addition, it also improves accuracy and reduces inference time. We apply it to
ResNet, ResNeXt, and Darknet and observe the changes in
the amount of computations, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2: FLOPs of different computational layers
with/without CSP-ization.
17whkb2/16
whb2(3/4 + 13k/16)
ResX layer
137whkb2/128
whb2(3/4 + 73k/128)
Dark layer
whb2(3/4 + 5k/2)
From the ﬁgures shown in Table 2, we observe that after
converting the above CNNs to CSPNet, the new architecture
can effectively reduce the amount of computations (FLOPs)
on ResNet, ResNeXt, and Darknet by 23.5%, 46.7%, and
50.0%, respectively. Therefore, we use CSP-ized models as
the best model for performing model scaling.
3.2. Scaling Tiny Models for Low-End Devices
For low-end devices, the inference speed of a designed
model is not only affected by the amount of computation
and model size, but more importantly, the limitation of peripheral hardware resources must be considered. Therefore,
when performing tiny model scaling, we must also consider factors such as memory bandwidth, memory access
cost (MACs), and DRAM trafﬁc. In order to take into account the above factors, our design must comply with the
following principles:
Make the order of computations less than O(whkb2):
Lightweight models are different from large models in that
their parameter utilization efﬁciency must be higher in order to achieve the required accuracy with a small amount
of computations. When performing model scaling, we hope
the order of computation can be as low as possible. In Table
3, we analyze the network with efﬁcient parameter utilization, such as the computation load of DenseNet and OS-
ANet , where g means growth rate.
Table 3: FLOPs of Dense layer and OSA
Dense layer
whgbk + whg2k(k −1)/2
whbg + whg2(k −1)
For general CNNs, the relationship among g, b, and k
listed in Table 3 is k << g < b.
Therefore, the order of computation complexity of DenseNet is O(whgbk),
and that of OSANet is O(max(whbg, whkg2)). The or-
der of computation complexity of the above two is less than
O(whkb2) of the ResNet series. Therefore, we design our
tiny model with the help of OSANet, which has a smaller
computation complexity.
Minimize/balance size of feature map: In order to get the
best trade-off in terms of computing speed, we propose a
new concept, which is to perform gradient truncation between computational block of the CSPOSANet. If we apply the original CSPNet design to the DenseNet or ResNet
architectures, because the jth layer output of these two architectures is the integration of the 1st to (j −1)th layer
outputs, we must treat the entire computational block as a
whole. Because the computational block of OSANet belongs to the PlainNet architecture, making CSPNet from
any layer of a computational block can achieve the effect
of gradient truncation. We use this feature to re-plan the b
channels of the base layer and the kg channels generated
by computational block, and split them into two paths with
equal channel numbers, as shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Number of channel of OSANet, CSPOSANet, and
CSPOSANet with partial in computational block (PCB).
partial in CB
→(b + kg)/2
(b + kg)/2
→(b + kg)/2
When the number of channel is b + kg, if one wants
to split these channels into two paths, the best partition is
to divide it into two equal parts, i.e. (b + kg)/2. When
we actually consider the bandwidth τ of the hardware, if
software optimization is not considered, the best value is
ceil((b + kg)/2τ) × τ. The CSPOSANet we designed can
dynamically adjust the channel allocation.
Maintain the same number of channels after convolution: For evaluating the computation cost of low-end device, we must also consider power consumption, and the
biggest factor affecting power consumption is memory access cost (MAC). Usually the MAC calculation method for
a convolution operation is as follows:
MAC = hw(Cin + Cout) + KCinCout
where h, w, Cin, Cout, and K represent, respectively, the
height and width of feature map, the channel number of
input and output, and the kernel size of convolutional ﬁlter. By calculating geometric inequalities, we can derive
the smallest MAC when Cin = Cout .
Minimize Convolutional Input/Output (CIO): CIO 
is an indicator that can measure the status of DRAM IO.
Table 5 lists the CIO of OSA, CSP, and our designed
CSPOSANet.
Table 5: CIO of OSANet, CSPOSANet, and CSPOSANet with
partial in CB
bg + (k −1)g2 + (b + kg)2/2
kg2 + (kg)2
kg2 + (b + kg)2/4
When kg > b/2, the proposed CSPOSANet can obtain
the best CIO.
3.3. Scaling Large Models for High-End GPUs
Since we hope to improve the accuracy and maintain the
real-time inference speed after scaling up the CNN model,
we must ﬁnd the best combination among the many scaling
factors of object detector when performing compound scaling. Usually, we can adjust the scaling factors of an object
detector’s input, backbone, and neck. The potential scaling
factors that can be adjusted are summarized as Table 6.
Table 6: Model scaling factors of different parts of object
detectors.
Scaling Factor
widthbackbone , depthbackbone, #stagebackbone
widthneck, depthneck, #stageneck
The biggest difference between image classiﬁcation and
object detection is that the former only needs to identify the
category of the largest component in an image, while the latter needs to predict the position and size of each object in an
image. In one-stage object detector, the feature vector corresponding to each location is used to predict the category
and size of an object at that location. The ability to better
predict the size of an object basically depends on the receptive ﬁeld of the feature vector. In the CNN architecture, the
thing that is most directly related to receptive ﬁeld is the
stage, and the feature pyramid network (FPN) architecture
tells us that higher stages are more suitable for predicting
large objects. In Table 7, we illustrate the relations between
receptive ﬁeld and several parameters.
Table 7: Effect of receptive ﬁeld caused by different
model scaling factors.
Scaling factor
Effect of receptive ﬁeld
no effect.
no effect.
one more k × k conv layer, increases k −1.
one more stage, receptive ﬁeld doubled.
From Table 7, it is apparent that width scaling can be
independently operated. When the input image size is increased, if one wants to have a better prediction effect for
large objects, he/she must increase the depth or number of
stages of the network. Among the parameters listed in Table
7, the compound of {sizeinput, #stage} turns out with the
best impact. Therefore, when performing scaling up, we
ﬁrst perform compound scaling on sizeinput, #stage, and
then according to real-time requirements, we further perform scaling on depth and width respectively.
4. Scaled-YOLOv4
In this section, we put our emphasis on designing scaled
YOLOv4 for general GPUs, low-end GPUs, and high-end
4.1. CSP-ized YOLOv4
YOLOv4 is designed for real-time object detection on
general GPU. In this sub-section, we re-design YOLOv4 to
YOLOv4-CSP to get the best speed/accuracy trade-off.
Backbone: In the design of CSPDarknet53, the computation of down-sampling convolution for cross-stage process
is not included in a residual block. Therefore, we can deduce that the amount of computation of each CSPDarknet
stage is whb2(9/4+3/4+5k/2). From the formula deduced
above, we know that CSPDarknet stage will have a better computational advantage over Darknet stage only when
k > 1 is satisﬁed. The number of residual layer owned by
each stage in CSPDarknet53 is 1-2-8-8-4 respectively. In
order to get a better speed/accuracy trade-off, we convert
the ﬁrst CSP stage into original Darknet residual layer.
Computaional blocks of reversed Dark layer
(SPP) and reversed CSP dark layers (SPP).
Neck: In order to effectively reduce the amount of computation, we CSP-ize the PAN architecture in YOLOv4.
The computation list of a PAN architecture is illustrated in
Figure 2(a). It mainly integrates the features coming from
different feature pyramids, and then passes through two sets
of reversed Darknet residual layer without shortcut connections. After CSP-ization, the architecture of the new computation list is shown in Figure 2(b). This new update effectively cuts down 40% of computation.
SPP: The SPP module was originally inserted in the middle position of the ﬁrst computation list group of the neck.
Therefore, we also inserted SPP module in the middle position of the ﬁrst computation list group of the CSPPAN.
4.2. YOLOv4-tiny
YOLOv4-tiny is designed for low-end GPU device, the
design will follow principles mentioned in section 3.2.
Figure 3: Computational block of YOLOv4-tiny.
We will use the CSPOSANet with PCB architecture to
form the backbone of YOLOv4. We set g = b/2 as the
growth rate and make it grow to b/2 + kg = 2b at the end.
Through calculation, we deduced k = 3, and its architecture
is shown in Figure 3. As for the number of channels of
each stage and the part of neck, we follow the design of
YOLOv3-tiny.
4.3. YOLOv4-large
YOLOv4-large is designed for cloud GPU, the main purpose is to achieve high accuracy for object detection. We
designed a fully CSP-ized model YOLOv4-P5 and scaling
it up to YOLOv4-P6 and YOLOv4-P7.
Figure 4 shows the structure of YOLOv4-P5, YOLOv4-
P6, and YOLOv4-P7. We designed to perform compound
scaling on sizeinput, #stage. We set the depth scale of each
stage to 2dsi, and ds to . Finally,
we further use inference time as constraint to perform additional width scaling. Our experiments show that YOLOv4-
P6 can reach real-time performance at 30 FPS video when
the width scaling factor is equal to 1. For YOLOv4-P7, it
can reach real-time performance at 16 FPS video when the
width scaling factor is equal to 1.25.
5. Experiments
We use MSCOCO 2017 object detection dataset to verify the proposed scaled-YOLOv4.
We do not use ImageNet pre-trained models, and all scaled-YOLOv4 models
are trained from scratch and the adopted tool is SGD optimizer. The time used for training YOLOv4-tiny is 600
epochs, and that used for training YOLOv4-CSP is 300
As for YOLOv4-large, we execute 300 epochs
ﬁrst and then followed by using stronger data augmentation
method to train 150 epochs. As for the Lagrangian multiplier of hyper-parameters, such as anchors of learning rate,
the degree of different data augmentation methods, we use
Figure 4: Architecture of YOLOv4-large, including YOLOv4-P5, YOLOv4-P6, and YOLOv4-P7. The dashed arrow means
replace the corresponding CSPUp block by CSPSPP block.
k-means and genetic algorithms to determine. All details
related to hyper-parameters are elaborated in Appendix.
5.1. Ablation study on CSP-ized model
In this sub-section, we will CSP-ize different models
and analyze the impact of CSP-ization on the amount of
parameters, computations, throughput, and average precision. We use Darknet53 (D53) as backbone and choose
FPN with SPP (FPNSPP) and PAN with SPP (PANSPP)
as necks to design ablation studies. In Table 8 we list the
APval results after CSP-izing different DNN models. We
use LeakyReLU (Leaky) and Mish activation function respectively to compare the amount of used parameters, computations, and throughput. Experiments are all conducted
on COCO minval dataset and the resulting APs are shown
in the last column of Table 8.
Table 8: Ablation study of CSP-ized models @608×608.
From the data listed in Table 8, it can be seen that the
CSP-ized models have greatly reduced the amount of parameters and computations by 32%, and brought improvements in both Batch 8 throughput and AP. If one wants to
maintain the same frame rate, he/she can add more lay-
Table 9: Ablation study of partial at different position in computational block.
with/without ﬁne-tuning.
ers or more advanced activation functions to the models
after CSP-ization.
From the ﬁgures shown in Table 8,
we can see that both CD53s-CFPNSPP-Mish, and CD53s-
CPANSPP-Leaky have the same batch 8 throughput with
D53-FPNSPP-Leaky, but they respectively have 1% and
1.6% AP improvement with lower computing resources.
From the above improvement ﬁgures, we can see the huge
advantages brought by model CSP-ization. Therefore, we
decided to use CD53s-CPANSPP-Mish, which results in the
highest AP in Table 8 as the backbone of YOLOv4-CSP.
5.2. Ablation study on YOLOv4-tiny
In this sub-section, we design an experiment to show
how ﬂexible can be if one uses CSPNet with partial func-
Table 11: Comparison of state-of-the-art object detectors.
EfﬁcientDet-D0 
EfﬁcientNet-B0 
YOLOv4-CSP
EfﬁcientDet-D1 
EfﬁcientNet-B1 
YOLOv4-CSP
YOLOv3-SPP 
YOLOv3-SPP ours
PP-YOLO 
R50-vd-DCN 
YOLOv4 
YOLOv4 ours
EfﬁcientDet-D2 
EfﬁcientNet-B2 
RetinaNet 
RetinaNet 
EfﬁcientDet-D3 
EfﬁcientNet-B3 
SM-NAS: E2 
EfﬁcientDet-D4 
EfﬁcientNet-B4 
SM-NAS: E3 
RetinaNet 
RDSNet 
CenterMask 
R101-FPN 
EfﬁcientDet-D5 
EfﬁcientNet-B5 
R101-DCN 
CenterMask 
V99-FPN 
EfﬁcientDet-D6 
EfﬁcientNet-B6 
RDSNet 
RetinaNet 
SM-NAS: E5 
EfﬁcientDet-D7 
EfﬁcientNet-B6 
X-32x8d-101-DCN 
X-64x4d-101-DCN 
EfﬁcientDet-D7x 
EfﬁcientNet-B7 
tions in computational blocks. We also compare with CSP-
Darknet53, in which we perform linear scaling down on
width and depth. The results are shown in Table 9.
From the ﬁgures shown in Table 9, we can see that the
designed PCB technique can make the model more ﬂexible, because such a design can be adjusted according to actual needs. From the above results, we also conﬁrmed that
linear scaling down does have its limitation. It is apparent that when under limited operating conditions, the residual addition of tinyCD53s becomes the bottleneck of inference speed, because its frame rate is much lower than the
COSA architecture with the same amount of computations.
Meanwhile, we also see that the proposed COSA can get a
higher AP. Therefore, we ﬁnally chose COSA-2x2x which
received the best speed/accuracy trade-off in our experiment
as the YOLOv4-tiny architecture.
5.3. Ablation study on YOLOv4-large
In Table 10 we show the AP obtained by YOLOv4 models in training from scratch and ﬁne-tune stages.
5.4. Scaled-YOLOv4 for object detection
We compare with other real-time object detectors, and
the results are shown in Table 11. The values marked in
bold in the [AP, AP50, AP75, APS, APM, APL] items indicate that model is the best performer in the corresponding
item. We can see that all scaled YOLOv4 models, including YOLOv4-CSP, YOLOv4-P5, YOLOv4-P6, YOLOv4-
P7, are Pareto optimal on all indicators. When we compare YOLOv4-CSP with the same accuracy of EfﬁcientDet-
D3 (47.5% vs 47.5%), the inference speed is 1.9 times.
When YOLOv4-P5 is compared with EfﬁcientDet-D5 with
the same accuracy (51.8% vs 51.5%), the inference speed
is 2.9 times. The situation is similar to the comparisons between YOLOv4-P6 vs EfﬁcientDet-D7 (54.5% vs 53.7%)
and YOLOv4-P7 vs EfﬁcientDet-D7x (55.5% vs 55.1%). In
both cases, YOLOv4-P6 and YOLOv4-P7 are, respectively,
3.7 times and 2.5 times faster in terms of inference speed.
All scaled-YOLOv4 models reached state-of-the-art results.
The results of test-time augmentation (TTA) experiments
of YOLOv4-large models are shown in Table 12. YOLOv4-
P5, YOLOv4-P6, and YOLOv4-P7 gets 1.1%, 0.7%, and
0.5% higher AP, respectively, after TTA is applied.
Table 12: Results of YOLOv4-large models
with test-time augmentation (TTA).
YOLOv4-P5 with TTA
YOLOv4-P6 with TTA
YOLOv4-P7 with TTA
We then compare the performance of YOLOv4-tiny with
that of other tiny object detectors, and the results are shown
in Table 13. It is apparent that YOLOv4-tiny achieves the
best performance in comparison with other tiny models.
Table 13: Comparison of state-of-the-art tiny models.
YOLOv4-tiny
YOLOv4-tiny (3l)
ThunderS146 
CSPPeleeRef 
YOLOv3-tiny 
Finally, we put YOLOv4-tiny on different embedded
GPUs for testing, including Xavier AGX, Xavier NX, Jetson TX2, Jetson NANO. We also use TensorRT FP32 (FP16
if supported) for testing. All frame rates obtained by different models are listed in Table 14.
It is apparent that
YOLOv4-tiny can achieve real-time performance no matter which device is used. If we adopt FP16 and batch size 4
to test Xavier AGX and Xavier NX, the frame rate can reach
380 FPS and 199 FPS respectively. In addition, if one uses
TensorRT FP16 to run YOLOv4-tiny on general GPU RTX
2080ti, when the batch size respectively equals to 1 and 4,
the respective frame rate can reach 773 FPS and 1774 FPS,
which is extremely fast.
Table 14: FPS of YOLOv4-tiny on embedded devices.
5.5. Scaled-YOLOv4 as na¨ıve once-for-all model
In this sub-section, we design experiments to show that
an FPN-like architecture is a na¨ıve once-for-all model. Here
we remove some stages of top-down path and detection
branch of YOLOv4-P7.
YOLOv4-P7\P7 and YOLOv4-
P7\P7\P6 represent the model which has removed {P7}
and {P7, P6} stages from the trained YOLOv4-P7. Figure 5 shows the AP difference between pruned models and
original YOLOv4-P7 with different input resolution.
Figure 5: YOLOv4-P7 as “once-for-all” model.
We can ﬁnd that YOLOv4-P7 has the best AP at high
resolution, while YOLOv4-P7\P7 and YOLOv4-P7\P7\P6
have the best AP at middle and low resolution, respectively.
This means that we can use sub-nets of FPN-like models to
execute the object detection task well. Moreover, we can
perform compound scale-down the model architectures and
input size of an object detector to get the best performance.
6. Conclusions
We show that the YOLOv4 object detection neural network based on the CSP approach, scales both up and
down and is applicable to small and large networks. So
we achieve the highest accuracy 56.0% AP on test-dev
COCO dataset for the model YOLOv4-large, extremely
high speed 1774 FPS for the small model YOLOv4-tiny on
RTX 2080Ti by using TensorRT-FP16, and optimal speed
and accuracy for other YOLOv4 models.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank National Center for Highperformance Computing (NCHC) for providing computational and storage resources.
A large part of the code
is borrowed from 
 and https:
//github.com/glenn-jocher.
Thanks for their
wonderful works.