Featured Article
Using data science to diagnose and characterize heterogeneity
of Alzheimer’s disease
Ting F. A. Anga,b,c,1, Ning And,1, Huitong Dinga,d, Sherral Devinea,c, Sanford H. Auerbachc,e,
Joseph Massaroc,f, Prajakta Joshia,c, Xue Liua,c, Yulin Liua,c, Elizabeth Mahona,c,
Rhoda Aua,b,c,e,*, Honghuang Linc,g,**
aDepartment of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
bDepartment of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
cThe Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA
dSchool of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
eDepartment of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
fDepartment of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
gSection of Computational Biomedicine, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
Introduction: Despite the availability of age- and education-adjusted standardized scores for most
neuropsychological tests, there is a lack of objective rules in how to interpret multiple concurrent neuropsychological test scores that characterize the heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s disease.
Methods: Using neuropsychological test scores of 2091 participants from the Framingham Heart
Study, we devised an automated algorithm that follows general diagnostic criteria and explores the
heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s disease.
Results: We developed a series of stepwise diagnosis rules that evaluate information from multiple
neuropsychological tests to produce an intuitive and objective Alzheimer’s disease dementia diagnosis with more than 80% accuracy.
Discussion: A data-driven stepwise diagnosis system is useful for diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease
from neuropsychological tests. It demonstrated better performance than the traditional dichotomization of individuals’ performance into satisfactory and unsatisfactory outcomes, making it more reﬂective of dementia as a spectrum disorder. This algorithm can be applied to both within clinic and
outside-of-clinic settings.
 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer’s Association. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( 
Alzheimer’s disease; Dementia; Machine-learning; Decision tree; Neuropsychological assessment; Dementia
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative
disorder, which makes up more than 60% of all dementia
cases . With a rapidly aging population, projected
number of cases will triple by 2050 . Cognitive decline
is a key symptom of AD, and neuropsychological (NP) tests
are widely used to assess varying degree of cognitive
dysfunction, especially those affecting attention, memory,
impairment is a sine qua non criterion in AD diagnosis,
the complexity of NP test data poses a challenge for
consistent and accurate interpretation and the number of
experts available to do so are limited, particularly in non-
Western countries. Further, clinical AD trial studies have
largely failed, partly due to the presumption of a more
The authors have declared that no conﬂict of interest exists.
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Corresponding author. Tel.: 1508-935-3422; Fax: 11 617-358-5677.
**Corresponding authors. Tel.: 1617-358-0091; Fax: 1617-358-5677.
E-mail address: (R.A.), (H.L.)
 
2352-8737/  2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer’s Association. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license ( 
Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
homogeneous clinical progression . Therefore, variability
in NP proﬁles based on different AD risk factors and its
implication warrant further investigation.
Currently, age- and education-adjusted standardized
norms are available to serve as a reference for individual
NP test scores , but performance variability does not
lend itself easily to a set of decision rules, nor are discrete
cutoff values generalizable across all inﬂuencing factors.
For example, although the Mini-Mental State Examination
has well-established threshold scores , the score can
vary signiﬁcantly among people based on education and/or
age ; ﬂoor and ceiling effects are additional important
limitations. The Mini-Mental State Examination is also
insensitive in detecting cognitive abnormalities during the
earliest stages of AD , and its cutoff values rely on
a single total score, making it difﬁcult to determine the
cognitive etiology of poor performance and the subtype of
Another challenge in AD diagnosis is the evaluation and
interpretation of NP test results. Deciding cognitive status
based on NP performance is clinician-subjective. Most conventional analyses also assume linear correlation between
cognitive diagnoses and a single test, which is not reﬂective
of dementia as a spectrum disorder. Therefore, there is clinical utility in applying new analytic approaches that can
assess cognitive performance objectively across its multiple
dimensions.
Machine learning techniques can readily derive information from complex data such as NP scores and uncover new
knowledge to predict disease outcomes and improve the
clinical decision-making process. Decision tree is one of
the most widely used machine learning methods that involves breaking up a complex diagnostic process into a series of simpler rules, eventually leading to a multistage
decision-making algorithm, and overcoming the knowledge
bottleneck imposed by human experts . It has been
applied to a broad range of tasks from credit risk assessment
to medical diagnosis . Although the receiveroperating characteristic curve is often used to determine cutoff values of medical measures , isolation of a single
cutoff value for a given NP test may compromise the overall
accuracy of the prediction model. As an alternative, a decision tree can use multilevel cutoff values determined via discretization
technology,
prediction accuracy for complex diseases such as AD. It is
also important to consider the relevance of various NP tests
in the diagnostic process as it has been widely accepted that
certain tests are more sensitive in detecting cognitive decline
than others . Given the heterogeneity of AD,
impairment
domains for different subpopulations. It is, thus, important
to use feature selection techniques to distinguish subsets of
NP measures that are predictive of AD based on different
demographic and AD risk factors.
Leveraging the rich collection of NP tests available at the
Framingham Heart Study (FHS), the objective of this study
is two-fold: (1) identify the most informative NP tests and
(2) build a multilevel diagnostic decision tree to systematically screen for dementia.
2. Methods
2.1. Study population
The FHS is a longitudinal community-based multigenerational observational study initiated in 1948. In 1976, the
FHS started cognitive screening of a subset of Original participants and subsequently extended it to all participants in
all cohorts. Details of the dementia surveillance have been
previously reported . Given that sporadic AD is a
disease that primarily affects individuals of advanced age,
only participants from the Original, Offspring, Omni 1,
and New Offspring Spouse cohorts , aged 70 years and
older, were included in our study sample .
Thirty-two tests comprise the NP test protocol. Given that
some tests were administered only to a subset of participants,
the current analysis focused on 11 tests that were conducted
on more than 85% of all participants. These tests included
Wechsler Memory Scale Logical Memory —Immediate
Recall (LMi), Delayed Recall (LMd), and Recognition; Visual Reproductions28—Immediate Recall (VRi), Delayed
Recognition;
Learning28—Immediate Recall (PASi), and the Similarities
Test from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale . Additional tests included the Boston Naming Test (30-item Even
Version; BNT30) and recall of hard scores from PAS immediate (PASi_h) and delayed conditions (PASd_h), measures
of confrontational word retrieval and verbal learning,
respectively .
FHS dementia diagnosis is based on the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition
 , and AD diagnosis met criteria as speciﬁed by the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Disorders Association . Dementia diagnosis is evaluated
and veriﬁed through an adjudication panel, which includes at
least one neuropsychologist and one neurologist and has
been previously described . Each NP assessment was
assigned to one of these three outcomes: healthy control,
AD, and non-Alzheimer’s dementia (NAD). Refer to
Supplementary Fig. 1 for sample selection ﬂowchart.
2.2. Decision tree for dementia diagnosis
We implemented a supervised machine learning approach
to recognize dementia diagnosis—both AD and NAD—
from the NP assessment perspective. Our key approach is
a Chi-square Automatic Interaction Detection decision tree
 , which identiﬁes a series of diagnostics rules and arranges them in a tree-like manner in order of importance.
Starting from the root node—the topmost decision step—
Chi-square Automatic Interaction Detection adopts a topdown approach to select the optimal NP test that is most
T.F.A. Ang et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
important to cognitive outcomes. It designates a set of cutoff
values for the chosen NP test via ChiMerge and
branches out to two or more lower-level (internal) nodes.
This process is repeated at every internal node until the sample size in a speciﬁc node is less than 50 . The
performance of the model was evaluated by ten-fold cross
validation .
2.3. Identiﬁcation of most informative NP tests for
cognitive diagnosis
The 11 NP tests were ranked, based on their strength of
association with cognitive outcomes, using three feature
selection techniques, namely Information Theory-based
ﬁltering , Correlation-based Feature Selection Adapting
Greedy Search , and Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees
(CART) —each representative of a class of feature selection methods (ﬁlter, wrapper, and embedded, respectively). The top ﬁve most informative NP tests were
selected using majority voting. To demonstrate AD heterogeneity, a similar selection process was performed for each
subpopulation, stratiﬁed by sex (male/female), education
level (beyond high school/high school graduate and below),
and apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 status [OMIM 107741].
For APOE-stratiﬁed analyses, participants who did not consent to genetic analyses or without APOE information were
excluded (200 observations). Similarly, participants with
missing education information were excluded from the
education-stratiﬁed analyses (11 observations). Results
from feature selection were further validated using k-means
cluster analysis and hierarchical clustering . Additional decision trees were constructed using only the
selected tests to avoid model overﬁtting and to increase
generalizability of the algorithm. Refer to Supplemental
materials for further details.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, and this study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Boston University Medical Campus. All
data collection methods used in this study were monitored
by a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Observational Study Monitoring Board and followed the Strengthening
Observational
Epidemiology reporting guideline.
3. Results
This study included 4512 sets of NP scores from 2091
participants (55.8% female), aged 79 6 6 years. On average,
each participant underwent 2.2 NP examinations. Among
these observations, 555 were marked as AD, 443 as NAD,
and the remaining were healthy controls (Table 1).
3.1. Dementia diagnosis from NP tests by decision tree
Fig. 1 shows the decision tree for dementia diagnosis. An
illustration
generation
Supplemental Results. The tree consists of ﬁve levels, with
27 internal nodes and 48 terminal nodes. Among the 11
NP tests, all but Logical Memory (Recognition) were represented.
(P , 1.0 ! 10215), which branches to six internal nodes.
The highest AD diagnostic accuracy yielded by this single
decision step was 68.6%—the leftmost branch where LMd
1.0. With the introduction of other NP tests at subsequent
nodes, the model appraises the individual overall cognitive
performance, based on a set of NP scores rather than one
single test score, and provides the diagnostic accuracy
accordingly. For example, the leftmost path, besides LMd
1.0, is comprised of a BNT30 score from 0 to 23
Demographics, NP test scores, and APOE genotypes of the studied
population
Characteristics
(n 5 3514)
Alzheimer’s
Alzheimer’s
Age at NP examination
Male, no. (%)
1521 (43.3) 179 (32.3)
220 (49.7)
Highest level of education
Valid education
data, no. (%)
3510 (99.9) 549 (98.9)
442 (99.8)
High school and
below, no. (%)*
1491 (42.5) 358 (65.2)
241 (54.5)
Beyond high
school, no. (%)*
2019 (57.5) 191 (34.8)
201 (45.5)
APOE ε4 allele
Valid genetic
data, no. (%)y
3369 (95.9) 530 (95.5)
413 (93.2)
APOE ε4 (2), no. (%)*
2794 (82.9) 346 (65.3)
327 (79.2)
APOE ε4 (1), no. (%)*
575 (17.1) 184 (34.7)
NP test scores, mean (SD)
11.2 (3.7)
10.2 (3.9)
12.8 (3.3)
15.5 (3.9)
11.6 (4.7)
26.1 (3.4)
19.4 (5.9)
22.3 (5.4)
Abbreviations: APOE, apolipoprotein E; BNT30, Boston Naming Test
(30-item Even Version); NP, neuropsychological; LMd, Logical Memory
(Delayed Recall); LMi, Logical Memory (Immediate Recall); LMr, Logical
Memory (Recognition); PASd_h, Hard score of Paired Associate Learning
(Delayed Recall); PASi, Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall); PA-
Si_h, Hard Score of Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall); SD,
standard deviation; SIM, Similarities Test; VRd, Visual Reproductions (Delayed Recall); VRi, Visual Reproductions (Immediate Recall); VRr, Visual
Reproductions (Recognition).
*Values are calculated based on a subset with valid data.
yParticipants who did not consent to genetic analyses, had an APOE ε2/ε4
genotype, or with no APOE information were excluded.
T.F.A. Ang et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
(P , 1.0 ! 10211), VRd score of 0.0 (P 5 .0036), and PA-
Si_h score of 0.0 (P 5 .0023), and this set of decision rules
yielded the highest AD diagnostic accuracy sensitivity of
88.1%. This decision tree has an overall accuracy of
73.9%, with an all-cause dementia sensitivity of 85.0%.
Decision trees for different subpopulations were presented in Supplementary Figs. 2–7, with their individual
performances and NP test cutoff values reported in
Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Table 7, respectively.
3.2. Most informative NP tests for AD diagnosis
Table 2 shows the top ﬁve most informative NP tests with
regard to cognitive outcomes, determined via each of the
three feature selection methods. Both CART and Information Theory approaches identiﬁed the same set of ﬁve NP
tests—LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi, and BNT30—for the total
sample population, while the Correlation-based Feature Selection Adapting Greedy Search approach differed by picking PASi over VRi. As demonstrated in a previous study21,
LMd was consistently selected as an important feature for
dementia diagnoses. While the BNT30 played a more important role for dementia diagnosis in men, PAS was preferred
for women. A similar trend was observed in the stratiﬁed analyses for education and APOE ε4 status.
Fig. 2 represents the decision tree derived based on the
top ﬁve most informative NP tests for total sample population. It consisted of ﬁve levels, with 19 internal nodes and
38 terminal nodes. Similar to Fig. 1, LMd was chosen as
the root node. Its overall accuracy was 73.3%, with an allcause dementia sensitivity of 84.5%. Supplementary Figs.
8–13 are decision trees created using only the optimal NP
tests for different subpopulations. Their individual overall
performance and NP test cutoff values are summarized in
Supplementary Tables 2 and 8, respectively. Based on these
results, the optimal tests had not only comparable performance with their full NP test-set counterparts but also
reduced tree nodes, which would promote better ease of
use for health-care workers.
4. Discussion
Cognitive domains are interconnected and may be simultaneously affected under diseased state, hence the complex
and heterogeneous nature of AD . Accurate dementia
diagnosis requires the understanding of these relationships
across all cognitive domains and the appreciation of various
NP test outcomes concurrently. The current diagnostic process, however, depends heavily on the prior knowledge
and experience of specialty clinicians, who often subjectively evaluate selected NP tests when making an AD
diagnosis. This study comprehensively evaluated the relationships among various NP tests in a data-driven manner.
None of NP tests alone was sufﬁcient to separate participants
with or without dementia. It is thus important to consider
multiple NP tests for dementia diagnosis. The grading system for each NP test not only aids differential diagnoses
but also transcends the traditional dichotomization—acceptable and unsatisfactory results—of individuals’ neurocognitive performance, making it more reﬂective of dementia as a
disease with a continuous spectrum of cognitive impairment.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that uses a datadriven approach to leverage the multitude of NP test scores
and simplify them into a set of intuitive instructions. Our
approach could facilitate AD diagnosis for experienced
clinicians in minimizing the subjectivity that is introduced
in practitioners’ decision-making process. Other healthcare providers, who might lack sufﬁcient clinical knowledge
and training for AD diagnosis, could also potentially
We also evaluated the contribution of each NP test to the
diagnosis of dementia. LMd was consistently identiﬁed as
the most important performance indicator for AD diagnosis,
Fig. 1. Clinical cognitive screen decision tree based on all NP tests in total population. Each rectangle represents a branch node, which is a decision step where
participants are divided into different subgroups based on the designated NP test score. Each pie chart represents a terminal node and is divided into color-coded
slices to illustrate the probability of the three cognitive outcomes (AD, NAD, and HC). The outcome with the highest probability is indicated alongside each pie
chart. Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BNT30, Boston Naming Test (30-item Even Version); HC, healthy control; NP, neuropsychological; LMd,
Logical Memory (Delayed Recall); LMi, Logical Memory (Immediate Recall); NAD, non-Alzheimer’s dementia; PASd_h, Hard score of Paired Associate
Learning (Delayed Recall); PASi, Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall); PASi_h, Hard Score of Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall);
SD, standard deviation; SIM, Similarities Test; VRd, Visual Reproductions (Delayed Recall); VRi, Visual Reproductions (Immediate Recall).
T.F.A. Ang et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
which aligned with the widespread use of verbal memory as
a diagnostic tool. The overall performance of the reduced
feature set decision tree (Fig. 2) was comparable to that of
the decision tree based on all NP tests (Fig. 1): overall accuracy (73.9% vs. 73.3%) and all-cause dementia sensitivity
(85.0% vs. 84.5%). This approach minimized model overﬁtting, and it can also potentially reduce time and effort
required for clinical screening of dementia. We validated
our ﬁndings using hierarchical clustering (Supplementary
Fig. 14). Although both dendrograms identiﬁed three
distinct clusters, the distinguishability was more pronounced
for the reduced feature set dendrogram, which indicated that
the use of optimal NP tests would potentially minimize data
redundancy and better represent the inherent patterns within
the NP data. In addition, with fewer NP tests to consider, we
were able to reintroduce an additional 310 observations with
valid NP scores for selected NP tests (LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi,
and BNT30) and observed similar prediction accuracy
(Supplementary Fig. 15).
This study effectively demonstrated the cognitive heterogeneity of AD and more importantly the need to consider the
multiplicity during the diagnostic process. For example, results of the sex-stratiﬁed analysis revealed different optimal
NP proﬁles that are most predictive for AD diagnoses in both
sexes (Table 2, Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3), which is in
with previous ﬁndings of sex differences
observed in various NP tests . Heterogeneity of a
disease is not unique to AD, as evident by various risk
prediction models and diagnostic criteria having sexspeciﬁc algorithms to account for the effect modiﬁcation
by sex . Despite well-established sex differences in
cognitive performance, none of the current AD diagnostic
criteria offer sex-speciﬁc decision rules. To meet the objectives of AD precision medicine, accurate patient stratiﬁcation is crucial, and this study showed machine learning as
one of the viable approaches that can help to do so. It is
important to appreciate the effects of selected demographic
and AD risk factors, as these not only enable more comprehensive dementia diagnosis decision-making but also have
implications on patient selection in clinical trials.
Our study has several strengths. First, FHS started
cognitive assessment in 1976 and has continued to monitor
the participants for dementia over the next 4 decades. The
long follow-up period and minimal loss to follow-up
makes FHS an ideal population to examine late-onset diseases such as AD . Second, dementia diagnosis of FHS
participants were adjudicated by a panel of subject-matter
experts, who evaluated multiple sources of information,
thus minimizing outcome misclassiﬁcation bias. Third,
the FHS NP test battery consists of a wide array of
commonly administered NP tests, which is ideal in translating the results for practical uses for clinicians and researchers. With feature selection, experts can focus on a
subset of relevant NP tests to efﬁciently appreciate the
overall data. Fourth, this data-driven approach surpasses
the conventional model of dichotomizing individuals’ performance into normal and impaired categories, by adopting a performance scale that is more representative of
the spectrum of symptoms often exhibited by individuals
with AD. Fifth, in contrast to other dimensionality reduction techniques such as those based on projection or
compression, we chose to use feature selection, to avoid
transforming the original values of the NP scores. With
the original semantic nature of variables preserved, the
discrete cutoff values allows easy interpretability, hence
making it easy for assessors to follow the decision tree.
Finally, the standard set of if-then diagnostic rules not
only renders the implementation easy and scalable but
also encourages reproducible science. As data accumulate,
the accuracy of the algorithm will improve as well.
In terms of limitations, our study participants have higher
levels of educational attainment compared to the general
NP tests selected by different feature selection methods for different subpopulations
Information gain
Majority voting
LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi, BNT30
LMd, VRd, BNT30, PASi, LMi
VRd, LMd, LMi, VRi, BNT30
LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi, BNT30
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, BNT30, LMi, SIM
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, PASi_h, LMi, PASi
VRd, LMd, BNT30, PASi, LMi
VRd, LMd, LMi, PASi, PASi_h
LMd, VRd, PASi_h, LMi, PASi
APOE ε4 allele*
APOE ε4 (2)
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, BNT30, SIM, LMi
VRd, LMd, LMi, VRi, BNT30
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
APOE ε4 (1)
LMd, VRd, LMi, PASd_h, PASi_h
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, LMi, PASi, VRi
LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi, PASi
High school
LMd, VRd, BNT30, LMi, VRi
LMd, VRd, BNT30, LMi, SIM
LMd, VRd, LMi, BNT30, VRi
LMd, VRd, BNT30, LMi, VRi
Beyond high
LMd, VRd, LMi, PASd_h, PASi
VRd, LMd, PASi, BNT30, VRi
VRd, LMd, VRi, PASi, LMi
LMd, VRd, LMi, VRi, PASi
NOTE. Participants who did not consent to genetic analyses, had an APOE ε2/ε4 genotype, or with no APOE information were excluded.
Abbreviations: APOE, apolipoprotein E; BNT30, Boston Naming Test (30-item Even Version); CBFSGS, Correlation-based Feature Selection Adapting
Greedy Search; LMd, Logical Memory (Delayed Recall); LMi, Logical Memory (Immediate Recall); NP, neuropsychological; PASd_h, Hard score of Paired
Associate Learning (Delayed Recall); PASi, Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall); PASi_h, Hard Score of Paired Associate Learning (Immediate
Recall); SIM, Similarities Test; VRd, Visual Reproductions (Delayed Recall); VRi, Visual Reproductions (Immediate Recall).
*APOE ε4 (2): APOE genotype ε2/ε2, ε2/ε3 or ε3/ε3; APOE ε4 (1): APOE genotype ε3/ε4 or ε4/ε4.
T.F.A. Ang et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
public and are individuals predominantly of European
descent. NP examinations were restricted to those conducted
in English because of the limited number of evaluations done
in Spanish. Therefore, results of this study may not be generalizable to populations of lower educational status, other
races and non-English–speaking groups. In addition, the decision tree presented in this study solely uses information
from NP tests. Given that FHS adjudication panel diagnosed
dementia cases using multiple information sources, NP test
results alone may not be adequate for deﬁnitive AD diagnosis. Hence, it should be viewed as an objective screening
algorithm to identify high-risk individuals for further investigations to conﬁrm AD diagnosis and potentially help
reduce health-care costs related to overtesting. Further,
only a subset of 11 tests were used and thus did not represent
the full spectrum of cognitive domains assessed. It is
possible that applied to a broader range of tests, a different
proﬁle of important NP features could emerge across the
various AD risk factors. Similar to all clinical guidelines,
these diagnosis instructions need to be periodically updated
with the accumulation of additional data.
5. Conclusion
A summary of the critical achievements of our study are
as follows: (1) intuitive and objective diagnostic criteria has
been created as a set of if-then rules, which can be translated
for actual clinical use that accounts for the complexity of AD
clinical expression; (2) cutoff values of different tests have
been identiﬁed with the ability to indicate a scale of severity
and accurately reﬂect the spectrum of symptoms related to
the heterogeneity of AD; and (3) the heterogeneity of AD
in the context of NP tests has been veriﬁed by identifying
important NP tests and predictive NP proﬁles for AD in subpopulations.
Future work includes development of an AD diagnosis
support system based on a heterogeneous set of rules.
When the individual’s NP record is obtained, the system
can automatically match the corresponding rule and make
a diagnosis in a stepwise way that reﬂects a distinct AD subtype. Using concept learning methods, we can then build a
general deﬁnition of AD that includes heterogeneous representation. With accumulation of additional longitudinal NP
data, we will focus on the diagnosis of preclinical AD that
is anticipated to have even a broader range of heterogeneity.
We anticipate developing methods to diagnose conversion to
AD within 5 to 10 years.
Acknowledgment
The authors want to express their thanks to the FHS study
staff for their many years of hard work in the examination
of subjects and acquisition of data. This work was supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
contract (N01-HC-25195) and by grants from the National
Institute on Aging AG-008122, AG-16495, and AG-
062109 and from the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, NS017950. It was also supported
by Pﬁzer, Inc, the Boston University Digital Health Initiative, Boston University Alzheimer’s Disease Center Pilot
Grant, and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, through
BU-CTSI Grant Number 1UL1TR001430. The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the National Institutes of Health or the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at
 
Fig. 2. Clinical cognitive screen decision tree based on optimal NP proﬁles (ﬁve tests) in total population. Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BNT30,
Boston Naming Test (30-item Even Version); HC, healthy control; NP, neuropsychological; LMd, Logical Memory (Delayed Recall); LMi, Logical Memory
(Immediate Recall); NAD, non-Alzheimer’s dementia; PASd_h, Hard score of Paired Associate Learning (Delayed Recall); PASi, Paired Associate Learning
(Immediate Recall); PASi_h, Hard Score of Paired Associate Learning (Immediate Recall); SD, standard deviation; SIM, Similarities Test; VRd, Visual Reproductions (Delayed Recall); VRi, Visual Reproductions (Immediate Recall).
T.F.A. Ang et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 264-271
RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
1. Systematic review: Despite the availability of ageand
education-adjusted
standardized
most neuropsychological tests, there is a lack of
objective rules on how to interpret multiple concurrent neuropsychological test scores that characterize
the heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Relevant studies are cited.
2. Interpretation: Stepwise diagnosis rules that evaluate
information from multiple neuropsychological tests
were derived to produce an intuitive and objective
AD dementia diagnosis with more than 80% accuracy. Heterogeneous AD proﬁles based on speciﬁc
AD risk factors were also identiﬁed.
3. Future directions: Future work includes the development of an AD diagnosis support system based on a
heterogeneous set of rules. Automated diagnosis
rules have potential applications in both within clinic
and outside-of-clinic settings. With accumulation of
additional longitudinal NP data, we will focus on the
diagnosis of preclinical AD that is anticipated to have
an even broader range of heterogeneity.