Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ITERATIVE ENERGY-BASED PROJECTION ON A NOR-
MAL DATA MANIFOLD FOR ANOMALY LOCALIZATION
David Dehaene∗, Oriel Frigo∗, Sébastien Combrexelle, Pierre Eline
AnotherBrain, Paris, France
{david, oriel, sebastien, pierre}@anotherbrain.ai
Autoencoder reconstructions are widely used for the task of unsupervised anomaly
localization. Indeed, an autoencoder trained on normal data is expected to only
be able to reconstruct normal features of the data, allowing the segmentation of
anomalous pixels in an image via a simple comparison between the image and
its autoencoder reconstruction. In practice however, local defects added to a normal image can deteriorate the whole reconstruction, making this segmentation
challenging. To tackle the issue, we propose in this paper a new approach for
projecting anomalous data on a autoencoder-learned normal data manifold, by using gradient descent on an energy derived from the autoencoder’s loss function.
This energy can be augmented with regularization terms that model priors on what
constitutes the user-deﬁned optimal projection. By iteratively updating the input
of the autoencoder, we bypass the loss of high-frequency information caused by
the autoencoder bottleneck. This allows to produce images of higher quality than
classic reconstructions. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on various
anomaly localization datasets. It also shows promising results at an inpainting
task on the CelebA dataset.
INTRODUCTION
Automating visual inspection on production lines with artiﬁcial intelligence has gained popularity
and interest in recent years. Indeed, the analysis of images to segment potential manufacturing
defects seems well suited to computer vision algorithms. However these solutions remain data
hungry and require knowledge transfer from human to machine via image annotations. Furthermore,
the classiﬁcation in a limited number of user-predeﬁned categories such as non-defective, greasy,
scratched and so on, will not generalize well if a previously unseen defect appears. This is even more
critical on production lines where a defective product is a rare occurrence. For visual inspection, a
better-suited task is unsupervised anomaly detection, in which the segmentation of the defect must
be done only via prior knowledge of non-defective samples, constraining the issue to a two-class
segmentation problem.
From a statistical point of view, an anomaly may be seen as a distribution outlier, or an observation
that deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicion that it was generated by a
different mechanism . In this setting, generative models such as Variational AutoEncoders ), are especially interesting because they are capable
to infer possible sampling mechanisms for a given dataset. The original autoencoder (AE) jointly
learns an encoder model, that compresses input samples into a low dimensional space, and a decoder, that decompresses the low dimensional samples into the original input space, by minimizing
the distance between the input of the encoder and the output of the decoder. The more recent variant,
VAE, replaces the deterministic encoder and decoder by stochastic functions, enabling the modeling
of the distribution of the dataset samples as well as the generation of new, unseen samples. In both
models, the output decompressed sample given an input is often called the reconstruction, and is
used as some sort of projection of the input on the support of the normal data distribution, which
we will call the normal manifold. In most unsupervised anomaly detection methods based on VAE,
models are trained on ﬂawless data and defect detection and localization is then performed using a
∗Equal contributions.
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
distance metric between the input sample and its reconstruction .
One fundamental issue in this approach is that the models learn on the normal manifold, hence there
is no guarantee of the generalization of their behavior outside this manifold. This is problematic
since it is precisely outside the dataset distribution that such methods intend to use the VAE for
anomaly localization. Even in the case of a model that always generates credible samples from the
dataset distribution, there is no way to ensure that the reconstruction will be connected to the input
sample in any useful way. An example illustrating this limitation is given in ﬁgure 1, where a VAE
trained on regular grid images provides a globally poor reconstruction despite a local perturbation,
making the anomaly localization challenging.
In this paper, instead of using the VAE reconstruction, we propose to ﬁnd a better projection of an
input sample on the normal manifold, by optimizing an energy function deﬁned by an autoencoder
architecture. Starting at the input sample, we iterate gradient descent steps on the input to converge
to an optimum, simultaneously located on the data manifold and closest to the starting input. This
method allows us to add prior knowledge about the expected anomalies via regularization terms,
which is not possible with the raw VAE reconstruction. We show that such an optimum is better than
previously proposed autoencoder reconstructions to localize anomalies on a variety of unsupervised
anomaly localization datasets and present its inpainting capabilities on the
CelebA dataset . We also propose a variant of the standard gradient descent that
uses the pixel-wise reconstruction error to speed up the convergence of the energy.
(a) Training sample
(c) VAE reconstruction
Gradientbased projection
Figure 1: Even though an anomaly is a local perturbation in the image (b), the whole VAEreconstructed image can be disturbed (c). Our gradient descent-based method gives better quality
reconstructions (d).
BACKGROUND
GENERATIVE MODELS
In unsupervised anomaly detection, the only data available during training are samples x from a
non-anomalous dataset X ⊂Rd. In a generative setting, we suppose the existence of a probability function of density q, having its support on all Rd, from which the dataset was sampled.
The generative objective is then to model an estimate of density q, from which we can obtain
new samples close to the dataset. Popular generative architectures are Generative Adversarial Networks ), that concurrently train a generator G to generate samples from random, low-dimensional noise z ∼p, z ∈Rl, l ≪d, and a discriminator D to
classify generated samples and dataset samples. This model converges to the equilibrium of the
expectation over both real and generated datasets of the binary cross entropy loss of the classiﬁer
minG maxD [ Ex∼q [log(D(x))] + Ez∼p [log(1 −D(G(z)))] ].
Disadvantages of GANs are that they are notoriously difﬁcult to train , and they
suffer from mode collapse, meaning that they have the tendency to only generate a subset of the
original dataset. This can be problematic for anomaly detection, in which we do not want some
subset of the normal data to be considered as anomalous . Recent works
such as Thanh-Tung et al. offer simple and attractive explanations for GAN behavior and
propose substantial upgrades, however Ravuri & Vinyals still support the point that GANs
have more trouble than other generative models to cover the whole distribution support.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Another generative model is the VAE ), where, similar to a GAN generator, a decoder model tries to approximate the dataset distribution with a simple latent variables prior
p(z), with z ∈Rl, and conditional distributions output by the decoder p(x|z). This leads to the estimate p(x) =
p(x|z)p(z)dz, that we would like to optimize using maximum likelihood estimation
on the dataset. To render the learning tractable with a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) estimator
with reasonable variance, we use importance sampling, introducing density functions q(z|x) output
by an encoder network, and Jensen’s inequality to get the variational lower bound :
log p(x) = log Ez∼q(z|x)
p(x|z)p(z)
≥Ez∼q(z|x) log p(x|z) −DKL(q(z|x)∥p(z)) = −L(x)
We will use L(x) as our loss function for training. We deﬁne the VAE reconstruction, per analogy with an autoencoder reconstruction, as the deterministic sample fV AE(x) that we obtain by
encoding x, decoding the mean of the encoded distribution q(z|x), and taking again the mean of the
decoded distribution p(x|z).
VAEs are known to produce blurry reconstructions and generations, but Dai & Wipf show
that a huge enhancement in image quality can be gained by learning the variance of the decoded
distribution p(x|z). This comes at the cost of the distribution of latent variables produced by the
encoder q(z) being farther away from the prior p(z), so that samples generated by sampling z ∼
p(z), x ∼p(x|z) have poorer quality. The authors show that using a second VAE learned on samples
from q(z), and sampling from it with ancestral sampling u ∼p(u), z ∼p(z|u), x ∼p(x|z), allows
to recover samples of GAN-like quality. The original autoencoder can be roughly considered as a
VAE whose encoded and decoded distributions have inﬁnitely small variances.
ANOMALY DETECTION AND LOCALIZATION
We will consider that an anomaly is a sample with low probability under our estimation of the
dataset distribution. The VAE loss, being a lower bound on the density, is a good proxy to classify samples between the anomalous and non-anomalous categories. To this effect, a threshold
T can be deﬁned on the loss function, delimiting anomalous samples with L(x) ≥T and normal samples L(x) < T. However, according to Matsubara et al. , the regularization term
LKL(x) = DKL(q(z|x)∥p(z)) has a negative inﬂuence in the computation of anomaly scores. They
propose instead an unregularized score Lr(x) = −Ez∼q(z|x) log p(x|z) which is equivalent to the
reconstruction term of a standard autoencoder and claim a better anomaly detection.
Going from anomaly detection to anomaly localization, this reconstruction term becomes crucial to
most of existing solutions. Indeed, the inability of the model to reconstruct a given part of an image
is used as a way to segment the anomaly, using a pixel-wise threshold on the reconstruction error.
Actually, this segmentation is very often given by a pixel-wise or patch-wise comparison of the input image, and some generated image,
as in Bergmann et al. , where the structural dissimilarity )
between the input and its VAE reconstruction is used.
Autoencoder-based methods thus provide a straightforward way of generating an image conditioned
on the input image. In the GAN original framework, though, images are generated from random
noise z ∼p(z) and are not conditioned by an input. Schlegl et al. propose with AnoGAN to
get the closest generated image to the input using gradient descent on z for an energy deﬁned by:
EAnoGAN = ||x −G(z)||1 + λ · ||fD(x) −fD(G(z))||1
The ﬁrst term ensures that the generation G(z) is close to the input x. The second term is based
on a distance between features of the input and the generated images, where fD(x) is the output of
an intermediate layer of the discriminator. This term ensures that the generated image stays in the
vicinity of the original dataset distribution.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: Illustration of our method. We perform gradient descent on E(xt) to iteratively correct
PROPOSED METHOD
ADVERSARIAL PROJECTIONS
According to Zimmerer et al. , the loss gradient with respect to x gives the direction towards
normal data samples, and its magnitude could indicate how abnormal a sample is. In their work on
anomaly identiﬁcation, they use the loss gradient as an anomaly score.
Here we propose to use the gradient of the loss to iteratively improve the observed x. We propose
to link this method to the methodology of computing adversarial samples in Szegedy et al. .
After training a VAE on non-anomalous data, we can deﬁne a threshold T on the reconstruction loss
Lr as in , such that a small proportion of the most improbable samples are
identiﬁed as anomalies. We obtain a binary classiﬁer deﬁned by
1 if Lr(x) ≥T
0 otherwise
Our method consists in computing adversarial samples of this classiﬁer , that
is to say, starting from a sample x0 with A(x0) = 1, iterate gradient descent steps over the input x,
constructing samples x1, . . . xN, to minimize the energy E(x), deﬁned as
E(xt) = Lr(xt) + λ · ||xt −x0||1
An iteration is done by calculating xt+1 as
xt+1 = xt −α · ∇xE(xt),
where α is a learning rate parameter, and λ is a parameter trading off the inclusion of xt in the
normal manifold, given by Lr(xt), and the proximity between xt and the input x0, assured by the
regularization term ||xt −x0||1.
REGULARIZATION TERM
We model the anomalous images that we encounter as normal images in which a region or several
regions of pixels are altered but the rest of the pixels are left untouched. To recover the best segmentation of the anomalous pixels from an anomalous image xa, we want to recover the closest image
from the normal manifold xg. The term closest has to be understood in the sense that the smallest
number of pixels are modiﬁed between xa and xg. In our model, we therefore would like to use the
L0 distance as a regularization distance of the energy. Since the L0 distance is not differentiable, we
use the L1 distance as an approximation.
OPTIMIZATION IN INPUT SPACE
While in our method the optimization is done in the input space, in the previously mentioned
AnoGAN, the search for the optimal reconstruction is done by iterating over z samples with the
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
energy deﬁned in equation 2. Following the aforementioned analogy between a GAN generator G
and a VAE decoder Dec, a similar approach in the context of a VAE would be to use the energy
||x −Dec(z)||1 −λ · log p(z)
where the −log p(z) term has the same role as AnoGAN’s ||fD(x) −fD(G(z))||1 term, to ensure
that Dec(z) stays within the learned manifold. We chose not to iterate over z in the latent space
for two reasons. First, because as noted in Dai & Wipf and Hoffman & Johnson , the
prior p(z) is not always a good proxy for the real image of the distribution in the latent space q(z).
Second, because the VAE tends to ignore some details of the original image in its reconstruction,
considering that these details are part of the independent pixel noise allowed by the modeling of
p(x|z) as a diagonal Gaussian, which causes its infamous blurriness. An optimization in latent
space would have to recreate the high frequency structure of the image, whereas iterating over the
input image space, and starting the descent on the input image x0, allows us to keep that structure
and thus to obtain projections of higher quality.
OPTIMIZING GRADIENT DESCENT
We observed that using the Adam optimizer is beneﬁcial for the quality of the
optimization. Moreover, to speed up the convergence and further preserve the aforementioned high
frequency structure of the input, we propose to compute our iterative samples using the pixel-wise
reconstruction error of the VAE. To explain the intuition behind this improvement, we will consider
the inpainting task. In this setting, as in anomaly localization, a local perturbation is added on top of
a normal image. However, in the classic inpainting task, the localization of the perturbation is known
beforehand, and we can use the localization mask Ωto only change the value of the anomalous pixels
in the gradient descent:
xt+1 = xt −α · ( ∇xE(xt) ⊙Ω)
where ⊙is the Hadamard product.
For anomaly localization and blind inpainting, where this information is not available, we compute
the pixel-wise reconstruction error which gives a rough estimate of the mask. The term ∇xE(xt) is
therefore replaced with ∇xE(xt) ⊙(xt −fV AE(xt))2 ) in equation 5:
xt+1 = xt −α · ( ∇xE(xt) ⊙(xt −fV AE(xt))2 )
where fV AE(x) is the standard reconstruction of the VAE. Optimizing the energy this way, a pixel
where the reconstruction error is high will update faster, whereas a pixel with good reconstruction
will not change easily. This prevents the image to update its pixels where the reconstruction is
already good, even with a high learning rate. As can be seen in appendix B, this method converges
to the same performance as the method of equation 5, but with fewer iterations. An illustration of
our method can be found in ﬁgure 2.
STOP CRITERION
A standard stop criterion based on the convergence of the energy can efﬁciently be used. Using
the adversarial setting introduced in section 3.1, we also propose to stop the gradient descent when
a certain predeﬁned threshold on the VAE loss is reached. For example, such a threshold can be
chosen to be a quantile of the empirical loss distribution computed on the training set.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed method for two different applications: anomaly segmentation and image inpainting. Both applications are interesting use cases of our method, where we
search to reconstruct partially corrupted images, correcting the anomalies while preserving the uncorrupted image regions.
UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION
In order to evaluate the proposed method for the task of anomaly segmentation, we perform experiments with the recently proposed MVTec dataset . This collection of datasets
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: Results for anomaly segmentation on MVTec datasets, expressed in AUROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics). Four different baselines are trained on normal samples
and are augmented by our proposed gradient based reconstruction (grad) for comparison: A deterministic autoencoder trained with L2 loss (L2AE) as in ; A deterministic
autoencoder trained with DSSIM loss (DSAE) as in ; A variational autoencoder (VAE); And a variational autoencoder with a learned decoder variance (γ-VAE) as in . For each result a green or red background denotes respectively an improvement or a
decrease in performance compared to the baseline. It can be seen that the proposed gradient-based
reconstruction achieves the best segmentation for most datasets, with a mean improvement rate of
9.52% over all baselines.
toothbrush
transistor
consists of 15 different categories of objects and textures in the context of industrial inspection, each
category containing a number of normal and anomalous samples.
We train our model on normal training samples and test it on both normal and anomalous test samples to evaluate the anomaly segmentation performance.
We perform experiments with three different baseline autoencoders: A “vanilla” variational autoencoder with decoder covariance matrix ﬁxed to identity , a variational
autoencoder with learned decoder variance , a “vanilla” deterministic autoencoder trained with L2 as reconstruction loss (L2AE) and a deterministic autoencoder trained with
DSSIM reconstruction loss (DSAE), as proposed by Bergmann et al. . For the sake of a fair
comparison, all the autoencoder models are parameterized by convolutional neural networks with the
same architecture, latent space dimensionality (set to 100), learning rate (set to 0.0001) and number
of epochs (set to 300). The architecture details (layers, paddings, strides) are the same as described
in Bergmann et al. and Bergmann et al. . Similarly to the authors in Bergmann et al.
 , for the textures datasets, we ﬁrst subsample the original dataset images to 512 × 512 and
then crop random patches of size 128 × 128 which are used to train and test the different models.
For the object datasets, we directly subsample the original dataset images to 128 × 128 unlike in
Bergmann et al. who work on 256 × 256 images, then we perform rotation and translation
data augmentations. For all datasets we train on 10000 images.
Anomaly segmentation is then computed by reconstructing the anomalous image and comparing it
with the original. We perform the comparison between reconstructed and original with the DSSIM
metric as it has been observed in Bergmann et al. that it provides better anomaly localization
than L2 or L1 distances. For the gradient descent, we set the step size α := 0.5, L1 regularization
weight λ := 0.05 and the stop criterion is achieved when a sample reconstruction loss is inferior to
the minimum reconstruction loss over the training set.
In table 1 we show the AUROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics) for different
autoencoder methods, with different thresholds applied to the DSSIM anomaly map computed be-
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
tween original and reconstructed images. Note that an AUROC of 1 expresses the best possible
segmentation in terms of normal and anomalous pixels. For each autoencoder variant we compare
the baseline reconstruction with the proposed gradient-based reconstruction (grad.). As in Bergmann
et al. we observe that an overall best model is hard to identify, however we show that our
method increases the AUC values for almost all autoencoder variants. Aggregating the results over
all datasets and baselines, we report a mean improvement rate of 9.52%, with a median of 4.33%, a
25th percentile of 1.86%, and a 75th percentile of 15.86%. The histogram of the improvement rate
for all datasets and baselines is provided in appendix F, as well as a short analysis.
In ﬁgure 3 we compare our anomaly segmentation with a baseline L2 autoencoder Bergmann et al.
 (L2AE) for a number of image categories. For all results in ﬁgure 3, we set the same threshold
to 0.2 to the anomaly detection map given by the DSSIM metric. The visual results in ﬁgure 3
highlights an overall improvement of anomaly localization by our proposed iterative reconstruction
(L2AE-∆). See appendix C for additional visual results of anomaly segmentation on remaining
categories of MVTec dataset, and on remaining baseline models.
Figure 3: First row: Normal samples of hazelnut, grid, cable, wood, carpet and bottle categories in
MVTec dataset; Second row: anomalous samples from the aforementioned dataset categories; Third
row: Anomaly segmentation with baseline L2 autoencoder ; Fourth row:
our proposed anomaly segmentation with L2 autoencoder augmented with gradient-based iterative
reconstruction. Ground truth is represented by red contour, and each estimated segmentation by a
green overlay. It can be seen that anomaly segmentation is reﬁned by our proposed method, with a
tendency of detecting less false positives.
INPAINTING
Image inpainting is a well known image reconstruction problem which consists of reconstructing a
corrupted or missing part of an image, where the region to be reconstructed is usually given by a
known mask. Many different approaches for inpainting have been proposed in the literature, such
as anisotropic diffusion , patch matching , context
autoencoders and conditional variational autoencoders .
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Blind inpaint, VAE
Blind inpaint, ours
Groundtruth
Figure 4: Inpainting experiment performed on CelebA dataset, where the test face images are
masked with uniform noise. The baseline VAE reconstruction is disturbed by the noise mask, providing a poor inpainting. The proposed gradient-based VAE provides a more convincing inpainting
by an iterative process.
If we consider that the region to be reconstructed is not known beforehand, the problem is sometimes
called blind inpainting , and the corrupted part can be seen as an anomaly to be
corrected.
We performed experiments with image inpainting on the CelebA dataset , which
consists of celebrity faces. In ﬁgure 4 we compare the inpainting results obtained with a baseline
VAE with learned variance (γ-VAE) and Resnet architecture, as described by Dai & Wipf ,
with the same VAE model, augmented by our proposed gradient-based iterative reconstruction. Note
that for the regular inpainting task, gradients are multiplied by the inpainting mask at each iteration
(equation 7), while for the blind inpainting task, the mask is unknown. See appendix D for a comparison with a recent method based on variational autoencoders, proposed by Ivanov et al. .
RELATED WORK
Baur et al. have used autoencoder reconstructions to localize anomalies in MRI scans, and
have compared several variants using diverse per-pixel distances as well as perceptual metrics derived from a GAN-like architecture. Bergmann et al. use the structural similarity metric
 to compare the original image and its reconstruction to achieve better anomaly
localization, and also presents the SSIM autoencoder, which is trained directly with this metric.
Zimmerer et al. use the derivative of the VAE loss function with respect to the input, called
the score. The amplitude of the score is supposed to indicate how abnormal a pixel is. While we
agree that the gradient of the loss is an indication of an anomaly, we think that we have to integrate
this gradient over the path from the input to the normal manifold to obtain meaningful information.
We compare our results to score-based results for anomaly localization in appendix A.
The work that is the most related to ours is AnoGAN . We have mentioned
above the differences between the two approaches, which, apart from the change in underlying architectures, boil down to the ability in our method to update directly the input image instead of
searching for the optimal latent code. This enables the method to converge faster and above all to
keep higher-frequency structures of the input, which would have been deteriorated if it were passed
through the AE bottleneck. Bergmann et al. compare standard AE reconstructions techniques to AnoGAN, and observes that AnoGAN’s performances on anomaly localizations tasks are
poorer than AE’s due to the mode collapse tendency of GAN architectures. Interestingly, updates on
AnoGAN such as fast AnoGAN or AnoVAEGAN replaced
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
the gradient descent search of the optimal z with a learned encoder model, yielding an approach
very similar to the standard VAE reconstruction-based approaches, but with a reconstruction loss
learned by a discriminator, which is still prone to mode collapse .
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel method for unsupervised anomaly localization, using gradient
descent of an energy deﬁned by an autoencoder reconstruction loss. Starting from a sample under
test, we iteratively update this sample to reduce its autoencoder reconstruction error. This method
offers a way to incorporate human priors into what is the optimal projection of an out-of-distribution
sample into the normal data manifold. In particular, we use the pixel-wise reconstruction error to
modulate the gradient descent, which gives impressive anomaly localization results in only a few
iterations. Using gradient descent in the input data space, starting from the input sample, enables us
to overcome the autoencoder tendency to provide blurry reconstructions and keep normal high frequency structures. This signiﬁcantly reduces the number of pixels that could be wrongly classiﬁed
as defects when the autoencoder fails to reconstruct high frequencies. We showed that this method,
which can easily be added to any previously trained autoencoder architecture, gives state-of-the-art
results on a variety of unsupervised anomaly localization datasets, as well as qualitative reconstructions on an inpainting task. Future work can focus on replacing the L1-based regularization term
with a Bayesian prior modeling common types of anomalies, and on further improving the speed of
the gradient descent.