Deep learning ensembles for melanoma recognition in dermoscopy images1
N. C. F. Codella, Q. B. Nguyen, S. Pankanti, D. Gutman, B. Helba, A. Halpern, J. R. Smith
Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. While curable with early detection, only highly
trained specialists are capable of accurately recognizing the disease. As expertise is in limited
supply, automated systems capable of identifying disease could save lives, reduce unnecessary
biopsies, and reduce costs. Toward this goal, we propose a system that combines recent
developments in deep learning with established machine learning approaches, creating
ensembles of methods that are capable of segmenting skin lesions, as well as analyzing the
detected area and surrounding tissue for melanoma detection. The system is evaluated using the
largest publicly available benchmark dataset of dermoscopic images, containing 900 training and
379 testing images. New state-of-the-art performance levels are demonstrated, leading to an
improvement in the area under receiver operating characteristic curve of 7.5% (0.843 vs. 0.783),
in average precision of 4% (0.649 vs. 0.624), and in specificity measured at the clinically
relevant 95% sensitivity operating point 2.9 times higher than the previous state-of-the-art
(36.8% specificity compared to 12.5%). Compared to the average of 8 expert dermatologists on a
subset of 100 test images, the proposed system produces a higher accuracy (76% vs. 70.5%), and
specificity (62% vs. 59%) evaluated at an equivalent sensitivity (82%).
Introduction
Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States, with over 5 million cases diagnosed
each year . Melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer, is involved in approximately
100,000 new instances every year in the United States, and over 9,000 deaths . The cost to the
U.S. healthcare system exceeds $8 billion . Internationally, skin cancer also poses a major
public health threat. In Australia, there are over 13,000 new instances of melanoma yearly,
leading to over 1,200 deaths . In Europe, melanoma causes over 20,000 deaths a year .
In order to combat the rising mortality of melanoma, early detection is critical. Currently, highly
trained experts and professional equipment are necessary for accurate and early detection of
melanoma. Dermoscopy is a specialized method of high-resolution imaging of the skin that
reduces skin surface reflectance, allowing clinicians to visualize deeper underlying structures.
Using this device, specially trained clinicians have demonstrated a diagnostic accuracy as high as
75-84% . However, recognition performance drops significantly when the clinicians are not
adequately trained .
While in the United States there are over 10,000 dermatologists, in other areas of the world the
supply of expertise is limited. For example, in Australia, the number of registered dermatologists
in 2004 was approximately 340 , and in New Zealand, there were 16 . Restricted access
to expert consultation leads to additional challenges in providing adequate levels of care to the
populations that are at risk.
In order to address the limited supply of experts, there has been effort in the research community
to develop automated image analysis systems to detect disease from dermoscopy images. Such
1 This paper will appear, in final form, in the IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 61, no. 4/5,
2017, as part of a special issue on “Deep Learning.” Please cite the IBM Journal official paper version of
record. For more information on the journal, see: ©IBM.
technology could be used as a diagnostic tool by primary care physicians and staff for regular
screening, or by clinicians who are otherwise not trained to interpret dermoscopy images.
Review articles covering a spectrum of publications have been recently presented . The
variety of automated image analysis techniques discussed is broad, but mostly restricted within
the space of classical computer vision approaches, typically using combinations of low-level
visual feature representations (color, edge, and texture descriptors, quantification of melanin
based on color, etc.), rule-based image processing or segmentation algorithms, and classical
machine learning techniques, such as k-nearest neighbor (kNN) and support vector machines
(SVM). Some publications have presented algorithms that include segmentation of the lesion
 . A team from the Pedro Hispano Hospital of Portugal sought to evaluate the performance
of several (e.g., SVM and kNN) machine learning classifiers based on color, edge, and texture
descriptors . Other teams employed ensemble learning approaches . Interestingly,
some earlier work employed neural network machine learning approaches . However,
these were built on top of hand-coded low-level features.
More recent work has begun to examine the efficacy of the state-of-the-art deep learning
approaches to image recognition within the dermatology and dermoscopy application domain
 . Representations learned from the natural photo domain were leveraged, in conjunction
with unsupervised and hand-coded features, to achieve state-of-the-art performance in a data of
over 2,000 dermoscopy images . However, the work was limited to lesion images that had
been manually pre-segmented: images were already cropped around the lesion of interest.
In 2016, the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) organized an international effort to
aggregate a dataset of dermoscopic images from multiple institutions for the purposes of
developing and evaluating clinical and automated techniques for the diagnosis of melanoma .
A snapshot of the dataset that contained the most complete set of annotations was selected to
host a melanoma recognition challenge at the 2016 International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging . The challenge was titled “Skin Lesion Analysis toward Melanoma
Detection” . In total, 38 individual participants contributed 79 submissions across 3 image
analysis tasks, including 43 submissions toward disease classification. This was the first publicly
organized large-scale standardized evaluation of algorithms for the detection of melanoma. Top
performing techniques involved deep learning approaches, including Deep Residual Networks
for classification , and fully convolutional networks for segmentation .
In this work, we combine hand-coded feature extractors, sparse-coding methods, and SVMs,
with more recent machine learning techniques, including deep residual networks and fully
convolutional neural networks, into ensembles focused toward the task of melanoma recognition
and segmentation in dermoscopy images. We have chosen to use the ISBI 2016 dataset for
evaluation, which provides an immediate comparison to dozens of prior algorithms, and
opportunity for future comparisons. New state-of-the-art performance levels are demonstrated
across a variety of evaluation metrics, including an almost tripling of specificity measured at
95% sensitivity. These results emphasize that combining a multitude of machine learning
approaches can yield higher performance than relying on any one method alone, especially in
regards to recognition of melanoma in dermoscopic images.
For the training and evaluation, we used the dataset released by the International Skin Imaging
Collaboration (ISIC) for the 2016 International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging 
challenge titled “Skin Lesion Analysis toward Melanoma Detection” . The ISBI 2016
challenge dataset contains 900 annotated dermoscopic images for training (173 melanomas), and
379 images in a held-out test set for evaluation (75 melanomas). Figure 1 shows sample images
from this dataset. The challenge consisted of three parts: Part 1) Lesion Segmentation, Part 2)
Lesion Dermoscopic Feature Extraction, and Part 3) Lesion Classification. Parts 2 and 3 were
further broken into Parts 2 and 2B, and Parts 3 and 3B. Part 2 represented the dermoscopic
feature extraction problem as a classification task, whereas 2B represented the problem as a
segmentation task. The purpose of this breakdown was to quantify how the framing of the
problem influenced end system performance. Part 3 presented the disease classification task
withholding ground truth (GT) segmentations from the held-out test dataset, whereas Part 3B
provided the GT lesion segmentations with the held-out test dataset. The purpose of this
breakdown was to understand how knowledge of ground truth segmentation affects disease
classification performance.
For lesion segmentation tasks, outputs were represented as binary image masks. Pixels inside the
lesions were represented by the pixel intensity value of 255, and pixels outside the lesions
(background normal skin) were represented by pixel intensity values of 0. Participants were
ranked according to the Jaccard index (JACC) . Other segmentation performance metrics
such as pixel-wise accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SENS), and specificity (SPEC) were also
reported. For lesion classification tasks, participants were ranked according to the average
precision (AP). Additional performance metrics such as classification accuracy (ACC),
sensitivity (SENS), specificity (SPEC), area under the receiver operator curve (AUC), and
specificity measured at the clinically relevant 95% sensitivity threshold (SP95), were reported as
well. The last metric is particularly important, as clinicians tend to desire systems that are set at a
sensitivity level not likely to miss instances of disease. A detailed description of the definition of
each metric is given in the ISBI challenge report .
The scope of this paper encompasses Parts 1 and 3 of the ISBI challenge. Part 2, and the
potential influence of dermoscopic feature extraction towards the detection of disease, is left for
a future study.
Visual Recognition System
The proposed visual recognition system consists of two primary components: segmentation and
classification. With segmentation, the skin lesion is identified in the dermoscopic image and
distinguished from background healthy skin. This allows the system to subsequently perform
analysis within two contexts. The first context is focused within the lesion itself, the potentially
diseased tissue, and the second context is focused within the entire image, including the
surrounding area that may exhibit other patterns indicative of the disease state of the lesion.
Segmentation
For lesion segmentation, a fully convolutional network structure , similar to that used for the
U-Net architecture , was implemented using Theano, Lasagne, and Nolearn python packages
 . Generally speaking, the approach is a modeling
framework that learns a functional mapping from an input image to an output image. The input
image is the original image, and the output image is a segmentation mask. The structure of the
network involves a series of convolution and pooling operations, followed by a single fully
connected layer, and followed-up with a series of unpooling and deconvolution operations. Skip
connections are used to link convolutional data prior to pooling operations with the
deconvolution operations. This enables the network to model functional residuals, as well to
supply higher resolution information to the output layers, in order to improve performance of the
network in comparison to networks without the skip connections.
The network structure is depicted in Figure 2. In the proposed model, three stages of
convolutions (abbreviated as “conv” in figures and tables) and pooling operations are followed
by a fully-connected layer (abbreviated as “fc” in figures and tables), whereupon the process is
symmetrically reversed with 3 stages of unpooling and deconvolution layers. In each stage prior
to the fully connected layer, there are 3 convolution operations, followed by 1 pooling operation.
The number of convolution filters for each convolution layer is doubled across stages, so that the
second stage has twice as many filters as the first stage, and the third stage has 4 times as many
filters as the first stage. After the fully connected layer, the ordering of the layers is simply
reversed to 1 unpooling layer followed by 3 deconvolutional layers. Skip-connections (also
referred to as concatenation layers) directly link the output of the last convolutional layer of
stages prior to the fully connected layer, to the corresponding unpooling layer in the symmetrical
stage on the opposite side of the fully connected layer. Across each stage after the fully
connected layer, the number of convolution filters is halved, so that the last stage has as many
filters again as the first stage before the fully connected layer.
The hyperbolic tangent was selected as the nonlinear squashing function for all neuron outputs.
Gaussian noise layers were inserted after the input layer, after each pooling layer prior to the
fully connected layer, and to the fully connected layer itself. Dropout was applied to all pooling
layers before the fully connected layer, to the fully connected layer itself, and to all
concatenation layers.
Images were input into the network using six color channels, including Red-Green-Blue (RGB)
and Hue-Saturation-Value (HSV) color spaces. Empirical experimentation found improvements
in performance on training data using 6 color channels as opposed to 3. All images were resized
to 128-by-128 dimensions using bilinear interpolation. (Although the size of the input can be
changed, for reduction of problem complexity, we held this value constant.) Input images are
standard normalized by subtracting the mean pixel intensity and dividing the standard deviation
for each image and each color channel independently. Output masks were normalized by
dividing by the maximum pixel value (255), subtracting by 0.5, and multiplying by 1.9. This
caused pixels in the mask representing background skin to take on values near -1, and pixels in
the mask representing lesion to take on values near 1 (to convert network outputs back to image
masks, this range is simply rescaled back to the range between 0 and 255). Output images were
kept the same size as the input images.
Images input to the network were subjected to data augmentation within each training batch.
Images are rotated, flipped, rescaled, shifted, cropped, and further subjected to non-linear
distortions (sinusoidal remapping with varying phase, frequency, and amplitude, in both X and Y
directions) . The motivation for non-linear distortion is that it appropriately models the
variation of soft-tissue biological structures.
The network has several tunable parameters. The first is the size of the convolution kernels,
which is held constant across all stages before the fully connected layer, but is doubled and
incremented in the first convolutional layers of stages on the opposite side of the fully connected
layer. The second is the number of convolution filters in the convolutional layers of the first
stage. The third parameter is the standard deviation of the noise in each Gaussian noise layer.
The fourth is the degree of dropout used both prior to the fully connected layer, within the fully
connected layer, and after the fully connected layer. The last two parameters are the learning rate
and the momentum.
Training data for segmentation was split into two partitions of 80% (720) for training and 20%
(180) for validation. Network parameters were trained on the 80%, and the loss function was
computed on the 20%. Early stopping was employed if performance on the validation dataset did
not improve within 100 epochs, if training ceased, and if the set of network weights that
produced best performance on the validation split were saved to disk. In addition, the learning
rate and momentum parameters were adapted as follows during the training phase: both were
linearly adjusted from their initial starting values, which may vary based on the input, to 0.001
and 0.99, respectively, from the first epoch to the maximum epoch. This led to a gradual
decrease in the learning rate and a gradual increase in momentum over the successive epochs.
The network was trained as a regression problem using a squared-error loss function. The output
of the network therefore represents a “soft” confidence spectrum rather than a hard binary
decision, which helps the network model the segmentation function in the presence of ambiguity
and human variability in ground truth annotations.
Two sets of experiments were conducted to train and assess the performance of the fully
convolutional U-Net architecture for semantic segmentation of dermoscopic lesions. In the first
experiment, a grid-search optimization process was employed to examine the configuration of
tunable network parameters to minimize the final loss function value on the 20% validation
dataset. The network that yielded the best performance on the validation split was applied to the
test set to perform final segmentation. In the second, an ensemble of 10 networks, each with
different parameter values, was created. The outputs of the 10 were averaged to create a
combined segmentation prediction.
Classification
For disease classification, we employ an ensemble of recent machine learning methods,
including deep residual networks , convolutional neural networks , and fully
convolutional U-Net architecture , as well as the established machine learning procedures,
such as sparse coding, and hand-coded feature representations. Our method is an improvement
over the previous methods used in the literature (e.g., ) in terms of use of automated
segmentation, multi-contextual analysis, and additional machine learning techniques. Each
machine learning technique was used to extract information in the form of a feature vector from
the dermoscopic image in up to two contexts: that from the entire image, and that from a region
tightly cropped around the lesion segmented by the segmentation procedure. Other prior reports
have found this technique of considering more than one context to yield improvements in
recognition performance . Once the feature vectors have been extracted, a non-linear
support vector machine (SVM) was used to learn a classifier over the feature vector to
discriminate for melanoma. A histogram intersection kernel was employed, along with sigmoid
feature normalization. The output of the SVM was calibrated to a logistic function (using threefold cross-validation), roughly approximating the probability of melanoma on an image,
assuming a balanced prior . After score calibration, the output of the SVMs trained
over each feature independently was averaged, producing a final disease confidence score
between 0.0 and 1.0 (0% and 100%), with a default decision threshold of 0.5 (50%). A visual
overview of the approach is shown in Figure 3. In the following subsections, we describe each
method used to extract features from the dermoscopic images.
Hand-coded Feature Extraction
Low-level visual features used in this work included color histogram, edge histogram, and a
multi-scale variant of color local binary patterns (LBP) . All of these features have been
used in systems presented in prior literature that have achieved top performance in various
medical image datasets , including those of dermoscopic images .
The color histogram distribution represents a 166-dimensional histogram in HSV color space.
The edge histogram contains 8 edge direction bins and 8 edge magnitude bins, based on a Sobel
filter (64-dimensional). Multiscale color LBP is an extension of the common grayscale LBP,
whereby LBP descriptors are extracted across 4 color channels (Red, Green, Blue, and Hue),
with one histogram per color channel. For each color channel, LBP descriptors are extracted
across multiple scales (1/1, 1/2, 1/4, and 1/8th image size), and aggregated into a single
histogram, weighted by the inverse of the spatial scale. For a 59-bin LBP histogram, this results
in 59×4 = 236 total bins. These features were extracted from the two contexts of whole image,
and lesion cropped regions.
Sparse Coding
Sparse coding (SC) is a class of unsupervised methods that learns a dictionary of sparse codes
from which a given dataset can be reconstructed. The SPArse Modeling Software (SPAMS)
sparse coding dictionary learning algorithm is an online optimization approach for this
method, based on stochastic approximations. Because the algorithm is efficient and has been
used in the prior state-of-the-art melanoma recognition systems , the SPAMS algorithm was
employed to learn dictionaries on this dataset. Four dictionaries were constructed in RGB and
grayscale color spaces, across both the whole image context and the lesion cropped region
context. Images were resized to 128×128 pixel dimensions before extraction of 8×8 patches, to
learn dictionaries of 1024 elements. We used default parameters (λ = 0.15, and the number of
iterations = 1000) recommended in the SPAMS implementation for minimization of the
objective function. These features were extracted from the two contexts of whole image, and
lesion cropped regions.
Convolutional Neural Network
The Caffe convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture developed at Berkeley was
used to extract image descriptors, similar to prior work . A pre-trained model from the Image
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) 2012 is provided for download from the
website. This pre-trained model includes 5 convolutional layers, 2 fully connected layers, and a
final 1000-dimensional concept detector layer. In this work, the first fully connected layer (4096
dimensions, referred to as “FC6”), is used as a visual descriptor for dermoscopy images. These
features were extracted from the two contexts of whole image, and lesion cropped regions.
Deep Residual Network
The Deep Residual Network (DRN) is the most recent network structure to win the ImageNet
recognition challenge . The network containing 101 layers was used to extract a 1000dimensional concept detector vector from dermoscopy images at the context of the whole image
level. Prior state-of-the-art medical image recognition works have found that concept detector
feature vectors contribute complimentary information to classification systems, improving
performance over baselines lacking the feature vectors . This feature was extracted only
from the whole image context.
Fully Convolutional U-Net
The fully convolutional U-Net architecture used in this work for lesion segmentation was also
used in the classification framework as a shape descriptor. The fully connected layer, which
maximally compresses information required to reconstruct the image segmentation, was
extracted from the network for every image in the dataset to serve as this feature vector. We
trained an independent U-Net network and limit the dimensionality of the fully connected layer
to 1024 dimensions to maintain compactness of the representation. This feature was extracted
only from the whole image context, as the network is designed to operate within this context.
Experimental Results
Segmentation
Table 1 presents a summary of the segmentation experiments. For the first experiment using an
optimized single U-Net structure, we used a convolution kernel size of 5×5, pooling layers of
2×2, 32 convolution filters at the first stage, an 8192-dimensional fully connected layer, a
dropout of 0.5 at all dropout layers, Gaussian noise with standard deviation of 0.025 applied to
all noise layers, an initial learning rate of 0.01, an initial momentum of 0.95, and a maximum
number of epochs set to 2000. This set of parameters produced the minimal error (0.0962) on the
validation dataset split during grid-search over the parameter space. On the 379 images in the
held-out test data, this network produced a Jaccard index of 0.836, an accuracy of 94.9%,
sensitivity of 91.4%, and specificity of 96.3%. This performance places it at the second rank in
the 2016 ISBI challenge on melanoma detection, 0.007 points below the Jaccard index of the top
performer. Without data augmentation techniques beyond standard rotations and flips,
performance of the network dropped to a 0.828 Jaccard Index, 94.7% accuracy, 91.2%
sensitivity, and 96% specificity. Additionally, eliminating Gaussian noise and dropout reduced
performance further to a 0.812 Jaccard Index, 94.1% accuracy, 89.8% sensitivity, and 95.9%
specificity.
In the second experiment, a U-Net Ensemble of networks, each with varied network parameters,
was employed, rather than relying on a single optimized network alone. 10 independently trained
networks were created. For each network, parameters were selected to achieve a reasonable
spectrum across network topology and dropout parameter values: the major network topology
and dropout parameters are configured in at least 2 different values. The exact parameters used
across all 10 networks are shown in Table 2. The resulting predictions of all 10 networks were
averaged before being subjected to binary thresholding at a pixel value of 128. The resulting
Jaccard index was 0.841, with corresponding accuracy of 95.1%, sensitivity of 91.1%, and
specificity of 96.7%. This performance still places the network at the second rank in the
challenge, but behind by merely 0.002 points as opposed to 0.007, a reduction of 71.4% of the
remaining error behind the top ranked submission. Example segmentations prior to thresholding,
along with the original image and the ground truth segmentation, are shown in Figure 4.
The residual error between automated algorithms and the ground truth was at least in part related
to segmentation variability in the ground truth itself, which results from intrinsic differences in
human annotation, low contrast, presence of hair, or visual adjacency of the lesion to other
lesions in the peripheral surrounding skin. In order to better understand variability in this context,
three clinical experts generated ground truth segmentations on a subset of 100 images from the
held-out test set. The Jaccard Index between the 3 pairs of clinicians was computed as a measure
of agreement between experts. The resultant Jaccard index measurements were 0.743, 0.754, and
0.861, yielding an average of 0.786.
In summary, these results demonstrate that the segmentation network approach described here
produced competitive segmentation performance to state-of-the-art, and showed agreement with
the ground truth that was within the range of human experts, making it satisfactory for use in
subsequent disease classification processing steps. The network was used as both a segmenter as
well as a visual descriptor of lesion shape by saving the outputs of the most compressed fullyconnected layer.
Classification
Automated classification results are summarized in Table 3. Performance for systems utilizing
each image context was assessed individually, including “Whole Image (WI)” (which considers
the entire dermoscopic image), “Crop (CR)” (which considers only the bounding box tightly
cropping the region segmented by the automatic segmentation), and “Crop GT (CRGT)” (which
considers the bounding box tightly cropping the region segmented by the ground truth
segmentation). Fusions of these individual systems are subsequently computed in “Part 3B:
AVG/VOTE(WI, CRGT),” which combines the whole image context with the cropped region
context from the ground truth segmentation, using average and voting fusions, respectively (and
corresponds to Part 3B of the ISBI challenge), and “Part 3: AVG/VOTE(WI, CR),” which
combines the whole image context with the cropped region context from the automatically
generated segmentation, using average and voting fusions, respectively (and corresponds to Part
3 of the ISBI challenge tasks). The baseline prior state-of-the-art (winning challenge submission)
for Parts 3 and 3B of the ISBI challenge are listed in the rows of the table labeled “Top Rank.” In
addition, two prior published methods, which we re-implemented and evaluated on this dataset,
are listed in the bottom four rows of the table. These involve ensembles of low-level,
unsupervised, and deep features without automated segmentation, as well as ensembles of lowlevel features alone.
While average precision results for Parts 3 and 3B demonstrate a 1.3% (0.645 vs. 0.637) and 4%
(0.649 vs. 0.624) improvement over the prior state-of-the-art, AUC measurements exhibit a 4.2%
(0.838 vs. 0.804) and 7.7% (0.843 vs 0.783) relative improvement, respectively. In addition,
specificity measured at the clinically relevant sensitivity operating point of 95%, demonstrates a
43.6% (32.6% vs. 22.7%) and 194.4% (36.8% vs. 12.5%) relative improvement, respectively.
Curiously, the prior state-of-the-art showed improved average precision with automatically
generated segmentation masks rather than relying on the ground truth segmentations (0.637 vs.
0.624). In this study, average precision performance of the system utilizing the ground truth
segmentations showed a higher, but very similar, performance to that relying on automatically
generated segmentation masks (0.649 vs. 0.645). These measurements may be the result of
automated segmentation performance falling in the range of human performance and variability.
Figure 5 shows the entire receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for both the proposed
system and the prior state-of-the-art on both image classification tasks. Performance
improvements are noted across multiple operating points, but particularly in areas corresponding
to the highest sensitivity levels, which are clinically the most relevant system operating points.
The performance of the proposed system was also compared directly to the performance of
expert dermatologists. On a random subset of 100 images in the test set (containing 50
melanomas and 50 non-melanomas), the average diagnostic performance of 8 dermatology
experts, with an average 13.5 years of experience in dermoscopy (ranging from 6 to 27 years),
was measured and reported . Compared to the performance of these clinical experts on the
subset of 100 images from the held-out test dataset, the proposed system using automatic
segmentation produces a higher specificity performance level (62% vs. 59%) evaluated at an
equivalent sensitivity operating point to the clinical experts (82%). In addition, evaluated at the
learned threshold of 50% machine confidence, the system produced a higher accuracy than the
average of the group of dermatologists (76% vs. 70.5%). When using ground truth
segmentations, the system produced a specificity of 60% at the 82% sensitivity operating point,
and an accuracy of 77% evaluated at the threshold of 50% machine confidence.
Next, we sought to assess the impact on system performance of using two ensemble component
selection algorithms, as opposed to simple score averaging or voting of all components for
ensemble fusion. While the initial selection of components to our system was informed by work
done in the literature , we examined whether system performance can be further
improved by selecting only those components of the system that lead to best performance on a 3fold cross-validation within the training set. The two selection algorithms studied were greedy
selection and forward model selection . Greedy selection ranks each component based on its
individual performance, combining them in order, until performance ceases to improve. Forward
model selection runs in multiple iterations, where in each iteration, a search is performed to find
the model that, when combined with the existing ensemble, improves recognition performance
Our findings demonstrate that both selection algorithms, while modest in terms of the number of
parameters learned, reduced performance on the held-out test set. Greedy model selection
produced average precision for Parts 3 & 3B of 0.638 and 0.646, respectively. The intermediate
steps and results of greedy model selection on the 3-fold cross-validation training data are shown
in Table 4. Forward model selection produced 0.614 and 0.612, respectively. The intermediate
steps and results of forward model selection on the 3-fold cross-validation training data are
shown in Table 5. Between the two algorithms, forward model selection produced the best
performance result on the 3-fold cross-validation dataset, but the worst performance on the heldout test dataset, suggesting that model selection routines might be overfitting the data. Table 6
shows the average precision of each individual system component on the held-out test dataset,
showing that each piece has learned a meaningful association with disease.
Finally, we quantified the contribution of the 1000-dimensions DRN concept detector vector to
overall system performance by way of exclusion. If the component is individually removed from
the ensemble of our system, performance decreases. Comparing the system using automatically
generated segmentations, average precision drops from 0.645 to 0.632. Comparing the system
using ground truth segmentations, the average precision drops from 0.649 to 0.633. These
experiments confirm earlier reports that vectors of concept detectors from deep networks can
contribute meaningful information to melanoma recognition in dermoscopy images .
Discussion
There are a number of important insights that come from the results presented in this work. The
first relates to the evaluation methodology of the classification tasks within ISBI challenge itself.
The organizers had decided to rank participants based on average precision, likely for its
precedent in being commonly used to evaluate other public computer vision benchmarks, such as
TRECVID . While average precision is a useful retrieval metric for search based
applications, it is clear from our results that it does not fully reflect the value of a system to the
clinical workflow. As an example, our fully automated pipeline for Part 3 of the challenge was
only 0.008 points in average precision above the prior state-of-the-art (a modest 1.3%
improvement). However, inspecting the AUC metric revealed a difference of 0.034 (a 4.2%
improvement). Focusing specifically on high sensitivity operating points of the ROC, where the
system operation is clinically viable (so as to minimize the number of inadvertently missed
disease states), specificity is increased by 9.9 points, representing over a 40% relative
improvement. These comparisons, while clinically important and of pertinent use, are not
reflected in the small change in average precision, suggesting that a different evaluation metric
should be used to rank participants in subsequent challenges.
The second relates to the fundamental algorithm design as being an ensemble of a multitude of
approaches. Since the high success rate of deep learning algorithms in the computer vision field,
most technical research has focused on optimizing and building higher performing network
structures. However, our results demonstrate that a traditional approach of generating ensembles
across multiple techniques still holds value. For segmentation, we were able to create an
ensemble of fully convolutional U-Nets to improve performance beyond that of the best
performing single network itself. For classification, by combining a variety of both deep learning
and classical computer vision techniques, our system demonstrated significant improvements
over the state-of-the-art systems that used deep learning alone . In the scope of this work, a
naïve ensemble constituting simple prediction averaging among all components was found to
outperform simple ensemble model selection methods such as greedy and forward model
selection routines. This is likely an artifact of the small size of the dataset at this time, rather than
the inherent utility of the selection methods. As the ISIC dataset grows, these ensemble learning
experiments should be repeated, perhaps including more complex algorithms.
The third insight is that we have produced further evidence that complex non-linear data
augmentation has rendered large neural networks better able to train on datasets with limited
examples. The fully convolutional U-Net structure presented here contains over 543,888,390
parameters, and yet was trained from a dataset of only 900 examples (as a reference, VGG
(Visual Geometry Group) Face , DeepFace , and FaceNet used 2.6 million, 4.4
million, and 200 million faces, respectively, for training face recognition networks). When
creating an ensemble of networks, the number of parameters further increases, roughly
proportional to the number of networks. What is important to observe here is that the augmented
data was not statically generated prior to training, but is generated dynamically during each minibatch. In this manner, the size of the dataset effectively increases to infinity, as random
perturbations are constantly introduced.
The fourth insight is that, surprisingly, deep residual networks trained on natural photographs
from ImageNet contribute meaningful diagnostic information when the 1000 concept detector
outputs are used as a descriptive image vector. This is consistent with past reports using similar
methods from other networks . In practice, it is common for human experts to describe
patterns seen in lesions by analogies to other common objects in everyday life . This was the
initial intuition behind attempting to use these concept detectors as feature detectors in
dermoscopic images. Our work is now the second published report to show positive results
utilizing such a technique.
There are two limitations of the study. The first involves a lack of statistical significance of
comparisons. Performance evaluations were carried out on a fixed dataset partition, which is
necessary for a public challenge to maintain a held-out blind test dataset. In addition, software
implementations of approaches used for comparison were not available to support multiple nfold evaluations. The second limitation is that the diagnostic performance of clinical experts with
dermoscopic images represents an approximation of performance in practice, where clinicians
may benefit from the situational context of each lesion, including patient history, temporal
evolution, comparison of the lesion to other lesions on the patient, and physical inspection.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have proposed a system for the segmentation and classification of melanoma
from dermoscopic images of skin. The method was evaluated on the largest public benchmark
for melanoma recognition available. New state-of-the-art performance is demonstrated, leading
to an improvement in the area under receiver operating characteristic curve of 7.5% (0.843 vs.
0.783), in average precision of 4% (0.649 vs. 0.624), and in specificity measured at the clinically
relevant 95% sensitivity operating point 2.9 times higher than the previous state-of-the-art
(36.8% specificity compared to 12.5%). In addition, compared to the average disease recognition
performance of 8 expert dermatologists, the proposed system produced a higher accuracy (76%
vs. 70.5%) evaluated at the machine confidence threshold of 50%, and a higher specificity (62%
vs. 59%) evaluated at the fixed sensitivity operating point of the clinicians (82%).
As the size of the ISIC dataset expands and additional dermoscopic pattern annotations become
available, future work may consider learning a joint pattern-disease classification model, or
building a semantic descriptor vector of dermoscopic patterns to be used in conjunction with
other approaches for disease classification. In addition, the use of non-linear image warping as a
data augmentation technique may be useful for classification. Other machine learning approaches
may bring additional performance gains, such as residual convolutional layers for semantic
segmentation, meta-learning or boosting for selection of network ensembles to perform
segmentation, or use of these segmentation ensembles as more complex shape descriptors for
disease classification. Finally, the use of additional situational contexts, such as patient history,
patient metadata, temporal evolution, and comparison of the lesion to other lesions on the
patient, should be studied, as all may further improve system performance.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the larger community of the International Skin Imaging
Collaboration (ISIC) for their effort in organizing the datasets used in this work, as well as
engaging and insightful discussions in dermoscopy and dermatology. In addition, we would like
to thank collaborators at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, including Ashfaq Marghoob, Michael
Marchetti, and Stephen Dusza, for their expertise and support.