Personalized Course Sequence Recommendations
Jie Xu, Member, IEEE, Tianwei Xing, Student Member, IEEE, and Mihaela van der Schaar, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Given the variability in student learning it is becoming increasingly important to tailor courses as well as
course sequences to student needs. This paper presents a systematic methodology for offering personalized course sequence
recommendations to students. First, a forward-search backwardinduction algorithm is developed that can optimally select course
sequences to decrease the time required for a student to graduate.
The algorithm accounts for prerequisite requirements (typically
present in higher level education) and course availability. Second,
using the tools of multi-armed bandits, an algorithm is developed
that can optimally recommend a course sequence that both
reduces the time to graduate while also increasing the overall
GPA of the student. The algorithm dynamically learns how
students with different contextual backgrounds perform for
given course sequences and then recommends an optimal course
sequence for new students. Using real-world student data from
the UCLA Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department,
we illustrate how the proposed algorithms outperform other
methods that do not include student contextual information when
making course sequence recommendations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent studies ﬁnd that the vast majority of college
students in the United States do not complete college in four
years and that fewer college students are today graduating on
time than a decade ago. Taking longer to graduate is not cheap
- it costs $15,933 more in tuition, fees and living expenses for
every extra year at a public two-year college and $22,826 for
every added year at a public four-year college . While many
factors contribute to students taking longer to graduate, such
as credits lost in transfer, uninformed choices due to the low
advisor-student ratios and poor preparation for college, the
inability of students to take required courses when needed is
among the leading causes . If courses are elected and taken
myopically, without a clear plan, a student may end up in an
awkward situation in which required subsequent courses are
offered (much) later, thereby (signiﬁcantly) prolonging graduation time. To reduce the time-to-graduation, it is therefore
of paramount importance for the student to elect courses in a
foresighted way by taking into account the possible subsequent
course sequences (including which courses are mandatory and
which ones are not, and the course prerequisites) and when
the various courses are offered. More importantly, because the
number and variety (in backgrounds, in knowledge, in goals)
of students is expanding rapidly, it is more and more important
to tailor course sequences to students since the same learning
path is unlikely to best serve all students. Therefore, it is
necessary to develop an automated course sequence recommendation system that learns from the performance of previous
J. Xu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33146, USA. Email: .
T. Xing and M. van der Schaar are with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Emails:
 , .
students in various courses/sequences and uses what it has
learned to adaptively recommend course sequences that are
personalized for the current student, depending on the student’s
background and his/her completion status of the program in
order to maximize any of a variety of objectives including
time to graduation, grades and the trade-off between the two.
Issuing personalized course sequences recommendations for
students poses numerous challenges, some of which are unique
to this type of recommendation system:
• Sequences Unlike most existing recommendation systems (such as those used to recommend movies or
products to purchase), course sequence recommendations
requires issuing sequences of courses (items) rather than
a single item at a time. Hence, such course sequence recommendations require dealing with a large decision space
which grows combinatorially with the number of courses.
Searching for the best sequence to make personalized
recommendations to a student represents a challenging
problem even when the number of courses is moderate.
When the number of offered courses is large (as it is
typical in academic programs at the undergraduate or
graduate level), offering personalized recommendations
becomes a very challenge problem.
• Flexibility and Constraints There is a great deal of ﬂexibility in course sequence recommendation since multiple
courses can be taken simultaneously. At the same time,
course sequence recommendation is also subject to many
constraints - some courses are mandatory while some are
not, and some courses are prerequisite of others. Both
the ﬂexibility and the constraints make course sequence
recommendation an extremely complex problem.
• Evolving Recommendation Any static course sequence
is sub-optimal since the knowledge, experience and performance of a student develops and evolves in the process
of learning. Students may arrive at different completion
status of the academic program at a given time depending
on their performance in the ﬁnished courses and hence,
they should be given different recommendations of subsequent courses.
• Personalization An even more difﬁcult challenge is that
students vary tremendously in backgrounds, knowledge
and goals. As a result, the same recommendation policy
is unlikely to best serve all students and provide the
best learning experience for every student. However,
personalizing course sequence recommendation seems a
daunting task since students attend college only once and
hence, it is unrealistic to try different course sequences
on a student and learn the best course sequence for this
Fig. 1. System Diagram for Course Sequence Recommendation
In this paper, we develop an automated course sequence
recommendation system that is able to provide personalized
and adaptive recommendation to students depending on their
background as well as their evolving performance in the
program. In order to reduce complexity and enable tractable
solutions, we solve this problem in two steps. The ﬁrst step
(Section III) involves ofﬂine learning, in which a set of candidate recommendation policies are determined to minimize
the expected time to graduation or maximize the on-time
graduation probability using an existing dataset of anonymized
student records. A dynamic programming based approach
is adopted to solve the adaptive sequence recommendation
which recommends subsequent course sequences to students
depending on their completion status of the academic program
by taking into account the prerequisite relationship among
courses and the course availability across academic terms
(quarters/semesters). The second step (Section IV) involves
online learning, in which for each new student, a suitable
course sequence recommendation policy is selected depending
on this student’s background using the learned knowledge
from the previous students. Online contextual multi-armed
bandit techniques are used to develop policy selection algorithms to maximize the students’ grades given the time-tocompletion constraints. To enable fast learning, the algorithm
exploits the similarity among students and adaptively clusters
students and reﬁnes the clustering as more students enter and
ﬁnish the program. See Figure 1 for a depiction of the system.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We formulate the personalized and adaptive course sequence recommendation problem and develop systematic
solutions aimed at reducing time to graduation and maximizing students’ grades upon graduation.
• We provide analytical characterizations on the impact of
course prerequisite dependency and the course availability on the possible emerging subsequent course sequences
as well the structure of the optimal course sequence
recommendation policy in certain speciﬁc scenarios.
• We rigorously analyze the performance of the online
personalized policy selection algorithm and prove that the
proposed algorithm converges fast and is able to select the
optimal personalized course sequence recommendation
policy for students.
• Extensive simulations are carried out on a real-world student record dataset to verify the efﬁcacy of the proposed
system. They also reveal how the time-to-graduation is
affected by the course prerequisite dependency as well
as the course availability across academic terms, thereby
providing important insights and guidelines on how to
plan the curriculum and allocate teaching resources to
improve the on-time graduation ratio.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we review the literature and highlight our contribution. In
Section III, we study the ofﬂine learning problem to determine
a set of candidate course sequence recommendation policies
based on dynamic programming. In Section IV, we study
the online learning problem to select personalized policies
for students based on online contextual multi-armed bandits
techniques. Section V provides simulation results. In Section
VI, we conclude the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Machine learning for education has recently gained much
attention . Previous research focuses on grade prediction
 , drop-out prediction , personalized teaching styles and
materials , estimating learners’ knowledge of concepts
underlying a domain , multimedia and cooperative learning
 etc. This paper studies the important, yet much less
investigated problem of (personalized) course sequence recommendation. Solving this problem has the potentially signiﬁcant
impact of shortening the time that students need to graduate.
Methods solving this problem can then be combined with
other methods to provide a comprehensive set of tools for
personalizing education.
recommending
courses/learning materials to students according to students’
types (e.g. interests, knowledge levels, learning styles and
feedback) . Besides
recommendation,
recommender
desirable products or services . However,
several unique features of course sequence recommendation
make these approaches unsuitable for the considered problem.
First, while traditional recommendation systems deal with
the problem of recommending items or sets of items,
most of them do not take into account prerequisites while
recommending an item: a course can be taken only when all
its prerequisite courses have been taken and passed. Thus, it
does not make sense to recommend to a student a course if
the prerequisite courses have not been completed. Secondly,
there are complex constraints on the recommendation: the
courses taken by a student must satisfy requirements (e.g.
take 10 mandatory courses and 5 out of 12 elective courses)
in order for the student to graduate. Thirdly, courses are not
available in all quarters due to teaching resource constraints.
If the next available quarter of a required course is far away
from the current quarter, then it might be wiser to take this
course earlier rather than later.
Recommendation with prerequisites was studied in ,
in which the goal is to recommend the best set of k items
when there is an inherent ordering between items. Various
prerequisite structures were studied and the complexity of
determining the best set is proven to be NP-Hard. Several
heuristic approximation algorithms were developed to solve
the recommendation problem. However, the problem is formulated as a set recommendation problem rather than a
sequential recommendation problem, which ignores the course
prerequites, the evolving knowledge of students (and grades
so far) as well as the course availability in different quarters.
Recommendation with complex constraints was studied in 
where increasingly expressive models were developed to check
if the requirements are satisﬁed and course recommendations
were made by taking into account these requirements. However, the course prerequisites and the course availability are not
considered. A Markov Decision Process based recommender
system was developed in to take into the long-term effects
of each recommendation. However, this approach is not able
to handle the course prerequisites or the course requirement
constraints.
Our algorithm for online personalized recommendation policy selection builds on the contextual multi-armed bandits
methods . Most of the prior work on
contextual bandits is focused on an agent making singlestage decisions based on the provided context information.
In contrast, in this paper, arms are the course sequence
recommendation policies which are selected depending on
the student’s background but the policy itself also induces
a sequence of decision making depending on the evolving
performance of the student.
III. COURSE SEQUENCE RECOMMENDATION: POLICY
CONSTRUCTION
We consider a curriculum consisting of a set of courses N =
{1, 2, ..., N}. Among these courses, there are M mandatory
courses and E = N −M elective courses. We consider a
discrete time system where a student takes courses quarter by
quarter 1 and can stay in the program for at most T quarters.
Quarters are indexed by t = 1, 2, ..., T . Let s(t) be a course
state vector of size N which is used to indicate the courses that
a student has already taken and passed by the end of quarter
t. The ﬁrst M elements are with respect to the mandatory
courses and the remaining E elements are with respect to the
elective courses. Each element of s(t) takes a binary value
where sn(t) = 1 means that the student has taken and passed
course n and sn(t) = 0 otherwise. Initially each student passes
zero courses such that each element of s(0) satisﬁes sn(0) =
In each quarter, the maximum number of courses a student
can take is C. Let A(t) denote the elected courses in quarter
t. However, even though the student is free to elect courses,
A(t) must come from a set of feasible courses F(t, s(t −1))
depending on the index t of the quarter as well as the course
state s(t −1) of the student. Firstly, courses that have already
been taken and passed cannot be retaken. Secondly, the student
can only take courses that are available in that quarter since a
course is usually not offered in every quarter. Let Γ(t) ⊆N
1We use the quarter system for illustration but our approach also works for
the semester system.
Fig. 2. The prerequisite graph for the undergraduate program in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department at UCLA.
denote the set of available courses offered in quarter t. Thirdly,
the student can only take a course when he/she has ﬁnished
all its prerequisite courses. We formalize course prerequisite
in more detail as follows.
Course Prerequisite Courses have prerequisite dependencies, namely courses can be elected only when certain prerequisite courses have been taken and passed. In general, the
prerequisite dependency can be described as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG), denoted by G = ⟨N, E⟩where N is the set of
courses and E is the set of directed edges. A directed edge
m →n between two courses m and n means that course m is a
prerequisite of course n. Let P(n) = {m : m →n ∈E} be the
set of prerequisite courses of n. Only when all courses in P(n)
have been taken can course n be elected. Note that if P(n) is
an empty set, then course n has no prerequisite courses and
hence can be elected at any time (whenever available). Moreover, any elective course cannot be the prerequisite course of
a mandatory course. Otherwise, the elective course effectively
becomes mandatory. Nevertheless, an elective course can be
the prerequisite of another elective course. Figure 2 illustrates
part of the prerequisite graph for the undergraduate program
in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department at
Given these constraints, the feasible set of courses that a
student can take in quarter t given his/her course state s(t−1)
can be computed as follows:
F(t, s(t −1)) = {n :sn(t −1) = 0; n ∈Γ(t);
∀m ∈P(n), sm(t −1) = 1}
Since a student cannot take more than C courses per quarter,
the possible combinations of courses that can be elected by a
student is
A(t, s(t −1)) = {A : A ⊆F(t, s(t −1)); |A| ≤C}
At the end of each quarter t, the student either passes or fails
the course that he/she takes in this quarter. The probability that
a student fails a course depends on the difﬁculty of the course
as well as how many courses that he/she is taking simultaneously in the same quarter, which can be estimated from
the student academic record dataset. Denote the probability
that the student fails a course n by ǫn(k) where k is the
number of simultaneous courses. Typically, ǫn(k) is a nondecreasing function in k to capture the fact that the student’s
effort has to be distributed into multiple courses. Depending
on the course performance outcome in this quarter, the course
state will evolve from s(t −1) to s(t). If the student passes a
course n ∈A(t), then sn(t) = 1; otherwise, sn(t) remains 0.
A student graduates when he/she has taken and passed all
mandatory courses and at least E0 ≤E elective courses
before the end of T quarters where E0 is a predeﬁned
number by the program. The course states in which the
student can graduate are called terminal states, which must
satisfy ∀n = 1, ..., M, sn = 1 and
sn ≥E0. Let ˆS
be the set of all terminal course states. There is a reward
function U : ˆS × {1, ..., T } →R for each terminal state
indicating the reward of reaching the terminal state by a
speciﬁc quarter. For example, U(ˆs, t) = 1, ∀ˆs ∈ˆS, ∀t assigns
equal value to all terminal states if the system only cares
about whether the student can graduate on time. For another
example, U(ˆs, t) = T −t + 1, ∀ˆs ∈ˆS allows the system to
take into account the exact time of graduation.
A course sequence recommendation policy speciﬁes for
each course state in any quarter, the next courses that should
be taken. Let π(s, t) denote the courses that are recommended
to take in quarter t given the course state s. Given a course
sequence recommendation policy π, starting with any state s in
any quarter t, the course state s evolves stochastically (since a
student may pass or fail the course with probabilities), thereby
inducing a probability distribution over the terminal state that
can be reached. Let V (s, t) =
ˆs,τ(s, t)U(ˆs, τ) denote
the value of state s in quarter t when policy π is adopted
ˆs,τ(s, t) is the probability of reaching a terminal
state ˆs in quarter τ ≥t starting with state s in quarter
t. The objective of the system is to determine the optimal
policy that maximizes the value of the initial state s(0), i.e.
π∗= arg maxπ V (s(0), 1).
Our solution to ﬁnd the optimal policy π∗consists of two
phases. In the ﬁrst phase, we perform a forward search starting
from quarter 1 through quarter T to determine all possible
course states that can emerge on the learning path. The purpose
of this phase is to reduce the course state space in each
quarter that the system should look at. In the second phase, we
perform a backward induction starting from quarter T through
quarter 1 to compute the optimal set of courses that should
be taken in each possible course state. The purpose of this
phase is to determine the course sequence recommendation
that minimizes the graduation time (or ensure that students
graduate before a desired time).
A. Forward Search Phase
Since the number of possible course states grows exponentially with the number of courses in the curriculum, the course
state space can be huge for even a moderate number of courses.
However, thanks to the course prerequisite constraint and the
course availability constraint, the number of course states that
can emerge in a particular quarter can be signiﬁcantly limited.
The purpose of the forward search is to determine the possible
course states, thereby reducing the problem complexity.
Let L(t) denote the set of possible course states by the
end of quarter t and H(t) denote the set of state-course pairs
in quarter t. Initially L(0) = {s(0)}. In each quarter t, the
Fig. 3. Illustration for Forward Search. Each course state (circle) represents
the completion status of the three courses. For instance, 100 means that
only the ﬁrst course is taken and passed. Each state-course pair (rectangle)
represents the next courses elected in a given state. For instance, 100/2 means
that course 2 is elected as the next course to take in a state 100.
algorithm examines each non-terminal course state s(t −1) ∈
L(t −1) and determines the feasible course set F(t, s(t −1))
for this course state hence the possible combinations of course
A(t, s(t −1)) that can be elected in this quarter. For each
combination of courses A ∈A(t, s(t −1)), the state-course
pair (s(t −1), A) is inserted into H(t). Then all possible new
course states s(t) with respect to (s(t −1), A) is included in
L(t). Moreover, the probability that s(t−1) transits to s(t) is
computed by
p(s(t)|s(t −1), A)
n:n∈A,sn(t)=1
(1 −ǫn(|A|))
n:n∈A,sn(t)=0
This algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1 and is illustrated
in Figure 2.
Algorithm 1 Forward Search
1: Initialization: L(t) = ∅, H(t) = ∅, ∀t.
2: Initial possible course states L(0) = s(0) = {sn = 0, ∀n}
3: For quarter t = 1 To quarter T :
For each course state s ∈L(t −1)
Determine feasible course set F(t, s) and feasible courses-to-take set A(t, s)
For each feasible combinations of courses A ∈
Update the current list H(t) ←H(t) ∪
Update L(t) by adding all possible states
11: End For
Next, we analyze the property of the set L(t) of possible
course states.
Lemma 1. For any course prerequisite and course availability
constraints, L(t) is weakly expanding, i.e. L(0) ⊆L(1)... ⊆
Proof. Consider any course state s ∈L(t). Since the student
can take no course in the subsequent quarter t + 1 and hence,
the course state remains the same. Therefore, L(t + 1) must
at least include s and hence, L(t) ⊆L(t + 1).
Lemma 1 states an intuitive result that the possible course
states grow over quarters. However, how fast this set grows
depend on the speciﬁc course prerequisite dependency as well
as the course availability. A formal characterization for a
general DAG seems extremely complicated; in the proposition
below, we determine the growth rate of L(t) for two speciﬁc
Proposition 1. Suppose all courses are offered in all quarters and C = 1. (1) If the course prerequisite DAG is a
line, then |L(t)| = t. (2) If the course prerequisite DAG
is an empty graph (i.e. no prerequisite dependency), then
. (3) For any general prerequisite DAG,
t ≤|L(t)| ≤
Proof. (1) By any quarter t, the student can take and pass
at most t courses. The only possible course states that can
emerge in quarter t is {1}, {1, 2}, ..., {1, 2, ..., t}. Therefore,
there are totally t possible course states.
(2) In quarter 1, the student can take any one of the N
courses or does not take any course. The number of possible
states is thus N + 1. If this student passes this course, he/she
can take any one of the remaining N −1 courses or does
not take any course in quarter 2. The possible states with two
courses passed is
+ N + 1. Continuing in this way, we
obtain the result.
(3) It is easy to see that (1) and (2) are two extreme cases
of a general DAG, therefore, the number of possible states is
bounded by t and
Proposition 1 shows that the possible course states highly
depend on the course prerequisite constraints. The number of
possible course states grows linearly when the prerequisite is
strict while it grows exponentially when the prerequisite is
loose. Note that in the above proposition we did not impose
any restriction on the course availability. In practice, only a
limited number of courses are offered in each quarter, thereby
further limiting the size of |L(t)|.
Remark: L(t) contains all possible course completion states
by the end of quarter t if students randomly choose their course
sequences. Therefore, L(t) reﬂects how diverse the students
learning experience can be by adopting a speciﬁc curriculum.
The larger L(t), the more diverse learning experience that
students can have by the end of quarter t. A more diverse
student learning experience (which is determined by the curriculum but not the course sequence recommendation) has two
implications. On one hand, ﬁnding the best course sequence to
recommend becomes more difﬁcult since the searching space
is larger. On the other hand, the best course sequence may
yield better learning outcome.
Fig. 4. Illustration for Backward Induction. The red thick arrow represents
the next course elected for each course state.
B. Backward Induction Phase
The outcome of the Forward Search phase is actually an
AND/OR graph where each course subsequence is a subgraph
of the AND/OR graph. In this graph, each OR node represents
a course state s ∈L(t) in which different possible combinations of subsequence courses can be elected. Each AND node
(s, A) corresponds to electing courses A in course state s.
The AND node also stores a probability distribution over the
possible next states by taking these courses, which is computed
by (3). The value of the optimal course sequence recommendation for this AND/OR graph can be computed by a bottom-up
sweep through the graph. This computation can be viewed as
a backward induction. First, the value of all OR nodes that
are non-terminal states and all AND nodes are initialized to
0, and the value of all OR nodes that are terminal states are
initialized to the reward of the corresponding terminal states.
Next, starting from quarter T , for each quarter t, we update
the value of the AND nodes in H(t) using the value of the
OR nodes in L(t), i.e. ∀(s, A) ∈H(t),
Q(s, t, A) =
p(s′|s, A)V (s′, t)
We then update the value of the OR nodes in L(t −1) using
the value of the AND nodes in H(t), i.e. ∀s ∈L(t −1),
V (s, t −1) = max
A Q(s, t, A)
and we record the combinations of courses in the course
recommendation policy
π∗(s, t −1) = arg max
A Q(s, t, A)
As mentioned, depending on the choice of the reward function
for the terminal course states, different system objectives can
be achieved by solving the above problem. The algorithm is
summarized in Algorithm 2 and illustrated in Figure 4.
Next, we analyze the property of the value function V (s, t)
and the structure of the optimal policy π∗. We say s ≺˜s if
sn = 1 implies ˜sn = 1. That is, all courses that are passed in
s are also passed in ˜s.
Algorithm 2 Backward Induction
1: Initialization: ∀s ̸∈ˆs, V (s, t) = 0, Q(s, t, A) = 0; ∀s ∈
ˆs, V (s, t) = U(s, t).
2: For quarter t = T To quarter 1
For each state and courses-to-take pair s, A ∈H(t)
Update Q(s, t, A) =
p(s′|s, A)V (s′, t)
For each course state s ∈L(t −1)
V (s, t −1)
maxA Q(s, t, A)
Update policy π(s, t−1) = arg maxA Q(s, t, A)
10: End For
Proposition 2. For any t, s and ˜s, if s ≺˜s, then V (˜s, t) ≥
Proof. Let A∗be the optimal courses for s, i.e. V (s(t), t) =
Q(s(t), t + 1, A∗). To prove V (˜s(t), t) ≥V (s(t), t), we will
prove for any A∗, we can ﬁnd ˜A ∈A(t + 1, ˜s(t)) such that
Q(˜s(t), t + 1, ˜A) ≥Q(s(t), t + 1, A∗). Since V (˜s(t), t) ≥
Q(˜s(t), t+1, ˜A), we will get V (˜s, t) ≥V (s, t). The proof uses
induction. It is straightforward to see that V (˜s, T ) ≥V (s, T )
since if s is a terminal state, ˜s must also be a terminal state.
Suppose the claim holds for all t + 1, ..., T .
Case 1: A∗∈A(t + 1, ˜s(t)). In this case, we let ˜A = A∗,
namely we select the same set of courses for the student to
take. Since the courses taken are the same, the probability
to pass each of these courses is the same. For each possible
next state s′(t+1), there must exist a corresponding next state
˜s′(t+1) such that p(s′(t+1)|s(t), A∗) = p(˜s′(t+1)|˜s(t), A∗).
Moreover, s′(t+1) ≺˜s′(t+1). By induction, we have V (s′(t+
1), t + 1) ≤V (˜s′(t + 1), t + 1). Therefore,
Q(s(t), t + 1, A∗)
p(s′(t + 1)|s(t + 1), A∗)V (s′(t + 1), t + 1)
p(˜s′(t + 1)|˜s(t), A∗)V (s′(t + 1), t + 1)
p(˜s′(t + 1)|˜s(t), A∗)V (˜s′(t + 1), t + 1)
=Q(˜s(t), t + 1, A∗)
Case 2: A∗̸∈A(t+1, ˜s(t)). In this case, we let ˜A to be the
largest subset of A∗that belongs to A(t + 1, ˜s(t)). Moreover,
since s ≺˜s, the remaining subset of A∗must be courses
that have already been passed in ˜s. Suppose that courses in
A∗−˜A are passed with probability 1 starting from s(t) and the
remaining courses are passed with probability 1 −ǫn(| ˜A|) >
1 −ǫn(|A∗|). Due to induction, such relaxation provides an
upper bound on Q(s(t), t + 1, A∗). Moreover, this relaxation
is the same as
p(˜s′(t + 1)|˜s(t), A∗)V (˜s′(t + 1), t + 1)
=Q(˜s(t), t + 1, ˜A)
Thus, Q(s(t), t + 1, A∗) ≤Q(˜s(t), t + 1, ˜A).
Proposition 2 implies that a course state where a larger set
of courses have been passed has a higher value since there is
more ﬂexibility in choosing subsequent course sequences. A
question naturally arises that is it always better to take as many
courses as possible in any quarter? The answer turns out to
be correct only in certain scenarios. The following proposition
identiﬁes one of such scenarios.
Proposition 3. Suppose E = ∅(i.e. no prerequisites for all
courses) and Γ(t) = N, ∀t (i.e. each course is offered in all
quarters), if ǫn(|A|) = ǫn is a constant, then at any t and
given state s(t −1), the optimal policy recommends that the
student should take the maximum number of C courses.
Proof. Consider any policy that selects K < C courses in
quarter t and a policy that selects these K courses plus one
more course n. For any possible next course state s′, by
selecting one more course, we have
p(s′|s, K) = p(s′|s, K + 1) + p(˜s′|s, K + 1)
where s′ ≺ˆs′ and ˆs′
n = 1. Due to the course failure
probability being independent, p(s′|s, C)
ǫnp(s′|s, K)
and p(˜s′|s, C) = (1 −ǫn)p(s′|s, K). Since V (˜s′) ≥V (˜s)
according to Proposition 2, we have Q(s, K) ≤Q(s, K + 1).
Therefore, taking C courses yields higher value than taking
fewer courses.
Proposition 3 states that it is always better to take many
courses as early as possible when there is no constraint on
course prerequisite and course availability. In practice, course
sequence recommendations are subject to many constraints.
We provide a counter-example below to show that the result
of proposition 3 does not hold in the general case.
Counter-Example: Consider a program consisting of two
courses and two quarters. Thus N = {1, 2} and T = 2.
Assume that there is no prerequisite course dependency, i.e.
∅. The course availability is Γ(1)
{1, 2} and
Γ(2) = {2}. That is, course 1 is offered only in the ﬁrst
quarter. C = 2 so students are allowed to take up to 2 courses.
Let ǫ(K) denote the probability of failing a course when K
courses are taken simultaneously.
• Option 1: Take 2 courses in quarter 1. The probability of
graduation on time can be computed as (1 −ǫ(2))(1 −
ǫ(2) + ǫ(2)(1 −ǫ(1))) = (1 −ǫ(2))(1 −ǫ(2)ǫ(1))
• Option 2: Take course 1 only in quarter 1. The probability
of graduation on time can be computed as (1−ǫ(1))(1−
Thus if (1 −ǫ(2))(1 −ǫ(2)ǫ(1)) < (1 −ǫ(1))(1 −ǫ(1)), then
taking only 1 course in the ﬁrst quarter leads to a higher
probability of graduation. For instance, taking ǫ(1) = 0.1
and ǫ(2) = 0.2 satisﬁes this condition. This counter-example
demonstrates the need for carefully planning the course sequence according to the course prerequisite and course availability because myopic course selection may lead to lower
learning reward if these constraints are ignored.
Remark: The complexity of the proposed forward-search
backward-induction algorithm to determine the optimal policy depends on, the number of courses, the speciﬁc course
prerequisite and availability constraints. As shown in Proposition 1, the set of possible course states grow at different
speeds depending on these constraints. The time and memory
complexity generally depend on the size of L(t) and H(t),
(|L(t)|+|H(t)|)), which can be large in certain
scenarios. However, since our algorithm in this section is
an ofﬂine algorithm and only needs to be executed once,
complexity is not a big concern.
C. Implications on Curriculum Planning
Teaching resources are limited. An important question for
curriculum planning is how to allocate the limited available
teaching resources to the courses to minimize students’ timeto-graduation. Our framework can be helpful in answering part
of this question. The proposition below shows, in a simpliﬁed
scenario, that courses with many dependent courses should
receive more teaching resource in order to minimize the timeto-graduation.
Proposition 4. Consider N + 1 courses and the prerequisite
DAG satisﬁes P(n) = {1}, ∀n > 1 (i.e. course 1 is the prerequisite course of all other courses). Consider the following
two cases of course availability constraints
• Case 1: Course 1 is offered in each quarter with probability p < 1 and all other courses is offered in each
quarter with probability 1.
• Case 2: Course 2 is offered in each quarter with probability p < 1 and all other courses is offered in each
quarter with probability 1.
Assume C = 1 and if p <
N+1, then the expected graduation
time in case 1 is larger than in case 2.
Proof. Since course 1 is the prerequisite of all the other
courses, it has to be passed before any other course can be
Case 1: The expected time to ﬁnish course 1 is
(1−ǫ)p where
ǫ is the probability of failing a course. The expected time to
ﬁnish the remaining N courses is
1−ǫ. Thus, the total expected
time to graduate is
Case 2: The expected time to ﬁnish course 1 is
Computing the expected time to ﬁnish the remaining N
courses is more complicated since one of the courses has
different course availability than others. We consider an upper
bound on this time. In particular, this upper bound is
1 −ǫ + max{
(1 −ǫ)(1 −p),
(1 −ǫ)p} ≜¯τ2
Depending on the values of p and N, ¯τ can be written as
(1−ǫ)(1−p),
N , it is easy to see that ¯τ2 < τ1 and hence τ2 < τ1. If
p + N −1 −N −1
(1 −p)2 −p2N
Therefore, if p <
N+1, then τ1 > ¯τ2 > τ2.
It is intuitive to understand that courses that are prerequisites
for many other courses are more “important”. Subsequent
courses can be taken only if the prerequisite course is passed.
Therefore, much time will be wasted if students cannot take
the prerequisite courses. On the other hand, even if a student
needs to but cannot take a course that is not a prerequisite for
other courses, he/she can still take other courses while waiting
for this course to become available.
D. Joint Optimization of Time-to-Graduation and GPA Performance
So far, we focused on constructing course sequence recommendation policies that minimize the time-to-graduation.
However, the exact learning performance upon graduation
(e.g. GPA) is neglected. Nevertheless, the above dynamic
programming based framework can be easily extended to the
case of joint optimization of time-to-graduation and GPA performance, provided that a sufﬁciently large dataset is available
to estimate the various model parameters. We elaborate on this
point below.
The grade that a student can receive in a course often depends on the grades that the student received in the prerequisite
courses and perhaps how long ago the prerequisite courses
were taken. Thus, the course sequence that the student is taking
may have a signiﬁcant impact on the GPA that he/she can
obtain. To account for this effect, we modify the problem
formulation: instead of keeping a course completion state,
which records the courses that have been taken and passed,
we keep a course performance state, which records the grades
that the student has received in the passed courses and when
these courses were taken. Then for each performance state, the
policy tries to ﬁnd the set of next courses to take in order to
maximize an objective function that jointly considers the time
of graduation and the obtained ﬁnal GPA. However, solving
this problem requires addressing several key challenges. First,
the course performance state space is signiﬁcantly larger than
the course completion state space and grows exponentially
with the number of possible grades. In particular, suppose the
number of grade levels is K, then the number of all possible
states is KN. Second, a huge dataset of student records is
needed to estimate the conditional probabilities of grades of
each course depending on all possible course performance
states. Therefore, solving the optimal course recommendation
policy is extremely difﬁcult.
To derive efﬁcient solutions without a large initial dataset,
we construct course sequence recommendation policies that
jointly consider the GPA and time to graduation in two steps.
Firstly, we determine a set of course sequence recommendation
policies that satisfy desired time to graduation constraints
using our method developed in this section. Since there is
a lack of dataset to estimate the course failure probabilities,
the course sequence recommendation policy can even be
constructed by ignoring the course failure probabilities (i.e.
treating ǫn →0, ∀n). In the second step, we maximize the
student GPA by considering only the policies derived in the
ﬁrst step. In particular, we aim to select for each student a
personalized policy that most suits this student and results
in the highest GPA. We formalize the personalized policy
selection problem in the next section.
Remark: Readers may wonder why there are multiple
solutions of course sequence recommendation policies from
the ﬁrst step so that personalization is possible in the second
step. A couple of reasons can lead to multiple solutions. First,
multiple solutions may occur due to ties, which are more likely
to happen when the randomness disappears as ǫn →0. For
instance, consider 4 courses {1, 2, 3, 4} and course 1 is the
prerequisite of the other three courses. Assume C = 2 and
all courses are offered in all quarters, then course sequences
1 →{2, 3} →4, 1 →{2, 4} →3 and 1 →{3, 4} →2 all
lead to the same shortest time-to-graduation. Second, instead
of keeping only the course sequence recommendation policy
that yields the shortest time-to-graduation, the ﬁrst step of
our approach can also generate a set of course sequence
recommendation policies that result in on-time graduation.
IV. ONLINE RECOMMENDATION POLICY
PERSONALIZATION
A. Problem Formulation
We consider an online setting where students enter the program in sequence. The students are indexed by {1, 2, ..., i, ...}.
Students come with different background (e.g. schools from
which the students graduated, SAT scores). We use a context
∈Θ to denote the student background where
Θ = W is the normalized context space with dimension
W. We have a set of Z course sequence recommendation
policies constructed, denoted by Z, using our method proposed
in Section III. These recommendation policies ensure that
students will graduate early with high probability. However,
the impact of these recommendation policies on the students’
GPA performance is unknown a priori and may be different
for students with different backgrounds.
For each student i, the system selects one of the Z policies
to recommended course sequence to this student. When the
student completes the program by following the recommended
course sequence, the GPA that he/she obtains is revealed
as ri. Let µz(θ) = E{r|θ} be the expected GPA for the
student with background θ if a recommendation policy z is
adopted. If µz(θ) were known for each policy z, then the
policy selection problem would have been simple - selecting
z∗(θ) = arg maxz µz(θ) maximizes the expected GPA for this
student. However, since the effectiveness of the recommendation policies is unknown a priori, the best policies must be
learned for each student.
Let σ be an online learning algorithm for policy selection
and σ(i) ∈Z denote the policy that is used on student i. We
use learning regret as the performance metric for a learning
algorithm. The learning regret up to student I is deﬁned as
the aggregate GPA difference between our learning algorithm
and the oracle solution that selects the best policy z∗(θi), ∀i,
Reg(I) := E[
µz∗(θi)(θi) −
where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness
in grade realization and the selected policies. The regret
characterizes the loss incurred due to the unknown system
dynamics and gives convergence rate of the total expected GPA
of the learning algorithm to the value of the oracle solution.
The regret is non-decreasing in the total number of incoming
students, but we want it to increase as slow as possible. Any
algorithm whose regret is sublinear in I, i.e. Reg(I) = O(Iα)
such that α < 1, will converge to the optimal solution in
terms of the average reward, i.e. lim
= 0. The regret
of learning also gives a measure for the rate of learning. A
smaller α will result in a faster convergence to the optimal
average reward and thus, learning the optimal course sequence
recommendation is faster if α is smaller.
B. Context-Aware Adaptive Policy Selection
A natural way to learn a course sequence recommendation
policy’s effectiveness is to record and update the sample mean
GPA obtained as students arrive and complete the program
by adopting this policy. Using such a sample mean-based
approach for policy selection is the basic idea of our learning
algorithm. However, major challenges still remain. Without
using the context information, we have only learned the
average performance of each recommendation policy and thus,
a single policy will always be selected. On the other hand,
personalizing the policy for each student according to his/her
background can be very difﬁcult since the students can have
diverse background and hence the context space Θ can be
huge. The sample mean reward approach can fail to work since
there will be very limited number of students who have the
same background. Our method to overcome this difﬁculty is by
exploiting the similarity of students based on the assumption
that students with similar background will achieve similar
expected GPA by following the same course sequence recommendation policy. Our learning algorithm starts with a larger
context space to learn the best recommendation policy for this
space and then gradually reﬁnes the learning by partitioning
the context space into smaller spaces.
Before we describe the details of our algorithm, we introduce several useful concepts.
• Student Cluster. A student cluster is represented by
the range of context information that is associated with
students in the cluster. In this paper, we consider student
clusters that are created by uniformly partitioning the
context space on each dimension, which are enough
to guarantee sublinear learning regrets. Thus, each
student cluster is a W-dimensional hypercube with
side length being 2−l for some l. This hypercube
represents a level-l student cluster. At any moment
Fig. 5. Illustration of 2-D Student Clusters.
in time when a recommendation policy is applied to
a student i, the algorithm keeps a set of mutually
exclusive student clusters that cover the entire student
population. We call these student clusters the active
student clusters, and denote this set by Ω. Since
the active student clusters evolve (i.e. become more
reﬁned) as more students are enrolled and graduate, the
active set Ωi uses a superscript i, which is the student
index, to represent its dynamic nature. For instance,
one-dimensional
{[0, 1/2), [1/2, 1]}
{[0, 1/4), [1/4, 1/2), [1/2, 3/4), [3/4, 7/8), [7/8, 1]}
is another feasible set of active student clusters. Figure
5 illustrates a 2-dimensional student clustering.
• Counters. For each active student cluster C, the algorithm
maintains Z counters: for each recommendation policy
z ∈Z, MC(z) records the number of students so far in
which z is applied to.
• GPA Estimates. For each active student cluster, the
algorithm also maintains the sample mean GPA estimates
¯rC(z) for each policy z ∈Z using the realized GPA of
students that belong to C so far.
The algorithm (see Algorithm 3) works as follows. For each
student i, the algorithm works in two steps.
• Policy Selection Step. When an student arrives, the
algorithm ﬁrst checks which active student cluster C ∈Ωi
it belongs to. Then it investigates counter MC(z) for all
z ∈Z to see if there exists any under-explored policy
such that MC(z) ≤γ(i, l) where γ(i, l) is a deterministic
control function depending on the index of the student i
and the level of the student cluster l. If there exists such
an under-explored policy z, then the algorithm uses this
policy to recommend course sequence for this student i.
If there does not exist any under-explored policy, then
the algorithm selects the policy with the highest GPA
estimate for the cluster C, i.e. arg maxz ¯rC(z).
• Variable Update Step. After the student completes the
program and the GPA is realized, the GPA estimate of
the selected policy is updated. Moreover, if the number of
students in the student cluster C satisﬁes P
MC(z) ≥ζ(l)
where ζ(l) is a deterministic control function depending
on the level of student cluster, the current student cluster
C is partitioned into 2W level-(l + 1) smaller student
clusters. For the next student on, C is deactivated and
the new level-(l + 1) student clusters are activated.
Remark: In the policy selection step, the algorithm may
select an under-explored policy for a student. The purpose of
this exploration is to learn the effectiveness of every policy
with high conﬁdence. However, this exploration does raise
fairness issues for some students. There are a couple of solutions that can be used to address this “unfair” policy selection
issue. First, the policy selection is merely a recommendation,
students can still freely choose whichever course sequence
they want to follow. Second, rewards mechanisms can be
designed to incentivize students to follow the recommended
policy. For example, students who follow an under-explored
policy can enjoy a lower tuition or receive some form of
compensation through some special fellowship.
Algorithm 3 Policy Selection and Adaptive Clustering
1: Initialize Ω= Θ, ¯rΘ(z) = 0, MΘ(π) = 0, ∀z ∈Z.
2: for each student i do
Determine active cluster C ∈Ωi such that θi ∈C
Case 1: ∃z ∈Z such that MC(z) ≤γ(i, l)
Randomly select among such policies σi = z
Case 2: ∀z ∈Z, MC(z) > γ(i, l)
Select σt = arg min
z∈Z ¯rC(z).
Set MC(σi) ←MC(σi) + 1
(The student GPA ri is realized.)
Update ¯rC(σt)
z MC(z) ≥ζ(l) then
Uniformly partition C into 2W level-(l+1) student
Update the set of active clusters Ωi.
Update the counters and GPA estimates for all new
student clusters
16: endfor
C. Control Function Determination
In this subsection, we determine the control function γ(i, l)
and ζ(l) and evaluate the performance of the policy selection
algorithm. The following assumption on student similarity is
needed for the regret analysis but not needed in the algorithm.
Assumption 1. (Student Similarity). For each policy z ∈Z,
there exists α > 0 such that for all θ, θ′ ∈Θ, we have |µθ(z)−
µθ′(z)| ≤∥θ, θ′∥α.
The above assumption states that if the student background
(i.e. context) is similar, then the expected GPA by using the
same course sequence recommendation policy is also similar.
Proposition 5. By setting γ(i, l) = 22αl ln i and ζ(l) = A2pl,
the learning regret for students up to I is
[Sl(I)Z22αl ln I
i−2 + A(2W α/2 + 2)2(p−α)l)]
where Yl(I) is the number of level-l student clusters that are
activated at student I, Sl(I) is the number of level-l active
student clusters at student I and lmax(I) is the maximum level
of student clusters at student I.
Proof. We break down the learning regret into three parts
Reg(I) = Reg1(I) + Reg2(I) + Reg3(I) that are respective regrets due to exploration, selection of suboptimal policies in exploitation and selection of near-optimal policies
in exploitation. For each of these three parts we can provide a bound. In particular, Reg1(I) can be bounded by
[Sl(I)Z22αl ln I] since the number of exploration steps
increases sublinearly in I. Reg2(I) can be bounded by
i−2 since the probability of choosing a suboptimal
policy in exploitation steps decreases sufﬁciently rapidly using
a Chernoff-Hoeffding bound. Reg3(I) can be bounded by
Yl(I)A(2W α/2+2)2(p−α)l since the marginal cost of selecting
a near-optimal policy decreases sufﬁciently rapidly.
Corollary 1. If the student context arrivals by student I is
uniformly distributed, we have
Reg(I) < I
3α+W [Z(ln I +
i−2) + (W α/2 + 2)22α+W ]
As we can see, the regret bound is sublinear in the number
of students I and hence, if I is sufﬁciently large, then the
average regret will be close to 0, which means that the optimal
average GPA is achieved.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we apply the forward-search backwardinduction method presented in Section III, and the regret
minimization learning algorithm developed in Section IV to
our dataset.
A. Dataset
Our experiments are based on a dataset from the undergraduate curriculum of the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
(MAE) department at UCLA. The dataset contains the course
sequences and the course grades of 1444 anonymized students
who graduated between the academic years 2013 and 2015.
The course availability varies across years; typically, a course
is offered either once or twice every academic year but some
courses are offered once every two years. UCLA adopts the
quarter system and in each academic year and courses are
mostly offered in Fall, Winter, Spring quarters but not Summer
quarters. Therefore, we will consider that one academic year
consists of three quarters (hence, four academic years equal
12 quarters).
The dataset also includes context information of the students, including their SAT scores and their high school GPAs.
We observe that many students in the dataset take courses
outside of the curriculum (such as the art courses). Our model
can be extended to capture this possibility with added model
complexity but our experiment in this paper does not consider
Fig. 6. Graduation Time Distribution and the Impact of Math SAT score.
the recommendation of such courses. Some of the students
in the dataset are transfer students, and they do not need to
take the same number of courses as the regular students, since
they may have fulﬁlled several requirements before coming to
UCLA. Since the course information before the transferring
is not included in this dataset, we exclude such transfer
students from our analysis. Figure 6 shows the graduation
time distribution of the students in the dataset. As we can
see, even though the majority of students graduate on time
within the desired four years (12 quarters), many students
do not graduate on time and stay in the college for one or
even two more years. There is also a noticeable difference in
the graduation time distributions for students with different
context information: students with higher math SAT scores
have a higher probability to graduate on time. This suggests
that personalization based on the students’ context information
has indeed the potential to provide better learning experience
and lead to better learning outcomes.
B. Impact of constraints
In this subsection we illustrate how course prerequisite and
availability reduce the number of possible course sequence
recommendations for students in MAE department at UCLA.
Figure 2 in Sec. III depicts the prerequisite DAG of the 19
courses used for analysis. Most of these courses are math,
physics, and core MAE major courses. Generally speaking,
math courses are prerequisites of physics courses which are
further prerequisites of MAE major courses. We consider two
cases of course availability constraints. In the ﬁrst case, most
courses are offered twice every academic year and in the
second case, most courses are offered once every academic
year. This allows us to investigate the impact of course
availability on course sequence recommendation. We focus
on how to recommend course sequences to complete these
19 courses as soon as possible.
First, we investigate the possible course completion states
that can emerge. Although there are totally 219 = 524288
possible states, the course prerequisites and availability signiﬁcantly limit the number of possible states that can emerge.
Figure 7 illustrates the number of possible states (i.e. the size
of the state set L(t) deﬁned in Section III-A). Interestingly, the
course prerequisite constraint limits lim
t→∞L(t) as the quarters
go by. In our experiment, there are totally 4880 possible
completion states depending on whether the student has taken,
passed or failed the course, which are signiﬁcantly fewer
than the possible states without any prerequisite constraints.
# of emerged states / # of all possible states
Case 1 Course Availability
Case 2 Course Availability
Fig. 7. Number of Course Completion States.
Moreover, the maximal number of possible states are reached
within a ﬁnite number of quarters. On the other hand, the
course availability constraint affects how fast the set L(t)
expands and reaches its maximal size. When courses are
offered less frequently, L(t) expands more slowly but will
eventually reach the maximal size.
C. Course sequences
In this subsection, we apply the forward-search backwardinduction algorithm presented in Sec. III to compute candidate course sequence recommendation policies to students to
complete the 19 courses presented in Sec. V-C. Although the
course difﬁculty varies across courses, for illustrative purposes,
we set the course failure ratio to be the same ǫ = 0.1 for
all courses. Indeed, common practice tells us that teachers
often curve the students grades so that the passing ratios of
courses do not vary signiﬁcantly across courses. Table I and
II show the best sequences that can be obtained for the two
course availability cases when the student does not fail any
course. It is worth noting that while some courses are taken
after some others in the ﬁrst case, the order can be reversed in
the second case due to different course availability constraints.
For instance, course CS 31 is taken in the ﬁrst quarter before
courses MATH 31B and MSE 104 in the ﬁrst cases but it is
taken in the third quarter after courses MATH 31B and MSE
104 in the second case. The generated course sequence is also
useful for the students to decide when is good time to take
extracurricular courses (e.g. the art courses). For instance, a
student should focus on the curriculum courses in quarter 1,
3 and 5 since three courses need to be taken in each of these
quarters while quarters 4 and 8 are good time for the student
to take extracurricular courses that fall in the student’s interest.
Since students may fail the course, the best course sequence
can no longer be followed by a student. Once this happens,
it becomes important to determine the subsequent courses
to recommend in any possible course completion state. The
course sequence recommendation policy generated by our
algorithm can provide us with these answers for any course
BEST RECOMMENDED COURSE SEQUENCE (CASE 1 COURSE
AVAILABILITY)
Recommended Courses
MATH 31A, CS 31, MAE 94, CHE 20
MATH 31B, MSE 104
PHY 1A, MATH 32A, MATH 33B
PHY 1B, PHY 4AL, MATH 32B
PHY 1C, PHY 4BL, MATH 33A, MAE 101
MAE 105A, MAE 102, MAE 103
BEST RECOMMENDED COURSE SEQUENCE (CASE 2 COURSE
AVAILABILITY)
Recommended Courses
MATH 31A, MAE 94, CHE 20
MATH 31B, MSE 104
CS 31, MATH 32A, PHY 1B
PHY 1A, MATH 33A, MAE 105A
PHY 1B, PHY 4AL
PHY 1C, PHY 4BL
MAE 102, MAE 103
failure ratio. Table III shows the results by running our
algorithm aimed at maximizing the on-time graduation probability or minimizing the graduation time for the two course
availability cases. When courses are offered more frequently,
the expected graduation time is signiﬁcantly reduced and the
on-time graduation probability is signiﬁcantly improved. The
proposed framework can also be used to evaluate different
allocations of teaching resources by calculating their expected
on-time graduation probability and expected graduation time.
D. Personalized policy selection
As mentioned in Sec. IV, depending on the context information of the students, different course sequence recommendation
policies may result in different learning experience. The ﬁrst
step of our framework constructs course sequence recommendation policies to minimize time-to-graduation. The second
step then personalizes the recommendation according to the
students’ context to achieve a high GPA.
Due to the limited number of student records that we
have, we focus on the subsequence recommendation for a
subset of 3 MAE major courses (i.e. MAE 101, MAE 103,
MAE 105A). From our dataset, we observe that there are
six sequences that student use to take these 3 courses. We
will use these six typical sequences to validate the proposed
personalized policy selection algorithm. Note that we are not
using the policies generated in the ﬁrst step to make course
sequence recommendations because the results on the students
COMPLETION TIME RESULTS
Probability of
Completing 19 Courses
in 10 Quarters
Completion
9.3 quarters
9 quarters
6.4 quarters
6 quarters
GPA STATISTICS FOR THE SIX COURSE SEQUENCES
Number of students
700<SAT≤760
760<SAT≤780
in the dataset cannot be known if they are not aligned with
the actual sequences that the students take. Thus, instead of
evaluating the joint efﬁcacy of the policy construction and
policy selection, we only evaluate the efﬁcacy of the policy
selection algorithm in this subsection.
Table IV shows the statistics regarding these 6 subsequences. As we can see, depending on the context information (i.e. math SAT score) of the students, different course
sequences yield different GPA performance. The average GPA
of these students is 3.26. The evaluation of the proposed
personalized policy selection will use the statistics given in
Table IV. We compare the proposed algorithm with several
benchmarks:
• Oracle: the oracle algorithm knows the GPA statistics
a priori and hence always recommends the best course
sequence to each student.
• Learning without Personalization: this algorithm does
not know the GPA statistics. However, when recommending course sequences, it ignores the context information
of the students.
• Random: this algorithm simply recommends course sequence to students randomly.
Figure 8 shows the average GPA that the students can obtain
as the proposed algorithm recommends course sequences to
more students. Initially, the achievable GPA is low since
the algorithm does not have sufﬁcient training samples. As
more training samples are provided, the performance of the
algorithm improves, causing an increase in the simulated GPA
for the selected course sequence. Moreover, the algorithm
adaptively clusters the students according to their context
information and signiﬁcantly outperforms sequence recommendation that ignores the personalized context information.
It is noteworthy that the Random scheme achieves a similar
GPA as the actual average GPA in the dataset (i.e. 3.26). This
suggests that the current practice of course sequence selection
does not recognize the difference in individual students and
hence, there is much room to improve the students’ learning
outcomes by personalizing the course sequences recommended
to students.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the problem of personalized course
sequence recommendation. The problem is solved in two steps.
In the ﬁrst step, we determine candidate course sequence recommendation policies that result in short time-to-graduation
Number of Students
Average GPA
Personalized (Proposed)
Learning without Personalization
Fig. 8. GPA performance v.s. the number of students
using a Forward-Search Backward-Induction algorithm. In
the second step, we develop an online regret minimization
learning algorithm to select personalized course sequence
recommendation policies among the candidate policies for
students aimed at maximizing students’ GPA performance.
Our analysis and simulation results show that the proposed
personalized course sequence recommendation method is able
to shorten the students’ graduation time and improve students’
GPAs. Our framework also has important implications on
how the curriculum planner should design the curriculum and
allocate teaching resources.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are indebted to Mr. John S. Toledo, Research
Associate, Evaluation and Educational Assessment, UCLA
Ofﬁce of Instructional Development for providing us the data
based on which our methods were evaluated.