Lecture Notes in Statistics
Edited by S. Fienberg, J. Gani, K. Krickeberg,
I. OIkin, and B. Singer
Constantine Gatsonis
James S. Hodges
Robert E. Kass
Nozer D. Singpurwalla (Eds.)
Case Studies in Bayesian
Statistics
Springer-Verlag
New York Berlin Heidelberg London Paris
Tokyo Hong Kong Barcelona Budapest
Constantine Gatsonis
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
25 Shattuck St., Parcel B
Boston, MA 02115 USA
Robert E. Kass
Department of Statistics
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Mathematics Subject Classification:
James S. Hodges
1700 Main Sl.
Santa Monica, CA 90407 USA
Nozer D. Singpurwalla
Department of Operations Research
The George Washington University
Washington, D.C. 20052 USA
Libcary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Dall.
Case studies on Bayesian statistics I Constantine GalSonis ... leI aLl
p. em. -- (Lecture notes in statistics; v. 83)
Papers presented at a wO£kshop held at Carnegie-Mellon University.
Seplember 29 through October I. 1991.
Includes bibliographical references and Inde:>;.
ISBN·I3: 973·0·387·94043·4
e·ISBN·13: 978·1·4612·2714·4
om: 10.10071978·1·4612·2714·4
1. Bayesian statistical decision theory·-Congresses.
I. GalSOnis. Constantine. II. Series: Lectur.: nOies in
statistics (Splin8er-Verlag): v. 83
QA279.S.C37 1994
S19.S'42--dc20
Printed on acid·free paper.
10 1993 Springer·Vedag New YOIt, Inc.
All righu reserved. This work may nOl. be tnnslated or copied in whole or in pan without the written
pennission of the publisher (Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.. 175 FIfth Avenue, New York, NY
10010, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in
cameaion with any form of infonn. lion ltorage and retritv':!, electronic ad.ptation, comp.ner
software, or by similar or dillimilu methodology now known or hereafter developed u folbidden.
The use of gmen.! descriptive names, lnIde names. lnIdem.rb. etc., in thil publicalioo, even ifth.e
former are nOl. especially identified, is not to be taken as align th. t such names, as W1derstood by the
Trade Marks and Merchandise M-rks Act, may aw:ordingJy be used freely by anyone.
Camera ready copy provided by the .uthor.
The past few years have witnessed dramatic advances in computational methods
for Bayesian inference.
As a result, Bayesian approaches to solving a wide variety
of problems in data analysis and decision-making have become feasible, and there is
currently a growth spurt in the application of Bayesian methods. The purpose of this
volume is to present several detailed examples of applications of Bayesian thinking, with
an emphasis on the scientific or technological context of the problem being solved.
The papers collected here were presented and discussed at a Workshop held at
Carnegie-Mellon University, September 29 through October 1, 1991. There are five major articles, each with two discussion pieces and a reply. These articles were invited by
us following a public solicitation of abstracts. The problems they address are diverse,
but all bear on policy decision-making. Though not part of our original design for the
Workshop, that commonality of theme does emphasize the usefulness of Bayesian methods in this arena. Along with the invited papers were several additional commentaries
of a general nature; the first comment was invited and the remainder grew out of the
discussion at the Workshop. In addition there are nine contributed papers, selected
from the thirty-four presented at the Workshop, on a variety of applications.
This collection of case studies illustrates the ways in which Bayesian methods are
being incorporated into statistical practice. The strengths (and limitations) of the
approach become apparent through the examples. Noteworthy are the construction of
explicit and conceptually simple models, the use of information external to the data
under scrutiny, and the representation of uncertainty from various sources together
with propagation of that uncertainty to quantities of interest. We hope the papers will
illuminate these and other aspects of Bayesian statistical science and serve as a resource
for those who wish to explore the role of Bayesian thinking in science and technology.
INVITED PAPERS
The first paper, Potential Fuel Efficiency Gain through Technology Improvements,
by R. W. Andrews, J. O. Berger, and M. H. Smith, concerns the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standard for automobiles. This is calculated by taking a
weighted harmonic average, for each manufacturer, among the vehicles sold. The standard is currently 27.5 miles per gallon and the U.S. Congress is considering legislation
that would increase the minimum CAFE value, under the assumption that the required
fuel efficiency could be achieved, for the most part, through manufacturers' institution
of technology improvements alone. The overall goal of the authors' study was to determine whether this assumption is reasonable. The work began with data analysis
using a loglinear hierarchical model. Then, subjective assessments of performance and
control were elicited from automotive industrial engineers. These two components of
the analysis were combined to produce results that should inform the policy discussion.
In Bayes Analysis for Model-Based Methods for Nonignorable Nonresponse in the
Harvard Medical Practice Survey, S. L. Crawford, W. G. Johnson, and N. M. Laird
discuss the problem of handling nonignorable nonresponse in a complex survey of hospitalized patients in New York. A major goal of the survey was to assess the medical
costs of injuries resulting from hospital treatment. Nonresponse resulted from failure to
contact a patient or from a patient's refusal to participate. The authors used mixture
models to account for the different types of nonresponse and to facilitate the incorporation of covariates, which were needed to implement multiple imputation for the missing
values. Probabilities of the different types of nonresponse were modeled using logistic
regression. Medical costs were modeled as functions of patient characteristics using linear regression. The fully Bayesian formulation permitted incorporation of uncertainty
about the assumptions concerning nonresponse.
In Modeling of Subjective Prior Information in Water and Sewerage Systems,
A. O'Hagan and F. S. Wells discuss estimation of capital investment needed in
the sewerage system of Anglian Water Services Ltd. In 1989 the publicly-owned Water
Authorities in England and Wales became private companies and each was obliged to
estimate its requirement for capital investment to the year 2007 to maintain and improve its water mains and sewers. Data about the condition of underground pipes is
expensive to obtain but local managers have considerable knowledge of their system,
captured in the Levels of Service database. O'Hagan and Wells focused on modeling
the available prior information, selecting a small number of Anglian's water districts
for intensive special studies of capital investment needs, and using those special studies
to update the prior estimate of the required capital investment. In such a complex
problem the authors considered it unrealistic to try to elicit multivariate joint prior
distributions. They circumvented this difficulty by using an approximation that only
required Anglian's planning staff and data base to supply means and variances of the
unknown quantities.
In Estimation of Bowhead Whale,
Balaena Mysticetus,
Population Size,
A. Raftery and J. Zeh consider estimation of the Bowhead Whale population size
based on the 1988 combined visual and acoustic census off Point Barrow, Alaska. Their
approach to censusing whales has been accepted for the official purposes of the International Whaling Commission. It is employs a model of the census process and of whale
behavior and yields a full posterior distribution of the number of whales given the data.
The model breaks the census period into smaller time periods and the offshore area into
bands depending on distance from shore; given that breakdown of space and time, it
takes account of numbers of acoustic and visual detections of whales, the probability
of acoustic and visual detection under different conditions, and multiple detections of
individual whales. The authors also analyze the sources of uncertainty in the posterior
distribution of the number of whales, finding that the largest sources of uncertainty are
the absence of data for some parts of the migration and lack of knowledge about parameters involved in the detection probabilities and those needed to amalgamate multiple
detections.
In Bayesian Decision Support Using Environmental Transport-and-Fate Models,
Robert L. Wolpert, Laura J. Steinberg, and Kenneth H. Reckhow examine the
general procedures of many researchers concerned with environmental risk assessment,
who build mechanistic models for the transport and fate of hazardous substances and use
them to predict future concentrations of these substances. The models are generally
quite complex and involve many unknown parameters. Some measurements of the
parameters are available from diverse sources, but typically no systematic effort will
have been made to use all the available information. The authors, whose work is in
progress, consider this task in detail for the problem of PCBs in the upper Hudson
River. By laying out the requirements of a fully Bayesian approach to the problem,
they have identified more clearly the possibilities and difficulties of using the sparse data
currently available. They conclude that the typical complex models should probably be
avoided in favor of simpler alternatives, and in further work they hope to show how to
build and use more tractable models.
FIN AL DISCUSSION
An invited comment by Thomas Louis summarizes several major issues raised by
the papers presented at the Workshop. James Berger, Frank Lad, Tony O'Hagan,
Adrian Raftery, and Tore Schweder provide additional remarks.
CONTRIBUTED PAPERS
In the first of the contributed papers, "Bayesian Analysis of the Ames Salmonella/
Microsome Assay," Ruth Etzioni and Bradley P. Carlin re-analyze the data from a
collaborative, multi-institution trial to assess intra- and inter-laboratory variability in
the results from the Ames Salmonella/Microsome assay. Hierarchical models are natural
for this problem and the authors entertain several, with a nonlinear dose-response curve
and varying degrees of complexity in the hierarchical structure. Marginal posterior
distributions are computed using adaptive numerical integration.
In the next paper, "A Clinical Experiment in Bone Marrow Transplantation Estimating a Percentage Point of a Quantal Response Curve," Nancy Flournoy discusses
a Bayesian approach to the design of a Phase I clinical trial, aimed at determining the
dose of a new drug that produces an acceptable level of toxicity. Dose levels were chosen
to minimize the predicted posterior variance for the quantity of interest, and Bayesian
updating provided the information for implementing an up-and-down treatment allocation scheme.
The third paper, "The Composition of a Composition: Just the Facts," by Stuart
Greene and Larry Wasserman, concerns the way writers select information from
multiple sources. The authors analyze compositions about the post-World War II reconstruction of Europe, comparing those written by students tasked with summarizing
a group of sources and those by students tasked with suggesting a reconstruction plan
based on the same sources.
In "Predicting Coproduct Yields in Microchip Fabrication," William S. Jewell
and Shrane-Koung Chou address a problem in high technology manufacturing, involving the sorting of microelectronic chips into bins, each reflecting different quality.
The multinomial is the natural model for this process but the authors reject a use of
the conjugate Dirichlet prior because it implies a weak negative correlation in the outputs from any two categories. The authors advocate instead the use of the credibility
approximation formulae, for predictive purposes.
In "On the Synchronicity of Whale Strandings with the Phases of the Moon," by
Frank Lad and Mark Brabyn use the New Zealand Whale Stranding Data Base to
compare three theories about the relationship of pilot whale strandings to the phases
of the moon. A subjectivist formulation of the statistical analysis allows a natural
evaluation of the relative strength of the evidence in the data and in the propositions
implied by the three theories.
In the following paper, "Bayesian Methodology for Estimation for Small Areas:
The National Health Interview Survey," Donald Malec, J. Sedransk and Linda
Tompkins use a hierarchical logistic model to analyze health utilization data from the
National Health Interview Survey. They frame their inferential questions as predictions,
for finite populations and use the Gibbs sampler in a fully Bayesian analysis.
"A Cost-Utility Analysis of Alternative Strategies in Screening for Breast Cancer,"
by Giovanni Parmigiani and Mark S. Kamlet, provides a cost-utility analysis of
screening strategies for breast cancer. Assuming a four-state stochastic process for the
natural history of the disease, the authors derive analytic expressions for the expected
number of examinations, treatment costs, and quality-adjusted life years, which are used
to evaluate and compare different strategies.
In "Restoration and Segmentation of Rail Surface Images," Thomas H. Short
considers the problem of detection and classification of rail surface defects by restoring
video images of the surface. He employs two Bayesian image restoring algorithms, the
Iterated Conditional Averages algorithm, and an extension of the Iterated Conditional
Modes algorithm, concluding that both algorithms provide satisfactory results for image
restoration if the data is of relatively high quality, but that both algorithms fail to
provide a satisfactory rule for defect classification.
Finally, in "Assessing Mechanisms of Neural Synaptic Activity," Mike West and
Guoliang Cao analyze measurements of synaptic activity of stimulated nerve tissues
using Dirichlet process mixtures of normal distributions. Their analysis focuses on
mixture deconvolution and on the numbers and weights of components. They describe
and exemplify some of the scientific issues, together with technical aspects of data
analysis, modeling, and the use of prior information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance we received in managing the Workshop
and in preparing this volume. Marilyn Becker and Heidi Rhodes helped organize and
run the Workshop. Sharon Koga and Heidi Rhodes prepared the manuscripts in TeX
and Sharon Koga produced the camera-ready copy. Carnegie Mellon graduate students
Madhumita Lodh, Augustino Nobile, Dan Powers, Glen Takahara, Kok Tan, and Suraj
Rao transcribed the discussion. Support was provided by the National Science Foundation, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and the U.S. Army Research Office.
Constantine Gatsonis
James S. Hodges
Robert E. Kass
Nozer D. Singpurwalla
Table of Contents
Preface .........................................................................
INVITED PAPERS (with discussions)
Andrews, Richard W., Berger, James O. and Smith, Murray H.:
Bayesian Estimation of Fuel Economy Potential Due to Technology Improvements ......................................................................
Crawford, Sybil L., Johnson, William G. and Laird, Nan M.: Bayes Analysis of Model-Based Methods for Nonignorable Nonresponse in the Harvard
Medical Practice Survey .................................................... 78
O'Hagan, Anthony and Wells, Frank S.: Use of Prior Information to Estimate Costs in a Sewerage Operation ........................................ 118
Raftery, Adrian E. and Zeh, Judith E.: Estimation of Bowhead Whale,
Balaena mysticetus, Population Size ........................................ 163
Wolpert, Robert L., Steinberg, Laura J. and Reckhow, Kenneth H.:
Bayesian Decision Support Using Environmental Transport-And-Fate Models 241
FINAL DISCUSSIONS ..................................................... 297
CONTRIBUTED PAPERS
Etzioni, Ruth and Carlin, Bradley P.: Bayesian Analysis of the Ames Salmonella/Microsome Assay .................................................... 311
Flournoy, Nancy: A Clinical Experiment in Bone Marrow Transplantation: Estimating a Percentage Point of a Quantal Response Curve .................... 324
Greene, Stuart and Wasserman, Larry: The Composition of a Composition:
Just the Facts .............................................................. 337
Jewell, William S. and Chou, Shrane-Koung: Predicting Coproduct Yields
in Microchip Fabrication ................................................... 351
Lad, Frank and Brabyn, Mark W.: Synchronicity of Whale Strandings with
Phases of the Moon ........................................................ 362
Malec, Donald, Sedransk, Joseph and Tompkins, Linda: Bayesian Predictive Inference for Small Areas for Binary Variablps ill thp National Health
Interview Survey .......................... " ............................... 377
Parmigiani, Giovanni and Kamlet, Mark S.: A Cost-Utility Analysis of Alternative Strategies in Screening for Breast Cancer ............................ 390
Short, Thomas H.: Restoration and Segmentation of Rail Surface Images ..... 403
West, Mike and Cao, Guoliang: Assessing Mechanisms of Neural Synaptic Activity ................................................................ 416
AUTHOR INDEX ......................................................... , .... 429
SUBJECT INDEX ............................................................. 435