The large-scale organization of metabolic networks
1, B. Tombor
2, R. Albert
1, Z. N. Oltvai
2 and A.-L. Barabási
1Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, and
2Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611
In a cell or microorganism the processes that generate mass, energy, information transfer, and
cell fate specification are seamlessly integrated through a complex network of various cellular
constituents and reactions 1. However, despite the key role these networks play in sustaining
various cellular functions, their large-scale structure is essentially unknown. Here we present
the first systematic comparative mathematical analysis of the metabolic networks of 43
organisms representing all three domains of life. We show that, despite significant variances in
their individual constituents and pathways, these metabolic networks display the same
topologic scaling properties demonstrating striking similarities to the inherent organization of
complex non-biological systems 2. This suggests that the metabolic organization is not only
identical for all living organisms, but complies with the design principles of robust and errortolerant scale-free networks 2-5, and may represent a common blueprint for the large-scale
organization of interactions among all cellular constituents.
An important goal in biology is to uncover the fundamental design principles that provide the
common underlying structure and function in all cells and microorganisms 6-13. For example, it is
increasingly appreciated that the robustness of various cellular processes is rooted in the dynamic
interactions among its many constituents 14-16, such as proteins, DNA, RNA, and small molecules.
Recent scientific developments improve our ability to identify the design principles that integrate these
interactions into a complex system. Large-scale sequencing projects have not only provided complete
sequence information for a number of genomes, but also allowed the development of integrated
pathway-genome databases 17-19 that provide organism-specific connectivity maps of metabolic- and,
to a lesser extent, various other cellular networks. Yet, due to the large number and the diversity of the
constituents and reactions forming such networks, these maps are extremely complex, offering only
limited insight into the organizational principles of these systems. Our ability to address in quantitative
terms the structure of these cellular networks, however, has benefited from recent advances in
understanding the generic properties of complex networks 2.
Until recently, complex networks have been modeled using the classical random network theory
introduced by Erdös and Rényi (ER) 20, 21. The ER model assumes that each pair of nodes (i.e.,
constituents) in the network is connected randomly with probability p, leading to a statistically
homogeneous network, in which, despite the fundamental randomness of the model, most nodes have
the same number of links, 〈k〉 (Fig. 1a). In particular, the connectivity follows a Poisson distribution
strongly peaked at 〈k〉 (Fig. 1b), implying that the probability to find a highly connected node decays
exponentially (i.e. P(k) ~ e
-k for k » 〈k〉). On the other hand, recent empirical studies on the structure of
the World-Wide Web 22, Internet 23, and social networks 2 have reported serious deviations from this
random structure, demonstrating that these systems are described by scale-free networks 2 (Fig. 1c),
for which P(k) follows a power-law, i.e. P(k) ~ k
-γ (Fig. 1d). Unlike exponential networks, scale-free
networks are extremely heterogeneous, their topology being dominated by a few highly connected
nodes (hubs) which link the rest of the less connected nodes to the system (Fig. 1c). Since the
distinction between the scale-free and exponential networks emerges as a result of simple dynamical
principles 24, 25, understanding the large-scale structure of cellular networks can provide not only
valuable and perhaps universal structural information, but could also lead to a better understanding of
the dynamical processes that generated these networks. In this respect the emergence of power law
distribution is intimately linked to the growth of the network in which new nodes are preferentially
attached to already established nodes 2, a property that is also thought to characterize the evolution of
biological systems 1.
To begin to address the large-scale structural organization of cellular networks, we have examined
the topologic properties of the core metabolic network of 43 different organisms based on data
deposited in the WIT database 19. This integrated pathway-genome database predicts the existence of
a given metabolic pathway based on the annotated genome of an organism combined with firmly
established data from the biochemical literature. As 18 of the 43 organisms deposited in the database
are not yet fully sequenced, and a substantial portion of the identified ORFs are functionally
unassigned, the list of enzymes, and consequently the list of substrates and reactions (see Table 1 in
Supplementary Material 26), will certainly be expanded in the future. Nevertheless, this publicly
available database represents our current best approximation for the metabolic pathways in 43
organisms and provides sufficient data for their unambiguous statistical analysis (see Methods and
Supplementary Material 26).
As we illustrate in Fig. 1e, we have first established a graph theoretic representation of the
biochemical reactions taking place in a given metabolic network. In this representation, a metabolic
network is built up of nodes, which are the substrates that are connected to one another through links,
which are the actual metabolic reactions. The physical entity of the link is the temporary educt-educt
complex itself, in which enzymes provide the catalytic scaffolds for the reactions yielding products,
which in turn can become educts for subsequent reactions. This representation allows us to
systematically investigate and quantify the topologic properties of various metabolic networks using the
tools of graph theory and statistical mechanics 21. Our first goal was to identify the structure of the
metabolic networks, i.e., to establish if their topology is best described by the inherently random and
uniform exponential model 21 (Fig. 1a and b), or the highly heterogeneous scale-free model 2 (Fig. 1c
and d). As illustrated in Fig. 2, our results convincingly indicate that the probability that a given
substrate participates in k reactions follows a power-law distribution, i.e., metabolic networks belong to
the class of scale-free networks. Since under physiological conditions a large number of biochemical
reactions (links) in a metabolic network are preferentially catalyzed in one direction (i.e., the links are
directed), for each node we distinguish between incoming and outgoing links (Fig. 1e). For instance, in
E. coli the probability that a substrate participates as an educt in k metabolic reactions follows P(k) ~
-γin, with γin = 2.2, and the probability that a given substrate is produced by k different metabolic
reactions follows a similar distribution, with γout = 2.2 (Fig. 2b). We find that scale-free networks describe
the metabolic networks in all organisms in all three domains of life (Fig. 2a-c) 26, indicating the generic
nature of this structural organization (Fig. 2d).
A general feature of many complex networks is their small-world character 27, i.e., any two nodes in
the system can be connected by relatively short paths along existing links. In metabolic networks these
paths correspond to the biochemical pathway connecting two substrates (Fig. 3a). The degree of
interconnectivity of a metabolic network can be characterized by the network diameter, defined as the
shortest biochemical pathway averaged over all pairs of substrates. For all non-biological networks
examined to date the average connectivity of a node is fixed, which implies that the diameter of a
network increases logarithmically with the addition of new nodes 2, 27, 28. For metabolic networks this
implies that a more complex bacterium with higher number of enzymes and substrates, such as E. coli,
would have a larger diameter than a simpler bacterium, such as M. genitalium. In contrast, we find that
the diameter of the metabolic network is the same for all 43 organisms, irrespective of the number of
substrates found in the given species (Fig. 3b). This is surprising and unprecedented, and is possible
only if with increasing organism complexity individual substrates are increasingly connected in order to
maintain a relatively constant metabolic network diameter. Indeed, we find that the average number of
reactions in which a certain substrate participates increases with the number of substrates found within
the given organism (Fig. 3c and d).
An important consequence of the power-law connectivity distribution is that a few hubs dominate
the overall connectivity of the network (Fig. 1c), and upon the sequential removal of the mostconnected nodes the diameter of the network rises sharply, the network eventually disintegrating into
isolated clusters that are no longer functional. Yet, scale-free networks also demonstrate unexpected
robustness against random errors 5. To examine if metabolic networks display a similar error tolerance
we performed computer simulations on the metabolic network of the bacterium, E. coli. Upon removal
of the most connected substrates the diameter increases rapidly, illustrating the special role these
metabolites play in maintaining a constant metabolic network diameter (Fig. 3e). However, when
randomly chosen M substrates were removed, -mimicking the consequence of random mutations of
catalyzing enzymes-, the average distance between the remaining nodes was not affected, indicating a
striking insensitivity to random errors. Indeed, in-silico and in-vivo mutagenesis studies indicate a
remarkable fault tolerance upon removal of a substantial number of metabolic enzymes from the E. coli
metabolic network 29. Of note, data similar to that shown in Fig. 3e have been obtained for all
investigated organisms, without detectable correlations with their evolutionary position.
Since the large-scale architecture of the metabolic network rests on the most highly connected
substrates, we need to address whether the same substrates act as hubs in all organisms, or if there
are major organism-specific differences in the identity of the most connected substrates. When we rank
order all the substrates in a given organism based on the number of links they have (Table 1)26, we find
that the ranking of the most connected substrates is practically identical for all 43 organisms. Also, only
~4% of all substrates that are found in all 43 organisms are present in all species. These substrates
represent the most highly connected substrates found in any individual organism, indicating the generic
utilization of the same substrates by each species. In contrast, species-specific differences among
various organisms emerge for less connected substrates. To quantify this observation, we examined
the standard deviation (σr) of the rank for substrates that are present in all 43 organisms. As shown in
Fig. 3f, we find that σr increases with the average rank order, 〈r〉, implying that the most connected
substrates have a relatively fixed position in the rank order, but the ranking of less connected
substrates is increasingly species-specific. Thus, the large-scale structure of the metabolic network is
identical for all 43 species, being dominated by the same highly connected substrates, while less
connected substrates preferentially serve as educt or product of species-specific enzymatic activities.
The contemporary topology of a metabolic network reflects a long evolutionary process molded in
general for a robust response towards internal defects and environmental fluctuations and in particular
to the ecological niche the specific organism occupies. As a result, one expects that these networks are
far from being random, and our data demonstrate that the large-scale structural organization of
metabolic networks is indeed highly similar to that of robust and error-tolerant networks 2, 5. The
uniform network topology observed in all 43 organisms strongly suggests that, irrespective of their
individual building blocks or species-specific reaction pathways, the large-scale structure of metabolic
networks is identical in all living organisms, in which the same highly connected substrates may provide
the connections between modules responsible for distinct metabolic functions 1.
A unique feature of metabolic networks, as opposed to that seen in non-biological scale-free
networks, is the apparent conservation of the network diameter in all living organisms. Within the
special characteristics of living systems this attribute may represent an additional survival and growth
advantage, since a larger diameter would attenuate the organism’s ability to efficiently respond to
external changes or internal errors. For example, should the concentration of a substrate suddenly
diminish due to mutation in its main catalyzing enzyme, offsetting the changes would involve the
activation of longer alternative biochemical pathways, and consequently the synthesis of more new
enzymes, than within a smaller metabolic network diameter.
But how generic these principles are for other cellular networks (e.g., information transfer, cell
cycle)? While the current mathematical tools do not allow unambiguous statistical analysis of the
topology of other networks due to their relatively small size, our preliminary analysis suggest that
connectivity distribution of non-metabolic pathways also follows a power-law distribution, indicating that
cellular networks as a whole are scale-free networks. Therefore, the evolutionary selection of a robust
and error tolerant architecture may characterize all cellular networks, for which the scale-free topology
with a conserved network diameter appears to provide an optimal structural organization.
Database preparation: For our analyses of core cellular metabolisms we used the “Intermediate metabolism and
Bioenergetics” portions of the WIT database 19 ( that predicts the
existence of a metabolic pathway in an organism based on its annotated genome (i.e., on the presence of the
presumed open reading frame (ORF) of an enzyme that catalyzes a given metabolic reaction), in combination
with firmly established data from the biochemical literature. As of December 1999, this database provides
description for 6 archaea, 32 bacteria and 5 eukaryota. The downloaded data were manually rechecked,
removing synonyms and substrates without defined chemical identity.
Construction of metabolic network matrices: Biochemical reactions described within a WIT database are
composed of substrates and enzymes connected by directed links. For each reaction, educts and products were
considered as nodes connected to the temporary educt-educt complexes and associated enzymes. Bi-directional
reactions were considered separately. For a given organism with N substrates, E enzymes and R intermediate
complexes the full stochiometric interactions were compiled into an (N+E+R) × (N+E+R) matrix, generated
separately for each of the 43 organisms.
Connectivity distribution [P(k)]: Substrates generated by a biochemical reaction are products, and are
characterized by incoming links pointing to them. For each substrate we have determined kin, and prepared a
histogram for each organism, providing how many substrates have exactly kin =0,1,…. Dividing each point of the
histogram with the total number of substrates in the organism provided P(kin), or the probability that a substrate
has kin incoming links. Substrates that participate as educts in a reaction have outgoing links. We have performed
the analysis described above for kin, determining the number of outgoing links (kout) for each substrate. To reduce
noise logarithmic binning was applied.
Biochemical pathway lengths [Π(l)]: For all pairs of substrates, the shortest biochemical pathway, Π(l) (i.e., the
smallest number of reactions by which one can reach substrate B from substrate A) were determined using a
burning algorithm. From Π(l) we determined the diameter, D =
, which represents the
average path length between any two substrates.
Substrate ranking [ <r>o , σ(r) ]: Substrates present in all 43 organisms (i.e., a total of 51 substrates) were ranked
based on the number of links each had in each organisms, having considered incoming and outgoing links
separately (r =1 were assigned for the substrate with the largest number of connections, and r =2 for second most
connected one, etc.). This way for each substrate a well-defined r value in each organism was defined. The
average rank <r>o for each substrate was determined by averaging r over the 43 organisms. We also determined
the standard deviation, σ(r) = <r
2>o - <r>o
2 for all 51 substrates present in all organisms.
Analysis of the effect of database errors: Of the 43 organisms whose metabolic network we have analyzed the
genome of 25 has been completely sequenced (5 Archaea, 18 Bacteria, 2 Eukaryotes), while the remaining 18
are only partially sequenced. Therefore two major sources of possible errors in the database could affect our
analysis: (a) the erroneous annotation of enzymes and consequently, biochemical reactions; for the organisms
with completely sequenced genomes this is the likely source of error. (b) reactions and pathways missing from the
database; for organisms with incompletely sequenced genomes both (a) and (b) are of potential source of error.
We investigated the effect of database errors on the validity of our findings, the results being presented in the
Supplementary Material 26, indicating that the results offered in this paper are robust to these errors.
Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge all members of the WIT project for making this invaluable database publicly
available for the scientific community. We also thank C. Waltenbaugh and H. S. Seifert for comments on the
manuscript. Research at the University of Notre Dame was supported by the National Science Foundation, and at
Northwestern University by grants from the National Cancer Institute.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.-L.B. ( ) or Z.N.O.
( ).