JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
ASSESSING TEACHING PRESENCE IN A
COMPUTER CONFERENCING CONTEXT
Terry Anderson
Professor and Canadian Research Chair in Distance Education
Athabasca University
 
Liam Rourke
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
 
D. Randy Garrison
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
 
Walter Archer
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
 
This paper presents a tool developed for the purpose of assessing teaching presence in online
courses that make use of computer conferencing, and preliminary results from the use of this tool.
The method of analysis is based on Garrison, Anderson, and Archer’s model of critical
thinking and practical inquiry in a computer conferencing context. The concept of teaching
presence is constitutively defined as having three categories – design and organization,
facilitating discourse, and direct instruction. Indicators that we search for in the computer
conference transcripts identify each category. Pilot testing of the instrument reveals interesting
differences in the extent and type of teaching presence found in different graduate level online
Teaching, CMC, instruction, formal education
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
I. INTRODUCTION
In the one-room schools that dotted the North American landscape during the pioneer era, the
tasks of a skilled and dedicated teacher were challenging, to say the least. The teacher performed
several functions. Obviously, she or he provided direct instruction – in all school subjects, to
children in up to nine different grades! Perhaps less obvious, the teacher had to spend long hours
designing and organizing the learning experiences of the children. This teacher function often
included non-traditional activities such as lighting the potbellied stove on each frigid winter
morning so that the school would be habitable when the students arrived. A third teaching
function that was very important in these pioneer schools was creating a community of learners
by facilitating student-to-student discourse. It was obviously impossible for one teacher to
provide constant direct instruction to twenty-five students in up to nine different grades. Most of
the learning in the one-room school took place as children in one grade worked in a peer-learning
group while the teacher was providing direct instruction to children in another grade. Frequently
the teacher would assign “the big kids” – i.e., those who knew more about the subject – to help
“the little kids,” those who knew less about the subject. These various teaching functions are now
being replicated in a new “pioneering” context, that of online learning, to which we now turn.
II. TEACHING PRESENCE IN AN ONLINE ENVIRONMENT
There are two reasons why we begin a paper on teaching presence in a virtual environment with a
look back at teaching presence in an earlier pioneering era. First, in the earlier, supposedly
simpler era of the one-room schoolhouse, it was clear that the functions of a teacher were multifacetted. In that more physical, more observable environment, it is easy to see the function of the
teacher as consisting of three major roles: first, as designer of the educational experience,
including planning and administering instruction as well as evaluating and certifying competence;
second, as facilitator and co-creator of a social environment conducive to active and successful
learning; and finally, as a subject matter expert who knows a great deal more than most learners
and is thus in a position to ‘scaffold’ learning experiences by providing direct instruction.
Another reason for our reference to the experience of pioneer teachers in one-room schools is that
it serves as an analogy to the time consuming and often frustrating experience of twenty-first
century “pioneer teachers” in online learning communities. As was the case in the one-room
schools in the early twentieth century, creating the necessary “warmth” in the pioneering virtual
learning environments of the early twenty-first century takes considerable teacher effort.
However, the imperfect tools of today are harbingers of easier and more ubiquitous online
learning tools, just as the one-room schools of long ago have given place to modern, wellequipped schools in rural centers.
This paper reviews the tasks of the online teacher as gleaned from the literature and our
experiences as teachers of graduate level, online courses. It then introduces a technique for
systematically analyzing the context of the text-based transcripts of those courses. We expect that
these tools will allow teachers to assess and then improve their own postings in online courses.
We also expect that these tools can be used for research designed to test hypotheses or diagnose
problems in online teaching. We conclude the paper with the preliminary results of our analysis
of the transcripts from two graduate level teaching courses.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Teaching in online courses is an extremely complex and challenging function. Therefore, study of
this multifaceted function requires an appropriate theoretical perspective that frames this
particular research context. This is provided by the framework of our extended research project -
the goal of which is to better understand teaching and learning via computer conferencing in a
higher education context through the development of analytical and measurement tools that assess
critical discourse in a community of inquiry . Our research is based on a model of critical
thinking and practical inquiry developed by Garrison, Anderson and Archer . This model is
framed by a community of inquiry model and used to illustrate the multifaceted components of
teaching and learning in a text-based environment . The three elements of this framework are:
cognitive presence, social presence and teaching presence. Earlier papers have discussed
methodology of transcript analysis , cognitive presence , and social presence in computer
conferencing . In the current paper we examine the variable that is most directly under the
control of teachers--the task of creating and sustaining “teaching presence” in a text-based
computer conferencing context.
In a transactional approach to education, consistent with traditional higher education values, the
teacher is expected to assume certain responsibilities and fulfill an important role. Regardless of
the mediated nature of the communication, “it is the teacher’s responsibility to precipitate and
facilitate learning that has purpose and is focused on essential concepts and worthwhile goals”
 . Fulfilling the complex responsibilities of a teacher necessitates sustained and authentic
communication between and among teachers and students. While control must be shared and
choices provided, the discourse must also be guided toward higher levels of learning through
reflective participation as well as by challenging assumptions and diagnosing misconceptions.
This collaborative construction of knowledge is a challenge that all educators face. However, it is
made extraordinarily difficult when it is the educator’s responsibility to design, facilitate, and
direct learning online. For learning to occur in this lean medium of communication, dependent on
written language only, a strong element of what we refer to as teaching presence is required. We
will now turn to the task of defining with greater precision what teaching presence is and how it
may be measured.
IV. CLASSIFICATION OF TEACHER ROLES IN COMPUTER
CONFERENCING
The initial classification of teaching presence proposed by the present authors consisted of three
characteristics – design and administration, facilitating discourse, and direct instruction . A
review of the literature related to online teaching provides support for this classification.
Our three categories of teaching presence can be mapped directly to previous work by other
researchers (see Table 1). First, it is important to note that Berge categorizes four major
functions of the online moderator. He adds a “technical” support role to the three we have
itemized. However, while we acknowledge that providing technical assistance to students is
currently an onerous function of the online teacher, like tending the prairie school stove, we
believe that its importance will decrease as users become more experienced and as the tools of
online learning become more intuitive and ubiquitous. Moreover, technical support can be
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
provided by a variety of means (i.e. technical discussions, Frequently Asked Questions, student
call centers, etc.) that do not necessarily involve the teacher .
Paulsen and Mason also divide the educational moderator's role into three major
responsibilities – organizational, social, and intellectual. The one area where we depart somewhat
from these authors is in terms of how we construct and define the social aspects of an educational
experience. We have separated out the purely social elements as a separate element of a
community of inquiry and refer to (this distinct element) it as "social presence" . The creation
of the social environment is the responsibility of students as well as teachers. In our model, only
the social aspects of the teacher's messages that directly relate to the content contributions from
the student are included in the teaching presence category. The corresponding characteristic from
a teaching presence perspective is the role of facilitating discourse. Finally, we refer to the third
function as “direct instruction” rather than Berge’s “pedagogical” which, in its broadest sense,
can refer to all three functions or to Paulsen and Mason’s “intellectual” which does not
necessarily denote teaching at all.
Models of teaching roles in computer conferencing
Anderson et al
Paulsen 
Instructional design and
organization
Managerial
Organizational
Organizational
Facilitating Discourse
Direct Instruction
Pedagogical
Intellectual
Intellectual
Rossman's extensive research provides empirical support for these classification systems.
Through the analysis of over 3000 student end-of-course evaluations from 154 university courses,
Rossman found student comments and complaints clustered into three major groupings – teacher
responsibility, facilitating discussions, and course requirements. These map to our categories of
direct instruction, facilitating discourse, and design and administration, respectively. Finally
Coppola, Hiltz and Rotter’s qualitative interview research with 20 ‘virtual professors”
identified affective, cognitive and managerial roles (changes) as major categories undergoing
change through the teaching of online courses. Obviously these three match directly with our
indicators of teaching presence.
Lists of hints and suggestions for conference moderators and online teachers have also been
provided by many authors (see especially Salmon and the many lists of hints at Berge and
Collins’ Moderators’ Home Page). However, these provide few, if any guidelines by which
teaching presence characteristics can be measured or assessed. To achieve this goal we have
developed a template and tool for assessing teaching presence. We have done this through the
provision of indicators and examples that clearly describe and measure the concept of teaching
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
V. DESCRIBING TEACHING PRESENCE
We define teaching presence as the design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social
processes for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile
learning outcomes. Teaching presence begins before the course commences as the teacher, acting
as instructional designer, plans and prepares the course of studies, and it continues during the
course, as the instructor facilitates the discourse and provides direct instruction when required.
Through adequate teaching presence, formal learning that facilitates personally relevant and
educationally defined outcomes is achieved. We do not wish to denigrate individual learning that
occurs through independent or self-directed study. However, it is only through active intervention
of a teacher that a powerful communications tool such as collaborative computer conferencing
 , or cooperative learning becomes a useful instructional and learning resource.
Identifying and quantifying the types of teaching presence interventions give us some clues to
developing better support tools for pioneers of online education.
Usually a formal distance education course consists of much more than dialogue between and
among teacher and students and includes course readings, web explorations, exercises and
individual and collaborative projects. Teaching presence mediates all of these components,
however we have initially only used our analysis tools on the computer conferencing component
of the course. We are grateful to the reviewer of this article who pointed out that the analysis of
teacher presence could be extended to other components of the course and we invite subsequent
researchers to follow through on this approach.
Teachers and students come to conventional higher education having already learned welldefined roles through years of common educational background and experience in the formal
education system. During online learning this background and prior experience are less relevant
to the context, which can invoke feelings of anomie. This forces teachers and students to
explicitly define or redefine their functional roles. They must rely less on predefined roles and
behavioral expectations. In addition, for the teacher “the ability to create, maintain, and control
space (whatever we call it - virtual, nonplace, network) links us to notions of power and
necessarily to issues of authority, dominance, submission, rebellion, and cooperation” . Thus,
we feel a need for systems that teachers and researchers can use to better understand the effect of
their behavior in this complex environment.
We next describe each of the three categories of teaching presence, as well as indicators that are
later used to measure the extent to which each category of teaching presence is represented in the
transcript of a given online course.
A. Design and Organization
As in many forms of distance education, the process of designing and planning the online course
is usually more extensive and time-consuming than is the analogous process in classroom based
teaching. More thorough planning often results when teachers work on courses that may be
visible to peers, administrators and visitors as well as their own students. Building the course in a
digital format forces teachers to think through the process, structure, evaluation and interaction
components of the course. Much of the learned expectation of classroom norms is not available
for either student or teacher use, and thus the teacher is forced to be more explicit and transparent
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
in their planning process. We refer to this component of teacher presence as design and
organization.
Activities in this category of teaching presence include building curriculum materials including
the creation and integration of external ‘learning objects’ such as those available through
MERLOT. ‘Re-purposing’ materials, such as lecture notes to provide online teacher
commentaries, mini-lectures, personal insights and other customized views of course content, is
another common activity that we assign to this category of teaching presence. This category also
involves designing and administering an appropriate mix of group and individual activities that
take place during the course. This category of teaching presence also includes the processes
through which the instructor negotiates time lines for group activities and student project work, a
very important aspect of online courses. Many researchers have documented the challenge to the
instructor of synchronizing activities so that learners feel “in synch” with the rest of the class 
The teacher also provides organizational service to students by providing guidelines and tips and
modeling appropriate etiquette and effective use of the medium. This includes appropriate use of
the reply and quote functions, and repair of communications breakdowns such as inappropriate
posting or postings placed in the wrong discussion forum.
Students also need to have a sense of the “grand design” of the course and reassurance that
participating in the learning activities will lead to attainment of their learning goals. We concur
with Laurillard, Stratfold, Lukin, Plowman and Taylor that the teacher’s task is to create a
narrative path through the mediated instruction and activity set such that students are aware of the
explicit and implicit learning goals and activities in which they participate. Macro-level
comments about course process and content are thus an important motivation and orientation
component of this category of teaching presence.
Coding scheme for Instructional Design and Organization
Indicators
Setting curriculum
"This week we will be discussing. . .”
Designing methods
"I am going to divide you into groups, and you will
debate. . .”
Establishing time parameters
"Please post a message by Friday. . .”
Utilizing medium effectively
"Try to address issues that others have raised when
Establishing netiquette
"Keep your messages short"
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
B. Facilitating Discourse
Facilitating discourse during the course is critical to maintaining the interest, motivation and
engagement of students in active learning. We use the term discourse rather than discussion to
highlight the focused and sustained deliberation that marks learning in a community of inquiry or
as Scardamalia and Bereiter refer to it, the “ knowledge-building community.”
In fulfillment of this component of teaching presence, the teacher regularly reads and comments
on student postings, constantly searching for ways to support the development of the learning
community. This component overlaps with many of the behaviors identified in our larger model
of “social presence” as the teacher is an active member of the community of inquiry.
However, the teacher’s role is more demanding than that of other participants, and carries with it
higher levels of responsibility for establishing and maintaining the discourse that creates and
sustains social presence. The teacher shares responsibility with each individual student for
attainment of agreed upon learning objectives. The teacher supports and encourages participation
by modeling appropriate behaviors, commenting upon and encouraging student responses,
drawing in the less active participations, and curtailing the effusive comments of those who tend
to dominate the virtual space.
Unlike the analogous categories used by previous researchers, our facilitating discourse category
is more than the facilitation of social activities. Our facilitating discourse function differs from
the “social dimension” of computer conferencing, which Henri defines as “statements not
related to formal content or subject matter” (p. 126). Rather, facilitation of discourse is usually
integrated within direct instruction and in situ design of instructional activity. Under this heading
we place teacher postings that stimulate social process with a direct goal of stimulating individual
and group learning. Therefore, we tend not to search in the “coffee room” or “chat” areas of the
computer conference for evidence of these indicators, but do look for indicators of support for
social discourse within each message in the content focused discussions. Their presence indicates
the teacher is helping to create a positive learning environment. The indicators we use to identify
the facilitating discourse component of teaching presence include the identification of areas of
agreement and disagreement. From a Piagetian perspective, cognitive development requires
that individuals encounter others who contradict their own intuitively derived ideas and notions
and thereby create cognitive conflicts. It is the resolution of these conflicts that results in higher
forms of reasoning. Teachers may be required to help students find congruent linkages when two
seemingly contrary opinions are being expressed. Similarly, helping students articulate consensus
and shared understanding, when these are already implicit in the discussion, is also useful.
Finally, the teacher’s facilitation tasks include assessing the efficacy of the process. Computer
conferencing has become associated with large time commitments from teachers and students
 . Thus, we look for indicators that the teacher is “moving the discussion along” and insuring
effective and efficient use of time.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
Coding scheme for Facilitating Discourse
Indicators
Identifying areas of agreement/disagreement
"Joe, Mary has provided a compelling counterexample to your hypothesis. Would you care to
Seeking to reach consensus/understanding
"I think Joe and Mary are saying essentially the
same thing"
Encouraging, acknowledging, or reinforcing
student contributions
"Thank you for your insightful comments"
Setting climate for learning
"Don't feel self-conscious about 'thinking out
loud' on the forum. This is a place to try out
ideas after all."
Drawing in participants, prompting discussion
"Any thoughts on this issue?" "Anyone care to
Assess the efficacy of the process
"I think we're getting a little off track here"
C. Direct Instruction
In this final teaching presence category, teachers provide intellectual and scholarly leadership and
share their subject matter knowledge with students. Davie writes that the instructor must be
able to set and communicate the intellectual climate of the course or seminar, and model the
qualities of a scholar. The students and the teacher have expectations of the teacher
communicating content knowledge that is enhanced by the teacher’s personal interest, excitement
and in-depth understanding of the content. The cognitive apprenticeship model espoused by
Collins & Brown , Rogoff's model of apprenticeship in thinking or Vygotsky’s 
scaffolding analogies illustrate an assistive role for teachers in providing instructional support to
students from their position of greater content knowledge. Although many authors recommend a
"guide on the side" approach to moderating student discussions, this type of laissez faire
approach misinterprets a fundamental element of peer collaboration models. A key feature of
such social cognition models is the adult, the expert or the more skilled peer who scaffolds a
novice's learning.
The role of the teacher, in any context, involves direct instruction that makes use of the subject
matter and pedagogical expertise of the teacher. Some theorists have argued that online teaching
is unlike classroom based teaching in that the "the teacher must adopt the role of facilitator not
content provider" (p. 447). The arbitrary distinction between facilitator and content provider
we find troublesome. Garrison in a lively exchange focused on differentiating so called
teacher-centered and student-centered instruction, makes the point that “the self-directed
assumption of andragogy suggests a high degree of independence that is often inappropriate from
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
a support perspective and which also ignores issues of what is worthwhile or what qualifies as an
educational experience" (p. 124).
Salmon writes of the diverse role of “e-moderator” which likens the teacher to a facilitator of
learning. Her description suggests that the e-moderator does not require extensive subject matter
expertise. She writes, “they need a qualification at least at the same level and in the same topic as
the course for which they are moderating” (p. 41). We believe that such minimal subject level
competency provides less than the ideal that defines high quality professional education. We
recognize that economic factors and intense demand for instruction in some content areas may
result in large scale educational programs being designed around “big distance education” models
 that, through specialization and skill differential, provide adequate learning experiences for
some subjects. However, we believe that there are many fields of knowledge, as well as attitudes
and skills, that are best learned in forms of higher education that require the active participation
of a subject matter expert in the critical discourse. This subject matter expert is expected to
provide direct instruction by interjecting comments, referring students to information resources,
and organizing activities that allow the students to construct the content in their own minds and
personal contexts.
Table 4 illustrates the indicators we use to identify direct instruction. Presentation of content and
directing questions to the group or to individual students is an important, traditional role for the
teacher. Teachers also provide focus to the discussion by directing attention to particular
concepts or information that is necessary to frame or pursue knowledge growth. A widely
documented problem in computer conferencing is the difficulty of focusing and refining
discussions so that conversation progresses beyond information sharing to knowledge
construction and especially application and integration. We believe that this stalling of the
discussion at the lower levels of the critical inquiry process occurs when there is not adequate
teaching presence in the computer conference , , . The teacher's summary is also
normally not merely a neutral “weaving” of the previous postings. It often serves to develop and
explicitly delineate the context in which knowledge growth has taken place.
Direct instruction also takes the form of statements that confirm understanding through
assessment and explanatory feedback. Assessing student comments is time consuming and
requires higher levels of knowledge than that commonly held by student participants. Often a
small component of the formal course assessment relates to student participation in the
conference, but in addition informal and timely teacher assessment and feedback is especially
useful and valued by students.
Diagnosing misconceptions is another critical task of the on-line teacher. Often students hold
misconceptions that impair their capacity to build more correct conceptions and mental schemata.
The design of effective learning activities leads to opportunities for students themselves to
uncover these misconceptions, but the teacher’s comments and questions as direct instruction are
also invaluable.
The teacher is also familiar with a wealth of resources to which they can refer students for further
individual or group study. The number, quality and accessibility of these resources are increasing
exponentially as more information is digitized and made available via the World Wide Web.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
Finally, the teacher may be asked to provide direct instruction on technical questions related to
access to the conferencing system, manipulation of the conferencing software, operation of other
tools or resources, and the technical aspects of dealing with any of the subject related tools and
techniques.
Coding scheme for Direct Instruction
Indicators
Present content/questions
"Bates says…what do you think"
Focus the discussion on specific issues
"I think that's a dead end. I would ask you to
consider…"
Summarize the discussion
"The original question was …Joe said…Mary
said…we concluded that…We still haven't
addressed…"
Confirm understanding through assessment and
explanatory feedback.
"You're close, but you didn't account for…
…this is important because…
Diagnose misconceptions
"Remember, Bates is speaking from an
administrative perspective, so be careful when
Inject knowledge from diverse sources, e.g.,
experiences (includes pointers to resources)
"I was at a conference with Bates once, and he
said…You can find the proceedings from the
conference at "
Responding to technical concerns
"If you want to include a hyperlink in your
message, you have to . . ."
VI. METHOD
The descriptions of three categories of teaching presence in the previous section provide a
starting point for assessing and investigating the corresponding roles that are filled primarily by
the online instructor, though often with the aid of other individuals such as instructional
designers. In this section, we present a method of assembling empirical evidence in support of the
existence of teaching presence and its three categories by analyzing the transcripts of computer
conferences that form part of graduate level university courses.
The method utilizes a research technique called content analysis, defined as "a research
methodology that uses a set of procedures to make valid inferences from text” . The set of
procedures includes identifying and defining a target variable, collecting samples of
representative text, and devising reliable and valid rules for categorizing segments of the text.
Ultimately, this process culminates in descriptive or inferential conclusions about the target
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
A definition of our target variable, teaching presence, and a description of its three categories has
been provided above. To facilitate the classification of transcript segments into the categories, we
have listed the pedagogic roles subsumed under each category and provided examples of how
these roles are typically performed in conferences (see Tables 3 through 5). For example,
"Acknowledging student contributions" is one of the roles of Facilitating Discourse. This role is
performed in conferences with expressions such as "Thank you for your insightful comments."
The process of selecting segments of a transcript requires the researcher to stipulate what the
segments or units of analysis will be. Rourke et al. identified five units of analysis that have
been used in computer conferencing research including proposition units, sentence units,
paragraph units, thematic units, and message units. Of these five, they determined that thematic
units were by far the most commonly used by researchers, although message units were the most
practical.
Thematic units are identified based on their correspondence to a particular category definition
 . The thematic unit allows coders to capture variables in their natural form; however, it is a
prohibitively labor intensive process. It is also difficult to maintain what Hagelin calls unit
reliability, defined as “the consistency in identifying what is to be classified, i.e., the amount of
information to be included in each unit.” Using the message as the unit of analysis, coders
generally assign an entire message to one category. The use of message units is less timeconsuming and facilitates unit reliability; however, this unit has been characterized as alternately
too large or too small to adequately characterize a single item of data (for further discussion see
Rourke, et al., ). In previous work, our research group has used both the thematic unit and the
message unit .
In the present study, we again used the message unit. However, rather than simply assigning each
message unit that demonstrated some sort of teaching presence to one and only one of the
categories of teaching presence, we allowed for the possibility that a single message might exhibit
characteristics of more than one category. Therefore, each message posted by the instructor was
coded as exhibiting or not exhibiting one or more indicator of each of the three categories of
teaching presence.
This procedure proved to have a number of advantages for our investigation. First, the number of
coding decisions was pre-determined for the coders – three decisions per message. This was
useful for alerting coders to the need to make a decision and provided a denominator for
calculating reliability. Second, the system was quickly implemented and did not require coders to
determine the number or the exact text length of indicators present per unit of analysis. Third,
totals for each category are easily determined and meaningfully expressed by reporting the
percentage of total teacher postings that contains each of the categories.
We feel that procedure is reliable, efficient, and practical. Ultimately, the validity of this system
will be judged according to two criteria: Does the procedure facilitate the objective quantification
of the insights that an observer would gain from an informal reading of the transcripts? And does
the procedure reveal additional insights that are not apparent from an informal reading? These
questions will be addressed in the discussion section.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
VII. RESULTS
In order to establish the reliability of the coding procedure, two raters were assigned to code all
messages in both of the 13-week conference transcripts. As a result of using the message as the
unit of analysis, unit reliability was 100%. Interrater reliability, defined as "agreement among
coders about the categorization of content,” was determined using Cohen's kappa. Cohen's
kappa is a chance-corrected measure of interrater reliability that assumes two raters, n cases, and
m mutually exclusive and exhaustive nominal categories . The formula for calculating kappa
k = (Fo - Fc) / (N - Fc)
N = the total number of judgments made by each coder
Fo = the number of judgments on which the coders agree
Fc = the number of judgments for which agreement is expected by chance.
Interrater reliability for the distance education transcript was k = .77; for the Health Promotions
transcript, interrater reliability was k = .84. Riffe et al. report "research usually reports
reliability figures in the .80 to .90 range. Research that is breaking new ground with concepts that
are rich in analytical value may go forward with reliability levels that are somewhat below that
Table 5 shows the frequency and percentage of teaching presence categories that were observed
in the messages posted by the instructors of two graduate level, distance education courses.
Percentages were calculated by dividing the total number of postings showing a given category of
teaching presence by the total number of messages posted by that instructor. Direct instruction
was the predominant category, with between 77% and 88% of all teacher messages including
some form of direct instruction. Instructional design was the least frequently observed category of
teaching presence, with between 22% and 38% of messages addressing instructional design.
Frequencies of teaching presence categories by instructor
Health Course
Education Courseb
Instructional Design
Facilitating
Direct Instruction
a n of instructor messages =139.
b n of instructor messages = 32.
Table 6 illustrates the frequency and percentage of instructor messages that addressed 0, 1, 2, or 3
of the categories of teaching presence. 64% of the Health Promotions instructor's messages
included only one category of teaching presence. For the Distance Education instructor, the
largest percentage of messages included two categories of teaching presence.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
Frequency and percentage of messages that included 0, 1, 2, or 3 categories of
teaching presence
Health Coursea
0 categories
1 category
2 categories
3 categories
a n of instructor messages =139.
b n of instructor messages = 32.
VIII. DISCUSSION
Our results show the pattern of teaching presence varying considerably between these two
courses facilitated by two experienced online teachers. The education teacher made use of student
moderators during the later weeks of the course, and thus the number of teacher postings were
considerably reduced compared to the health teacher who responded to almost every student
posting. In the education course, the student moderators were performing a substantial part of the
teaching presence role. We have observed this phenomenon in a number of online courses. This
supports our decision to refer to this element of the community of inquiry as "teaching presence"
rather than "teacher presence," as a number of individuals who are not teachers often collaborate
in carrying out this role. Again with regard to the two courses we examined, it should be noted
that the education instructor made far fewer postings, but those postings covered, on average, a
considerably higher number of the categories of teaching presence, as compared to the more
frequent postings of the health sciences instructor.
Among teachers of online courses, generally, there are probably many individual variables that
affect the number and content of the instructors’ postings and hence their contribution to teaching
presence in the conference. These will include teaching style, discipline related conceptions of the
education process, size of the class, and the teachers' and students' familiarity and expertise with
the medium. We report above only the aggregate totals of each of our three categories of
teaching presence. It may be useful to use frequencies of individual indicators in further studies
that focus on one of the three major functions of the CMC teacher that we have identified. The
tool may also be used as a diagnostic instrument for teachers to analyze and compare the
magnitude and pattern of their “teaching presence” with that of other teachers. Finally, we can see
applications in which hypothesis testing is done related to any number of determinants of
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
teaching presence, including work load, subject matter expertise, nature of the learning activities,
and the teacher's previous experience in conventional or technology enhanced instruction.
Activities in, particularly, the instructional design category of teaching presence start well before
the actual course starts, but unlike ‘canned forms’ of distance education, online teaching allows
the instructor to revise and augment content and learning activities as the course progresses. As
much of the work of this phase precedes the establishment of computer conferencing based
interactions, many of the roles of this category are not visible to the students or researchers in the
computer conference transcript. Thus, the record we examine is only a subset of this activity.
Further, some of the teacher presence activities do not take place in common forums and are
conducted through private email, voicemail or telephone. Thus, the conferencing transcript
provides a snapshot and an indicator of teacher presence activities. These organizational functions
vary considerably based on the features and services of the ‘system’ within which the formal
courses are offered.
The usefulness of this tool relates to its simplicity and its diagnosis capacity. Coding using our
format is relatively easy and training procedures necessary to achieve reasonably reliable results
are not as time consuming as other schemes we have used. More importantly we see practicing
teachers as well as researchers being able to review their postings and look for or note the
absence of each of the three indicators of teaching presence. Thus, the system can be used to
diagnose teaching difficulties, to help teachers reduce workloads by increasing the quality and
reducing the quantity of their messages, and to increase the semantic density and functionality of
their postings. The tool may also be used to analyze and describe differences in style between
different types of teachers, teachers of different disciplines or to assess the contribution of student
moderators or others assigned to perform ancillary teaching functions.
IX. CONCLUSION
Marshall McLuhan is famous for his insight that “the medium is the message,” implying that the
impact of the medium is integral to and in some cases determinant of the message. Certainly
teaching in an online environment is influenced by the absence of the non-verbal communication
that occurs in the face-to-face settings of conventional education, and the reduction in the amount
of paralinguistic information transmitted, as compared to some other modes of distance education
such as video or audio teleconferencing. However, McLuhan also noted that each new medium
takes a preceding medium for its content, and that the process of interpreting a new medium in
terms of an older one (horseless carriage effect) filters our conception of the newer medium.
This process of viewing the new medium through the conceptual filter developed for the older
medium necessarily colors our understanding of the teaching process in a computer mediated
communications (CMC) context. Part of the challenge, as mentioned above, is to develop
compensatory behaviors for the relative lack of non-verbal and paralinguistic communication in a
text-based medium such as computer conferencing. Another part of the challenge is to overcome
the difficulty of conceiving the role of the teacher in online courses within the long established
conceptual framework that we have built in the context of conventional, face-to-face teaching.
Feenberg suggests that this is problematic because teachers have difficulty transposing
leadership skills developed in the rich medium to the leaner medium of the text-based conference.
We are not convinced that the function of teaching changes, though certainly its manifestation
looks quite different in this mediated context. Especially in these “pioneering days” of online
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
learning the thoughtful design of learning activities is critical to the attainment of educational
outcomes. In the process of designing and using these tools, teachers are forced to be learners
themselves and like all who experience learning, the learners themselves are changed. As Kiesler
 notes, “skill changes, though triggered by the adoption of a technology, less reflect the
technology itself than they are outcomes of setting up and putting in technology, and of the
structure of the workplace and groups into which the technology is deployed” (p. 162).
The focus of our paper has been on developing the conceptual framework to understand, measure
and improve the important function of “teaching presence” within a computer conference
environment. We invite others to use and refine the concept and the tools piloted in our study, in
order to better provide theoretical and empirical information to help the many pioneer online
teachers of this decade.
X. REFERENCES
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. Critical inquiry in a text-based environment:
Computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2-3), 1-19,
Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. A transactional perspective on teaching and learning: A
framework for adult and higher education. Oxford, UK: Pergamon, 2000.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. Methodological issues in the
content analysis of computer conference transcripts. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 11(3) to appear, 2000.
Garrison, D.R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. Critical thinking, cognitive presence, and
computer conferencing in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education,
15(1), 7-23, 2001.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., Archer, W. Assessing social presence in
asynchronous, text-based computer conferencing. Journal of Distance Education, 14(3), 51-
Rourke, L. & Anderson, T. (in press). Exploring social communication in computer
conferencing. Journal of Interactive Learning Research.
Berge, Z. L. Facilitating computer conferencing: Recommendations from the field.
Educational
Technology,
 
Salmon, G. E-moderating: The key to teaching and learning online. London: Kogan Page,
Paulsen, M. P. Moderating educational computer conferences. In Berge, Z. L. & Collins, M.
P. (Eds.). Computer-mediated communication and the on-line classroom in distance
education. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1995.
Mason, R. Moderating educational computer conferencing. DEOSNEWS Vol. 1 (19)
 
Paulsen, M. P. Moderating educational computer conferences. In Berge, Z. L. & Collins, M.
P. (Eds.). Computer-mediated communication and the on-line classroom in distance
education. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1995.
12. Rossman, M. Successful online teaching using an asynchronous learner discussion Forum.
Asynchronous
 1999.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
Coppola N., Hiltz, S.R. & Rotter, N. Becoming a virtual professor: Pedagogical roles and
ALN. Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, IEEE
 , 2001
Harasim, L. On-line education: A new domain. In R. Mason and A. Kaye (Eds.),
Mindweave: Communication, computers and distance education (pp. 91-109). Oxford:
Pergamon Press, 1989.
Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. Cooperation and the use of technology. In D. Jonassen (Ed.),
Handbook of research for educational communications and technology (pp. 1017-1044).
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996.
Jones, S. Information, Internet and community: Notes towards an understanding of
community in the Information Age. In. S. Jones, (Ed.) Cybersociety 2.0 (pp. 1-34) Thousand
Oaks: Sage.
Downes, S. Learning Objects. Available [online]
 2000.
Laurillard, D., Stratfold, M., Luckin, R., Plowman, L. & Taylor, J. Affordances for
learning in a non-linear narrative medium. Journal of Interactive Media in Education,
Available [Online]: 2000.
Lipman, M. Thinking in education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. Computer support for knowledge-building communities.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283, 1994.
Henri, F. Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative
learning through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp. 115-136). New York:
Springer, 1992.
Piaget, J. Judgment and reasoning in the child. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1928.
Montgomerie, T.C., Harapnuik, D. Observations on web-based course development and
delivery. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications 3(2/3), 181-203, 1997.
Davie, L. Facilitation techniques for the on-line tutor, In R. Mason and A. Kaye (Eds.),
Mindweave: Communication, computers and distance education (pp. 74-85). Oxford:
Pergamon Press, 1989.
Collins A. & Brown J. S. Cognitive apprenticeship: Making things visible. American
Educator 15(3) 38-46, 1991.
Rogoff, B. Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Vygotsky L. Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Mason, R. and Romiszowski, A. J. Computer-mediated communication. In D. H. Jonassen
(Ed.), The handbook of research for educational communications and technology (pp. 438-
456). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan, 1996.
Garrison, D. R. Andragogy, learner-centeredness, and the educational transaction at a
distance. Journal of Distance Education, 3(2), 123-127, 1988.
Bullen, M. Participation and critical thinking in online university distance education.
Journal of Distance Education, 13(2), 1-32, 1998.
Kanuka, H. & Anderson, T. Online social interchange, discourse, and knowledge
construction. Journal of Distance Education, 13(1), 57-74, 1998.
Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1990.
Krippendorf, K. Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. London: Sage, 1980.
Hagelin, E. Coding data from child health records: The relationship between interrater
agreement and interpretive burden. Journal of Pediatric Nursing 14(5) 313-321, 1999.
Riffe, D., Lacy, S., & Fico, F. Analyzing media messages: Quantitative content analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, pp. 104, 131, 1998.
JALN Volume 5, Issue 2 - September 2001
Capozzoli, M., McSweeney, L. & Sinha, D. Beyond kappa: A review of interrater
agreement measures. The Canadian Journal of Statistics, 27(1), 3-23, 1999.
Feenberg, A. The written word. On the theory and practice of computer conferencing, In A.
Kaye and R. Mason (Eds.) Mindweave: Communication, computers, and distance education
(pp. 22-39). Toronto: Pergamon Press, 1986.
Kiesler, S. Talking, teaching and learning in network groups: Lessons from research. In A.
Kaye (Ed.) Collaborative learning through computer conferencing. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
XI. Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Social Science Research Council of the
Government of Canada for support of this investigation.
XII. AUTHORS' BIOGRAPHIES
Terry Anderson is a Professor and Co-director of Academic Technologies for Learning in the
Faculty of Extension, University of Alberta. Terry has been a presenter at numerous conferences
and has been widely published in the area of technologies for learning and distance education.
 
Liam Rourke is a doctoral student specializing in instructional technology in the University of
Alberta’s Department of Educational Psychology. .
D. Randy Garrison is a Professor and Dean of the Faculty of Extension at the University of
Alberta. His areas of research relate to the teaching and learning transaction in the context of
adult, distance, and higher education. He has published extensively in both of these areas.
 .
Walter Archer is a Professor and Associate Dean, Research, in the Faculty of Extension at the
University of Alberta. He is also Acting Director of the new distance-delivered Master of Arts in
Communications and Technology. He has 12 years experience with CMC and other modes of
distance delivery. .