Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the
company's public news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre
remains active.
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals
Nonlinear Science, and Nonequilibrium and Complex Phenomena
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chaos
Time series forecasting of COVID-19 transmission in Canada using
LSTM networks 
Vinay Kumar Reddy Chimmula ∗, Lei Zhang
Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan, S4S0A2 Canada
a r t i c l e
Article history:
Received 6 April 2020
Revised 4 May 2020
Accepted 4 May 2020
Available online 8 May 2020
Epidemic transmission
Time series forecasting
Machine learning
Corona virus
Long short term memory (LSTM) networks
a b s t r a c t
On March 11 th 2020, World Health Organization (WHO) declared the 2019 novel corona virus as global
pandemic. Corona virus, also known as COVID-19 was ﬁrst originated in Wuhan, Hubei province in China
around December 2019 and spread out all over the world within few weeks. Based on the public datasets
provided by John Hopkins university and Canadian health authority, we have developed a forecasting
model of COVID-19 outbreak in Canada using state-of-the-art Deep Learning (DL) models. In this novel
research, we evaluated the key features to predict the trends and possible stopping time of the current
COVID-19 outbreak in Canada and around the world. In this paper we presented the Long short-term
memory (LSTM) networks, a deep learning approach to forecast the future COVID-19 cases. Based on the
results of our Long short-term memory (LSTM) network, we predicted the possible ending point of this
outbreak will be around June 2020. In addition to that, we compared transmission rates of Canada with
Italy and USA. Here we also presented the 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14 th day predictions for 2 successive
days. Our forecasts in this paper is based on the available data until March 31, 2020. To the best of our
knowledge, this of the few studies to use LSTM networks to forecast the infectious diseases.
© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Every infectious disease outbreak exhibits certain patterns and
such patterns needed to be identiﬁed based on transmission dy-
namics of such outbreaks. Intervening measures to eradicate such
infectious diseases rely on the methods used to evaluate the out-
break when it occurs. Any outbreak in a country or province usu-
ally occurs at different levels of magnitude with respect to time i.e.
seasonal changes, adaptation of virus over time. Usually patterns
exhibited in such scenarios are non-linear in nature and this mo-
tivates us to design the system that can capture such non-linear
dynamic changes. With the help of these non-linear systems, we
can describe the transmission of such infectious diseases. In a
transmission model for malaria and in a mathematical model
for analysing dynamics of tuberculosis has been developed to study
the transmission using mathematical models. In a laplacian
based decomposition is used to solve the non-linear parameters
in a Pine Witt disease. A modiﬁed SIRS model in successfully
helped to control the syncytial virus in infants. Similarly mathe-
 This document is the results of the research project funded by the Saskatchewan
Centre for Patient Oriented Research (SCPOR), Saskatchewan, Canada
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: (V.K.R. Chimmula), (L.
matical models presented in helped clinicians to better un-
derstand the characteristics of human liver and transmission of
dengue outbreak.
Most of the Data driven approaches used in previous stud-
ies are linear methods and often neglects the temporal com-
ponents in the data. They depend upon regression without non-
linear functions and failed to capture the dynamics of transmis-
sion of infectious diseases like novel corona virus. Statistical mod-
els such as Auto Regressive Moving Average (ARIMA), Moving Aver-
age (MA), Auto Regressive (AR) methods overwhelmingly depends
on assumptions and such models are diﬃcult for forecasting real-
time transmission rates. Wide range of statistical and mathematical
models have been proposed to model the transmission dy-
namics of current COVID-19 epidemic. In many cases, these models
are not able to ﬁt the given data perfectly and accuracy is also low
while predicting the growth of COVID-19 transmission.
R0 is a popular statistical method speciﬁcally used to model
an infectious disease. Often referred as âreproduction numberâ be-
cause, the infections reproduce itself with respect to time. R0 fore-
casts the number of people can get the infection from the infected
person. In this model, an extra weight is applied to the person
who never infected the current disease nor vaccinated. If the value
of R0 of a disease is 10, then the infected person will spread the
disease to 10 other people surrounding him. In authors used
R0 method to ﬁnd the infection rate of novel virus on diamond
 
0960-0779/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
V.K.R. Chimmula and L. Zhang / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
princes cruise ship . However, in such method it is diﬃcult to
ﬁnd the starting point of the infectious disease by identifying pa-
tient zero and the people he interacted with during his incubation
period. It is worth noting that mathematical models presented in
 can be used to solve the complex non-linear patterns of
infectious diseases.
Even though these epidemiological models are good at captur-
ing vital components of an infectious disease, parameters of these
models required several assumptions. Such hypothesized parame-
ters would not ﬁt the data perfectly and precision of such mod-
els will be low. Meanwhile, in engineering applications , model
parameters are calculated with the help of real-time data. Similar
approach was used in this research to ﬁnd the model parameters
instead of assumptions.
In order to overcome the barriers of statistical approaches,
we developed the Deep Learning based network to predict the
real-time transmission. Our model could help public health care
providers, policy makers to make necessary arrangements to tackle
the rush of potential COVID-19 patients. This experiment is based
on the data sets of conﬁrmed COVID-19 cases available until March
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and mobile computing are one of the key
factors for the success of technology in health care systems .
In the world of smart devices, data is being generated in the un-
precedented way than ever before and promoted the role of ma-
chine learning in healthcare . The world today is more con-
nected than ever before this helped to share the real time infec-
tious data between the countries. The distinctive feature of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence is its ﬂexibility, domain adaptation and econom-
ical to integrate with existing systems. Over the last few weeks,
many researchers came up with several mathematical models to
predict the transmission of novel corona virus . The ma-
jor drawbacks of the existing models are linear, non-temporal and
several assumptions while modelling the network. First of all, the
covid-19 is a time series data set and it is highly recommended
to use the sequential networks to extract the patterns from it.
Second of all, the data we are dealing with is dynamic in nature
so by using statistical and epidemiological models, results are of-
ten vague . In researchers used deep learning based
LSTM networks to forecast COVID-19 infections. The LSTM models
used in the above networks could not able to represent the spatio-
temporal components simultaneously. In this paper we addressed
the above problem by modifying the internal connections. In our
modiﬁed LSTM cells, We have established the alternative connec-
tions between the input and output cells. This type of connections
not only helps the networks to preserve spatio-temporal compo-
nents, but also to transfer the historical information to the next
In this paper, we made an effort to predict the outbreak of
COVID-19 based on past transmission data. First of all, coherence
of input data needs to be analyzed in order to ﬁnd the key feature
i.e. number of new cases reported with respect to the previous day
infections. After selecting the key parameters of the network, sev-
eral experiments was conducted to ﬁnd the optimal model that can
predict future infections with minimum error. Previous studies on
COVID-19 predictions, did not considered the recovery rate while
developing the model. In this research, we considered the recovery
rate as one of the features while building our model. From the de-
sign point of view, when a crisis occurs, algorithms tend to assign
high probability and completely neglects the previous information
which leads to biased predictions. We addressed this issue in our
literature and solved this by using LSTM networks.
Our results are expected to alert the public health care
providers of Canada to prepare themselves for the crisis against
COVID-19. With the help of this real-time forecasting tool, front-
line clinical staff will be alerted before the crisis.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: section II de-
scribes methods, datasets and LSTM models used in this paper. In
Section III, we have discussed our ﬁndings and in Section IV, con-
cussion and future work was discussed
2. Methods and models
2.1. Dataset
The COVID-19 data used in this research is collected from Johns
Hopkins University and Canadian Health authority, provided with
number of conﬁrmed cases until March 31, 2020. The data set also
includes number of fatalities and recovered patients by the end of
each day. The dataset is available in the time series format with
date, month and year so that the temporal components are not
neglected. A wavelet transformation is applied to preserve the
time-frequency components and it also mitigates the random noise
in the dataset. The fundamental point to represent and forecast the
trends of current is to select conventional functions to ﬁt the data.
The COVID-19 dataset is divided into training set (80%) on which
our models are trained and testing set (20%) to test the perfor-
mance of the model.
2.2. LSTM Network for modelling time series
A large part of real-world datasets are temporal in nature. Due
to its distinctive properties, there are numerous unsolved problems
with wide range of applications. Data collected over regular inter-
vals of time is called time-series (TS) data and each data point is
equally spaced over time. TS prediction is the method of forecast-
ing upcoming trends/patterns of the given historical dataset with
temporal features. In order to forecast COVID-19 transmission, it
would be effective if input data has temporal components and it
is different from traditional regression approaches. A time series
(TS) data can be break downed into trend, seasonality and error.
A trend in TS can be observed when a certain pattern repeats
on regular intervals of time due to external factors like lockdown
of country, mandatory social distancing, quarantines etc. In many
real-world scenarios, either of trend or seasonality are absent. Af-
ter ﬁnding the nature of TS, various forecasting methods have to
be applied on given TS
Given the TS, it is broadly classiﬁed into 2 categories i.e. sta-
tionary and non-stationary. A series is said to be stationary, if it
does not depend on the time components like trend, seasonality
effects. Mean and variances of such series are constant with re-
spect to time. Stationary TS is easier to analyze and results skil-
ful forecasting. A TS data is said to non-stationary if it has trend,
seasonality effects in it and changes with respect to time. Statis-
tical properties like mean, variance, sand standard deviation also
changes with respect to time.
In order to check the nature (stationarity and non-stationarity)
of the given COVID-19 dataset, we have performed Augmented
Dickey Fuller (ADF) test on the input data. ADF is the stan-
dard unit root test to ﬁnd the impact of trends on the data and
its results are interpreted by observing p-values of the test. If P is
between 5-1%, it rejects the null hypothesis i.e. it does not have a
unit root and it is called stationary series. If P is greater than 5% or
0.05 the input data has unit root so it is regarded as non-stationary
Before diving into the model architecture, it is crucial to explain
the internal mechanisms of LSTM networks and reasons behind us-
ing it instead of traditional Recurrent Neural Networks. Recurrent
LSTM networks has capability to address the limitations of tradi-
tional time series forecasting techniques by adapting nonlinearities
of given COVID-19 dataset and can result state of the art results
on temporal data. Each block of LSTM operates at different time
V.K.R. Chimmula and L. Zhang / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
Fig. 1. LSTM internal architecture.
step and passes its output to next block until the ﬁnal LSTM block
generates the sequential output.
As of this writing, RNNs with blocks (LSTM) are the eﬃcient
algorithms to build a time series sequential model. The fundamen-
tal component of LSTM networks is memory blocks, which was in-
vented to tackle vanishing gradients by memorizing network pa-
rameters for long durations. Memory block in LSTM architecture
are similar to the differential storage systems of a digital systems.
Gates in LSTM helps in processing the information with the help of
activation function (sigmoid) and output is in between 0 or 1. Rea-
son behind using sigmoid activation function is because, we need
to pass only positive values to the next gates for getting a clear
output. The 3 gates of LSTM network are represented with the fol-
lowing equations below:
J t = sigmoid(w J [ h t−1 , k t ] + b J )
G t = sigmoid(w G [ h t−1 , k t ] + b G )
P t = sigmoid(w P [ h t−1 , k t ] + b P )
Where: J t = function of input gate
G t = function of forget gate
P t = function of output gate
W x = coeﬃcients of neurons at gate (x)
H t−1 = result from previous time step
k t = input to the current function at time-step t
b x = bias of neurons at gate (x)
Input gate in the ﬁrst equation gives the information that needs
to be stored in the cell state. Second equation throws the informa-
tion based on the forget gate activation output. The third equation
for output gate combines the information from the cell state and
the output of forget gate at time step âtâ for generating the out-
put. The internal block diagram of LSTM block used in this study
is shown in 1
The motivation behind initiating self-loops is to create a path so
that gradients or weights can be shared for long durations. Espe-
cially, this is useful while modelling deep networks where vanish-
ing gradient is a frequent issue to deal with. By adjusting weights
as self-looped gates, we can adjust the time scale to detect the dy-
namically changing parameters. Using the above techniques, LSTMs
are able to produce the state-of-the-art results in . The network
architecture used in this study is shown in 2
3. Results and discussion
The methods used in this study are based on data guided ap-
proaches and are completely different from previous studies. Our
approaches and predictive outcomes will provide assistance for re-
stricting the infections and possible elimination of current COVID-
19 pandemic. We trained our network with data until March 31,
2020 reported by Canadian health authority. In this study we found
that policies or decisions taken by government will greatly af-
fect the current outbreak.Several studies on forecasting of COID-
19 transmission are based on the R0 method however, they didn’t
include the sensitivity analysis to ﬁnd the important features. We
examined our model predictions using mean square error (MSE).
In Fig. 4 we plotted the total number of conﬁrmed cases and fore-
casted COVID-19 cases in Canada as a function of time. From the
ﬁgure we can observe that, Canada didnât witness its peak yet and
it is expected number of cases will soon increase exponentially de-
spite the social distancing.
Although our model achieved better performance when com-
pared with other forecasting models, it is unfortunate that trans-
missions are following increasing trend. The rate of infections in
USA, Italy and Spain are growing exponentially meanwhile, the
number of infections in Canada are increasing linearly in Fig. 3 . If
Canadians follow the regulations strictly, the number of conﬁrmed
cases will soon decline.
In our LSTM model-1 we trained and tested our network on
Canadian dataset; the RMSE error is 34.83 with an accuracy of
93.4% for short term predictions in Canada. Meanwhile, based on
our testing/validation dataset the RMSE error is about 45.70 with
an accuracy of 92.67% for long term predictions. The predictions of
LSTM model are shown in 4 with solid red line. It shows that our
model was able to capture the dynamics of the transmission with
Fig. 2. LSTM Architecture.
V.K.R. Chimmula and L. Zhang / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
Fig. 3. a) Number of infections in Canada vs USA vs Italy as of March 31, 2020. b) Distribution of conﬁrmed cases in Canada as of March 31, 2020.
Fig. 4. Predictions of the LSTM model on current exposed and infectious cases (Red solid line). The red dotted lines represents the sudden changes from where number
of infections started following exponential trend. The black dotted lines in the ﬁgure represents the training data or available conﬁrmed cases. (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
minimum loss. From the Fig. 4 we can say that Canada witnessed
linear growth in cases until March 16, 2020 after its ﬁrst conﬁrmed
case. The current epidemic in Canada is predicted to continue until
June 2020. Our second LSTM model-2 is trained on Italian dataset
to predict short-term and long-term infections in Canada. For short
term predictions, the RMSE error is about 51.46 which is higher
than previous model. According to this second model within 10
days, Canada is expected to see exponential growth of conﬁrmed
It was a challenging task to forecast the dynamics of trans-
mission based on small dataset. Even though COVID-19 outbreak
started in Canada around early January, the consistent epidemio-
logical data wasn’t released until early February. Because of small
dataset several statistical models struggled to select the optimal
parameters and several unknown variables led to uncertainty in
their predictions. LSTM model is different from statistical meth-
ods in many ways for instance, the proposed LSTM network ﬁts
the real-time data and without any assumptions while selecting
hyperparameters. It was able to overcome the parameter assump-
tions using cross validation and achieved better performance by
reducing the uncertainty. After reaching the inﬂection point, the
recovery rate will start decrease rapidly and death rate may in-
crease at the same time as shown in Fig. 5 . In order to ﬁnd the
trend of the infections we decomposed the given series and the
trend of infections is increasing with respect to time. Further, num-
ber of infections followed increasing trend from Sunday to Tues-
day and followed decreasing trend until Saturday as shown in
V.K.R. Chimmula and L. Zhang / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
Fig. 5. a) Mortality rate of COVID-19 in Canada and the average mortality stands around 3.2% b) Recovery rate of COVID-19 patients shows that it is decreasing with respect
to time because of rise in number of infections.
Fig. 6. Trend of infections in Canada.
As we are still under the stage of dilemma about the current
situation of COVID-19 because, the accuracy of our estimates is
bounded with a lot of external factors. So, it is recommended to
conduct the follow-up study after this experiment to be more pre-
cise about the dynamics of this novel infectious disease. The actual
number of cases might be higher than the cases reported by the
government because, of the backlog of test results and some peo-
ple will be immune before even testing. All the above factors may
lead to discrepancy of our model estimations. Even though we ad-
dressed data imbalance by using statistical methods like interpola-
tion and re-sampling yet we couldnât represent patients who are
on incubation period or not tested. Other problem while modelling
current pandemic is that, people travelling between the provinces.
Based on our sensitivity analysis our projections may go down if
current trials on potential vaccines achieves fruitful results. Finally,
in order to minimize the bias on our training algorithm we intro-
duced regularization.
Further, by training our network inversely, we found that out-
break in Canada started around early January but, it was not re-
ported until January last week. Even without the knowledge of 1st
case, our inverse training will help governments to better under-
stand the outbreak of COVID-19 and helps then to prevent such
outbreaks in future.
V.K.R. Chimmula and L. Zhang / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 135 109864
4. Conclusion and future work
The patterns from the data reveals that prompt and effective
approaches taken by Canadian public health authorities to mini-
mize the human exposure is showing a positive impact when com-
pared with other countries like USA and Italy 3 . Rate of transmis-
sion in Canada is following linear trend while in USA is witnessing
an exponential growth of transmissions. However, it is too early to
draw the conclusions about the current epidemic.
After simulations and data ﬁtting, our model predicted Canada
would reach peak within 2 weeks from now. However, the cur-
rent outbreak resembles early 20th century Spanish ﬂu , which
killed millions of people and lasted for 2 years. Based on our model
simulations, the current COVID-19 pandemic is expected to end
within 3 months from now. Due to some unreported cases, a small
number infection clusters may appear until December 2020. How-
ever, recent technological improvements and international coop-
eration between countries may even reduce the duration current
To sum up, this is the ﬁrst study to model the infections disease
transmission model to predict the gravity of COVID-19 in Canada
using deep learning approaches. Based on our current ﬁndings,
provinces that have implemented social distancing guidelines be-
fore the pandemic has less conﬁrmed cases than other provinces
3 . For instance, Saskatchewan issued social distancing guidelines 2
weeks ahead than Quebec which has half of the conﬁrmed cases
in Canada. Our results could help Canadian government to moni-
tor the current situation and use our forecasts to prevent further
transmissions.
Declaration of Competing Interest
1. Conﬂict of Interest
Potential conﬂict of interest exists:
We wish to draw the attention of the Editor to the following
facts, which may be considered as potential conﬂicts of interest,
and to signiﬁcant ﬁnancial contributions to this work: The nature
of potential conﬂict of interest is described below:
No conﬂict of interest exists.
We wish to conﬁrm that there are no known conﬂicts of inter-
est associated with this publication and there has been no signiﬁ-
cant ﬁnancial support for this work that could have inﬂuenced its
2. Funding Funding was received for this work.
All of the sources of funding for the work described in this
publication are acknowledged below: This research is funded by
Saskatchewan Center for Patient Oriented research (SCPOR)
We conﬁrm that we have given due consideration to the pro-
tection of intellectual property associated with this work and that
there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of
publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we
conﬁrm that we have followed the regulations of our institutions
concerning intellectual property.
Research Ethics
We further conﬁrm that any aspect of the work covered in this
manuscript that has involved human patients has been conducted
with the ethical approval of all relevant bodies and that such ap-
provals are acknowledged within the manuscript.
We conﬁrm that the manuscript has been read and approved
by all named authors.
We conﬁrm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript
has been approved by all named authors.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Vinay Kumar Reddy Chimmula: Conceptualization, Methodol-
ogy, Software, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.
Lei Zhang: Supervision, Writing - review & editing, Data curation.