0270.6474/83/0305-1116$02.OWO
for Neuroscience
The Journal
of Neuroscience
5, pp. 1116-1133
CONNECTIONS
IN CAT VISUAL
D. GILBERT2
Department
of Neurobiology,
Massachusetts
1, 1982; Revised
28, 1982; Accepted
The intrinsic connections of the cortex have long been known to run vertically,
across the cortical
layers. In the present study we have found that individual neurons in the cat primary visual cortex
can communicate over suprisingly long distances horizontally
(up to 4 mm), in directions parallel to
the cortical surface. For all of the cells having widespread projections, the collaterals within their
axonal fields were distributed in repeating clusters, with an average periodicity
of 1 mm. This
pattern of extensive clustered projections has been revealed by combining the techniques of
intracellular
recording and injection of horseradish peroxidase with three-dimensional computer
graphic reconstructions. The clustering pattern was most apparent when the cells were rotated to
present a view parallel to the cortical surface. The pattern was observed in more than half of the
pyramidal and spiny stellate cells in the cortex and was seen in all cortical layers. In our sample,
cells made distant connections within their own layer and/or within another layer. The axon of one
cell had clusters covering the same area in two layers, and the clusters in the deeper layer were
located under those in the upper layer, suggesting a relationship between the clustering phenomenon
and columnar cortical architecture.
Some pyramidal cells did not project into the white matter,
forming intrinsic connections exclusively. Finally, the axonal fields of all our injected cells were
asymmetric, extending for greater distances along one cortical axis than along the orthogonal axis.
The axons appeared to cover areas of cortex representing a larger part of the visual field than that
covered by the excitatory portion of the cell’s own receptive field. These connections may be used
to generate larger receptive fields or to produce the inhibitory flanks in other cells’ receptive fields.
The classical view of cortical connectivity,
from Golgi studies, is that axons run predominantly in a
direction perpendicular to the cortical surface, from layer
to layer, with relatively
little spread in the direction
parallel to the cortical surface .
Physiological studies have supported this view by dem-
onstrating the existence of the cortical column. Within a
column running from the pia to the white matter, all of
the cells have common functional properties, such as
orientation specificity and ocular dominance . This finding was consistent with the Golgi
studies, since one would expect cells with common prop-
erties to be interconnected, whereas cells with different
properties should be relatively independent.
There is evidence, however, that there may be consid-
erably more horizontal interaction within a given cortical
area than is suggested by Golgi studies. The first work to
was supported
by National
Institutes
histology,
cell reconstructions,
for developing
the three-dimensional
correspondence
be addressed
Rockefeller
University,
show this relied on degeneration techniques. From small
lesions within the cortex it was possible to trace degen-
erating fibers over surprisingly long distances, up to 6
mm in certain layers. . However, the degeneration studies could not
differentiate between fibers arising from cells in distant
sites, running within the cortex before giving off termi-
nals, and fibers representing intrinsic cortical connec-
tions. Studies based on tracing techniques using antero-
grade and retrograde transport, which do not suffer from
these limitations, have lent additional support to the
existence of long-range intrinsic connections. Further-
more, the distribution of label resulting from focal injec-
tions within a given cortical area is not uniform but is
patchy in appearance .
It is now possible to examine this phenomenon at the
single-cell level with the techniques of intracellular injec-
tion of horseradish peroxidase (HRP), which provides a
much more complete view of a cell’s axonal arbor than
do Golgi impregnations. These studies have revealed that
afferent fibers from the lateral geniculate nucleus give off
collaterals covering wide areas of cortex, innervating
of Neuroscience
Clustered Intrinsic Connections in Cat Visual Cortex
and LeVay,
1978; Gilbert
and Wiesel,
1979). The cortical
cells them-
selves also project
quite distant
from their own
but still within
the same cortical
and Wiesel,
1979). An intriguing
widespread
connections,
is consistent
the results
from the studies
based on axonal transport,
is not a uniform
distribution
of collaterals
field. Rather,
the collaterals
and Wiesel, 1979)) as are the collaterals
of the thalamic
and LeVay,
1978; Gil-
bert and Wiesel,
1979). While
the clustering
of the tha-
lamic afferents
is responsible
for ocular
umns, the functional
of the clusters
of intrinsic
connections
is not known.
In the present
we have attempted
to examine
this clustering
phenomenon
in greater
detail, making
of three-dimensional
to reconstruct
cells that have been injected
intracellularly
has been presented
in preliminary
and Wiesel,
and Methods
Intracellular
injections
were made in cat striate
to analyze
the patchiness
of intrinsic
connections
at the single-cell
level. To do these
beveled micropipettes
a tip diameter
filled with
in 0.2 M potassium
7.6, were advanced
the cortex.
Cells were
the advancing
Transvertex,
or by passage
of current
Their receptive
field properties
were then characterized.
Once a complete
functional
description
of a cell was
the cell was
passage of pulses of positive
1 to 1.5 nA in a 50-
msec on/50-msec
off duty cycle, for a period ranging from
3 to 5 min. At the end of the experiment
the animal was
2% glutaraldehyde
and its brain was sec-
into lOO-pm sections.
The sections
a combination
of the 3,3’-diaminobenzidine
at acid pH and cobalt inten-
sification
The injected
cells were
reconstructed
in a standard
two-dimensional
representation
using a drawing
a microscope
a x 40 oil planapochromatic
objective.
it is possible
to see the finest
processes,
and boutons
can be seen as distinct
along the course
of the collaterals.
Three-dimensional
reconstructions
a digitizing
(Summagraphics)
and a vector
in conjunction
11/34 computer.
In addition,
we used a microscope
ping motor-driven
attachment
The drawing
tube of the microscope
was pointed
at the graphics
scope, and lines were drawn
on the scope
the aid of the digitizing
This enabled us to
do the reconstructions
the same fashion
two-dimensional
reconstruction,
information
was retained
by recording
the focal position.
The sections
during the dehydration
procedure,
and there is considerably
more shrinkage
along the axis
perpendicular
to the section
than in the plane of
the section
It is therefore
to scale the
reconstructions
to compensate
for this differ-
shrinkage.
after dehydration.
The section
was measured
using the scale on the fine focus of the microscope,
dimensions
along the plane of section
the graticule
on the eyepiece
of the microscope.
Since the sections
on gelatinized
very little
in the plane of sections
2%), but substantial
in the orthogonal
axis (averaging
65%). The computer
reconstruc-
tions presented
in this paper are all scaled by the appro-
priate factors.
The reconstructions
are rotated
to provide
gential to the pial surface.
In one instance
(Fig. 2) the
cortex was curved, so the reconstruction
was flattened
it at one point and rotating
one half to lie in
cell relat-
ing physiology
to the anatomical
of HRP-in-
emphasized
the vertical,
interlaminar
connections.
In the present
we focus on the hori-
distribution
of intrinsic
connections
of cortical
cells and afferents.
We will present
cells from
of the cat visual cortex.
a sample of approx-
175 cells and afferents
that we have characterized
physiologically
and injected
in the cat striate
have reconstructed
55; 47 of these were cortical
cells. The
very long-ranging
connections
(2 mm or more)
be formed by pyramidal
and spiny stellate
cells, of which
we have reconstructed
44. A very striking
characteristic
of these extensive
axonal fields was that the axon collat-
erals, rather
than being uniformly
distributed
throughout
the field, were distributed
in discrete,
We divided
the reconstructed
cells into three cat-
cells forming
long-range
connections,
cells with
unclustered
connections,
and cells that were
insufficiently
to categorize
as clustered
unclustered
(Table I). It should
be noted, however,
even for complete
if the plane
of section
appropriate,
it is quite possible to miss the axon collateral
clustering.
Such was the case for the cell in Figures
three-dimensional
reconstructions
can reliably
information
on the clustering
of the axonal arbor.
Nonetheless,
of the 44 spiny
cells reconstructed
dimensions,
widespread
connections,
of reconstructed
Incomplete
Gilbert and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
11 were not clustered, and 16 were not filled sufficiently
to see the longest collaterals. From the three-dimensional
reconstructions it was apparent that cells forming wide-
spread axonal projections invariably
had their axonal
collaterals distributed in clusters. As shown in Table I,
this phenomenon was exhibited by cells in all layers of
cortex and, taken together, at least half of the pyramidal
and spiny stellate cortical cells form connections of this
type. Of the 11 well filled spiny cells reconstructed three-
dimensionally, all had long-range clustered projections.
The first three cells, shown in Figures 1 to 6, were
found in layer 2+3. A layer 2 pyramidal cell in area 17 is
shown in Figure 1. This cell had a complex receptive
field, 1” x lo in size. From the coronal view, several
discrete clusters of axon collaterals could be observed.
When the axon was flattened (Fig. 2A) and rotated to
obtain a view of the axon projected onto the cortical
surface (Fig. 2B), the pattern was more striking. The
axon had four long arms, each giving off one or more
discrete collateral clusters along their length. Because
some clusters were more clearly separated from their
neighbors than others, it is difficult to be precise about
the number of clusters or the spacing between them. For
this cell approximately six clusters could be seen, and the
average center-to-center
distance between neighboring
clusters was 800 pm. When the axonal boutons were
viewed in isolation, the clustering pattern was somewhat
more evident (Fig. 2C). The axons did not extend equally
in all directions but instead projected for greater dis-
tances along the dorsoventral axis than along the antero-
posterior axis. It is interesting to note that despite the
excellent labeling of this cell, covering a linear distance
of nearly 4 mm, we were unable to find any processes
projecting any deeper than layer 3. This indicates that
the cell, which was located in the layer from which
pyramidal cells project to other cortical areas, did not
itself participate in corticocortical
connections.
A second superficial layer pyramidal cell is shown in
Figures 3 to 5. It had a 3” x 2” complex receptive field,
with a 3:00 orientation.
This cell had a rich collateral
arborization in layer 5, extending into layer 6, as well as
a set of collaterals in layer 2+3 (Fig. 3). It appears from
the reconstruction that there were a number of collaterals
in layer 4, but this was an artifact due to the plane of
sectioning, and these collaterals actually lay in layer 2+3.
After giving off a number of collaterals in layer 5, the
axon entered the white matter and could be followed for
several millimeters within it.
When reconstructed in the coronal plane, no obvious
clustering pattern could be seen, although from the num-
ber of sections involved it was clear that the axon ex-
tended several millimeters along the anteroposterior axis.
However, once the three-dimensional reconstruction of
the axon was rotated about an axis perpendicular to the
cortical surface, it showed clear clustering of collaterals
(Fig. 4b). In this view, one could also see that the collat-
erals in layer 5 covered the same area as those in layer
2+3, that they were also clustered, and that the layer 5
clusters were situated nearly directly under those in layer
2+3. The three-dimensional reconstruction was then sep-
arated into layer 2+3 and layers 5 and 6 projections (the
dividing line (dashed line) is indicated in Fig. 4b), and
each set was rotated to provide a view projected onto the
cortical surface (Fig. 5a is a surface view of the layer 2+3
axon; Fig. 5b is a surface view of the layer 5 axon).
Reconstructions of the axonal boutons (Fig. 5c, layer 2+3
boutons; Fig. 5d, layer 5 boutons) are also presented. All
of these views show the clustering pattern and demon-
strate the similarity between the branching and cluster-
ing pattern in layers 5 and 6 and in layer 2+3. The
spacing between clusters for this cell was approximately
1.3 mm, nearly twice that of the cell shown in Figures 3
A third superficial layer pyramidal cell is shown in
Figure 6. Although we have no three-dimensional recon-
struction of this cell, the clustering pattern is apparent in
the coronal view. It was a complex cell, with a receptive
field 1.5” x 1.5” in size and having an 11:30 orientation.
Its axon projected to layer 5 and to layer 2+3. In addition
to the dense collateral arbor near the dendritic field, the
axon formed two additional discrete clusters at some
distance from the cell body. The total horizontal extent
of the axon was 2 mm.
The clustering pattern was not restricted to superficial
layer cells. An example of a layer 4c spiny stellate cell is
shown in Figure 7. The cell was taken from a monocularly
deprived animal but in many ways, it resembled cells
from normal animals. The field was lo x 1” in size,
oriented at 11:30, and responded only to movement of
the stimulus toward the peripheral visual field. The re-
ceptive field was centered at an elevation of -3.5” and
an azimuth of 4”. Its axon projected to layer 2+3 and
extended for 1% mm in the direction parallel to the
cortical surface. This constitutes the first concrete evi-
dence of a projection from layer 4c to layer 2+3. When
rotated to obtain a surface view (Fig. B), the axon exhibits
several clusters of collaterals. In distinction to the ones
shown previously, these clusters were arranged radially
from the cell body, in three groups. Interestingly,
three clusters were found at 4:00, 7:00, and lO:OO, with
only a rudimentary
projection into the remaining quad-
We reconstructed one layer 5 pyramidal cell that pro-
jected for nearly 4 mm within layer 6. The cell was
complex, with a 2%” X 1%” receptive field, oriented at
lO:OO, centered near the area centralis. It was presented
in a standard two-dimensional reconstruction in a previ-
ous paper . It is illus-
trated here to show its three-dimensional structure (Fig-
ure 9). As seen from the rotated surface view, the axon
extended for 4 mm along the medial bank of the gyrus
and gave off several discrete and tightly bunched clusters
of axon collaterals along its path.
Deep layer cells can have ascending projections as
well, and these projections also have a widespread clus-
tered appearance. A reconstruction of a layer 5 cell with
both ascending and descending projections is shown in
Figure 10. This cell had a complex receptive field, ori-
entation 8:30, directional for stimuli moving downward.
The field was 3” x 2” and was located 5” below and 3”
out from the area centralis. The axon projected both to
layer 6 and to layer 2+3. The portion within layer 6
extended for nearly 3 mm along the medial bank. The
projections to the superficial layers were distributed in
The Journal
of Neuroscience
Connections
in Cat Visual
1. A camera
of a pyramidal
cell in layer 2 of the cat’s striate
cortex which
was injected
intracellularly
with HRP, after its receptive
field properties
were determined.
This cell was a complex
cell, with
a 1” x lo receptive
field. Scale
and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
2. Computer
reconstruction
of the cell shown
1. A, Transverse
view of the axon, which
was straightened
it at the point
by the arrowhead
1. B shows the cell rotated
90” in order to view it projected
a plane parallel
to the cortical
surface. This
illustrates
more clearly
the clustered
of its connections
area 17. C
the axonal
in the same view as in B, further
emphasizing
the clustering
Scale marker
The Journal
of Neuroscience
Connections
in Cat Visual
Figure 3. Reconstruction
of a layer 3 pyramidal
cell. The cell had a complex
field, 3’ x 2’ in size and with
orientation.
Its receptive
field was centered
at an elevation
and an azimuth
of 2’. The axon had extensive
arborizations
both in layer 2-k3 and in layer 5, and then entered
Scale marker = 100 pm.
four distinct clumps, distributed around the crown of the
most of the layer 6 processes are found in the flat part of
gyrus. Because of the curvature
of the cortex in the
the gyrus. This view shows that the overall distribution
region of the labeled processes, it is diffkult
of processes in layer 6 extends for a greater distance in
surface view for all processes in a single rotated view.
the dorsoventral direction than in the anteroposterior
One can therefore get a better feeling for the three-
direction. From the different views of the cell one can
dimensional structure of the cell in a stereoscopic presen-
see that there is clustering of collaterals in both layers
tation (Fig. 10, b and c). The rotated view (Fig. 10d)
and that the layer 6 projection covers a larger part of the
gives an approximate surface projection of the processes cortex than the projection to the superficial layers.
in layer 6 but not of the processes in layer 2+3, because
The most substantial ascending projection in the cor-
4. Computer
reconstruction
of the cell shown in Figure
3. a, The axon shown
in the same view as the reconstruction
3. b, The axon rotated
an axis running
perpendicular
to the cortical
surface, showing
clustering
of the collaterals
layer 2+3 and clusters
in layer 5 lying directly
underneath
them. The dashed
line indicates
the axon was divided
illustrations
5. Scale marker
Figure 5. Surface views of the axon shown
4. The axon has been divided
into the portion
innervating
layer 2+3 and
that innervating
layer 5; then
has been rotated
to present
a view projected
onto a plane
tangential
to the cortical
surface. a, Layer 2+3 axon; b, layer 5 axon; c, layer 2+3 boutons; d, layer 5 boutons.
parts of the axons produce
collaterals
and are similar
in the overall
distribution
and branching
axes are indicated
and apply to a through
Scale marker = 100 pm.
and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
6. Layer 3 pyramidal
cell, in transverse
view. Its receptive
field was complex,
an 11:30 orientation.
The field was
x 1.5’ in size and was centered
at an eccentricity
of 6’ along the horizontal
Scale marker
= 100 ,um.
tex is that from layer 6 to layer 4. An example of a layer
6 pyramidal cell is shown in Figure 11. It was a simple
cell with the long receptive field that is characteristic of
cells in layer 6. The field was 4” long- and 1.5’ wide and
its orientation was 11:30. The cell’s axon projected pre-
dominantly to layer 4, which is characteristic of cells in
this layer . The horizontal extent of the
axon in layer 4 was 2% mm. Although no three-dimen-
sional reconstruction of the cell is available, in this cor-
onal view one can discern clustering of the collateral
The afferents to the cortex from the lateral geniculate
nucleus have a clear clustering of collaterals with a
periodicity
Presumably, these constitute the
morphological substrate of ocular dominance columns
 . One
such afferent is shown in Figure 12. It had a Y-type field,
with a So center, located 12” below and 7’ out from the
area centralis. The axon arborized in layer 4ab (Fig. 12a).
Viewed in the plane of sectioning (Fig. 12a), the axon
seemed to give off collaterals over a distance of 2 mm
without the accustomed gaps for ocular dominance col-
umns serving the opposite eye. However, when it was
rotated 9’ about an axis running perpendicular to the
cortical surface, the presumed ocular dominance pattern
became apparent. This pattern was also visible in a
surface view (Fig. 12c), with two large zones of innerva-
tion separated by a gap of approximately
equal size.
Within each of the innervated zones, particularly the one
The Journal
of Neuroscience
Clustered Intrinsic Connections in Cat Visual Cortex
7. Layer 4c spiny stellate cell, in transverse view. Its receptive field had an 11:30 orientation and it was very directional,
preferring movement to the right. The field was lo X lo in size and was centered at an elevation of -3.5” and an azimuth of 4’.
Scale m&ker
on the left in Figure 12c, one could see another pattern
of clustering at a smaller periodicity, with dense islands
of innervation alternating with areas that were relatively
free of innervation.
In the figure (12~) the arrowheads
point along the axes of some of the collateral clusters,
with the collateral-sparse areas lying between
the arrow-
heads. The spacing between adjacent clusters averaged
90 pm. This pattern was also evident when examining the
axonal boutons (Fig. 12d). Although the pattern is not
evident throughout the axonal field of this afferent, we
have seen it in the axonal fields of three other three-
dimensionally reconstructed axons as well.
Discussion
Intrinsic cortical connections cover large regions within
the cortical area from which they originate. Our findings
demonstrate that individual cortical cells are capable of
forming projections of extraordinary
richness and extent,
and that whenever an axon covers large areas of cortex,
its collaterals are grouped into a number of discrete,
repeating clusters. Furthermore, we find that the overall
distribution of an axonal field tends to be asymmetric,
extending for greater distances along one cortical axis
than another. In area 17 of the cat, intrinsic cortical
connections extended up to 4 mm in directions parallel
to the cortical surface. At first sight this seems to consti-
tute a violation
of the principles of topography. It is
worth considering whether these projections are consist-
ent with what is known about magnification factor, re-
ceptive field scatter, and receptive field size. In other
words, do cells receive input from an area of cortex whose
topographic representation is contained within their re-
ceptive fields or do they receive input from more distant
points? There are two ways of answering this question.
One is to refer to visual field maps and figures for
magnification factor for the striate cortex to determine the visuotopic representation of the
part of cortex covered by a given axon. Another is to
employ a principle established by Hubel and Wiesel
 concerning the relationship between magnification
factor, receptive field size, and receptive field scatter.
They found in the monkey that, because of the scatter in
receptive field positions in area 17, one has to move a
minimum of 2 mm across the cortex (two “hypercol-
umns”) to get to a position where cells’ receptive fields
do not overlap with those at the original position. Using
visual field maps or estimating the numbers of hypercol-
umns traversed, we have found that many of the axons
we have reconstructed overreach the cortical territory
that represents the receptive field area of the cells from
which the axons originate. Individual
axons commonly
cover an area of cortex representing a portion of visual
field that is 2 to 3 times the length of the cell’s own
receptive field. For example, the axon of the cell shown
in Figure 3 covered an area of cortex corresponding to 6”
of visual angle in its longest dimension, which was ap-
proximately twice the length of the cell’s receptive field
and was larger than receptive fields of other cells in that
For the layer 5 cell, the widespread connections formed
by its axon might make sense in view of the receptive
field properties of the layer 6 cells to which it projects.
Layer 6 cells can have very long receptive fields and
might reasonably be expected to collect input from large
areas of cortex in order to form them. With the layer 2+3
cells the explanation is not so obvious. They project to
other cells in the same layer, with comparable receptive
field sizes. These cells, however, possess inhibitory
gions flanking the excitatory
portion of their receptive
fields on their orientation axes as well as on the axes
perpendicular to the orientation axes. The first set of
inhibitory flanks produces the property of end inhibition,
and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
8. Surface view of the axon of the cell shown
7. Cortical
axes are indicated.
Scale marker
and the second produces the property of side-band inhi-
 or disparity
sensitivity
 . By including
the inhibitory regions as part of the total receptive field
rather than the excitatory
region alone, the size of the
receptive field becomes more consistent with the exist-
ence of widespread connections. Thus, even though a
pair of layer 2+3 layer cells can be separated by a
considerable expanse of cortex, the distances involved
could still be consistent with the overlap in their recep-
tive fields when all parts of the fields are taken into
consideration. One may therefore postulate that for some
projections, such as that from layer 5 to layer 6, the effect
is excitatory and results in an increase in the length of
the excitatory
portion of the recipient cell’s receptive
field. For other projections, such as that between super-
ficial layer cells, the net effect could be inhibitory
using inhibitory
neurons as intermediates),
inhibitory
flanks in the recipient cell’s receptive field.
Thus the collateral clusters distant from the cell body
might have a net excitatory
or int1bitor-y effect on the
region of cortex that they innervate, depending on the
cell type contacted, and may be useful for generating a
wide variety of receptive field properties.
In addition to demonstrating that intrinsic cortical
connections can extend for considerable distances, we
have shown that they are asymmetric, extending for
greater distances along one cortical axis than along the
orthogonal axis. Cells’ axonal fields are much more strik-
ingly elongated than their dendritic fields. An obvious
question to ask is whether the orientation
of a cell’s
axonal field is related to the orientation of its receptive
field. One might expect that, for the supposed excitatory
projection from layer 5 to layer 6, the axonal field should
9. Layer 5 pyramidal
cell with extensive
projection
to layer 6. Its receptive
field was complex,
at lO:OO, and 23/4”
X 13/” in size. The field was centered
near the area centralis.
a shows that the axon can be followed
for a considerable
in layer 6. When the axon is rotated
to show a view tangential
to the cortical
surface (b), one can see that the axon’s collaterals
are distributed
in a number
of densely
collaterals.
of the curvature
of the cortex,
the dendrite
is not seen in
surface view at this axis of rotation,
and the apical
in oblique
view. The marker
for cortical
axes applies
Scale marker
and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
10. Computer
reconstruction
of a layer
5 pyramidal
cell. It had a complex
field with
a 2:30 orientation,
directional
for stimuli
The field was 3” x 2’ in size and was centered
at an elevation
and an azimuth
of 4”. a is the reconstruction
of the dendrite,
is represented
schematically
in b. b and c are a stereo pair of the cell’s axon.
The Journal
of Neuroscience
Connections
in Cat Visual
Figure 11. Layer 6 pyramidal
a recurrent
projection
to layer 4. It had a simple
field, oriented
x 1.5” in size. The field was centered
at an elevation
and an azimuth
of 3”. The cell forms an extensive
arbor in layer 4, covering
2 mm of cortex, and within
that arbor
one can discern
clustering
of the collaterals.
Scale marker
be oriented along a visuotopic axis that matches the
fields are oriented predominantly along the dorsoventral
orientation of the receptive field of the cell forming the
axis of the medial bank of the lateral gyrus, which cor-
projection. Although the sample is small, the two layer
responds to a horizontal line in the visual field. Further-
5 cells presented seem to follow this pattern. Both cells
more, the axon of the cell in Figure 10 (with a receptive
have nearly horizontal
receptive fields. Their axonal
field oriented at 8:30), moves slightly anteriorly
The pial surface is indicated
by the bold curved line. Scale marker = 100 pm. The axon formed
a recurrent
projection
2+3 as well as an extensive
projection
to layer 6. There
are several axon collaterals
to layer 2+3, each giving
of collaterals
in that layer, and the clusters
are separated
from one another
by a distance
of approximately
850 pm. d is a
view rotated
the vertical
axis of the view in b. Because
of the curvature
of the cortex, it is a surface view only for the
processes lying along the medial
bank of the gyrus, which
are primarily
those in layer 6. The clusters
in layer 6 are indicated
the number
6, and those in layer 2+3 are indicated
by the number
2. The cortical
axes are indicated.
12. Afferent
axons from the lateral
geniculate
It had a Y-type
field with
a So center. a, Transverse
view in the plane
of section,
distribution,
collaterals
to layer 4ab. b, The axon rotated
axis, revealing
a distribution
of the collaterals
separated’
by a terminal-sparse
zone; these
presumably
correspond
c, The axon rotated
the horizontal
axis, giving a surface view. In
to seeing the coarse clustering
of the collaterals
into ocular
one can see a clustering
This clustering
is particularly
in the oular
on the left and is indicated
arrowheads.
The clustering
is somewhat
more evident
one displays
the boutons
alone, as shown
in d. The bouton-dense
and bouton-sparse
with a spacing of 90 pm. The cortical
axis marker
to c and d. Scale marker
The Journal
of Neuroscience
Connections
in Cat Visual
scans down the medial bank, while the axon of the cell in
Figure 9 (with a receptive field oriented at l&00)
posteriorly, which is what one would expect from the
visuotopic map. However, as will be discussed below,
there are other circumstances in which the visuotopic
representation of the axonal field orientation is orthogo-
nal to the receptive field orientation.
While it is quite possible for these long-ranging con-
nections to produce large receptive fields or inhibitory
flanks, one must be aware of an alternative possibility. It
is possible that there are irregularities in magnification
factor or in the visuotopic map, such that the portion of
the visual field covered by an axon is smaller than pre-
dicted by relatively
coarse mapping experiments. Also,
there may be anisotropies in magnification factor, so that
one cortical axis would have a much smaller magnifica-
tion factor than does the orthogonal axis. This has been
established for ocular dominance columns, where the
magnification factor along a column is half of that across
the column . Since the axons extend
farther in one direction than in another, they could be
oriented along the axis with the smallest magnification
factor (expressed as degrees per millimeter) and conse-
quently could cover an equivalent part of the visual field
along both axes.
To this point we have only considered the overall
distance covered by individual axons. A second issue is
the reason for the clustering of the axon collaterals. Why
would a cell skip over (or make relatively few terminals
in) a nearby region of cortex to communicate with cells
that are more distant? This is probably related to the
fact that cells in the superficial layers are not homoge-
neous in their functional properties or in their extracor-
tical projections. Although
they are complex in their
receptive field type, there are sufficient differences in
receptive field size, degree of end inhibition, and so on to
suggest further functional categories. Also, different pop-
ulations of layer 2+3 cells project to different cortical
areas . It is therefore likely
that interactions occur preferentially between cells shar-
ing some functional property and/or projection target. If
the purpose of the connection were to provide an inhib-
itory side band to a cell’s receptive field, it would be
appropriate that the projection be to cells with the same
orientation specificity, but with adjacent receptive fields.
This would correspond morphologically to an axonal field
having skips (to pass over cells having the wrong orienta-
tion) and projections a hypercolumn or more away (to
get to a new visual field position). The cell shown in
Figure 5 has an axon that is oriented along the antero-
posterior cortical axis, which is along an isoazimuth line
(i.e., parallel to the vertical meridian). It had a horizon-
tally oriented receptive field and, consequently, could
provide inhibitory
side bands for other horizontally
ented cells. Similarly, the cell in Figure 6 appeared to be
oriented along the dorsoventral axis and had a vertically
oriented receptive field, suggesting that it too could pro-
vide side bands to other vertically
oriented cells with
receptive fields displaced horizontally
from its own. In-
terestingly, the layer 2+3 pyramidal cell shown in Figure
5 had clustered projections both to layer 2+3 and to layer
5, and the clusters in layer 5 had the same periodicity
and lay directly under those in layer 2+3. This is sugges-
tive of a relationship between the clustered intrinsic
connections and the cortical columns. Based on the ex-
tracellular tracing studies in the tree shrew , Mitchison and Crick proposed that the
clustering phenomenon may be related to a tendency for
cells to communicate with other cells having the same
orientation specificity, and they postulated the existence
of one population of cells forming clustered connections
running perpendicular to the orientation columns, and
another population of cells forming continuous connec-
tions running along the orientation columns. While our
results suggest that any cell that makes long-range in-
trinsic connections has clustered axon collaterals, this
may be related to the tortuous course of the orientation
columns in the cat.
The geniculate afferent shown in Figure 12 formed
large clusters with a repeat of 700 pm, but within those
clusters one could discern a clustering pattern with a
finer spacing of 90 pm. The larger clustering pattern is
most likely related to the ocular dominance columns, but
the functional correlate of the clustering with finer spac-
ing is a mystery. At antecedent stations in the visual
pathway, the on and off pathways are segregated , leading one to ask whether the segrega-
tion is maintained in the cortex. Since the on- and off-
center afferents of a given type (either X or Y) have
similar laminar distributions, it is possible that the finer
clustering represents an alternation between on-center
and off-center afferents in the plane that is parallel to
the cortical surface. This would enable a stellate cell
lying in layer 4ab or 4c to receive on-input on one set of
dendrites and off-input on another, producing a simple
receptive field with its characteristic on and off subfields.
Thus a single geniculate afferent has terminal clusters at
a low periodicity to produce ocular dominance columns
and could have a superimposed high periodicity cluster-
ing to produce on and off regions. Another clustering
pattern in the geniculocortical projection that may be
related to the one observed here has been described in
the monkey. This projection, from the parvocellular ge-
niculate layers to layer 4A of the cortex, is distributed in
a “honeycomb” pattern . Like
the one described here, its functional significance has not
yet been revealed.
From the intracellular HRP injections we have found
pyramidal cells with no projection into the white matter
despite extensive intrinsic axonal connections. The cell
shown in Figures 1 and 2 is one example, and we have
seen others. The absence of an axon projecting into the
white matter is probably not due to a lack of filling with
the injected HRP. Although no process went deeper than
layer 3, some could be traced for several millimeters from
their origin within the superficial layers. The classical
view is that pyramidal cells are projection neurons . From these studies it was not clear
whether the absence of axons entering the white matter
was due to failure of impregnation.
Our results lend
and Wiesel
Vol. 3, No. 5, May 1983
to the idea that some pyramidal cells participate
in local circuits exclusively.
That intrinsic cortical connections are widespread is
not unexpected in view of the findings of degeneration
et al., 1975; Creutzfeldt
et al., 1977)
of studies
techniques
et al., 1982).
also shown,
on the basis of the projections
the projections
appearance.
The results from the extracellular tracing experiments
our intracellular
are probably
demonstrat-
ing the same phenomenon, although there may be some
discrepancies
sets of findings,
in regard to the horizontal
extent and laminar
distribution
of the clustering.
it is worth
out the similarity
the pattern
of intrinsic
connections
and the pat-
of connections
was first observed
in examining
the distribution
of cells that
give rise to corticocortical
connections
retrograde
cells projecting
distributed
in addition
predominantly
superficial
clustering
pattern has been seen in the monkey as well as in the cat
 . Other studies, which use techniques that trace
connections
anterograde
direction,
a particular
patches of terminals in other cortical areas .
relationship
the intrinsic
projection
established,
but it would
not be surprising
phenomena were related.