Brief Communication
Setting Boundaries: Brain Dynamics of Modal and Amodal
Illusory Shape Completion in Humans
Micah M. Murray,1,2 Deirdre M. Foxe,2 Daniel C. Javitt,2 and John J. Foxe2,3
1The Functional Electrical Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neuropsychology Division and Radiodiagnostic and Interventional Radiology Service, Vaudois
Univerity Hospital Center, Nestle´ Hospital, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland, 2The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience
and Schizophrenia, The Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York 10962, and 3Departments of Neuroscience and
Psychiatry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10462
Normal visual perception requires differentiating foreground from background objects. Differences in physical attributes sometimes
determinethisrelationship.Oftensuchdifferencesmustinsteadbeinferred,aswhentwoobjectsortheirpartshavethesameluminance.
Modal completion refers to such perceptual “filling-in” of object borders that are accompanied by concurrent brightness enhancement,
in turn termed illusory contours (ICs). Amodal completion is filling-in without concurrent brightness enhancement. Presently there are
controversies regarding whether both completion processes use a common neural mechanism and whether perceptual filling-in is a
bottom-up, feedforward process initiating at the lowest levels of the cortical visual pathway or commences at higher-tier regions. We
previously examined modal completion and provided evidence that the earliest modal IC sensitivity occurs within
higher-tier object recognition areas of the lateral occipital complex (LOC). We further proposed that previous observations of IC sensitivity in lower-tier regions likely reflect feedback modulation from the LOC. The present study tested these proposals, examining the
commonality between modal and amodal completion mechanisms with high-density electrical mapping, spatiotemporal topographic
analyses, and the local autoregressive average distributed linear inverse source estimation. A common initial mechanism for both types
of completion processes (140 msec) that manifested as a modulation in response strength within higher-tier visual areas, including the
LOCandparietalstructures,isdemonstrated,whereasdifferentialmechanismswereevidentonlyatasubsequenttimeperiod(240msec),
with amodal completion relying on continued strong responses in these structures.
Key words: illusory contour; visual evoked potential; VEP; event-related potential; ERP; source analysis; binding; figure-ground
segregation
Introduction
Normal visual perception requires discriminating foreground
from background objects. This is sometimes determined from
physical differences (e.g., luminance, color, etc.). Frequently, this
must be inferred, as when two objects or their parts have the same
luminance. Consequently, object borders are perceptually
“filled-in” and hence termed “illusory” (see Fig. 1a). Sometimes
such object borders are perceived above inducing stimuli and
concurrently with a perceived brightness enhancement of the
completed shape to produce illusory contours (modal completion), whereas in other cases they are perceived as lying below
them and not producing a concurrent brightness enhancement
(amodal completion) . The basis for the
modal–amodal nomenclature derives from whether local contrast changes are perceived, and some limit the use of the term
“llusory contour” specifically to the case of modal completion.
Nonetheless, in both cases, forms and their borders are perceived,
with psychophysical evidence indicating equivalent use of perceived borders to complete a discrimination task . More fundamentally, it remains controversial whether
both instances of perceptual filling-in share common spatiotemporal neural mechanisms and whether perceptual completion, in
general, is a bottom-up, feedforward process.
Using animal intracranial microelectrode recordings, Peterhans and von der Heydt and Lee and Nguyen 
found that lower-tier areas V2/V1 show distinct responses to
borders defined modally versus amodally. Neurons responded to
modally completed borders with magnitudes resembling those of
luminance-defined borders; however, responses from these same
neurons were severely diminished by “closed notch” stimuli that
would produce amodal completion . Collectively, these data suggest that lower-tier regions are sensitive to modal but not to amodal completion. Others, using human behavioral measures, similarly conclude that
distinct mechanisms operate for each type of completion process
 .
In contrast, others observed similar responses within macaque
V2/V1 to both modal and amodal shapes .
WethankDenisBrunetforthedevelopmentofCartoolevent-relatedpotentialanalysissoftware,RolandoGravede
PeraltaMenendezandSaraAndinoGonzalezfortheirdevelopmentoftheLAURAinversesolution,BethHigginsfor
technical expertise, and Glenn Wylie for comments on this manuscript.
CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoDr.MicahM.Murray,TheFunctionalElectricalNeuroimagingLaboratory,
Neuropsychology Division and Radiodiagnostic and Interventional Radiology Service, Vaudois University Hospital
Center, Nestle´ Hospital, 5 Avenue Pierre-Decker, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1996-04.2004
Copyright © 2004 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/04/246898-06$15.00/0
6898 • The Journal of Neuroscience, August 4, 2004 • 24(31):6898–6903
2000;Zhouetal.,2000),supportingacommonbottom-upandlowlevel mechanism. Evaluation of response latencies in these areas as
well as V4, however, reveals that V4 showed the earliest selective
response to illusory boundaries . Thus, although
lower-tierregionsmayshowsimilarresponsestomodalandamodal
completion,thismayreflectfeedbackmodulation .
Such does not preclude the possibility of common mechanisms for both completion types within higher-tier regions. Our
previous research examined the mechanisms of modal completion . We observed early
visual evoked potential (VEP) modulation (90 msec) to the
presence versus absence of modally completed shapes that lagged
visual cortical response onset by 40 msec. Likewise, source estimations and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
localized this effect to the lateral occipital complex (LOC) bilaterally . We proposed that the earliest illusory
contour sensitivity occurs within higher-tier visual areas, with
previous observations in V2/V1 likely reflecting LOC feedback
modulation. Here, we further tested this model by comparing
modal and amodal completion mechanisms with high-density
VEP recordings, topographic analyses, and local autoregressive
average (LAURA) source estimations.
Materials and Methods
Subjects. Nine (four female), right-handed neurologically normal, paid
volunteers, age 21–33 years (mean  SD  24.0  4.3) participated. All
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and provided written consent
to the procedures as approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
Nathan S. Kline Institute.
Stimuli and procedure. Kanisza-type stimuli were presented (114 cm distance) while subjects fixated a central cross. These
stimuli were constructed from four “Pacman” inducers oriented to either
form or not form an illusory contour (IC and NC, respectively). Square
and circular shapes were used (maximal width  6.5°; ratio between
physically present border and that induced  40%). Inducers were circular, subtended 2.6° of visual angle in diameter, and appeared gray on a
black background. Stimuli producing amodal completion were identical
to those producing modal completion, except for the inclusion of a gray
outline (1.5 mm thick) encircling the inducers. For circular IC shapes,
inducers appeared along the vertical and horizontal meridians at 3.25°
eccentricity. For square IC shapes, inducers appeared along 45° diagonals
from central fixation at 4.6° eccentricity. Thus there were four stimulus
conditions: modal IC (MIC), modal NC (MNC), amodal IC (AIC), and
amodal NC (ANC) (see Fig. 1a).
Stimuli appeared for 200 msec (randomized 1–2 sec interstimulus
interval; 200 msec steps; blank screen containing only the fixation point).
Subjects indicated the presence or absence of illusory shapes, regardless
of whether they were modally or amodally completed. Subjects had no
difficulty with this task, performing at near ceiling levels. Thus behavioral
data will not be discussed in further detail here. Each subject completed at
least eight 192-trial blocks (mean  SD  10.9  2.4). All stimulus
conditions were equally probable and randomized within a block of trials. Subjects were encouraged to take breaks between blocks to maintain
high concentration and prevent fatigue.
EEG acquisition and analyses. Continuous 128-channel EEG was acquired through Neuroscan Synamps (impedances 5 k), referenced to
the nose, bandpass filtered at 0.05–100 Hz, and digitized at 500 Hz.
Peristimulus epochs of continuous EEG (100 to 500 msec) were averaged from each subject separately for each condition to compute the
VEP. Baseline was defined as the 100 msec prestimulus period. Trials
with blinks or eye movements were rejected off-line, using horizontal
and vertical electro-oculography. An artifact criterion of 60 V was
applied at all other electrodes. The average number of accepted sweeps
per condition was 397  109 (range, 259–679). Data from artifact electrodes from each subject and condition were interpolated according to their digitized electrode positions (Polhemus Fastrak). After this procedure and before group-averaging, each subject’s
data were 40 Hz low-pass filtered, down-sampled to a common 111channel montage, and recalculated against the average reference.
The initial 350 msec of the VEPs from each condition were submitted
to two independent analyses of the electric field at the scalp. The methods
applied here have been described in detail previously . The first was a topographic pattern (i.e., map) analysis. Maps were
compared over time within and between conditions, because topographic changes indicate differences in the active generators of the brain.
This method is independent of the reference electrode and insensitive to
pure amplitude modulations across conditions (topographies of normalized maps are compared). A modified cross-validation criterion determined the number of maps that explained the whole group-averaged
data set . The pattern of maps observed in
the group-averaged data was statistically tested by comparing each of
these maps with the moment-by-moment scalp topography of individual
subjects’ VEPs from each condition. Each time point was labeled according to the map with which it best correlated. This revealed whether a
given experimental condition is described more often by one map versus
another, and therefore whether different generator configurations better
accounted for particular experimental conditions.
The second analysis used the instantaneous global field power (GFP)
for each subject and stimulus condition to identify changes in electric
field strength. GFP is equivalent to the spatial SD of the scalp electric field
 . The observation of a GFP modulation
does not exclude the possibility of a contemporaneous change in the
electric field topography or topographic modulations that nonetheless
yield statistically indistinguishable GFP values; however, observation of a
GFP modulation without simultaneous topographic changes is explained most parsimoniously as amplitude modulation of statistically
indistinguishable generators across experimental conditions. The analysis of a global waveform measure of the VEP was motivated in part by the
desire to minimize observer bias that can follow from analyses restricted
to specific selected electrodes. GFP area measures were calculated (vs the
0 V baseline) and submitted to a two-way repeated measures ANOVA,
using within subjects factors of modal versus amodal inducers and illusory shape presence versus absence.
Finally, we estimated the sources in the brain underlying the VEPs
from each condition, using the LAURA distributed linear inverse solution [for a comparison of
inverse solution methods, see Michel et al. ]. LAURA selects the
source configuration that better mimics the biophysical behavior of electric vector fields (i.e., activity at one point depends on the activity at
neighboring points according to electromagnetic laws). The solution
space was calculated on a realistic head model that included 4024 nodes,
selected from a 6  6  6 mm grid distributed equally within the gray
matter of the Montreal Neurological Institute’s average brain. The results
of the GFP and topographic pattern analyses defined time periods showing effects of contour completion and type of inducer with stable scalp
topographies for which intracranial sources were estimated. We emphasize that these estimations provide visualization, rather than a statistical
analysis, of the likely underlying sources.
As in our previous study , visual inspection
of the group-averaged VEPs revealed a difference between stimulus configurations forming and not forming illusory shapes over
the period encompassing the peak of the N1 component at lateral
posterior scalp sites bilaterally (Fig. 1b). This evidence of illusory
shape sensitivity was observed for both modal and amodal inducer types and was statistically tested using area measurements
over the 140–238 msec period from a set of three lateral posterior
electrodes bilaterally. These values were submitted to a 2 (shape
presence vs absence)  2 (inducer type)  2 hemiscalp  3
electrode ANOVA. Of the main effects, only that of shape presence versus absence was significant (F(1,8)  25.104; p  0.001),
with larger responses for conditions forming illusory shapes.
Murray et al. • Brain Dynamics of Modal and Amodal Completion
J. Neurosci., August 4, 2004 • 24(31):6898–6903 • 6899
There was also a significant interaction between inducer type and
hemiscalp (F(1,8)  9.873; p  0.014), with a greater right versus
left asymmetry for modal than amodal inducer types. Lastly,
there was a significant three-way interaction between shape presence versus absence, inducer type, and hemiscalp (F(1,8) 
10.833; p  0.011). This was caused by a larger left versus right
hemiscalp difference for modal completion and a larger right
versus left hemiscalp difference for amodal completion, although
responses to all stimulus conditions were of larger amplitude over
the right hemiscalp. No other interactions reached our p  0.05
significance criterion.
These effects observed at a local scale (specific electrodes) were
likewise statistically examined at a global scale to identify effects
caused by changes in the underlying brain sources and modulations in response strength. Two analyses of the electric field at the
scalp identified the likely neurophysiological basis of modal and
amodal completion. The first, the spatiotemporal topographic
pattern analysis, provided no indication of distinct maps, and by
extension generators, for any stimulus condition. Rather, VEPs
from all conditions showed the same sequence of scalp topographies. Five different scalp topographies accounted for the collective 350 msec poststimulus periods of all conditions (Fig. 1c).
Different maps were observed over the 0–68, 70–138, 140–238,
240–298, and 300–350 msec periods in each condition and corresponded well with previously described components observed
at the waveform level .
These time periods of stable scalp topography were then used to
define time windows for the GFP analysis, with the rationale that
periods of stable scalp topography are an objective means for
defining VEP components .
Similar to the observations at specific electrodes, a repeated
measures ANOVA using GFP area over the 140–238 msec period
yielded a significant main effect of shape presence versus absence
(F(1,8)  29.800; p  0.001). Neither the main effect of inducer
type nor the interaction between factors reached our significance
criterion. Over the ensuing 240–298 msec period, there was a
main effect of shape presence versus absence (F(1,8)  7.160; p 
0.028) and a significant interaction between factors of shape presence and inducer type (F(1,8)  14.305; p  0.005), indicative of
the larger GFP modulation over this period for amodal versus
modal completion. In contrast, the main effect of inducer type
was not significant. Over the 300–350 msec period, neither main
effect nor their interaction reached our significance criterion. In
addition to GFP area, we likewise tested GFP peak latency over
the 140–238 msec period. Neither main effect nor their interaction reached our significance criterion. Rather, mean peak latency was 184.0  3.9, 183.1  3.9, 186.0  4.0, and 183.8  4.2
msec for the MIC, MNC, AIC, and ANC conditions, respectively.
To this point, analyses at global and local levels revealed sensitivity to the presence versus absence of illusory shapes during
the 140–238 msec period that was independent of the inducer
type used. There was no evidence that this modulation followed
from a change in the scalp topography. Rather, a common stable
scalp topography was observed over this period across all conditions. In contrast, there was a robust GFP modulation, suggestive
of a change in the response magnitude of the same underlying
network of active brain areas. This is in solid agreement with our
previous research comparing illusory and luminance defined
contours . Over the later 240–298 msec period, a different stable scalp topography (vs that over the 140–238
msec period) was observed for all stimulus conditions indicative
of the activity of a distinct brain network; however, there was no
topographic modulation between stimulus conditions, providing
no evidence of distinct brain networks responsive to modal or
amodal completion processes. Rather, there was again a GFP
modulation with the presence versus absence of illusory shapes.
Additionally, responses to amodal completion were of signifi-
a,Examplesofstimulusconfigurationsformingandnotformingmodaloramodal
illusoryshapes.b,Group-averaged(n9)VEPsfromeachstimulusconditionataleftandright
posteriorelectrode.c,Resultsofthespatiotemporaltopographicpatternanalysis.d,Globalfield
powerwaveformsfromeachstimuluscondition,aswellasthecorrespondingbargraphsshowing results of area measures (SEM shown). See Results for full details.
6900 • J. Neurosci., August 4, 2004 • 24(31):6898–6903
Murray et al. • Brain Dynamics of Modal and Amodal Completion
cantly larger amplitude than those to modal completion or either
control condition (Fig. 1). In other words, over this later period
there was brain discrimination of amodal and modal completion
in terms of the strength of responses, rather than in terms of
particular brain areas that were active, with amodal completion
yielding stronger activity.
Source estimations were therefore conducted over this 140–
238 msec period, as well as over the subsequent 240–298 msec
period. We first averaged the VEP for each subject and each experimental condition over each time period. LAURA source estimations were then performed and subsequently averaged across
subjects (Fig. 2). In agreement with the implications of the above
analyses, identical sources were observed across all conditions
that varied in their strength. For the 140–238 msec period,
sources were observed within lateral occipital and posterior parietal cortices for all conditions and were stronger in response to
conditions inducing an illusory shape. For the 240–298 msec
period, sources were again observed for all conditions within
lateral occipital and posterior parietal cortices. Additional
sources were observed within more anterior regions of the left
parietal cortex and left occipitotemporal junction. The most
readily apparent modulations over this later period were those
within the posterior parietal cortex and lateral occipital cortices,
where responses were strongest for amodal completion. Neither
period demonstrated strong sources within regions of the calcarine sulcus (i.e., the locus of areas V1/V2).
Discussion
The present study provides evidence that modal and amodal
completion processes share a common initial spatiotemporal
neural mechanism. Both modal and amodal illusory contour
completion processes manifested as a strength modulation of
statistically indistinguishable generators without evidence of either topographic or latency shifts across conditions. These effects
were first evident over the 140–238 msec period. LAURA source
estimations of the active generators during this initial period of
shape completion were localized to higher-tier visual areas bilaterally, including areas within posterior parietal and lateral occipital cortices. In what follows, we discuss the implications of
these findings on our understanding of perceptual completion
processes.
This study constitutes the first electrophysiological demonstration in humans of common mechanisms for modal and
amodal completion processes. Evidence from humans had been
limited thus far to psychophysical or hemodynamic measures,
which are ill equipped to address temporal dynamics of these
processes, or to the related process of texture segregation (using VEPs). The high temporal resolution of VEPs
is particularly important for determining the commonality of
brain mechanisms. In addition, the current analysis procedure
provided a statistical means for identifying and differentiating
changes in response strength versus scalp topography (genera-
Group-averaged (n  9) LAURA source estimation for each stimulus condition over the 140–238 and 240–298 msec periods.
Murray et al. • Brain Dynamics of Modal and Amodal Completion
J. Neurosci., August 4, 2004 • 24(31):6898–6903 • 6901
tors). These analyses indicate that the earliest detectable sensitivity to illusory shapes, regardless of the inducer type, is attributable
to amplitude modulation of statistically indistinguishable scalp
topographies. That is, the initial illusory shape processes do not
specifically recruit activity in a new area or network, but rather
modulate the responses of areas responding to inducer arrays that
do not produce illusory perceptions [for corroborating fMRI evidence, see Mendola et al. ]. Psychophysical research similarly supports a common boundary completion mechanism,
with discrimination of inducer rotation on the “thin/fat” task
improved by the presence of modal and amodal illusory shapes
 . Although performance differed at short exposure durations , suggestive of differential processing at some stage before response execution, this performance difference is not
forcibly the result of distinct boundary completion mechanisms.
Here, this may be borne out during the 240–298 msec period,
which demonstrated an interaction between inducer type and
illusory shape presence in GFP amplitude but not scalp topography across conditions. One possibility is that amodal completion
may rely more heavily on horizontal and recursive volleys of
activity. In support of this, the source analysis of this time period
shows stronger responses in posterior parietal and lateral occipital cortices to amodal completion than all other stimulus conditions, including modal completion. This posterior parietal locus
is consistent with visuospatial grouping and depth placement
functions , and the timing of
this modulation is consistent with our previous observations suggesting that this time period may reflect more effortful object
recognition processes .
Greater GFP amplitude in response to amodal completion
relative to all other conditions also speaks to the possibility of
selective involvement of V1/V2 in modal completion during this
later period. If this were the case, one strong prediction would be
a topographic shift across conditions, because these areas would
be active for one condition but not others. The present data do
not appear to support this prediction. A second prediction would
be that modal completion would yield the strongest response
magnitude (GFP) over this period, in light of previous results
from nonhuman primates . This was not
the case. Rather, the stimulus configuration leading to amodal completion demonstrated statistically stronger response magnitude.
Given the previous intracranial evidence of completionrelated modulation in areas V1/V2, one might ask whether VEP
measures are simply insensitive to modulations in these areas or
whether activity in such areas might be overshadowed by stronger
responses elsewhere (e.g., the LOC and parieto-occipital areas).
Despite the evidence from nonhuman primates, however, several
recent fMRI investigations of these processes also did not observe
completion-specific modulations within these areas, although
robust V1/V2 responses versus a baseline condition were obtained . Likewise, our previous work on modal
completion did not show completion-specific activity in lowertier areas, whereas clear and robust modulation of early visual
processing was obtained as a function of low-level stimulus features and at latencies preceding those sensitive to perceptual
completion . A recent magnetoencephalography study replicated these results, and in
this study the authors found some later and presumably feedback
modulation in the region of V1/V2, albeit short lived (i.e., 30
msec). These collective results thus favor a feedback interpretation of effects observed in lower-tier areas of nonhuman primates
 . Additional experimentation combining anatomic tracing and lesioning–cooling would be better
able to resolve the role of areas V1/V2 in perceptual completion.
More germane, however, is the fact that the initial sensitivity to
modal and amodal completion appears to share a common neurophysiological mechanism in humans, with differential processing occurring only at later latencies.
In summary, noninvasive electrical neuroimaging in humans
provide an interpretational framework for animal studies. Our
results run counter to predictions based on intracranial results
from nonhuman primates , showing neurons in lower-tier regions
responding to modally but not to amodally completed shapes.
The strong prediction in the extension to humans would be for
topographic–generator differences across stimulus conditions,
with modal completion selectively recruiting lower-tier areas
 . A series of analyses revealed that this was
not the case. Rather, a common initial mechanism for both types
of completion processes is demonstrated (140–238 msec), manifesting as a modulation in response strength within higher-tier
LOC and parietal structures. Differential mechanisms were only
evident later (240–298 msec), with amodal completion relying
on continued strong responses in these structures. The present
results thus provide further support both for a model of illusory
contour sensitivity that initiates within higher-tier visual areas, as
well as for the interpretation of effects seen in lower-tier areas
V1/V2 as reflecting feedback modulation.