Generating Classiﬁcation Weights with GNN Denoising Autoencoders for
Few-Shot Learning
Spyros Gidaris1,2 and Nikos Komodakis1
1University Paris-Est, LIGM, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
Given an initial recognition model already trained on
a set of base classes, the goal of this work is to develop a
meta-model for few-shot learning. The meta-model, given
as input some novel classes with few training examples per
class, must properly adapt the existing recognition model
into a new model that can correctly classify in a uniﬁed
way both the novel and the base classes. To accomplish
this goal it must learn to output the appropriate classiﬁcation weight vectors for those two types of classes. To
build our meta-model we make use of two main innovations: we propose the use of a Denoising Autoencoder network (DAE) that (during training) takes as input a set of
classiﬁcation weights corrupted with Gaussian noise and
learns to reconstruct the target-discriminative classiﬁcation
weights. In this case, the injected noise on the classiﬁcation
weights serves the role of regularizing the weight generating meta-model. Furthermore, in order to capture the
co-dependencies between different classes in a given task
instance of our meta-model, we propose to implement the
DAE model as a Graph Neural Network (GNN). In order
to verify the efﬁcacy of our approach, we extensively evaluate it on ImageNet based few-shot benchmarks and we report strong results that surpass prior approaches. The code
and models of our paper will be published on: https:
//github.com/gidariss/wDAE_GNN_FewShot
1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep learning has achieved impressive results on various visual understanding tasks, such
as image classiﬁcation , object detection ,
or semantic segmentation . However, their success heavily relies on the ability to apply gradient based optimization
routines, which are computationally expensive, and having
access to a large dataset of training data, which often is
very difﬁcult to acquire. For example, in the case of image
classiﬁcation, it is required to have available thousands or
hundreds of training examples per class and the optimization
routines consume hundreds of GPU days. Moreover, the set
of classes that a deep learning based model can recognize
remains ﬁxed after its training. In case new classes need to
be recognized, then it is typically required to collect thousands / hundreds of training examples for each of them, and
re-train or ﬁne-tune the model on those new classes. Even
worse, this latter training stage would lead the model to “forget” the initial classes on which it was trained. In contrast,
humans can rapidly learn a novel visual concept from only
one or a few examples and reliably recognize it later on.
The ability of fast knowledge acquisition is assumed to be
related with a meta-learning process in the human brain that
exploits past experiences about the world when learning a
new visual concept. Even more, humans do not forget past
visual concepts when learning a new one. Mimicking that
behavior with machines is a challenging research problem,
with many practical advantages, and is also the topic of this
Research on this subject is usually termed few-shot object
recognition. More speciﬁcally, few-shot object recognition
methods tackle the problem of learning to recognize a set
of classes given access to only a few training examples for
each of them. In order to compensate for the scarcity of
training data they employ meta-learning strategies that learn
how to efﬁciently recognize a set of classes with few training data by being trained on a distribution of such few-shot
tasks (formed from the dataset available during training)
that are similar (but not the same) to the few-shot tasks
encountered at test time . Few-shot learning is also
related to transfer learning since the learned meta-models
solve a new task by exploiting the knowledge previously
acquired by solving a different set of similar tasks. There
is a broad class of few-shot learning approaches, including,
among many, metric-learning-based approaches that learn a
distance metric between a test example and the training ex-
 
amples , methods that learn to map a test
example to a class label by accessing memory modules that
store the training examples of that task ,
approaches that learn how to generate model parameters for
the new classes given access to the few available training
data of them , gradient descent-based approaches that learn how to rapidly adapt a model
to a given few-shot recognition task via a small number of
gradient descent iterations, and training data hallucination
methods that learn how to hallucinate more examples of a class given access to its few training data.
Our approach.
In our work we are interested in learning
a meta-model that is associated with a recognition model
already trained on set of classes (these will be denoted as
base classes hereafter). Our goal is to train this meta-model
so as to learn to adapt the above recognition model to a set
of novel classes, for which there are only very few training
data available (e.g., one or ﬁve examples), while at the same
time maintaining the recognition performance on the base
classes. Note that, with few exceptions ,
most prior work on few-shot learning neglects to fulﬁll the
second requirement. In order to accomplish this goal we
follow the general paradigm of model parameter generation
from few-data . More speciﬁcally, we assume
that the recognition model has two distinctive components,
a feature extractor network, which (given as input an image)
computes a feature representation, and a feature classiﬁer,
which (given as input the feature representation of an image)
classiﬁes it to one of the available classes by applying a set
of classiﬁcation weight vectors (one per class) to the input
feature. In this context, in order to be able to recognize novel
classes one must be able to generate classiﬁcation weight
vectors for them. So, the goal of our work is to learn a metamodel that fulﬁlls exactly this task: i.e., given a set of novel
classes with few training examples for each of them, as well
as the classiﬁcation weights of the base classes, it learns to
output a new set of classiﬁcation weight vectors (both for
the base and novel classes) that can then be used from the
feature classiﬁer in order to classify in a uniﬁed way both
types of classes.
DAE based model parameters generation.
Learning to
perform such a meta-learning task, i.e., inferring the classiﬁcation weights of a set of classes, is a difﬁcult meta-problem
that requires plenty of training data in order to be reliably
solved. However, having access to such a large pool of data
is not always possible; or otherwise stated the training data
available for learning such meta-tasks might never be enough.
In order to overcome this issue we build our meta-model
based on a Denoising Autoencoder network (DAE). During
training, this DAE network takes as input a set of classiﬁcation weights corrupted with additive Gaussian noise, and is
SEA ENTITIES
Scuba Diver
Coral reef
WILD-CAT ANIMALS
Figure 1: Some classes (e.g., wild-cat animals, birds, or sea creatures) are semantically or visually similar. Thus it is reasonable
to assume that there are correlations between their classiﬁcation
weight vectors that could be exploited in order to reconstruct a
more discriminative classiﬁcation weight vector for each of them.
trained to reconstruct the target-discriminative classiﬁcation
weights. The injected noise on the inputs of our DAE-based
parameter generation meta-model helps in the regularization
of the learning procedure thus allowing us to avoid the danger
of overﬁtting on the training data. Furthermore, thanks to the
theoretical interpretation of DAEs provided in , our DAEbased meta-model is able to approximate gradients of the
log of conditional distribution of the classiﬁcation weights
given the available training data by computing the difference
between the input weights and the reconstructed weights .
Thus, starting by an initial (but not very accurate) estimate of
classiﬁcation weights, our meta-model is able to perform gradient ascents step(s) that will move the classiﬁcation weights
towards more likely conﬁgurations (when conditioned on
the given training data). In order to properly apply the DAE
framework in the context of few-shot learning, we also adapt
it so as to follow the episodic formulation typically
used in few-shot learning. This further improves the performance of the parameters generation meta-task by forcing it
to reconstruct more discriminative classiﬁcation weights.
Building the model parameters DAE as a Graph Neural Network.
Reconstructing classiﬁcation weights conditioned only on a few training data, e.g., one training example
per class, is an ill-deﬁned task for which it is crucial to exploit as much of the available information on the training
data of base and novel classes as possible. In our context,
one way to achieve that is by allowing the DAE model to
learn the structure of the entire set of classiﬁcation weights
that has to reconstruct on each instance (i.e., episode) of that
task. We believe that such an approach is more principled
and can reconstruct more distriminative classiﬁcation weight
vectors than reconstructing the classiﬁcation weight of each
class independently. For example, considering that some of
the classes (among the classes whose classiﬁcation weight
vectors must be reconstructed by the DAE model in a given
task instance) are semantically or visually similar, such as
different species of birds or see creatures (see Figure 1), it
would make sense to assume that there are correlations to
their classiﬁcation weight vectors that could be exploited
in order to reconstruct a more discriminative classiﬁcation
weight vector for each of them. In order to capture such
co-dependencies between different classes (in a given task
instance of our meta-model), we implement the DAE model
as a Graph Neural Network (GNN). This is a family of deep
learning networks designed to process an unordered set of
entities (in our case a set of classes) associated with a graph
G such that they take into account their inter-entity relationships (in our case inter-class relationships) when making
predictions about them (for a recent survey on models and applications of deep learning on graphs
see also Bronstein et al. ).
Related to our work, Gidaris and Komodakis also tried
to capture such class dependencies in the context of fewshot learning, by predicting the classiﬁcation weight of each
novel class as a mixture of the base classiﬁcation weights
through an attention mechanism. In contrast to them, we
consider the dependencies that exist between all the classes,
both novel and base (and not of a novel class with the base
ones as in ) and try to capture them in a more principled
way through GNN architectures, which are more expressive
compared to the simple attention mechanism proposed in .
Graph Neural Networks have been also used in the context of
few-shot learning by Garcia and Juan . However, in their
work, they give as input to the GNN the labeled training
examples and the unlabeled test examples of a few-shot
problem and they train it to predict the label of the test
examples. Differently from them, in our work we provide as
input to the GNN some initial estimates of the classiﬁcation
weights of the classes that we want to learn and we train them
to reconstruct more discriminative classiﬁcation weights.
Finally, Graph Neural Networks have been applied on a
different but related problem, that of zero-shot learning , for regressing classiﬁcation weights. However, in this
line of work they apply the GNNs to knowledge graphs
provided by external sources (e.g., word-entity hierarchies)
while the input that is given to the GNN for a novel class is its
word-embedding. Differently from them, in our formulation
we do not consider any side-information (i.e., knowledge
graphs or word-embeddings), which makes our approach
more agnostic to the domain of problems that can solve and
the existence of such knowledge graphs.
To sum up, our contributions are, (1) the application of
Denoising Autoencoders in the context of few-shot learning,
(2) the use of Graph Neural Network architectures for the
classiﬁcation weight generation task, and (3) performing
detailed experimental evaluation of our model on ImageNet-
FS and MiniImageNet datasets and achieving
state-of-the-art results on ImageNet-FS, MiniImageNet, and
tiered-MiniImageNet datasets.
In the following sections, we describe our classiﬁcation
weights generation methodology in §2, we provide experimental results in §3, and ﬁnally we conclude in §4.
2. Methodology
We deﬁne as C(F(·|θ)|w) a recognition model, where
F(·|θ) is the feature extractor part of the network with parameters θ, and C(·|w) is the feature classiﬁcation part with
parameters w.
The parameters w of the classiﬁer consists of N classiﬁcation weight vectors, w = {wi}N
where N is the number of classes that the network can
recognize, and wi ∈Rd is the d-dimensional classiﬁcation weight vector of the i-th class. Given an image x,
the feature extractor will output a d-dimensional feature
z = F(x|θ) and then the classiﬁer will compute the classi-
ﬁcation scores [s1, ..., sN] = [z⊺w1, ..., z⊺wN] := C(z|w)
of the N classes. In our work we use cosine similarity-based
feature classiﬁers 1 that have been shown to exhibit
better performance when transferred to a few-shot recognition task and to be more appropriate for performing uniﬁed
recognition of both base and novel classes. Therefore, for
the above formulation to be valid, we assume that the features z of the feature extractor and the classiﬁcation weights
wi ∈w of the classiﬁer are already L2 normalized.
Following the formulation of Gidaris and Komodakis ,
we assume that the recognition network has already been
trained to recognize a set of Nbs base classes using a training
tr. The classiﬁcation weight vectors that correspond to
those Nbs classes are deﬁned as wbs = {wbs
i=1. Our goal
is to learn a parameter-generating function g(·|φ) that, given
as input the classiﬁcation weights wbs of the base classes,
and a few training data Dnv
= SNbs+Nnv
i=Nbs+1 {xk,i}K
Nnv novel classes, it will be able to output a new set of
classiﬁcation weight vectors
w = {wi}N=Nbs+Nnv
tr , wbs|φ)
for both the base and the novel classes, where K is the number of training examples per novel class, xk,i is the k-th
training example of i-th novel, N = Nbs + Nnv is the total
number of classes, and φ are the learnable parameters of the
weight generating function. This new set of classiﬁcation
weights w will be used from the classiﬁer C(·|w) for recognizing from now on in a uniﬁed way both the base and the
novel classes.
1This practically means that the features z and the classiﬁcation weights
wi ∈w are L2 normalized
Figure 2: Given a few training data of some novel classes, our meta-model adapts an existing recognition model such that it can classify
in a unied way both novel and base classes by generating classication weights for both types of classes. We learn to perform this task by
employing a Denoising Autoencoders (DAE) for classication weight vectors. Speciﬁcally, given some initial estimate of classication weights
injected with additive Gaussian noise, the DAE is trained to reconstruct target-discriminative classiﬁcation weights, where the injected noise
serves the role of regularizing the weight generation meta-model. Furthermore, in order to capture co-dependencies between different classes
(in a given task instance of our meta-model), we implement the DAE model by use of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) architecture.
The parameter-generating function consists of a Denoising Autoencoder for classiﬁcation weight vectors implemented with a Graph Neural Network (see Figure 2 for an
overview). In the remainder of this section we will describe
in more detail how exactly we implement this parametergenerating function.
2.1. Denoising Autoencoders for model parameters
generation
In our work we perform the task of generating classiﬁcation weights by employing a Denoising Autoencoder (DAE)
for classiﬁcation weight vectors. The injected noise on the
classiﬁcation weights that the DAE framework prescribes
serves the role of regularizing the weights generation model
g(·|φ) and thus (as we will see in the experimental section)
boost its performance. Furthermore, the DAE formulation
allows to perform the weights generation task as that of (iteratively) reﬁning some initial (but not very accurate) estimates
of the weights in a way that moves them to more probable
conﬁgurations (when conditioned on the available training
data). Note that the learnable parameters φ in g(·|φ) refer
to the learnable parameters of the employed DAE model.
In the remainder of this section will brieﬂy provide some
preliminaries about DAE models and then explain how they
are being used in our case.
Preliminaries about DAE.
Denoising autoencoders are
neural networks that, given inputs corrupted by noise, are
trained to reconstruct “clean” versions of them. By being
trained on this task they learn the structure of the data to
which they are applied. It has been shown that a DAE
model, when trained on inputs corrupted with additive Gaussian noise, can estimate the gradient of the energy function
of the density p(w) of its inputs w:
σ2 · (r(w) −w) ,
where σ2 is the amount of Gaussian noise injected during
training, and r(·) is the autoencoder. The approximation becomes exact as σ →0, and the autoencoder is given enough
capacity and training examples. The direction (r(w) −w)
points towards more likely conﬁgurations of w. Therefore,
the DAE learns a vector ﬁeld pointing towards the manifold where the input data lies. Those theoretical results are
independent of the parametrization of the autoencoder.
Applying DAE for classiﬁcation weight generation.
our case we are interested in learning a DAE model that,
given an initial estimate of the classiﬁcation weight vectors
w, would provide a vector ﬁeld that points towards more
probable conﬁgurations of w conditioned on the training
data Dtr = {Dnv
tr}. Therefore, we are interested in a
DAE model that learns to estimate:
∂log p(w|Dtr)
σ2 · (r(w) −w) ,
where p(w|Dtr) is the conditional distribution of w given
Dtr, and r(w) is a DAE for the classiﬁcation weights.
So, after having trained our DAE model for the classiﬁcation weights, r(w), we can perform gradient ascent in
log p(w|Dtr) in order to (iteratively) reach a mode of the
estimated conditional distribution p(w|Dtr):
w ←w +ϵ· ∂log p(w|Dtr)
= w +ϵ·(r(w)−w) , (4)
where ϵ is the gradient ascent step size.
Classifier
Test example
Train examples
of novel classes
Autoencoder
Base class
Reconstructed
weights r (w)
w ←w+ε(r (w)−w)
Classifier
Test example
Base & novel
class weights
Adapted recognition model for base & novel classes
Existing recognition model for base classes
Meta-model: adapts the recognition model to recognize both base and novel classes
Classification scores
of base & novel classes
Classification scores
of base classes
Figure 3: Overview of how our meta-model (bottom) is applied at test time in order to properly adapt an existing recognition model (top-left)
into a new model (top-right) that can classify in a uniﬁed way both novel and base classes (where only a few training data are provided at
test time for the novel classes).
The above iterative inference mechanism of the classiﬁcation weights requires to have available an initial estimate
of them. This initial estimate is produced using the training
tr of the novel classes and the existing classiﬁcation
weights wbs = {wbs
i=1 of the base classes. Speciﬁcally,
for the base classes we build this initial estimate by using
the classiﬁcation weights already available in wbs and for
the novel classes by averaging for each of them the feature
vectors of their few training examples:
if i is a base class
k=1 F(xk,i|θ),
where xk,i is the k-th training example of the novel class i.
summarize,
generation
tr , wbs|φ) is implemented by ﬁrst producing an initial
estimate of the new classiﬁcation weights by applying
equation (5) (for which it uses Dnv
tr , and wbs ) and then
reﬁning those initial estimates by applying the weight update
rule of equation (4) using the classiﬁcation weights DAE
model r(w) (see an overview of this procedure in Figure 3).
Episodic training of classiﬁcation weights DAE model.
For training, the DAE framework prescribes to apply Gaussian noise on some target weights and then train the DAE
model r(·) to reconstruct them. However, in our case, it
is more effective to follow a training procedure that more
closely mimics how the DAE model would be used during test time.
Therefore, we propose to train the DAE
model using a learning procedure that is based on training
episodes . More speciﬁcally, during training we form
training episodes by sampling ˜Nnv “fake” novel classes
from the available Nbs classes in the training data Dbs
and use the remaining ˜Nbs = Nbs −˜Nnv classes as base
ones. We call the sampled novel classes “fake” because
they actually belong to the set of base classes but during
this training episode are treated as being novel. So, for each
“fake” novel class we sample K training examples forming
a training set for the “fake” novel classes of this training
episode. We also sample M training examples both from
the “fake” novel and the remaining base classes forming
the validation set Dval = {(xm, ym)}M
m=1 of this training
episode, where (xm, ym) is the image xm and the label ym
of the m-th validation example. Then, we produce an initial estimate ˜w of the classiﬁcation weights of the sampled
classes (both “fake” novel and base) using the mechanics
of equation (5), and we inject to it Gaussian additive noise
˜w = {˜wi + ε}
, where ε ∼N(0, σ). We give
˜w as input to the DAE model in order to output the reconstructed weights ˆw = {ˆwi} ˜
i=1. Having computed ˆw we
apply to them a squared reconstruction loss of the target
weights w∗= {w∗i} ˜
i=1 and a classiﬁcation loss of the M
validation examples of this training episode:
loss(xm, ym| ˆw) ,
where loss(xm, ym|ˆw) = −z⊺
m ˆwym + log(P ˜
is the cross entropy loss of the m-th validation example
and zm = F(xm|θ) is the feature vector of the m-th example. Note that the target weights w∗are the corresponding
base class weight vectors already learned by the recognition
2.2. Graph Neural Network based Denoising Autoencoder
Here we describe how we implement our DAE model.
Reconstructing the classiﬁcation weights of the novel classes,
for which training data are scarce, is an ill-deﬁned problem.
One way to boost DAE’s reconstruction performance is by
allowing it to take into account the inter-class relationships
when reconstructing the classiﬁcation weights of a set of
classes. Given the unordered nature in a set of classes, we
chose to implement the DAE model by use of a Graph Neural
Network (GNN). In the remainder of this subsection we
describe how we employed a GNN for the reconstruction
task and what type of GNN architecture we used.
GNNs are multi-layer networks that operate on graphs
G = (V, E) by structuring their computations according to
the graph connectivity. i.e., at each GNN layer the feature
responses of a node are computed based on the neighboring
nodes deﬁned by the adjacency graph (see Figure 4a for
an illustration). In our case, we associate the set of classes
i=1 (for which we want to reconstruct their classiﬁcation weights) with a graph G = (V, E), where each node
vi ∈V corresponds to the class i in Y (either base or novel).
To deﬁne the set of edges (i, j) ∈E of the graph, we connect
each class i with its J2 closest classes in terms of the cosinesimilarity of the initial estimates of their classiﬁcation weight
vectors (before the injection of the Gaussian noise). The edge
strength aij ∈ of each edge (i, j) ∈E is computed by
applying the softmax operation over the cosine similarities
scores of its neighbors N(i) = {j, ∀(i, j) ∈E}, thus forcing P
j∈N(i) aij = 13. We deﬁne as h(l) = {h(l)
set of feature vectors that represent the N graph nodes (i.e.,
the N classes) at the l-th level of the GNN. In this case, the
input set h(0) to the GNN is the set of classiﬁcation weight
vectors w = {wi}N
i=1 = h(0) that the GNN model will
reﬁne. Each GNN layer, receives as input the set h(l) and
outputs a new set h(l+1) as:
N(i) = AGGREGATE
j , ∀j ∈N(i)}
where AGGREGATE(·) is a parametric function that for each
node i aggregates information from its node neighbors N(i)
to generate the message feature h(l)
N(i), and UPDATE(·, ·) is
a parametric function that for each node i will get as input
the features h(l)
N(i) and will compute the new feature
vector h(l+1)
of that node.
2In our experiments we use J = 10 classes as neighbors.
3For this softmax operation we used an inverse temperature value of 5.
AGGREGATION
Aggregated
neighboring
Input state
Output state
Graph G = (V, E)
Graph Neural Network Layer
(a) The general architecture of a GNN layer.
Aggregated
neighboring
Input state
Output state
Graph Neural Network Layer with RelationNet based Aggregation Function
Linear Layer +
Activation function
RelationNet based
AGGREGATION FUNCTION
UPDATE FUNCTION
PAIRWISE FUNCTION q(. , .)
Activation
(b) The architecture of the hidden GNN layers in our work.
Figure 4: (a) A GNN layer typically consists of two functions, an
aggregation function that, for a node of interest (e.g., node A in the
ﬁgure), aggregates information from its neighboring nodes, and an
update function that updates the state (i.e., the features) of that node
by taking into account both the state of that node and the aggregated
information from its neighborhood. (b) The GNN layer architecture
that we use in our work implements the aggregation function as
a small Relation-Net network . The two linear layers in the
pairwise function q(·, ·) are the same (i.e., share parameters).
Relation-Net based aggregation function.
Generally,
the aggregation function is implemented as linear combination of message vectors received from the node neighbors:
aij · q(l) 
where q(l) 
is a function that computes the message vector that node i receives from its neighbor j. Inspired
by relation networks , we implement q(l) 
a non-linear parametric function of the feature vectors of
both the sender and the receiver nodes. Speciﬁcally, given
the two input vectors, q(l) forwards each of them through
the same fully connected linear layer, adds their outputs, and
then applies BatchNorm + Dropout + LeakyReLU units (see
Figure 4b). Note that in this implementation the message
between two nodes, is independent of the direction of the
message, i.e., q(l) 
Update function.
The update function of the hidden GNN
layers is implemented as:
i ; u(l) h
where [ααα;βββ] is the concatenation of vectors ααα and βββ, and
u(l)(·) is a non-linear parametric function that, given as input
a vector, forwards it through a fully connected linear layer
followed by BatchNorm + Dropout + LeakyReLU + L2normalization units (see Figure 4b). For the last prediction
GNN layer, the update function is implemented as:
δwi, oi = u(L−1) h
where u(L−1)(·) is a non-linear parametric function that,
given an input vector, outputs the two d-dimensional vectors
δwi and oi. u(L−1)(·) is implemented as a fully connected
linear layer followed by a L2-normalization unit for the δwi
output, and a Sigmoid unit for the oi output. The ﬁnal output
of the GNN is computed with the following operation:
ˆwi = wi + oi ⊙δwi.
As can be seen, we opted for residual-like predictions of the
new classiﬁcation weights ˆwi, since this type of operations
are more appropriate for the type of reﬁning/denoising that
must be performed by our DAE model. Our particular implementation uses the gating vectors oi to control the amount
of contribution of the residuals δwi to the input weights wi.
We named this GNN based DAE model for weights reconstruction wDAE-GNN model. Alternatively, we also
explored a simpler DAE model that is implemented to reconstruct each classiﬁcation weight vector (in a given task
instance of our meta-model) independently with a MLP network (wDAE-MLP model). More speciﬁcally, the wDAE-
MLP model is implemented with layers similar to those of
the GNN that only include the update function part and not
the aggregation function part. So, it only includes fully
connected layers and the skip connections (i.e., 2nd and 3rd
boxes in update function part of Figure 4b).
3. Experimental Evaluation
In this section we ﬁrst compare our method against prior
work in §3.2 and then in §3.3 we perform a detailed experimental analysis of it.
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics.
We evaluate our approach on three datasets, ImageNet-FS , MiniImageNet , and tiered-MiniImageNet . ImageNet-FS
is a few-shot benchmark created by splitting the ImageNet
classses into 389 base classes and 611 novel classes;
193 of the base classes and 300 of the novel classes are used
for validation and the remaining 196 base classes and 311
novel classes are used for testing. In this benchmark the models are evaluated based on (1) the recognition performance of
the 311 test novel classes (i.e., 311-way classiﬁcation task),
and (2) recognition of all the 507 classes (i.e., both the 196
test base classes and the 311 novel classes; for more details
we refer to ). We report result for K = 1, 2, 5, 10,
or 20 training examples per novel class. For each of those
K-shot settings we sample 100 test episodes (where each
episode consists of sampling K training examples per novel
class and then evaluating on the validation set of ImageNet)
and compute the mean accuracies over all episodes. Mini-
ImageNet consists of 100 classes randomly picked from the
ImageNet with 600 images per class. Those 100 classes
are divided into 64 base classes, 16 validation novel classes,
and 20 test novel classes. The images in MiniImageNet
have size 84 × 84 pixels. tiered-MiniImageNet consists of
ImageNet 608 classes divided into 351 base classes, 97 validation novel classes, and 160 novel test classes. In total there
are 779, 165 images again with size 84 × 84. In MiniImageNet and tiered-MiniImageNet, the models are evaluated
on several 5-way classiﬁcation tasks (i.e., test episodes) created by ﬁrst randomly sampling 5 novel classes from the
available test novel classes, and then K = 1, or 5 training
examples and M = 15 test examples per novel class. To
report results we use 20000 such test episodes and compute
the mean accuracies over all episodes. Note that when learning the novel classes we also feed the base classes to our
wDAE-GNN models in order to take into account the class
dependencies between the novel and base classes.
3.1. Implementation details
Feature extractor architectures.
For the ImageNet-FS
experiments we use a ResNet-10 architecture that given
images of size 224 × 224 outputs 512-dimensional feature
vectors. For the MiniImageNet and tiered-MiniImageNet
experiments we used a 2-layer Wide Residual Network 
(WRN-28-10) that receives images of size 80 × 80 (resized
form 84 × 84) and outputs 640-dimensional feature vectors.
wDAE-GNN and wDAE-MLP architectures.
In all our
experiments we use a wDAE-GNN architecture with two
GNN layers. In ImageNet-FS (MiniImageNet) the q(l)(·, ·)
parametric function of all GNN layers and the u(l)(·) parametric function of the hidden GNN layer output features
of 1024 (320) channels. All dropout units have 0.7 (0.95)
dropout ratio, and the σ of the Gaussian noise in DAE is
0.08 (0.1). A similar architecture is used in wDAE-MLP but
without the aggregation function parts.
For training we use SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9
and weight decay 5e −4. We train our models only on the
1-shot setting and then use them for all the K-shot settings.
During test time we apply only 1 reﬁnement step of the
initial estimates of the classiﬁcation weights (i.e., only 1
application of the update rule (4)). In ImageNet-FS the step
size ε of the update rule (4) is set to 1.0, 1.0, 0.6, 0.4, and
0.2 for the K = 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 shot settings respectively.
In MiniImageNet ε is set to 1.0 and 0.5 for the K = 1 and
K = 5 settings respectively. All hyper-parameters were
Novel classes
All classes
Prior work
Prototypical-Nets (from )
54.4 66.3 71.2 73.9
61.0 69.7 72.9 74.6
Matching Networks (from )
54.0 66.0 72.5 76.9
61.0 69.0 73.7 76.5
Logistic regression 
51.1 64.8 71.6 76.6
49.9 64.2 71.9 76.9
Logistic regression w/ H 
50.8 62.0 69.3 76.5
59.4 67.6 72.8 76.9
SGM w/ H 
62.1 71.3 75.8 78.1
Batch SGM 
60.5 71.4 75.8 78.5
Prototype Matching Nets w/ H 
57.8 69.0 74.3 77.4
64.7 71.9 75.2 77.5
57.5 69.2 74.8 78.1
65.2 72.7 76.5 78.7
59.7 70.3 75.0 77.8
66.3 73.2 76.1 77.5
59.2 70.0 74.8 77.7
66.1 72.9 75.8 77.4
Ablation study on wDAE-GNN
Initial estimates
56.9 68.9 74.5 77.7
64.3 72.3 75.6 77.3
wDAE-GNN - No Noise
59.0 70.0 74.9 77.8
66.0 72.9 75.8 77.4
wDAE-GNN - Noisy Targets as Input
59.4 70.1 74.8 77.7
66.0 73.1 76.0 77.5
wDAE-GNN - No Cls. Loss
59.1 69.8 74.6 77.6
65.5 72.7 75.8 77.5
wDAE-GNN - No Rec. Loss
59.4 70.1 75.0 77.8
66.0 73.1 76.1 77.6
Table 1: Top-5 accuracies on the novel and on all classes for the ImageNet-FS benchmark . To report results we use 100 test episodes.
For all our models the 95% conﬁdence intervals on the K = 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 settings are (around) ±0.21, ±0.15, ±0.08, ±0.06, and
±0.05 respectively for Novel classes and ±0.13, ±0.10, ±0.05, ±0.04, and ±0.03 for All classes.
cross-validated in the validation splits of the datasets.
We provide the implementation code at https://
github.com/gidariss/wDAE_GNN_FewShot
3.2. Comparison with prior work
Here we compare our wDAE-GNN and wDAE-MLP models against prior work on the ImageNet-FS, MiniImageNet,
and tiered-MiniImageNet datasets. More speciﬁcally, on
ImageNet-FS (see Table 1) the proposed models achieve
in most cases superior performance than prior methods especially on the challenging and interesting scenarios of
having less than 5 training examples per novel class (i.e.,
K ≤5). For example, the wDAE-GNN model improves the
1-shot accuracy for novel classes of the previous state-ofthe-art by around 1.8 accuracy points. On MiniImageNet
and tiered-MiniImageNet (see Tables 2 and 4 respectively)
the proposed models surpass the previous methods on all
settings and achieve new state-of-the-art results. Also, for
MiniImageNet we provide in Table 3 the classiﬁcation accuracies of both the novel and base classes and we compare
with the LwoF prior work. Again, we observe that our
models surpass the prior work.
3.3. Analysis of our method
Ablation study of DAE framework.
Here we perform ablation study of various aspects of our DAE framework on the
ImageNet and the MiniImageNet datasets (see corresponding results on Tables 1 and 2). Speciﬁcally, we examine the
cases of (1) training the reconstruction models without noise
(entries with sufﬁx No Noise), (2) during training providing
as input to the model noisy versions of the target classiﬁcation weights that has to reconstruct (entries with sufﬁx Noisy
Targets as Input), (3) training the models without classiﬁcation loss on the validation examples (i.e., using only the
ﬁrst term of the loss (6); entries with sufﬁx No Cls. Loss),
and (4) training the models with only the classiﬁcation loss
on the validation examples and without the reconstruction
loss (i.e., using only the second term of the loss (6); entries
with sufﬁx No Rec. Loss). (5) We also provide the recognition performance of the initial estimates of the classiﬁcation
weight vectors without being reﬁned by our DAE models
(entries Initial Estimates). We observe that each of those
ablations to our DAE models lead to worse few-shot recognition performance. Among them, the models trained without
noise on theirs inputs achieves the worst performance, which
demonstrates the necessity of the DAE formulation.
Impact of GNN architecture.
By comparing the classi-
ﬁcation performance of the wDAE-GNN models with the
wDAE-MLP models in Tables 1 and 2, we observe that indeed, taking into account the inter-class dependencies with
the proposed GNN architecture is beneﬁcial to the few-shot
recognition performance. Speciﬁcally, the GNN architecture
offers a small (e.g., around 0.40 percentage points in the
1-shot case) but consistent improvement that according to
the conﬁdences intervals of Tables 1 and 2 is in almost all
cases statistically signiﬁcant.
Prior work
48.70 ± 1.84%
63.10 ± 0.92%
Prototypical Nets 
49.42 ± 0.78%
68.20 ± 0.66%
56.20 ± 0.86%
72.81 ± 0.62%
RelationNet 
50.40 ± 0.80%
65.30 ± 0.70%
48.70 ± 0.60%
65.50 ± 0.60%
Conv-4-512
51.20 ± 0.60%
68.20 ± 0.60%
TADAM 
58.50 ± 0.30%
76.70 ± 0.30%
Munkhdalai et al. 
57.10 ± 0.70%
70.04 ± 0.63%
SNAIL 
55.71 ± 0.99%
68.88 ± 0.92%
Qiao et al. †
59.60 ± 0.41%
73.74 ± 0.19%
61.76 ± 0.08%
77.59 ± 0.12%
LwoF (our implementation)
60.06 ± 0.14%
76.39 ± 0.11%
61.07 ± 0.15%
76.75 ± 0.11%
60.61 ± 0.15%
76.56 ± 0.11%
62.96 ± 0.15%
78.85 ± 0.10%
62.67 ± 0.15%
78.70 ± 0.10%
Ablation study on wDAE-GNN
Initial estimate
59.68 ± 0.14%
76.48 ± 0.11%
wDAE-GNN - No Noise
60.29 ± 0.14%
76.49 ± 0.11%
wDAE-GNN - Noisy Targets as Input
60.92 ± 0.15%
76.69 ± 0.11%
wDAE-GNN - No Cls. Loss
60.96 ± 0.15%
76.75 ± 0.11%
wDAE-GNN - No Rec. Loss
60.76 ± 0.15%
76.64 ± 0.11%
Ablation study on wDAE-MLP
wDAE-MLP - No Noise
60.16 ± 0.15%
76.50 ± 0.11%
wDAE-MLP - Noisy Targets as Input
60.43 ± 0.15%
76.49 ± 0.11%
wDAE-MLP - No Cls. Loss
60.55 ± 0.15%
76.62 ± 0.11%
wDAE-MLP - No Rec. Loss
60.45 ± 0.15%
76.50 ± 0.11%
Table 2: Top-1 accuracies on the novel classes of MiniImageNet
test set with 95% conﬁdence intervals. †: using also the validation
classes for training.
Novel classes
All classes
60.03 ± 0.14%
76.35 ± 0.11%
55.70 ± 0.08%
66.27± 0.07%
61.07 ± 0.15%
76.75 ± 0.11%
56.55 ± 0.08%
67.00 ± 0.07%
60.61 ± 0.14%
76.56 ± 0.11%
56.07 ± 0.08%
67.05 ± 0.07%
Table 3: Top-1 accuracies on the novel and on all classes of Mini-
ImageNet test set with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
MAML (from )
51.67 ± 1.81%
70.30 ± 0.08%
Prototypical Nets 
53.31 ± 0.89%
72.69 ± 0.74 %
RelationNet (from )
54.48 ± 0.93%
71.32 ± 0.78%
Liu et al. 
57.41 ± 0.94%
71.55 ± 0.74
66.33 ± 0.05%
81.44 ± 0.09 %
LwoF (our implementation)
67.92 ± 0.16%
83.10 ± 0.12%
wDAE-GNN (Ours)
68.18 ± 0.16%
83.09 ± 0.12%
Top-1 accuracies on the novel classes of tiered-
MiniImageNet test set with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
4. Conclusion
We proposed a meta-model for few-shot learning that
takes as input a set of novel classes (with few training examples for each of them) and then generates classiﬁcation
weight vectors for them. Our model is based on the use
of a Denoising Autoencoder (DAE) network. During training, the injected noise on the classiﬁcation weights given as
input to the DAE network allows the regularization of the
learning procedure and helps in boosting the performance
of the meta-model. After training, the DAE model is used
for reﬁning an initial set of classiﬁcation weights with the
goal of making them more discriminative with respect to
the classiﬁcation task at hand. We implemented the above
DAE model by use of a Graph Neural Network architecture
so as to allow our meta-model to properly learn (and take
advantage of) the structure of the entire set of classiﬁcation
weights that must be reconstructed on each instance (i.e.,
episode) of the meta-learning task. Our detailed experiments
on the ImageNet-FS and MiniImageNet datasets reveal (1) the signiﬁcance of our DAE formulation for training
meta-models capable to generate classiﬁcation weights, and
(2) that the GNN architecture manages to offer a consistent
improvement on the few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy. Finally, our model surpassed prior methods on all the explored
5. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Martin Simonovsky and Shell Xu
for fruitful discussions and Thibault Groueix for helping to
write the paper.