Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 484–494,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Neural Summarization by Extracting Sentences and Words
Jianpeng Cheng
Mirella Lapata
ILCC, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB
 
 
Traditional
approaches
extractive
summarization rely heavily on humanengineered features.
In this work we
propose a data-driven approach based on
neural networks and continuous sentence
We develop a general framework for single-document summarization
composed of a hierarchical document
encoder and an attention-based extractor.
This architecture allows us to develop
different classes of summarization models
which can extract sentences or words. We
train our models on large scale corpora
containing
document-summary pairs1. Experimental
results on two summarization datasets
demonstrate that our models obtain results
comparable to the state of the art without
any access to linguistic annotation.
Introduction
The need to access and digest large amounts of
textual data has provided strong impetus to develop automatic summarization systems aiming to
create shorter versions of one or more documents,
whilst preserving their information content. Much
effort in automatic summarization has been devoted to sentence extraction, where a summary is
created by identifying and subsequently concatenating the most salient text units in a document.
extractive
sentences based on human-engineered features.
These include surface features such as sentence
position and length , the words
in the title, the presence of proper nouns, content
features such as word frequency , and event features such as action nouns . Sentences are
1Resources are available for download at http://
homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s1537177/resources.html
typically assigned a score indicating the strength
of presence of these features.
Several methods
have been used in order to select the summary sentences ranging from binary classiﬁers , to hidden Markov models , graph-based algorithms , and integer linear programming .
In this work we propose a data-driven approach
to summarization based on neural networks and
continuous sentence features. There has been a
surge of interest recently in repurposing sequence
transduction neural network architectures for NLP
tasks such as machine translation , question answering , and sentence compression . Central to these approaches is an encoderdecoder architecture modeled by recurrent neural networks. The encoder reads the source sequence into a list of continuous-space representations from which the decoder generates the target
sequence. An attention mechanism is often used to locate the region of focus
during decoding.
We develop a general framework for singledocument summarization which can be used to
extract sentences or words. Our model includes
a neural network-based hierarchical document
reader or encoder and an attention-based content
extractor. The role of the reader is to derive the
meaning representation of a document based on its
sentences and their constituent words. Our models
adopt a variant of neural attention to extract sentences or words. Contrary to previous work where
attention is an intermediate step used to blend hidden units of an encoder to a vector propagating additional information to the decoder, our model applies attention directly to select sentences or words
of the input document as the output summary.
Similar neural attention architectures have been
previously used for geometry reasoning , under the name Pointer Networks.
One stumbling block to applying neural network models to extractive summarization is the
lack of training data, i.e., documents with sentences (and words) labeled as summary-worthy.
Inspired by previous work on summarization
 
and reading comprehension we retrieve hundreds of thousands of news
articles and corresponding highlights from the
DailyMail website. Highlights usually appear as
bullet points giving a brief overview of the information contained in the article (see Figure 1 for
an example). Using a number of transformation
and scoring algorithms, we are able to match highlights to document content and construct two large
scale training datasets, one for sentence extraction
and the other for word extraction. Previous approaches have used small scale training data in the
range of a few hundred examples.
Our work touches on several strands of research
within summarization and neural sequence modeling. The idea of creating a summary by extracting
words from the source document was pioneered in
Banko et al. who view summarization as a
problem analogous to statistical machine translation and generate headlines using statistical models for selecting and ordering the summary words.
Our word-based model is similar in spirit, however, it operates over continuous representations,
produces multi-sentence output, and jointly selects summary words and organizes them into sentences.
A few recent studies perform sentence extraction based on pre-trained sentence embeddings
following an unsupervised optimization paradigm.
Our work also uses continuous representations to
express the meaning of sentences and documents,
but importantly employs neural networks more directly to perform the actual summarization task.
Rush et al. propose a neural attention
model for abstractive sentence compression which
is trained on pairs of headlines and ﬁrst sentences
in an article. In contrast, our model summarizes
documents rather than individual sentences, producing multi-sentential discourse. A major architectural difference is that our decoder selects output symbols from the document of interest rather
than the entire vocabulary. This effectively helps
us sidestep the difﬁculty of searching for the next
output symbol under a large vocabulary, with lowfrequency words and named entities whose representations can be challenging to learn. Gu et
al. and Gulcehre et al. propose a
similar “copy” mechanism in sentence compression and other tasks; their model can accommodate both generation and extraction by selecting
which sub-sequences in the input sequence to copy
in the output.
We evaluate our models both automatically (in
terms of ROUGE) and by humans on two datasets:
the benchmark DUC 2002 document summarization corpus and our own DailyMail news highlights corpus.
Experimental results show that
our summarizers achieve performance comparable to state-of-the-art systems employing handengineered features and sophisticated linguistic
constraints.
Problem Formulation
In this section we formally deﬁne the summarization tasks considered in this paper. Given a document D consisting of a sequence of sentences
{s1,··· ,sm} and a word set {w1,··· ,wn}, we are
interested in obtaining summaries at two levels of
granularity, namely sentences and words.
Sentence extraction aims to create a summary from D by selecting a subset of j sentences
(where j < m). We do this by scoring each sentence within D and predicting a label yL ∈{0,1}
indicating whether the sentence should be included in the summary. As we apply supervised
training, the objective is to maximize the likelihood of all sentence labels yL = (y1
the input document D and model parameters θ:
log p(yL|D;θ) =
Although extractive methods yield naturally
grammatical summaries and require relatively
little linguistic analysis, the selected sentences
make for long summaries containing much redundant information.
For this reason, we also develop a model based on word extraction which
seeks to ﬁnd a subset of words2 in D and
their optimal ordering so as to form a summary
i ∈D. Compared to sentence
extraction which is a sequence labeling problem,
this task occupies the middle ground between
full abstractive summarization which can exhibit
a wide range of rewrite operations and extractive
2The vocabulary can also be extended to include a small
set of commonly-used (high-frequency) words.
AFL star blames vomiting cat for speeding
Adelaide::::::
Crows:::::::::
defender ::::::
Daniel:::::
his:::::::
driving::::::::
license, ::::::
telling::a :::::
was ::::::::
limit::::::::
because ::he::::
was:::::::::
distracted:::
The 22-year-old AFL star, who drove 96km/h in a 60km/h road works zone on the South Eastern
expressway in February, said he didn’t see the reduced speed sign because he was so distracted by his
cat vomiting violently in the back seat of his car.
the :::::::::
Adelaide :::::::::::
magistrates :::::
on::::::::::::
Wednesday,::::::::::
Magistrate:::::
Bob:::::::
Harrap::::::
ﬁned :::::
Talia::::::
exceeding:::
speed ::::
than::::::::
He lost four demerit points, instead of seven, because of his signiﬁcant training commitments.
• Adelaide Crows defender Daniel Talia admits to speeding but says he didn’t see road signs because his cat was vomiting in his car.
• 22-year-old Talia was ﬁned $824 and four demerit points, instead of seven, because of his ’significant’ training commitments.
Figure 1: DailyMail news article with highlights. Underlined sentences bear label 1, and 0 otherwise.
summarization which exhibits none. We formulate word extraction as a language generation task
with an output vocabulary restricted to the original
document. In our supervised setting, the training
goal is to maximize the likelihood of the generated
sentences, which can be further decomposed by
enforcing conditional dependencies among their
constituent words:
log p(ys|D;θ)=
In the following section, we discuss the data elicitation methods which allow us to train neural networks based on the above deﬁned objectives.
Training Data for Summarization
Data-driven neural summarization models require
a large training corpus of documents with labels
indicating which sentences (or words) should be
in the summary.
Until now such corpora have
been limited to hundreds of examples and thus used mostly for testing . To overcome the paucity of
annotated data for training, we adopt a methodology similar to Hermann et al. and create
two large-scale datasets, one for sentence extraction and another one for word extraction.
In a nutshell, we retrieved3 hundreds of thousands of news articles and their corresponding
highlights from DailyMail (see Figure 1 for an example). The highlights (created by news editors)
3The script for constructing our datasets is modiﬁed from
the one released in Hermann et al. .
are genuinely abstractive summaries and therefore
not readily suited to supervised training. To create the training data for sentence extraction, we
reverse approximated the gold standard label of
each document sentence given the summary based
on their semantic correspondence . Speciﬁcally, we designed a rulebased system that determines whether a document
sentence matches a highlight and should be labeled with 1 (must be in the summary), and 0 otherwise. The rules take into account the position
of the sentence in the document, the unigram and
bigram overlap between document sentences and
highlights, the number of entities appearing in the
highlight and in the document sentence. We adjusted the weights of the rules on 9,000 documents
with manual sentence labels created by Woodsend
and Lapata . The method obtained an accuracy of 85% when evaluated on a held-out set of
216 documents coming from the same dataset and
was subsequently used to label 200K documents.
Approximately 30% of the sentences in each document were deemed summary-worthy.
For the creation of the word extraction dataset,
we examine the lexical overlap between the highlights and the news article. In cases where all highlight words (after stemming) come from the original document, the document-highlight pair constitutes a valid training example and is added to
the word extraction dataset. For out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) words, we try to ﬁnd a semantically equivalent replacement present in the news article.
Speciﬁcally, we check if a neighbor, represented
by pre-trained4 embeddings, is in the original document and therefore constitutes a valid substitution. If we cannot ﬁnd any substitutes, we discard
the document-highlight pair. Following this procedure, we obtained a word extraction dataset containing 170K articles, again from the DailyMail.
Neural Summarization Model
The key components of our summarization model
include a neural network-based hierarchical document reader and an attention-based hierarchical
content extractor. The hierarchical nature of our
model reﬂects the intuition that documents are
generated compositionally from words, sentences,
paragraphs, or even larger units. We therefore employ a representation framework which reﬂects the
same architecture, with global information being
discovered and local information being preserved.
Such a representation yields minimum information loss and is ﬂexible allowing us to apply neural
attention for selecting salient sentences and words
within a larger context. In the following, we ﬁrst
describe the document reader, and then present the
details of our sentence and word extractors.
Document Reader
The role of the reader is to derive the meaning representation of the document from its constituent
sentences, each of which is treated as a sequence
of words. We ﬁrst obtain representation vectors
at the sentence level using a single-layer convolutional neural network (CNN) with a max-overtime pooling operation . Next, we build representations for documents using a standard recurrent neural network
(RNN) that recursively composes sentences. The
CNN operates at the word level, leading to the
acquisition of sentence-level representations that
are then used as inputs to the RNN that acquires
document-level representations, in a hierarchical
fashion. We describe these two sub-components
of the text reader below.
Convolutional Sentence Encoder
We opted for
a convolutional neural network model for representing sentences for two reasons. Firstly, singlelayer CNNs can be trained effectively (without
any long-term dependencies in the model) and
secondly, they have been successfully used for
300-dimensional GoogleNews vectors.
sentence-level classiﬁcation tasks such as sentiment analysis .
Let d denote the
dimension of word embeddings, and s a document sentence consisting of a sequence of n words
(w1,··· ,wn) which can be represented by a dense
column matrix W ∈Rn×d.
We apply a temporal narrow convolution between W and a kernel
K ∈Rc×d of width c as follows:
j = tanh(W j:j+c−1 ⊗K+b)
where ⊗equates to the Hadamard Product followed by a sum over all elements. fi
j denotes the
j-th element of the i-th feature map fi and b is the
bias. We perform max pooling over time to obtain
a single feature (the ith feature) representing the
sentence under the kernel K with width c:
si,K = max
In practice, we use multiple feature maps to
compute a list of features that match the dimensionality of a sentence under each kernel width. In
addition, we apply multiple kernels with different
widths to obtain a set of different sentence vectors.
Finally, we sum these sentence vectors to obtain
the ﬁnal sentence representation. The CNN model
is schematically illustrated in Figure 2 (bottom).
In the example, the sentence embeddings have six
dimensions, so six feature maps are used under
each kernel width. The blue feature maps have
width two and the red feature maps have width
three. The sentence embeddings obtained under
each kernel width are summed to get the ﬁnal sentence representation (denoted by green).
Recurrent Document Encoder
At the document level, a recurrent neural network composes a
sequence of sentence vectors into a document vector. Note that this is a somewhat simplistic attempt
at capturing document organization at the level of
sentence to sentence transitions. One might view
the hidden states of the recurrent neural network
as a list of partial representations with each focusing mostly on the corresponding input sentence
given the previous context. These representations
altogether constitute the document representation,
which captures local and global sentential information with minimum compression.
The RNN we used has a Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) activation unit for ameliorating the vanishing gradient problem when training long sequences (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
A recurrent convolutional document
reader with a neural sentence extractor.
Given a document d = (s1,··· ,sm), the
hidden state at time step t, denoted by ht, is updated as:
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 +it ⊙ˆct
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
where W is a learnable weight matrix. Next, we
discuss a special attention mechanism for extracting sentences and words given the recurrent document encoder just described, starting from the sentence extractor.
Sentence Extractor
In the standard neural sequence-to-sequence modeling paradigm , an attention mechanism is used as an intermediate step
to decide which input region to focus on in order
to generate the next output. In contrast, our sentence extractor applies attention to directly extract
salient sentences after reading them.
The extractor is another recurrent neural network that labels sentences sequentially, taking into
account not only whether they are individually
relevant but also mutually redundant. The complete architecture for the document encoder and
the sentence extractor is shown in Figure 2. As
can be seen, the next labeling decision is made
Figure 3: Neural attention mechanism for word
extraction.
with both the encoded document and the previously labeled sentences in mind. Given encoder
hidden states (h1,··· ,hm) and extractor hidden
states (¯h1,··· , ¯hm) at time step t, the decoder attends the t-th sentence by relating its current decoding state to the corresponding encoding state:
¯ht = LSTM(pt−1st−1, ¯ht−1)
p(yL(t) = 1|D) = σ(MLP(¯ht : ht))
where MLP is a multi-layer neural network with as
input the concatenation of ¯ht and ht. pt−1 represents the degree to which the extractor believes the
previous sentence should be extracted and memorized (pt−1=1 if the system is certain; 0 otherwise).
In practice, there is a discrepancy between training and testing such a model.
During training
we know the true label pt−1 of the previous sentence, whereas at test time pt−1 is unknown and
has to be predicted by the model. The discrepancy can lead to quickly accumulating prediction
errors, especially when mistakes are made early in
the sequence labeling process. To mitigate this,
we adopt a curriculum learning strategy : at the beginning of training when
pt−1 cannot be predicted accurately, we set it to
the true label of the previous sentence; as training
goes on, we gradually shift its value to the predicted label p(yL(t −1) = 1|d).
Word Extractor
Compared to sentence extraction which is a purely
sequence labeling task, word extraction is closer
to a generation task where relevant content must
be selected and then rendered ﬂuently and grammatically. A small extension to the structure of
the sequential labeling model makes it suitable
for generation: instead of predicting a label for
the next sentence at each time step, the model directly outputs the next word in the summary. The
model uses a hierarchical attention architecture:
at time step t, the decoder softly5 attends each
document sentence and subsequently attends each
word in the document and computes the probability of the next word to be included in the summary
t = wi|d,w′
t−1) with a softmax classi-
¯ht = LSTM(w′t−1, ¯ht−1)6
j = zT tanh(We ¯ht +Wrh j),hj ∈D
j = softmax(at
i = vT tanh(We′ ˜ht +Wr′wi),wi ∈D
t = wi|D,w′
t−1) = softmax . A simpler alternative which we adopt is to use n-gram features
collected from the document to rerank candidate
summaries obtained via beam decoding. We incorporate the features in a log-linear reranker whose
feature weights are optimized with minimum error
rate training .
Experimental Setup
In this section we present our experimental setup
for assessing the performance of our summarization models.
We discuss the datasets used for
5A simpler model would use hard attention to select a sentence ﬁrst and then a few words from it as a summary, but this
would render the system non-differentiable for training. Although hard attention can be trained with the REINFORCE
algorithm , it requires sampling of discrete
actions and could lead to high variance.
6We empirically found that feeding the previous sentencelevel attention vector as additional input to the LSTM would
lead to small performance improvements. This is not shown
in the equation.
training and evaluation, give implementation details, brieﬂy introduce comparison models, and explain how system output was evaluated.
We trained our sentence- and wordbased summarization models on the two datasets
created from DailyMail news. Each dataset was
split into approximately 90% for training, 5% for
validation, and 5% for testing. We evaluated the
models on the DUC-2002 single document summarization task. In total, there are 567 documents
belonging to 59 different clusters of various news
topics. Each document is associated with two versions of 100-word7 manual summaries produced
by human annotators. We also evaluated our models on 500 articles from the DailyMail test set
(with the human authored highlights as goldstandard). We sampled article-highlight pairs so that
the highlights include a minimum of 3 sentences.
The average byte count for each document is 278.
Implementation Details
We trained our models with Adam with initial learning rate 0.001. The two momentum parameters were set to 0.99 and 0.999 respectively.
We performed mini-batch training with a batch
size of 20 documents. All input documents were
padded to the same length with an additional mask
variable storing the real length for each document.
The size of word, sentence, and document embeddings were set to 150, 300, and 750, respectively. For the convolutional sentence model, we
followed Kim et al. 8 and used a list of kernel sizes {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}. For the recurrent document model and the sentence extractor, we used
as regularization dropout with probability 0.5 on
the LSTM input-to-hidden layers and the scoring
layer. The depth of each LSTM module was 1.
All LSTM parameters were randomly initialized
over a uniform distribution within [-0.05, 0.05].
The word vectors were initialized with 150 dimensional pre-trained embeddings.9
Proper nouns pose a problem for embeddingbased approaches, especially when these are rare
7According
guidelines
//www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/duc/guidelines/
2002.html, the generated summary should be within 100
8The CNN-LSTM architecture is publicly available at
 
9We used the word2vec skip-gram
model with context window size 6, negative sampling size 10
and hierarchical softmax 1. The model was trained on the
Google 1-billion word benchmark .
or unknown (e.g., at test time). Rush et al. 
address this issue by adding a new set of features
and a log-linear model component to their system. As our model enjoys the advantage of generation by extraction, we can force the model to inspect the context surrounding an entity and its relative position in the sentence in order to discover
extractive patterns, placing less emphasis on the
meaning representation of the entity itself. Specifically, we perform named entity recognition with
the package provided by Hermann et al. 
and maintain a set of randomly initialized entity
embeddings. During training, the index of the entities is permuted to introduce some noise but also
robustness in the data. A similar data augmentation approach has been used for reading comprehension .
A common problem with extractive methods
based on sentence labeling is that there is no constraint on the number of sentences being selected
at test time. We address this by reranking the positively labeled sentences with the probability scores
obtained from the softmax layer (rather than the
label itself). In other words, we are more interested in is the relative ranking of each sentence
rather than their exact scores. This suggests that
an alternative to training the network would be to
employ a ranking-based objective or a learning to
rank algorithm. However, we leave this to future
work. We use the three sentences with the highest
scores as the summary (also subject to the word or
byte limit of the evaluation protocol).
Another issue relates to the word extraction
model which is challenging to batch since each
document possesses a distinct vocabulary.
sidestep this during training by performing negative sampling which trims
the vocabulary of different documents to the same
length. At each decoding step the model is trained
to differentiate the true target word from 20 noise
samples. At test time we still loop through the
words in the input document (and a stop-word list)
to decide which word to output next.
System Comparisons
We compared the output
of our models to various summarization methods. These included the standard baseline of simply selecting the “leading” three sentences from
each document as the summary.
We also built
a sentence extraction baseline classiﬁer using logistic regression and human engineered features.
The classiﬁer was trained on the same datasets
as our neural network models with the following features: sentence length, sentence position,
number of entities in the sentence, sentence-tosentence cohesion, and sentence-to-document relevance. Sentence-to-sentence cohesion was computed by calculating for every document sentence
its embedding similarity with every other sentence
in the same document. The feature was the normalized sum of these similarity scores. Sentence
embeddings were obtained by averaging the constituent word embeddings. Sentence-to-document
relevance was computed similarly. We calculated
for each sentence its embedding similarity with the
document (represented as bag-of-words), and normalized the score. The word embeddings used in
this baseline are the same as the pre-trained ones
used for our neural models.
In addition, we included a neural abstractive
summarization baseline. This system has a similar
architecture to our word extraction model except
that it uses an open vocabulary during decoding.
It can also be viewed as a hierarchical documentlevel extension of the abstractive sentence summarizer proposed by Rush et al. . We trained
this model with negative sampling to avoid the excessive computation of the normalization constant.
Finally, we compared our models to three previously published systems which have shown competitive performance on the DUC2002 single document summarization task. The ﬁrst approach is
the phrase-based extraction model of Woodsend
and Lapata . Their system learns to produce
highlights from parsed input (phrase structure
trees and dependency graphs); it selects salient
phrases and recombines them subject to length,
coverage, and grammar constraints enforced via
integer linear programming (ILP). Like ours, this
model is trained on document-highlight pairs, and
produces telegraphic-style bullet points rather than
full-blown summaries.
The other two systems,
TGRAPH and URANK , produce more typical summaries and represent the state of the art. TGRAPH is a graph-based
sentence extraction model, where the graph is constructed from topic models and the optimization
is performed by constrained ILP. URANK adopts a
uniﬁed ranking system for both single- and multidocument summarization.
Evaluation
We evaluated the quality of the
summaries automatically using ROUGE . We report unigram and bigram over-
Table 1: ROUGE evaluation (%) on the DUC-2002
and 500 samples from the DailyMail.
lap (ROUGE-1,2) as a means of assessing informativeness and the longest common subsequence
(ROUGE-L) as a means of assessing ﬂuency.
In addition, we evaluated the generated summaries by eliciting human judgments for 20 randomly sampled DUC 2002 test documents. Participants were presented with a news article and
summaries generated by a list of systems. These
include two neural network systems (sentenceand word-based extraction), the neural abstractive system described earlier, the lead baseline, the
phrase-based ILP model10 of Woodsend and Lapata , and the human authored summary.
Subjects were asked to rank the summaries from
best to worst (with ties allowed) in order of informativeness (does the summary capture important information in the article?) and ﬂuency (is the
summary written in well-formed English?). We
elicited human judgments using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing platform.
Participants (self-reported native English speakers) saw
2 random articles per session. We collected 5 responses per document.
Table 1 (top half) summarizes our results on the
DUC 2002 test dataset using ROUGE.
represents our neural sentence extraction model,
10We are grateful to Kristian Woodsend for giving us access to the output of his system. Unfortunately, we do not
have access to the output of TGRAPH or URANK for inclusion
in the human evaluation.
Table 2: Rankings (shown as proportions) and
mean ranks given to systems by human participants (lower is better).
NN-WE our word extraction model, and NN-ABS
the neural abstractive baseline. The table also includes results for the LEAD baseline, the logistic
regression classiﬁer (LREG), and three previously
published systems (ILP, TGRAPH, and URANK).
The NN-SE outperforms the LEAD and LREG
baselines with a signiﬁcant margin, while performing slightly better than the ILP model. This
is an encouraging result since our model has
only access to embedding features obtained from
In comparison, LREG uses a set of
manually selected features, while the ILP system
takes advantage of syntactic information and extracts summaries subject to well-engineered linguistic constraints, which are not available to our
models. Overall, our sentence extraction model
achieves performance comparable to the state of
the art without sophisticated constraint optimization (ILP, TGRAPH) or sentence ranking mechanisms (URANK).
We visualize the sentence
weights of the NN-SE model in the top half of Figure 4. As can be seen, the model is able to locate
text portions which contribute most to the overall
meaning of the document.
ROUGE scores for the word extraction model
are less promising.
This is somewhat expected
given that ROUGE is n-gram based and not very
well suited to measuring summaries which contain
a signiﬁcant amount of paraphrasing and may deviate from the reference even though they express
similar meaning.
However, a meaningful comparison can be carried out between NN-WE and
NN-ABS which are similar in spirit. We observe
that NN-WE consistently outperforms the purely
abstractive model.
As NN-WE generates summaries by picking words from the original document, decoding is easier for this model compared
to NN-ABS which deals with an open vocabulary.
The extraction-based generation approach is more
robust for proper nouns and rare words, which
pose a serious problem to open vocabulary mod-
sentence extraction:
a gang of at least three people poured gasoline on a car that stopped to ﬁll up at entity5 gas station early on Saturday morning and set the vehicle on ﬁre
a gang of at least three people poured gasoline on a car that stopped to ﬁll up at entity5 gas station early on Saturday morning and set the vehicle on ﬁre
the driver of the car, who has not been identiﬁed, said he got into an argument with the suspects while he was pumping gas at a entity13 in entity14
the driver of the car, who has not been identiﬁed, said he got into an argument with the suspects while he was pumping gas at a entity13 in entity14
the group covered his white entity16 in gasoline and lit it ablaze while there were two passengers inside
the group covered his white entity16 in gasoline and lit it ablaze while there were two passengers inside
at least three people poured gasoline on a car and lit it on ﬁre at a entity14 gas station explosive situation
the passengers and the driver were not hurt during the incident but the car was completely ruined
the man’s grandmother said the ﬁre was lit after the suspects attempted to carjack her grandson, entity33 reported
the man’s grandmother said the ﬁre was lit after the suspects attempted to carjack her grandson, entity33 reported
she said:’ he said he was pumping gas and some guys came up and asked for the car
’ they pulled out a gun and he took off running
’ they took the gas tank and started spraying
’ no one was injured during the ﬁre , but the car ’s entire front end was torched , according to entity52
the entity53 is investigating the incident as an arson and the suspects remain at large
the entity53 is investigating the incident as an arson and the suspects remain at large
surveillance video of the incident is being used in the investigation
before the ﬁre , which occurred at 12:15am on Saturday , the suspects tried to carjack the man hot case
the entity53 is investigating the incident at the entity67 station as an arson
word extraction:
gang poured gasoline in the car, entity5 Saturday morning. the driver argued with the suspects. his grandmother said the ﬁre was lit by the suspects attempted to
carjack her grandson.
entity5:California entity13:76-Station entity14: South LA entity16:Dodge Charger entity33:ABC entity52:NBC entity53:LACFD entity67:LA76
Figure 4: Visualization of the summaries for a DailyMail article. The top half shows the relative attention
weights given by the sentence extraction model. Darkness indicates sentence importance. The lower half
shows the summary generated by the word extraction.
els. An example of the generated summaries for
NN-WE is shown at the lower half of Figure 4.
Table 1 (lower half) also shows system results
on the 500 DailyMail news articles (test set). In
general, we observe similar trends to DUC 2002,
with NN-SE performing the best in terms of all
ROUGE metrics. Note that scores here are generally lower compared to DUC 2002. This is due
to the fact that the gold standard summaries (aka
highlights) tend to be more laconic and as a result
involve a substantial amount of paraphrasing.
The results of our human evaluation study are
shown in Table 2. Speciﬁcally, we show, proportionally, how often our participants ranked each
system 1st, 2nd, and so on. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the human-written descriptions were considered best and ranked 1st 27% of the time, however closely followed by our NN-SE model which
was ranked 1st 22% of the time. The ILP system
was mostly ranked in 2nd place (38% of the time).
The rest of the systems occupied lower ranks. We
further converted the ranks to ratings on a scale of
1 to 6 (assigning ratings 6...1 to rank placements
1...6). This allowed us to perform Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) which revealed a reliable effect of system type. Speciﬁcally, post-hoc Tukey
tests showed that NN-SE and ILP are signiﬁcantly
(p < 0.01) better than LEAD, NN-WE, and NN-ABS
but do not differ signiﬁcantly from each other or
the human goldstandard.
Conclusions
In this work we presented a data-driven summarization framework based on an encoder-extractor
architecture. We developed two classes of models based on sentence and word extraction. Our
models can be trained on large scale datasets and
learn informativeness features based on continuous representations without recourse to linguistic
annotations. Two important ideas behind our work
are the creation of hierarchical neural structures
that reﬂect the nature of the summarization task
and generation by extraction. The later effectively
enables us to sidestep the difﬁculties of generating under a large vocabulary, essentially covering
the entire dataset, with many low-frequency words
and named entities.
Directions for future work are many and varied. One way to improve the word-based model
would be to take structural information into account during generation, e.g., by combining it with
a tree-based algorithm . It
would also be interesting to apply the neural models presented here in a phrase-based setting similar
to Lebret et al. . A third direction would be
to adopt an information theoretic perspective and
devise a purely unsupervised approach that selects
summary sentences and words so as to minimize
information loss, a task possibly achievable with
the dataset created in this work.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank three anonymous reviewers and members of the ILCC at the School of Informatics for their valuable feedback. The support
of the European Research Council under award
number 681760 “Translating Multiple Modalities
into Text” is gratefully acknowledged.