An Evolutionary Algorithm that Constructs
Recurrent Neural Networks
Peter J. Angeline, Gregory M. Saunders and Jordan B. Pollack
Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
Computer and Information Science Department
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
 
 
 
Standard methods for inducing both the structure and weight values of recurrent neural
networks ﬁt an assumed class of architectures to every task. This simpliﬁcation is necessary because the interactions between network structure and function are not well understood. Evolutionary computation, which includes genetic algorithms and evolutionary
programming, is a population-based search method that has shown promise in such complex tasks. This paper argues that genetic algorithms are inappropriate for network acquisition and describes an evolutionary program, called GNARL, that simultaneously
acquires both the structure and weights for recurrent networks. This algorithm’s empirical
acquisition method allows for the emergence of complex behaviors and topologies that are
potentially excluded by the artiﬁcial architectural constraints imposed in standard network
induction methods.
To Appear in:
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
An Evolutionary Algorithm that Constructs
Recurrent Neural Networks
Peter J. Angeline, Gregory M. Saunders and Jordan B. Pollack
Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
Computer and Information Science Department
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
 
 
 
Standard methods for inducing both the structure and weight values of recurrent neural
networks ﬁt an assumed class of architectures to every task. This simpliﬁcation is necessary because the interactions between network structure and function are not well understood. Evolutionary computation, which includes genetic algorithms and evolutionary
programming, is a population-based search method that has shown promise in such complex tasks. This paper argues that genetic algorithms are inappropriate for network acquisition and describes an evolutionary program, called GNARL, that simultaneously
acquires both the structure and weights for recurrent networks. This algorithm’s empirical
acquisition method allows for the emergence of complex behaviors and topologies that are
potentially excluded by the artiﬁcial architectural constraints imposed in standard network
induction methods.
1.0 Introduction
In its complete form, network induction entails both parametric and structural learning ,
i.e., learning both weight values and an appropriate topology of nodes and links. Current methods
to solve this task fall into two broad categories. Constructive algorithms initially assume a simple
network and add nodes and links as warranted , while destructive methods start with a large
network and prune off superﬂuous components . Though these algorithms address the problem of topology acquisition, they do so in a highly constrained manner. Because they monotonically modify network structure, constructive and destructive methods limit the traversal of the
available architectures in that once an architecture has been explored and determined to be insuf-
ﬁcient, a new architecture is adopted, and the old becomes topologically unreachable. Also, these
methods often use only a single predeﬁned structural modiﬁcation, such as “add a fully connected
hidden unit,” to generate successive topologies. This is a form of structural hill climbing, which is
susceptible to becoming trapped at structural local minima. In addition, constructive and destructive algorithms make simplifying architectural assumptions to facilitate network induction. For
example, Ash allows only feedforward networks; Fahlman assumes a restricted form of
recurrence, and Chen et al. explore only fully connected topologies. This creates a situation in
which the task is forced into the architecture rather than the architecture being ﬁt to the task.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
These deﬁciencies of constructive and destructive methods stem from inadequate methods for
assigning credit to structural components of a network. As a result, the heuristics used are overlyconstrained to increase the likelihood of ﬁnding any topology to solve the problem. Ideally, the
constraints for such a solution should come from the task rather than be implicit in the algorithm.
This paper presents GNARL, a network induction algorithm that simultaneously acquires both
network topology and weight values while making minimal architectural restrictions and avoiding
structural hill climbing. The algorithm, described in section 3, is an instance of evolutionary programming , a class of evolutionary computation that has been shown to perform well at
function optimization. Section 2 argues that this class of evolutionary computation is better suited
for evolving neural networks than genetic algorithms , a more popular class of evolutionary computation. Finally, section 4 demonstrates GNARL’s ability to create recurrent networks
for a variety of problems of interest.
2.0 Evolving Connectionist Networks
Evolutionary computation provides a promising collection of algorithms for structural and
parametric learning of recurrent networks . These algorithms are distinguished by their reliance on a population of search space positions, rather than a single position, to locate extrema of a
function deﬁned over the search space. During one search cycle, or generation, the members of
the population are ranked according to a ﬁtness function, and those with higher ﬁtness are probabilistically selected to become parents in the next generation. New population members, called
offspring, are created using specialized reproduction heuristics. Using the population, reproduction heuristics, and ﬁtness function, evolutionary computation implements a nonmonotonic search
that performs well in complex multimodal environments. Classes of evolutionary computation
can be distinguished by examining the speciﬁc reproduction heuristics employed.
Genetic algorithms (GAs) are a popular form of evolutionary computation that rely
chieﬂy on the reproduction heuristic of crossover.1 This operator forms offspring by recombining
representational components from two members of the population without regard to content. This
purely structural approach to creating novel population members assumes that components of all
parent representations may be freely exchanged without inhibiting the search process.
Various combinations of GAs and connectionist networks have been investigated. Much
research concentrates on the acquisition of parameters for a ﬁxed network architecture (e.g., ). Other work allows a variable topology, but disassociates structure acquisition from acquisition of weight values by interweaving a GA search for network topology with a traditional parametric training algorithm (e.g., backpropagation) over weights (e.g., ). Some studies
attempt to coevolve both the topology and weight values within the GA framework, but as in the
connectionist systems described above, the network architectures are restricted (e.g., ). In
spite of this collection of studies, current theory from both genetic algorithms and connectionism
suggests that GAs are not well-suited for evolving networks. In the following section, the reasons
for this mismatch are explored.
1. Genetic algorithms also employ other operators to manipulate the population, including a form of mutation, but
their distinguishing feature is a heavy reliance on crossover.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
2.1 Evolving Networks with Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms create new individuals by recombining the representational components of
two member of the population. Because of this commitment to structural recombination, GAs typically rely on two distinct representational spaces (Figure 1). Recombination space, usually
deﬁned over a set of ﬁxed-length binary strings, is the set of structures to which the genetic operators are applied. It is here that the search actually occurs. Evaluation space, typically involving a
problem-dependent representation, is the set of structures whose ability to perform a task is evaluated. In the case of using GAs to evolve networks, evaluation space is comprised of a set of networks. An interpretation function maps between these two representational spaces. Any set of
ﬁnite-length bit strings cannot represent all possible networks, thus the evaluation space is
restricted to a predetermined set of networks. By design, the dual representation scheme allows
the GA to crossover the bit strings without any knowledge of their interpretation as networks. The
implicit assumption is that the interpretation function is deﬁned so that the bit strings created by
the dynamics of the GA will map to successively better networks.
The dual representation of GAs is an important feature for searching in certain environments.
For instance, when it is unclear how to search the evaluation space directly, and when there exists
an interpretation function such that searching the space of bit strings by crossover leads to good
points in evaluation space, then the dual representation is ideal. It is unclear, however, that there
exists an interpretation function that makes dual representation beneﬁcial for evolving neural networks. Clearly, the choice of interpretation function introduces a strong bias into the search, typically by excluding many potentially interesting and useful networks . Moreover, the beneﬁts of having a dual representation hinge on
crossover being an appropriate evolutionary operator for the task for some particular interpretation function; otherwise, the need to translate between dual representations is an unnecessary
complication.
Characterizing tasks for which crossover is a beneﬁcial operator is an open question. Current
theory suggests that crossover will tend to recombine short, connected substrings of the bit string
representation that correspond to above-average task solutions when evaluated . These
substrings are called building blocks, making explicit the intuition that larger structures with high
ﬁtness are built out of smaller structures with moderate ﬁtness. Crossover tends to be most effective in environments where the ﬁtness of a member of the population is reasonably correlated with
the expected ability of its representational components . Environments where this is not true
are called deceptive .
There are three forms of deception when using crossover to evolve connectionist networks.
The ﬁrst involves networks that share both a common topology and common weights. Because
the interpretation function may be many-to-one, two such networks need not have the same bit
string representation (see Figure 2). Crossover will then tend to create offspring that contain
repeated components, and lose the computational ability of some of the parents’ hidden units. The
Interpretation
Recombination
Evaluation
Figure 2. The competing conventions problem . Bit strings A and B map to structurally and computationally
equivalent networks that assign the hidden units in different orders. Because the bit strings are distinct, crossover
is likely to produce an offspring that contains multiple copies of the same hidden node, yielding a network with
less computational ability than either parent.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
resulting networks will tend to perform worse than their parents because they do not possess key
computational components for the task. Schaffer et al. term this the competing conventions
problem, and point out that the number of competing conventions grows exponentially with the
number of hidden units.
The second form of deception involves two networks with identical topologies but different
weights. It is well known that for a given task, a single connectionist topology affords multiple
solutions for a task, each implemented by a unique distributed representation spread across the
hidden units . While the removal of a small number of nodes has been shown to effect
only minor alterations in the performance of a trained network , the computational role
each node plays in the overall representation of the task solution is determined purely by the presence and strengths of its interconnections. Furthermore, there need be no correlation between distinct distributed representations over a particular network architecture for a given task. This
seriously reduces the chance that an arbitrary crossover operation between distinct distributed
representations will construct viable offspring regardless of the interpretation function used.
Finally, deception can occur when the parents differ topologically. The types of distributed
representations that can develop in a network vary widely with the number of hidden units and the
network’s connectivity. Thus, the distributed representations of topologically distinct networks
have a greater chance of being incompatible parents. This further reduces the likelihood that
crossover will produce good offspring.
In short, for crossover to be a viable operator when evolving networks, the interpretation function must somehow compensate for all the types of deceptiveness described above. This suggests
that the complexity of an appropriate interpretation function will more than rival the complexity
of the original learning problem. Thus, the prospect of evolving connectionist networks with
crossover appears limited in general, and better results should be expected with reproduction heuristics that respect the uniqueness of the distributed representations. This point has been tacitly
validated in the genetic algorithm literature by a trend towards a reduced reliance on binary representations when evolving networks (e.g. ). Crossover, however, is still commonplace.
2.2 Networks and Evolutionary Programming
Unlike genetic algorithms, evolutionary programming (EP) deﬁnes representationdependent mutation operators that create offspring within a speciﬁc locus of the parent (see Figure
3). EP’s commitment to mutation as the sole reproductive operator for searching over a space is
preferable when there is no sufﬁcient calculus to guide recombination by crossover, or when separating the search and evaluation spaces does not afford an advantage.
Relatively few previous EP systems have addressed the problem of evolving connectionist
networks. Fogel et al. investigate training feedforward networks on some classic connectionist problems. McDonnell and Waagen use EP to evolve the connectivity of feedforward networks with a constant number of hidden units by evolving both a weight matrix and a
connectivity matrix. Fogel , uses EP to induce three-layer fully-connected feedforward
networks with a variable number of hidden units that employ good strategies for playing Tic-Tac-
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
In each of the above studies, the mutation operator alters the parameters of network η by the
where w is a weight, ε(η) is the error of the network on the task (typically the mean squared
error), α is a user-deﬁned proportionality constant, and N(µ, σ2) is a gaussian variable with mean
µ and variance σ2. The implementations of structural mutations in these studies differ somewhat.
McDonnell and Waagen randomly select a set of weights and alters their values with a probability based on the variance of the incident nodes’ activation over the training set; connections
from nodes with a high variance having less of a chance of being altered. The structural mutation
used in adds or deletes a single hidden unit with equal probability
Evolutionary programming provides distinct advantages over genetic algorithms when evolving networks. First, EP manipulates networks directly, thus obviating the need for a dual representation and the associated interpretation function. Second, by avoiding crossover between
networks in creating offspring, the individuality of each network’s distributed representation is
respected. For these reasons, evolutionary programming provides a more appropriate framework
for simultaneous structural and parametric learning in recurrent networks. The GNARL algorithm, presented in the next section and investigated in the remainder of this paper, describes one
such approach.
3.0 The GNARL Algorithm
GNARL, which stands for GeNeralized Acquisition of Recurrent Links, is an evolutionary
algorithm that nonmonotonically constructs recurrent networks to solve a given task. The name
The evolutionary programming approach to modeling evolution. Unlike genetic algorithms,
evolutionary programs perform search in the space of networks. Offspring created by mutation remain within a
locus of similarity to their parents.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
GNARL reﬂects the types of networks that arise from a generalized network induction algorithm
performing both structural and parametric learning. Instead of having uniform or symmetric
topologies, the resulting networks have “gnarled” interconnections of hidden units which more
accurately reﬂect constraints inherent in the task.
The general architecture of a GNARL network is straightforward. The input and output nodes
are considered to be provided by the task and are immutable by the algorithm; thus each network
for a given task always has min input nodes and mout output nodes. The number of hidden nodes
varies from 0 to a user-supplied maximum hmax. Bias is optional; if provided in an experiment, it
is implemented as an additional input node with constant value one. All non-input nodes employ
the standard sigmoid activation function. Links use real-valued weights, and must obey three
restrictions:
R1: There can be no links to an input node.
R2: There can be no links from an output node.
R3: Given two nodes x and y, there is at most one link from x to y.
Thus GNARL networks may have no connections, sparse connections, or full connectivity. Consequently, GNARL’s search space is:
S = {η: η is a network with real-valued weights,
η satisﬁes R1-R3,
η has min + b input nodes, where b=1 if a bias node is provided, and 0 otherwise,
η has mout output nodes,
η has i hidden nodes, 0 ≤ i ≤hmax}
R1-R3 are strictly implementational constraints. Nothing in the algorithm described below hinges
on S being pruned by these restrictions.
3.1 Selection, Reproduction and Mutation of Networks
GNARL initializes the population with randomly generated networks (see Figure 4). The
number of hidden nodes for each network is chosen from a uniform distribution over a user-supmin + b
at most hmax
hidden nodes
Figure 4. Sample initial network. The number of input nodes (min) and number of output nodes (mout) is ﬁxed
for a given task. The presence of a bias node (b = 0 or 1) as well as the maximum number of hidden units (hmax)
is set by the user. The initial connectivity is chosen randomly (see text). The disconnected hidden node does not
affect this particular network’s computation, but is available as a resource for structural mutations.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
plied range. The number of initial links is chosen similarly from a second user-supplied range.
The incident nodes for each link are chosen in accordance with the structural mutations described
below. Once a topology has been chosen, all links are assigned random weights, selected uniformly from the range [-1, 1]. There is nothing in this initialization procedure that forces a node to
have any incident links, let alone for a path to exist between the input and output nodes. In the
experiments below, the number of hidden units for a network in the initial population was selected
uniformly between one and ﬁve and the number of initial links varied uniformly between one and
In each generation of search, the networks are ﬁrst evaluated by a user-supplied ﬁtness function f: S →R, where R represents the reals. Networks scoring in the top 50% are designated as
the parents of the next generation; all other networks are discarded. This selection method is used
in many EP algorithms although competitive methods of selection have also been investigated
Generating an offspring involves three steps: copying the parent, determining the severity of
the mutations to be performed, and ﬁnally mutating the copy. Network mutations are separated
into two classes, corresponding with the types of learning discussed in . Parametric mutations
alter the value of parameters (link weights) currently in the network, whereas structural mutations
alter the number of hidden nodes and the presence of links in the network, thus altering the space
of parameters.
3.1.1 Severity of Mutations
The severity of a mutation to a given parent, η, is dictated by that network’s temperature,
where fmax is the maximum ﬁtness for a given task. Thus, the temperature of a network is determined by how close the network is to being a solution for the task. This measure of the network’s
performance is used to anneal the structural and parametric similarity between parent and offspring, so that networks with a high temperature are mutated severely, and those with a low temperature are mutated only slightly (cf. ). This allows a coarse-grained search initially, and a
progressively ﬁner-grained search as a network approaches a solution to the task, a process
described more concretely below.
3.1.2 Parametric Mutation of Networks
Parametric mutations are accomplished by perturbing each weight w of a network η with
gaussian noise, a method motivated by . In that body of work, weights are modiﬁed as follows:
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
where α is a user-deﬁned proportionality constant, and N(µ, σ2) is a gaussian random variable as
before. While large parametric mutations are occasionally necessary to avoid parametric local
minima during search, it is more likely they will adversely affect the offspring’s ability to perform
better than its parent. To compensate, GNARL updates weights using a variant of equation 3.
First, the instantaneous temperature
of the network is computed:
where U(0, 1) is a uniform random variable over the interval . This new temperature, varying from 0 to T(η), is then substituted into equation 3:
In essence, this modiﬁcation lessens the frequency of large parametric mutations without disallowing them completely. In the experiments described below, α is one.
3.1.3 Structural Mutation of Networks
The structural mutations used by GNARL alter the number of hidden nodes and the connectivity between all nodes, subject to restrictions R1-R3 discussed earlier. To avoid radical jumps in
ﬁtness from parent to offspring, structural mutations attempt to preserve the behavior of a network. For instance, new links are initialized with zero weight, leaving the behavior of the modi-
ﬁed network unchanged. Similarly, hidden units are added to the network without any incident
connections. Links must be added by future structural mutations to determine how to incorporate
the new computational unit. Unfortunately, achieving this behavioral continuity between parent
and child is not so simple when removing a hidden node or link. Consequently, the deletion of a
node involves the complete removal of the node and all incident links with no further modiﬁcation to compensate for the behavioral change. Similarly, deleting a link removes that parameter
from the network.
The selection of which node to remove is uniform over the collection of hidden nodes. Addition or deletion of a link is slightly more complicated in that a parameter identiﬁes the likelihood
that the link will originate from an input node or terminate at an output node. Once the class of
incident node is determined, an actual node is chosen uniformly from the class. Biasing the link
selection process in this way is necessary when there is a large differential between the number of
hidden nodes and the number of input or output nodes. This parameter was set to 0.2 in the experiments described in the next section.
Research in and uses the heuristic of adding or deleting at most a single fully connected node per structural mutation. Therefore, it is possible for this method is to become trapped
at a structural local minima, although this is less probable than in nonevolutionary algorithms
given that several topologies may be present in the population. In order to more effectively search
the range of network architectures, GNARL uses a severity of mutation for each separate structural mutation. A unique user-deﬁned interval specifying a range of modiﬁcation is associated
with each of the four structural mutations. Given an interval of [∆min, ∆max] for a particular structural mutation, the number of modiﬁcations of this type made to an offspring is given by:
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
Thus the number of modiﬁcations varies uniformly over a shrinking interval based on the parent
network’s ﬁtness. In the experiments below, the maximum number of nodes added or deleted was
three while the maximum number of links added or deleted was ﬁve. The minimum number for
each interval was always one.
3.2 Fitness of a Network
In evolving networks to perform a task, GNARL does not require an explicit target vector –
all that is needed is the feedback given by the ﬁtness function f. But if such a vector is present, as
in supervised learning, there are many ways of transforming it into a measure of ﬁtness. For
example, given a training set {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ...}, three possible measures of ﬁtness for a network η are sum of square errors (equation 7), sum of absolute errors (equation 8), and sum of
exponential absolute errors (equation 9):
Furthermore, because GNARL explores the space of networks by mutation and selection, the
choice of ﬁtness function does not alter the mechanics of the algorithm. To show GNARL’s ﬂexibility, each of these ﬁtness functions will be demonstrated in the experiments below.
4.0 Experiments
In this section, GNARL is applied to several problems of interest. The goal in this section is to
demonstrate the abilities of the algorithm on problems from language induction to search and collection. The various parameter values for the program are set as described above unless otherwise
4.1 Williams’ Trigger Problem
As an initial test, GNARL induced a solution for the enable-trigger task proposed in .
Consider the ﬁnite state generator shown in Figure 5. At each time step the system receives two
input bits, (a, b), representing “enable” and “trigger” signals, respectively. This system begins in
state S1, and switches to state S2 only when enabled by a=1. The system remains in S2 until it is
triggered by b=1, at which point it outputs 1 and resets the state to S1. So, for instance, on an input
stream {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1), (0, 1)}, the system will output {0, 0, 0, 1} and end in S1. This simple
problem allows an indeﬁnite amount of time to pass between the enable and the trigger inputs;
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
thus no ﬁnite length sample of the output stream will indicate the current state of the system. This
forces GNARL to develop networks that can preserve state information indeﬁnitely.
The ﬁtness function used in this experiment was the sum of exponential absolute errors (equation 9). Population size was 50 networks with the maximum number of hidden units restricted to
six. A bias node was provided in each network in this initial experiment, ensuring that an activation value of 1 was always available. Note that this does not imply that each node had a nonzero
bias; links to the bias node had to be acquired by structural mutation.
Training began with all two input strings of length two, shown in Table1. After 118 generations (3000 network evaluations2), GNARL evolved a network which solved this task for the
strings in Table 1 within tolerance of 0.3 on the output units. The training set was then increased
to include all 64 input strings of length three and evolution of the networks was allowed to continue. After an additional 422 generations, GNARL once again found a suitable network. At this
point, the difﬁculty of the task was increased a ﬁnal time by training on all 256 strings of length
four. After another 225 generations (~20000 network evaluations total) GNARL once again found
a network to solve this task, shown in Figure 6b. Note that there are two completely isolated
nodes. Given the ﬁtness function used in this experiment, the two isolated nodes do not effect the
network’s viability. To investigate the generalization of this network, it was tested over all 4096
unique strings of length six. The outputs were rounded off to the nearest integer, testing only the
network’s separation of the strings. The network performed correctly on 99.5% of this novel set,
generating incorrect responses for only 20 strings.
Figure 7 shows the connectivity of the population member with the best ﬁtness for each generation over the course of the run. Initially, the best network is sparsely-connected and remains
sparsely-connected throughout most of the run. At about generation 400, the size and connectivity
2. Number of networks evaluated = |population| + generations * |population| * 50% of the population removed each
generation, giving 50 + 118 * 50 * 0.5 = 3000 network evaluations for this trial.
a=1 →output 0
b=1 →output 1
Figure 5. An FSA that deﬁnes the enable-trigger task . The system is given a data stream of bit pairs
{(a1, b1), (a2, b2), ...}, and produces an output of 0’s and 1’s. To capture this system’s input/output behavior, a
connectionist network must learn to store state indeﬁnitely.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
increases dramatically only to be overtaken by the relatively sparse architecture shown in Figure
6b on the ﬁnal generation. Apparently, this more sparsely connected network evolved more
quickly than the more full architectures that were best in earlier generations. The oscillations
between different network architectures throughout the run reﬂects the development of such competing architectures in the population.
4.2 Inducing Regular Languages
A current topic of research in the connectionist community is the induction of ﬁnite state
automata (FSAs) by networks with second-order recurrent connections. For instance, Pollack 
trains sequential cascaded networks (SCNs) over a test set of languages, provided in and
{(0, 0), (0, 0)}
{(1, 0), (0, 0)}
{(0, 0), (0, 1)}
{(1, 0), (0, 1)}
{(0, 0), (1, 0)}
{(1, 0), (1, 0)}
{(0, 0), (1, 1)}
{(1, 0), (1, 1)}
{(0, 1), (0, 0)}
{(1, 1), (0, 0)}
{(0, 1), (0, 1)}
{(1, 1), (0, 1)}
{(0, 1), (1, 0)}
{(1, 1), (1, 0)}
{(0, 1), (1, 1)}
{(1, 1), (1, 1)}
Table 1. Initial training data for enable-trigger task.
Figure 6. Connectivity of two recurrent networks found in the enable-trigger experiment. (a) The best network of
generation 1. (b) The best network of generation 765. This network solves the task for all strings of length eight.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
shown in Table 2, using a variation of backpropagation. An interesting result of this work is that
the number of states used by the network to implement ﬁnite state behavior is potentially inﬁnite.
Other studies using the training sets in have investigated various network architectures and
training methods, as well as algorithms for extracting FSAs from the trained architectures [42 -
An explicit collection of positive and negative examples, shown in Table 3, that pose speciﬁc
difﬁculties for inducing the intended languages is offered in . Notice that the training sets are
unbalanced, incomplete and vary widely in their ability to strictly deﬁne the intended regular language. GNARL’s ability to learn and generalize from these training sets was compared against the
training results reported for the second-order architecture used in . Notice that all the languages in Table 2 require recurrent network connections in order to induce the language completely. The type of recurrence needed for each language varies widely. For instance, languages 1
through 4 require an incorrect input be remembered indeﬁnitely, forcing the network to develop
an analog version of a trap state. Networks for language 6, however, must parse and count indi-
Generation number
Network connectivity
Figure 7. Different network topologies explored by GNARL during the ﬁrst 540 generations on the enable-trigger
problem. The presence of a link between node i and j at generation g is indicated by a dot at position (g, 10 * i + j)
in the graph. Note that because node 3 is the output node, there are no connections from it throughout the run. The
arrow designates the point of transition between the ﬁrst two training sets.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
vidual inputs, potentially changing state from accept to reject or vice versa on each successive
The results obtained in are summarized in Table 4. The table shows the number of networks evaluated to learn the training set and the accuracy of generalization for the learned network to the intended regular language. Accuracy is measured as the percentage of strings of
Description
no odd length 0 strings anytime
after an odd length 1 string
no more than two 0s in a row
an even sum of 10s and 01s, pairwise
(number of 1s - number of 0s) mod 3 = 0
Table 2. Regular languages to be induced.
Positive Instances
Negative Instances
ε, 1, 11, 111, 1111, 11111, 111111, 1111111,
0, 10, 01, 00, 011, 110, 000, 11111110,
ε, 10, 1010, 101010, 10101010,
10101010101010
1, 0, 11, 00, 01, 101, 100, 1001010, 10110,
ε, 1, 0, 01, 11, 00, 100, 110, 111, 000, 100100,
110000011100001, 111101100010011100
10, 101, 010, 1010, 110, 1011, 10001, 111010,
1001000, 11111000, 0111001101,
11011100110
ε, 1, 0, 10, 01, 00, 100100, 001111110100,
0100100100, 11100, 010
000, 11000, 0001, 000000000, 00000, 0000,
11111000011, 1101010000010111,
1010010001
ε, 11, 00, 001, 0101, 1010, 1000111101,
1001100001111010, 111111, 0000
1, 0, 111, 010, 000000000, 1000, 01, 10,
1110010100, 010111111110, 0001, 011
ε, 10, 01, 1100, 101010, 111, 000000,
0111101111, 100100100
1, 0, 11, 00, 101, 011, 11001, 1111, 00000000,
010111, 10111101111, 1001001001
ε, 1, 0, 10, 01, 11111, 000, 00110011, 0101,
0000100001111, 00100, 011111011111, 00
1010, 00110011000, 0101010101, 1011010,
10101, 010100, 101001, 100100110101
Table 3. Training sets for the languages of Table 2 from .
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
length 10 or less that are correctly classiﬁed by the network. For comparison, the table lists both
the average and best performance of the ﬁve runs reported in .
This experiment used a population of 50 networks, each limited to at most eight hidden units.
Each run lasted at most 1000 generations, allowing a maximum of 25050 networks to be evaluated for a single data set. Two experiments were run for each data set, one using the sum of absolute errors (SAE) and the other using sum of square errors (SSE). The error for a particular string
was computed only for the ﬁnal output of the network after the entire string plus three trailing
“null” symbols had been entered, one input per time step. The concatenation of the trailing null
symbols was used to identify the end of the string and allow input of the null string, a method also
used in . Each network had a single input and output and no bias node was provided. The
three possible logical inputs for this task, 0, 1, and null, were represented by activations of -1, 1,
and 0, respectively. The tolerance for the output value was 0.1, as in .
Table 5 shows for both ﬁtness functions the number of evaluations until convergence and the
accuracy of the best evolved network. Only four of the runs, each of those denoted by a ‘+’ in the
table, failed to produce a network with the speciﬁed tolerance in the allotted 1000 generations. In
the runs using SAE, the two runs that did not converge had not separated a few elements of the
associated training set and appeared to be far from discovering a network that could correctly
classify the complete training set. Both of the uncompleted runs using SSE successfully separated
the data sets but had not done so to the 0.1 tolerance within the 1000 generation limit. Figure 8
compares the number of evaluations by GNARL to the average number of evaluations reported in
 . As the graph shows, GNARL consistently evaluates more networks, but not a disproportionate number. Considering that the space of networks being searched by GNARL is much larger
than the space being searched by , these numbers appear to be within a tolerable increase.
The graph of Figure 9compares the accuracy of the GNARL networks to the average accuracy
found in over ﬁve runs. The GNARL networks consistently exceeded the average accuracy
found in .
evaluations
evaluations
Table 4. Speed and generalization results reported by for learning the data sets of Table 3.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
These results demonstrate GNARL’s ability to simultaneously acquire the topology and
weights of recurrent networks, and that this can be done within a comparable number of network
evaluations as training a network with static architecture on the same task. GNARL also appears
to generalize better consistently, possibly due to its selective inclusion and exclusion of some
Evaluations
% Accuracy
Evaluations
% Accuracy
Table 5. Speed and generalization results for GNARL to train recurrent networks to recognize the data sets of
Result from 
SSE ﬁtness
SAE ﬁtness
Evaluations
Training Set
Figure 8. The number of network evaluations required to learn the seven data sets of Table 3. GNARL (using
both SAE and SSE ﬁtness measures) compared to the average number of evaluations for the ﬁve runs described
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
4.3 The Ant Problem
GNARL was tested on a complex search and collection task – the Tracker task described in
 , and further investigated in . In this problem, a simulated ant is placed on a two-dimensional toroidal grid that contains a trail of food. The ant traverses the grid, collecting any food it
contacts along the way. The goal of the task is to discover an ant which collects the maximum
number of pieces of food in a given time period. (Figure 10).
Following , each ant is controlled by a network with two input nodes and four output
nodes (Figure 11). The ﬁrst input node denotes the presence of food in the square directly in front
of the ant; the second denotes the absence of food in this same square, restricting the possible
legal inputs to the network to (1, 0) or (0, 1). Each of the four output units corresponds to a unique
action: move forward one step, turn left 90°, turn right 90°, or no-op. At each step, the action
whose corresponding output node has maximum activation is performed. As in the original study
 , no-op allows the ant to remain at a ﬁxed position while activation ﬂows along recurrent connections. Fitness is deﬁned as the number of grid positions cleared within 200 time steps. The task
is difﬁcult because simple networks can perform surprisingly well; the network shown in Figure
11 collects 42 pieces of food before spinning endlessly at position A (in Figure 10), illustrating a
very high local maximum in the search space.
The experiment used a population of 100 networks, each limited to at most nine hidden units,
and did not provide a bias node. In the ﬁrst run , GNARL found a network
(Figure 12b) that clears 81 grid positions within the 200 time steps. When this ant is run for an
additional 119 time steps, it successfully clears the entire trail. To understand how the network
traverses the path of food, consider the simple FSA shown in Figure 13, hand-crafted in as an
approximate solution to the problem. This simple machine receives a score of 81 in the allotted
Result from 
SSE ﬁtness
SAE ﬁtness
% Accuracy
Figure 9. Percentage accuracy of evolved networks on languages in Table 2. GNARL (using SAE and SSE
ﬁtness measures) compared to average accuracy of the ﬁve runs in .
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
200 time steps, and clears the entire trail only ﬁve time steps faster than the network in Figure
12b. A step by step comparison indicates there is only a slight difference between the two.
GNARL’s evolved network follows the general strategy embodied by this FSA at all but two
places, marked as positions B and C in Figure 10. Here the evolved network makes a few additional moves, accounting for the slightly longer completion time.
Figure 10. The ant problem. The trail is connected initially, but becomes progressively more difﬁcult to follow.
The underlying 2-d grid is toroidal, so that position “A” is the ﬁrst break in the trail – it is simple to reach this
point. Positions “B” and “C” indicate the only two positions along the trail where the ant discovered in run 1
behaves differently from the 5-state FSA of (see Figure 13).
Move Left Right
Figure 11. The semantics of the I/O units for the ant network. The ﬁrst input node denotes the presence of food
in the square directly in front of the ant; the second denotes the absence of food in this same square. This
particular network ﬁnds 42 pieces of food before spinning endlessly in place at position P, illustrating a very
deep local minimum in the search space.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
Figure 14 illustrates the strategy the network uses to implement the FSA by showing the state
of the output units of the network over three different sets. Each point is a triple of the form
(move, right, left).3 Figure 14a shows the result of supplying to the network 200 “food” inputs – a
ﬁxed point that executes “Move.” Figure 14b shows the sequence of states reached when 200 “no
food” signals are supplied to the network – a collection of points describing a limit cycle of length
ﬁve that repeatedly executes the sequence “Right, Right, Right, Right, Move.” These two attractors determine the response of the network to the task (Figure 14c, d); the additional points in Fig-
3. No-op is not shown because it was never used in the ﬁnal network.
Figure 12. The Tracker Task, ﬁrst run. (a) The best network in the initial population. Nodes 0 and 1 are input,
nodes 5-8 are output, and nodes 2-4 are hidden nodes. (b) Network induced by GNARL after 2090 generations.
Forward links are dashed; bidirectional links and loops are solid. The light gray connection between nodes 8
and 13 is the sole backlink. This network clears the trail in 319 epochs.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
ure 14c are transients encountered as the network alternates between these attractors. The
differences in the number of steps required to clear the trail between the FSA of Figure 13 and
GNARL’s network arise due to the state of the hidden units when transferring from the “food”
attractor to the “no food” attractor.
However, not all evolved network behaviors are so simple as to approximate an FSA . In a
second run (1595 generations) GNARL induced a network that cleared 82 grid points within the
200 time steps. Figure 15 demonstrates the behavior of this network. Once again, the “food”
attractor, shown in Figure 15a, is a single point in the space that always executes “Move.” The
“no food” behavior, however, is not an FSA; instead, it is a quasiperiodic trajectory of points
shaped like a “D” in output space (Figure 15b). The placement of the “D” is in the “Move / Right”
corner of the space and encodes a complex alternation between these two operations Fixed point attractor that results for sequence of 500 “food” signals; (b) Limit cycle
attractor that results when a sequence of 500 “no food” signals is given to network; (c) All states visited while
traversing the trail; (d) The path of the ant on an empty grid. The Z axis represents time. Note that x is ﬁxed, and
y increases monotonically at a ﬁxed rate. The large jumps in y position are artifacts of the toroidal grid.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
removal would affect only ease of implementation. In fact, no assumed features of GNARL’s networks are essential for the algorithm’s operation. GNARL could even use nondifferentiable activation functions, a constraint for backpropagation.
GNARL’s minimal representational constraints would be meaningless if not complemented by
appropriate search dynamics to traverse the space of networks. First, unlike constructive and
destructive algorithms, GNARL permits a nonmonotonic search over the space of network topol-
Figure 15. Limit behavior of the network of the second run. Graphs show the state of the output units Move,
Right, Left. (a) Fixed point attractor that results for sequence of 3500 “food” signals; (b) Limit cycle attractor
that results when a sequence of 3500 “no food” signals is given to network; (c) All states visited while
traversing the trail; (d) The path of the ant on an empty grid. The z axis represents time. The ant’s path is
comprised of a set of “railroad tracks.” Along each track, tick marks represent back and forth movement. At
the junctures between tracks, a more complicated movement occurs. There are no artifacts of the toroidal grid
in this plot, all are actual movements (cf. Figure 14d).
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
ogies. Consider that in monotonic search algorithms, the questions of when and how to modify
structure take on great signiﬁcance because a premature topological change cannot be undone. In
contrast, GNARL can revisit a particular architecture at any point, but for the architecture to be
propagated it must confer an advantage over other competing topologies. Such a non-linear traversal of the space is imperative for acquiring appropriate solutions because the efﬁcacy of the
various architectures changes as the parametric values are modiﬁed.
GNARL allows multiple structural manipulations to a network within a single mutation. As
discussed earlier, constructive and destructive algorithms deﬁne a unit of modiﬁcation, e.g., “add
a fully connected hidden node.” Because such singular structural modiﬁcations create a “one-unit
structural horizon” beyond which no information is available, such algorithms may easily ﬁxate
on an architecture that is better than networks one modiﬁcation step away, but worse than those
two or more steps distant. In GNARL, several nodes and links can be added or deleted with each
mutation, the range being determined by user-speciﬁed limits and the current ability of the network. This simultaneous modiﬁcation of the structural and parametric modiﬁcations based on ﬁtness allows the algorithm to discover appropriate networks quickly especially in comparison to
evolutionary techniques that do not respect the uniqueness of distributed representations.
Finally, as in all evolutionary computation, GNARL maintains a population of structures during the search. This allows the algorithm to investigate several differing architectures in parallel
while avoiding over-commitment to a particular network topology.
These search dynamics, combined with GNARL’s minimal representational constraints make
the algorithm extremely versatile. Of course, if topological constraints are known a priori, they
should be incorporated into the search. But these should be introduced as part of the task speciﬁcation rather than being built into the search algorithm. Because the only requirement on a ﬁtness
function f is that f: S →R, diverse criteria can be used to rate a network’s performance. For
instance, the ﬁrst two experiments described above evaluated networks based on a desired input/
output mapping; the Tracker task experiment, however, considered overall network performance,
not speciﬁc mappings. Other criteria could also be introduced, including speciﬁc structural constraints (e.g., minimal number of hidden units or links) as well as constraints on generalization. In
some cases, strong task restrictions can even be implicit in simple ﬁtness functions .
The dynamics of the algorithms guided by the task constraints represented in the ﬁtness function allow GNARL to empirically determine an appropriate architecture. Over time, the continual
cycle of test-prune-reproduce will constrain the population to only those architectures that have
acquired the task most rapidly. Inappropriate networks will not be indeﬁnitely competitive and
will be removed from the population eventually.
Complete network induction must be approached with respect to the complex interaction
between network topology, parametric values, and task performance. By ﬁxing topology, gradient
descent methods can be used to discover appropriate solutions. But the relationship between network structure and task performance is not well understood, and there is no “backpropagation”
through the space of network architectures. Instead, the network induction problem is approached
with heuristics that, as described above, often restrict the available architectures, the dynamics of
the search mechanism, or both. Artiﬁcial architectural constraints (such as “feedforwardness”) or
overly constrained search mechanisms can impede the induction of entire classes of behaviors,
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
while forced structural liberties (such as assumed full recurrence) may unnecessarily increase
structural complexity or learning time. By relying on a simple stochastic process, GNARL strikes
a middle ground between these two extremes, allowing the network’s complexity and behavior to
emerge in response to the requirements of the task.
6.0 Acknowledgments
This research has been partially supported by ONR grants N00014-92-J-1195 and N00014-
93-1-0059. We are indebted to Ed Large, Dave Stucki and especially John Kolen for proofreading
help and discussions during the development of this research. Finally, we would like to thank our
anonymous reviewers, and the attendees of Connectfest ’92 for feedback on a preliminary versions of this work.
7.0 References
A. G. Barto. Connectionist learning for control. In W. T. Miller III, R. S. Sutton, and P. J.
Werbos, editors, Neural Networks for Control, chapter 1, pages 5–58. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1990.
T. Ash. Dynamic node creation in backpropagation networks. Connection Science,
1(4):365–375, 1989.
M. Frean. The upstart algorithm: A method for constructing and training feed-forward neural networks. Technical Report Preprint 89/469, Edinburgh Physics Dept, 1990.
S. J. Hanson. Meiosis networks. In D. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 2, pages 533–541. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990.
S. E. Fahlman and C. Lebiere. The cascade-correlation architecture. In D. S. Touretsky, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processing Structures 2, pages 524–532. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990.
S. Fahlman. The recurrent cascade-correlation architecture. In R. Lippmann, J. Moody, and
D. Touretzky, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 3, pages 190–
196. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1991.
D. Chen, C. Giles, G. Sun, H. Chen, Y. Less, and M. Goudreau. Constructive learning of
recurrent neural networks. IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, 3:1196–
1201, 1993.
M. R. Azimi-Sadjadi, S. Sheedvash, and F. O. Trujillo. Recursive dynamic node creation in
multilayer neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 4(2):242–256, 1993.
M. Mozer and P. Smolensky. Skeletonization: A technique for trimming the fat from a network via relevance assessment. In D. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 1, pages 107–115. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1989.
 Y. L. Cun, J. Denker, and S. Solla. Optimal brain damage. In D. Touretzky, editor, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 2. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
 B. Hassibi and D. G. Stork. Second order derivatives for network pruning: Optimal brain
surgeon. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 5, pages 164–171. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1993.
 C. W. Omlin and C. L. Giles. Pruning recurrent neural networks for improved generalization
performance. Technical Report Tech Report No 93-6, Computer Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, April 1993.
 L. J. Fogel, A. J. Owens, and M. J. Walsh. Artiﬁcial Intelligence through Simulated Evolution. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1966.
 D. B. Fogel. Evolving Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Ph.D. thesis, University of California, San
Diego, 1992.
 J. H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. The University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 1975.
 D. E. Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, MA, 1989.
 D. B. Fogel. An introduction to simulated evolutionary optimization. This issue.
 A. P. Wieland. Evolving neural network controllers for unstable systems. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pages II-667 – II-673, IEEE Press, Seattle,
 D. Montana and L. Davis. Training feedforward neural networks using genetic algorithms.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 762–767, Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1989.
 D. Whitley, T. Starkweather, and C. Bogart. Genetic algorithms and neural networks: Optimizing connections and connectivity. Parallel Computing, 14:347–361, 1990.
 R. D. Beer and J. C. Gallagher. Evolving dynamical neural networks for adaptive behavior.
Adaptive Behavior, 1(1):91–122, 1992.
 G. F. Miller, P. M. Todd, and S. U. Hegde. Designing neural networks using genetic algorithms. In J. D. Schaffer, editor, Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Genetic Algorithms, pages 379–384. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1989.
 R. K. Belew, J. McInerney, and N. N. Schraudolf. Evolving networks: Using the genetic
algorithm with connectionist learning. Technical Report CS90-174, University of California, San Diego, June 1990.
 J. Torreele. Temporal processing with recurrent networks: An evolutionary approach. In R.
K. Belew and L. B. Booker, editors, Fourth International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, pages 555–561. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California, 1991.
 M. A. Potter. A genetic cascade-correlation learning algorithm. In Proceedings of
COGANN-92 International Workshop on Combinations of Genetic Algorithms and Neural
Networks, 1992.
 N. Karunanithi, R. Das, and D. Whitley. Genetic cascade learning for neural networks. In
Proceedings of COGANN-92 International Workshop on Combinations of Genetic Algorithms and Neural Networks, 1992.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
 D. E. Goldberg. Genetic algorithms and Walsh functions: Part 2, Deception and its analysis.
Complex Systems, 3:153–171, 1989.
 D. E. Goldberg. Genetic algorithms and Walsh functions: Part 1, A gentle introduction.
Complex Systems, 3:129–152, 1989.
 J. D. Schaffer, D. Whitley, and L. J. Eshelman. Combinations of genetic algorithms and neural networks: A survey of the state of the art. In Proceedings of COGANN-92 International
Workshop on Combinations of Genetic Algorithms and Neural Networks, 1992.
 G. E. Hinton, J. L. McClelland, and D. E. Rumelhart. Distributed representations. In D. E.
Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland, editors, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in
the Microstructure of Cognition, volume 1: Foundations, pages 77–109. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986.
 T. J. Sejnowski and C. R. Rosenberg. Parallel networks that learn to pronounce english text.
Complex Systems, 1:145–168, 1987.
 J. Koza and J. Rice. Genetic generation of both the weights and architecture for a neural network. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pages II-397 – II-404,
Seattle, WA, IEEE Press, 1991.
 R. Collins and D. Jefferson. An artiﬁcial neural network representation for artiﬁcial organisms. In H. P. Schwefel and R. Manner, editors, Parallel Problem Solving from Nature.
Springer-Verlag, 1991.
 D. B. Fogel. A brief history of simulated evolution. In D. B. Fogel and W. Atmar, editors,
Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on Evolutionary Programming, Evolutionary
Programming Society, La Jolla, CA., 1992.
 D. B. Fogel, L. J. Fogel, and V. W. Porto. Evolving neural networks. Biological Cybernetics,
63:487–493, 1990.
 J. R. McDonnell and D. Waagen. Determining neural network connectivity using evolutionary programming. In Twenty-ﬁfth Asilomar Conferences on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Monterey, CA, 1992.
 D. B. Fogel. Using evolutionary programming to create neural networks that are capable of
playing Tic-Tac-Toe. In International Conference on Neural Networks, pages 875–880.
IEEE Press, San Francisco, CA, 1993.
 S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220:671–680, 1983.
 R. J. Williams. Adaptive State Representation and Estimation Using Recurrent Connectionist Networks, chapter 4, pages 97–114. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
 J. B. Pollack. The induction of dynamical recognizers. Machine Learning, 7:227–252, 1991.
 M. Tomita. Dynamic construction of ﬁnite automata from examples using hill-climbing. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 105–
108, Ann Arbor, MI, 1982.
The Ohio State University
July 16, 1993
 R. L. Watrous and G. M. Kuhn. Induction of ﬁnite-state automata using second-order recurrent networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing 4. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Mateo, CA, 1992.
 C. L. Giles, G. Z. Sun, H. H. Chen, Y. C. Lee, and D. Chen. Higher order recurrent networks
& grammatical inference. In D. S. Touretsky, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2, pages 380-387. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990.
 C. L. Giles, C. B. Miller, D. Chen, G. Z. Sun, H. H. Chen, and Y. C. Lee. Extracting and
learning an unknown grammar with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing 4. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1992.
 Z. Zeng, R. M. Goodman, and P. Smyth. Learning ﬁnite state machines with self-clustering
recurrent networks. Neural Computation, to appear.
 D. Jefferson, R. Collins, C. Cooper, M. Dyer, M. Flowers, R. Korf, C. Taylor, and A. Wang.
Evolution as a theme in artiﬁcial life: The genesys/tracker system. In C. G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. D. Farmer, and S. Rasmussen, editors, Artiﬁcial Life II: Proceedings of the Workshop
on Artiﬁcial Life, pages 549–577. Addison-Wesley, 1991.
 J. Koza. Genetic evolution and co-evolution of computer programs. In J. D. F. Christopher
G. Langton, Charles Taylor and S. Rasmussen, editors, Artiﬁcial Life II. Addison Wesley
Publishing Company, Reading Mass., 1992.
 P. J. Angeline and J. B. Pollack. Competitive environments evolve better solutions for complex tasks. In S. Forrest, editor, Genetic Algorithms: Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference (GA93), Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1993.