International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Volume 6, Number 2.
ISSN: 1492-3831
July – 2005
Book Review – Learner Support in Open, Distance
and Online Learning Environments
Editors: J. Brindley, C. Walti, and O. Zawacki-Richter . Learner Support in Open,
Distance and Online Learning Environments. Bibliotheks – und Informationssystem der
Universitat Oldenburg. ISBN: 3 8142 0923 0
Reviewed by: Stacey Ludwig, Director of Academic Services, Western Governors University,
There is a growing need for high quality, proactive, learner-centered support services for distance
learning students. Learner-Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments is the
ninth volume in the ASF series on distance education that specifically addresses learner support
systems. The text provides an introduction to the current literature encompassing learner support
services, as well as a useful introduction to the trends and issues facing learner support
practitioners, and implementation and evaluation of practices.
Learner-Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments has 25 contributors
providing thoughtful reflection and analyses of the major challenges facing learner support
practitioners such as scaling to meet growing student populations, scarce resources, immense
technological changes, and greater emphases on learner-centered yet institutionally-connected
services. The text is comprised of four sections or units. Unit one focuses on visions and
retrospectives. The contributors to unit one provide detailed literature reviews, historical
perspectives, and thoughtful reflection on the complexities of providing support services to
distance learners. We are reminded that distance learning is more than just a business and that the
roles of faculty, students, administrators, and learner support practitioners must change to retain
and meet the needs of distance learners. The contributors also address pedagogical issues related
to e-learning and the development of courses that are both flexible and collaborative. Unit one is
an excellent introduction to the literature relating to learner support systems.
Unit two of Learner-Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments focuses on
strategies for learner success. The contributors to unit two challenge the traditional notions of
learner support by offering rationale for online learner support services, the librarian’s role in
developing information literacy and critical thinking skills, the use of e-portfolios and learning
journals, and the development of learning communities to support the students’ connection to the
education provider. Unit two contributors also address gender and cultural diversity issues
relating to DL environments.
Unit three of Learner-Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments focuses on
the planning and management of learner support systems. The contributors in unit three introduce
complex issues relating to the human resource, systems, training, and project management
practices related to designing and implementing learner support services. Unit three also includes
in-depth discussions about the quality, effectiveness, efficiency, and flexibility of learner support
systems and how to develop research and evaluation systems to measure outcomes. Unit three is a
Book Review – Learner Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments
series of chapters aimed at the more advanced practitioner that encourage the reader to explore
the concepts in more detail beyond the scope of the text. Readers get enough information from
the text to begin formulating research and evaluation questions related to measuring cost
effectiveness and quality of learner support systems.
Unit four of Learner-Support in Open, Distance and Online Learning Environments includes
three keynote addresses from the 2004 EDEN Conference on Learner Support. A DVD
accompanies the text which includes the original recordings of the keynote speeches by Terry
Anderson, Nicholas Allen, and Alan Tait, as well as speeches by Otto Peters, Gilly Salmon, and
Elsebeth Korsgaard Soerensen.
Overall, I enjoyed the text. The units and chapters are weaved together nicely so that the reader
flows from one chapter to the next. Again, I would recommend this text to practitioners that are
new to distance learning because it provides an overview of the literature as well as an
introduction to the trends and issues. More experienced practitioners will benefit from the review
of the recent literature in learner support services, as well as the units covering implementation,
research, and evaluation of learner support practices.