Detecting Spacecraft Anomalies Using LSTMs and
Nonparametric Dynamic Thresholding
Kyle Hundman
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
 
Valentino Constantinou
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
 
Christopher Laporte
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
 
Ian Colwell
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
 
Tom Soderstrom
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
 
As spacecraft send back increasing amounts of telemetry data, improved anomaly detection systems are needed to lessen the monitoring burden placed on operations engineers and reduce operational risk. Current spacecraft monitoring systems only target a
subset of anomaly types and often require costly expert knowledge to develop and maintain due to challenges involving scale and
complexity. We demonstrate the effectiveness of Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTMs) networks, a type of Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN), in overcoming these issues using expert-labeled telemetry
anomaly data from the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite and the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover, Curiosity. We
also propose a complementary unsupervised and nonparametric
anomaly thresholding approach developed during a pilot implementation of an anomaly detection system for SMAP, and offer false
positive mitigation strategies along with other key improvements
and lessons learned during development.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Anomaly detection; Neural
networks; Semi-supervised learning settings; • Applied computing →Forecasting;
Anomaly detection, Neural networks, RNNs, LSTMs, Aerospace,
Time-series, Forecasting
ACM Reference Format:
Kyle Hundman, Valentino Constantinou, Christopher Laporte, Ian Colwell,
and Tom Soderstrom. 2018. Detecting Spacecraft Anomalies Using LSTMs
and Nonparametric Dynamic Thresholding. In KDD ’18: The 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. 
ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by an employee,
contractor, or affiliate of the United States government. As such, the United States
government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this
article, or to allow others to do so, for government purposes only.
KDD ’18, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5552-0/18/08...$15.00
 
INTRODUCTION
Spacecraft are exceptionally complex and expensive machines with
thousands of telemetry channels detailing aspects such as temperature, radiation, power, instrumentation, and computational
activities. Monitoring these channels is an important and necessary
component of spacecraft operations given their complexity and
cost. In an environment where a failure to detect and respond to
potential hazards could result in the full or partial loss of spacecraft,
anomaly detection is a critical tool to alert operations engineers of
unexpected behavior.
Current anomaly detection methods for spacecraft telemetry
primarily consist of tiered alarms indicating when values stray outside of pre-defined limits and manual analysis of visualizations and
aggregate channel statistics. Expert systems and nearest neighborbased approaches have also been implemented for a small number
of spacecraft . These approaches have well-documented limitations – extensive expert knowledge and human capital are needed
to define and update nominal ranges and perform ongoing analysis
of telemetry. Statistical and limit-based or density-based approaches
are also prone to missing anomalies that occur within defined limits
or those characterized by a temporal element .
These issues will be exacerbated as improved computing and
storage capabilities lead to increasing volumes of telemetry data.
NISAR, an upcoming Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) satellite, will
generate around 85 terabytes of data per day and represents exponentially increasing data rates for Earth Science satellites .
Mission complexity and condensed mission time frames also call
for improved anomaly detection solutions. For instance, the Europa
Lander concept would have an estimated 20-40 days on Europa’s
surface due to high radiation and would require intensive monitoring during surface operations . Anomaly detection methods
that are more accurate and scalable will help allocate limited engineering resources associated with such missions.
Challenges central to anomaly detection in multivariate time
series data also hold for spacecraft telemetry. A lack of labeled
anomalies necessitates the use of unsupervised or semi-supervised
approaches. Real-world systems are usually highly non-stationary
and dependent on current context. Data being monitored are often
heterogeneous, noisy, and high-dimensional. In scenarios where
anomaly detection is being used as a diagnostic tool, a degree of
interpretability is required. Identifying the existence of a potential
issue on board a spacecraft without providing any insight into its
 
nature is of limited value to engineers. Lastly, a suitable balance
must be found between the minimization of false positives and false
negatives according to a given scenario.
Contributions. In this paper, we adapt and extend methods
from various domains to mitigate and balance the issues mentioned
above. This work is presented through the lens of spacecraft anomaly detection, but applies generally to many other applications involving anomaly detection for multivariate time series data. Specifically, we describe our use of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to achieve high prediction performance while maintaining interpretability throughout the system.
Once model predictions are generated, we offer a nonparametric,
dynamic, and unsupervised thresholding approach for evaluating
residuals. This approach addresses diversity, non-stationarity, and
noise issues associated with automatically setting thresholds for
data streams characterized by varying behaviors and value ranges.
Methods for utilizing user-feedback and historical anomaly data to
improve system performance are also detailed.
We then present experimental results using real-world, expertlabeled data derived from Incident Surprise, Anomaly (ISA) reports
for the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover, Curiosity, and the Soil
Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite. These reports are used by
mission personnel to process unexpected events that impact a spacecraft and place it in potential risk during post-launch operations.
Lastly, we highlight key milestones, improvements, and observations identified through an early implementation of the system for
the SMAP mission and offer open source versions of methodologies
and data for use by the broader research community1.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The breadth and depth of research in anomaly detection offers
numerous definitions of anomaly types, but with regard to timeseries data it is useful to consider three categories of anomalies –
point, contextual, and collective . Point anomalies are single values
that fall within low-density regions of values, collective anomalies
indicate that a sequence of values is anomalous rather than any
single value by itself, and contextual anomalies are single values
that do not fall within low-density regions yet are anomalous with
regard to local values. We use these characterizations to aid in
comparisons of anomaly detection approaches and further profile
spacecraft anomalies from SMAP and MSL.
Utility across application domains, data types, and anomaly types
has ensured that a wide variety of anomaly detection approaches
have been studied . Simple forms of anomaly detection consist
of out-of-limits (OOL) approaches which use predefined thresholds
and raw data values to detect anomalies. A myriad of other anomaly
detection techniques have been introduced and explored as potential improvements over OOL approaches, such as clustering-based
approaches , nearest neighbors approaches ,
expert systems , and dimensionality reduction approaches , among others. These approaches represent a
general improvement over OOL approaches and have been shown
to be effective in a variety of use cases, yet each has its own disadvantages related to parameter specification, interpretability, generalizability, or computational expense (see for a survey of
anomaly detection approaches). Recently, RNNs have demonstrated
1 
state-of-the-art performance on a variety of sequence-to-sequence
learning benchmarks and have shown effectiveness across a variety
of domains . In the following sections, we discuss the shortcomings of prior approaches in aerospace applications and demonstrate
RNN’s capacity to help address these challenges.
Anomaly Detection in Aerospace
Numerous anomaly detection approaches mentioned in the previous section have been applied to spacecraft. Expert systems have
been used with numerous spacecraft , notably the
ISACS-DOC (Intelligent Satellite Control Software DOCtor) with
the Hayabusa, Nozomi, and Geotail missions . Nearest neighbor
based approaches have been used repeatedly to detect anomalies
on board the Space Shuttle and the International Space Station
 , as well as the XMM-Newton satellite . The Inductive
Monitoring System (IMS), also used by NASA on board the Space
Shuttle and International Space Station, employs the practitioner’s
choice of clustering technique in order to detect anomalies, with
anomalous observations falling outside of well-defined clusters
 . ELMER, or Envelope Learning and Monitoring using Error
Relaxation, attempts to periodically set new OOL bounds estimated
using a neural network, aiming to reduce false positives and improve the performance of OOL anomaly detection tasks aboard the
Deep Space One spacecraft .
The variety of prior anomaly detection approaches applied to
spacecraft would suggest their wide-spread use, yet out-of-limits
(OOL) approaches remain the most widely used forms of anomaly
detection in the aerospace industry . Despite their limitations, OOL approaches remain popular due to numerous factors
– low computational expense, broad and straight-forward applicability, and ease of understanding – factors which may not all be
present in more complex anomaly detection approaches. NASA’s
Orca and IMS tools, which employ nearest neighbors and clustering
approaches, successfully detected all anomalies identified by Mission Evaluation Room (MER) engineers aboard the STS-115 mission
(high recall) but also identified many non-anomalous events as
anomalies (low precision), requiring additional work to mitigate
against excessive false positives . The IMS, as a clustering-based
approach, limits representation of prior data to four coarse statistical features: average, standard deviation, maximum, and minimum,
and requires careful parameterization of time windows . As a
neural network, ELMER was only used for 10 temperature sensors
on Deep Space One due to limitations in on-board memory and
computational resources . Notably, none of these approaches
make use of data beyond prior telemetry values.
For other missions considering the previous approaches, the
potential benefits are often not enough to outweigh their limitations and perceived risk. This is partially attributable to the high
complexity of spacecraft and the conservative nature of their operations, but these approaches have not demonstrated results and
generalizability compelling enough to justify widespread adoption.
OOL approaches remain widely utilized because of these factors,
but this is poised to change as data volumes grow and as RNN approaches demonstrate profound improvements in similar domains
and applications.
Anomaly Detection using LSTMs
The recent advancement of deep learning, compute capacity, and
neural network architectures have lead to performance breakthroughs
for a variety of problems including sequence-to-sequence learning
tasks . Until recently, previous applications in aerospace
involving large sets of high-dimensional data were forced to use
methods less capable of modeling temporal information. Specifically, LSTMs and related RNNs represent a significant leap forward
in efficiently processing and prioritizing historical information valuable for future prediction. When compared to dense Deep Neural
Networks (DNN) and early RNNs, LSTMs have been shown to improve the ability to maintain memory of long-term dependencies
due to the introduction of a weighted self-loop conditioned on
context that allows them to forget past information in addition to
accumulating it . Their ability to handle high-complexity,
temporal or sequential data has ensured their widespread application in domains including natural language processing (NLP),
text classification, speech recognition, and time series forecasting,
among others .
The inherent properties of LSTMs makes them an ideal candidate for anomaly detection tasks involving time-series, non-linear
numeric streams of data. LSTMs are capable of learning the relationship between past data values and current data values and
representing that relationship in the form of learned weights .
When trained on nominal data, LSTMs can capture and model normal behavior of a system , providing practitioners with a model
of system behavior under normal conditions. They can also handle
multivariate time-series data without the need for dimensionality
reduction or domain knowledge of the specific application
 , allowing for generalizability across different types of spacecraft and application domains. In addition, LSTM approaches have
been shown to model complex nonlinear feature interactions 
that are often present in multivariate time-series data streams, and
obviate the need to specify a time-window in which to consider
data values in an anomaly detection task due to the use of shared
parameters across time .
These advantages have motivated the use of LSTM networks in
several recent anomaly detection tasks , where
LSTM models are fit on nominal data and model predictions are
compared to actual data stream values using a set of detection rules
in order to detect anomalies .
The following methods form the core components of an unsupervised anomaly detection approach that uses LSTMs to predict highvolume telemetry data by learning from normal command and
telemetry sequences. A novel unsupervised thresholding method is
then used to automatically assess hundreds to thousands of diverse
streams of telemetry data and determine whether resulting prediction errors represent spacecraft anomalies. Lastly, strategies for
mitigating false positive anomalies are outlined and are a key element in developing user trust and improving utility in a production
Telemetry Value Prediction with LSTMs
Single-Channel Models. A single model is created for each telemetry channel and each model is used to predict values for that channel.
Figure 1: A visual representation of the input matrices used for prediction
at each time step t. Current prediction errors are compared to past errors to
determine if they are anomalous.
LSTMs struggle to accurately predict m-dimensional outputs when
m is large, precluding the input of all telemetry streams into one or
a few models. Modeling each channel independently also allows
traceability down to the channel level, and low-level anomalies can
later be aggregated into various groupings and ultimately subsystems. This enables granular views of spacecraft anomaly patterns
that would otherwise be lost. If the system were to be trained to
detect anomalies at the subsystem level without this traceability,
for example, operations engineers would still need to review a multitude of channels and alarms across the entire subsystem to find
the source of the issue.
Maintaining a single model per channel also facilitates more
granular control of the system. Early stopping can be used to limit
training to models and channels that show decreases in validation
error . When issues arise such as high-variance predictions due
to overfitting, these issues can be handled on a channel-by-channel
basis without affecting the system as a whole.
Predicting Values for a Channel. Consider a time series
X = {x(1), x(2), . . . , x(n)} where each step x(t) ∈Rm in the time
series is an m-dimensional vector {x(t)
2 , . . . ,x(t)
m }, whose elements correspond to input variables . For each point x(t), a
sequence length ls determines the number of points to input into
the model for prediction. A prediction length lp then determines
the number of steps ahead to predict, where the number of dimensions d being predicted is 1 ≤d ≤m. Since our aim is to predict
telemetry values for a single channel we consider the situation
where d = 1. We also use lp = 1 to limit the number of predictions
for each step t and decrease processing time. As a result, a single
scalar prediction ˆy(t) is generated for the actual telemetry value at
each step t (see Figure 1). In situations where either lp > 1 or d > 1
or both, Gaussian parameters can be used to represent matrices of
predicted values at a single step t .
In our telemetry prediction scenario, the inputs x(t) into the
LSTM consist of prior telemetry values for a given channel and
encoded command information sent to the spacecraft. Specifically,
the combination of the module to which a command was issued
and whether a command was sent or received are one-hot encoded
and slotted into each step t (see Figure 3).
Dynamic Error Thresholds
Automated monitoring of thousands of telemetry channels whose
expected values vary according to changing environmental factors
and command sequences requires a fast, general, and unsupervised
approach for determining if predicted values are anomalous. One
common approach is to make Gaussian assumptions about the distributions of past smoothed errors as this allows for fast comparisons
between new errors and compact representations of prior ones
 . However, this approach often becomes problematic when
parametric assumptions are violated as we demonstrate in Section
4.3, and we offer an approach that efficiently identifies extreme
values without making such assumptions. Distance-based methods
are similar in this regard but they often involve high computational
cost, such as those that call for comparisons of each point to a set
of k neighbors . Also, these methods are more general and
are concerned with anomalies that occur in the normal range of
values. Only abnormally high or low smoothed prediction errors
are of interest and error thresholding is, in a sense, a simplified
version of the initial anomaly detection problem.
Errors and Smoothing. Once a predicted value ˆy(t) is generated for each step t, the prediction error is calculated as e(t) =
|y(t) −ˆy(t)|, where y(t) = x(t+1)
with i corresponding to the dimension of the true telemetry value (see Figure 1). Each e(t) is appended
to a one-dimensional vector of errors:
e = [e(t−h), . . . ,e(t−ls), . . . ,e(t−1),e(t)]
where h is the number of historical error values used to evaluate
current errors. The set of errors e are then smoothed to dampen
spikes in errors that frequently occur with LSTM-based predictions –
abrupt changes in values are often not perfectly predicted and result
in sharp spikes in error values even when this behavior is normal
 . We use an exponentially-weighted average (EWMA) to generate the smoothed errors es = [e(t−h)
, . . . ,e(t−ls)
, . . . ,e(t−1)
 . To evaluate whether values are nominal, we set a threshold
for their smoothed prediction errors – values corresponding to
smoothed errors above the threshold are classified as anomalies.
Threshold Calculation and Anomaly Scoring. At this stage,
an appropriate anomaly threshold is sometimes learned with supervised methods that use labeled examples, however it is often
the case that sufficient labeled data is not available and this holds
true in our scenario . We propose an unsupervised method that
achieves high performance with low overhead and without the
use of labeled data or statistical assumptions about errors. With a
threshold ϵ selected from the set:
ϵ = µ(es) + zσ(es)
Where ϵ is determined by:
ϵ = arдmax(ϵ) = ∆µ(es)/µ(es)) + (∆σ(es)/σ(es)
|ea| + |Eseq|2
Such that:
∆µ(es) = µ(es) −µ({es ∈es |es < ϵ})
∆σ(es) = σ(es) −σ({es ∈es |es < ϵ})
ea = {es ∈es |es > ϵ}
Eseq = continuous sequences of ea ∈ea
Figure 2: An example demonstrating the anomaly pruning process. In this scenario emax = [0.01396, 0.01072, 0.00994] and the minimum percent decrease
p = 0.1. The decrease from Anomaly 2 to Anomaly 1 d(1) = 0.23 > p and
this sequence retains its classification as anomalous. From Anomaly 1 to the
next highest smoothed error (es = 0.0099) d(2) = .07 < p so this sequence is
re-classified as nominal.
Values evaluated for ϵ are determined using z ∈z where z is an
ordered set of positive values representing the number of standard
deviations above µ(es). Values for z depend on context, but we
found a range of between two and ten to work well based on our
experimental results. Values for z less than two generally resulted
in too many false positives. Once arдmax(ϵ) is determined, each
resulting anomalous sequence of smoothed errors eseq ∈Eseq is
given an anomaly score, s, indicating the severity of the anomaly:
seq) −arдmax(ϵ)
µ(es) + σ(es)
In simple terms, a threshold is found that, if all values above are
removed, would cause the greatest percent decrease in the mean
and standard deviation of the smoothed errors es. The function
also penalizes for having larger numbers of anomalous values (|ea|)
and sequences (|Eseq|) to prevent overly greedy behavior. Then
the highest smoothed error in each sequence of anomalous errors
is given a normalized score based on its distance from the chosen
threshold.
Mitigating False Positives
Pruning Anomalies. The precision of prediction-based anomaly
detection approaches heavily depends on the amount of historical
data (h) used to set thresholds and make judgments about current
prediction errors. At large scales it becomes expensive to query and
process historical data in real-time scenarios and a lack of history
can lead to false positives that are only deemed anomalous because
of the narrow context in which they are evaluated. Additionally,
when extremely high volumes of data are being processed a low
false positive rate can still overwhelm human reviewers charged
with evaluating potentially anomalous events.
To mitigate false positives and limit memory and compute cost,
we introduce a pruning procedure in which a new set, emax , is created containing max(eseq) for all eseq sorted in descending order.
We also add the maximum smoothed error that isn’t anomalous,
max({es ∈es ∈Eseq|es ∋ea}), to the end of emax. The sequence
is then stepped through incrementally and the percent decrease
d(i) = (e(i−1)
max)/e(i−1)
max at each step i is calculated where
i ∈{1, 2, ..., (|Eseq| + 1)}. If at some step i a minimum percentage
decrease p is exceeded by d(i), all e(j)
max ∈emax | j < i and their
corresponding anomaly sequences remain anomalies. If the minimum decrease p is not met by d(i) and for all subsequent errors
d(i),d(i+1), . . . ,d(i+|Eseq |+1) those smoothed error sequences are
reclassified as nominal. This pruning helps ensures anomalous sequences are not the result of regular noise within a stream, and it is
enabled through the initial identification of sequences of anomalous
values via thresholding. Limiting evaluation to only the maximum
errors in a handful of potentially anomalous sequences is much
more efficient than the multitude of value-to-value comparisons
required without thresholding.
Learning from History. A second strategy for limiting false
positives can be employed once a small amount of anomaly history or labeled data has been gathered. Based on the assumption
that anomalies of similar magnitude s generally are not frequently
recurring within the same channel, we can set a minimum score,
smin, such that future anomalies are re-classified as nominal if
s < smin. A minimum score would only be applied to channels
of data for which the system was generating anomalies above a
certain rate and smin is individually set for all such channels. Prior
anomaly scores for a channel can be used to set an appropriate smin
depending on the desired balance between precision and recall.
Additionally, if the anomaly detection system has a mechanism
by which users can provide labels for anomalies, these labels can
also be used to set smin for a given stream. For example, if a stream
or channel has several confirmed false positive anomalies, smin
can be set near the upper bound of these false positive anomaly
scores. Both of these approaches have played an important role in
improving the precision of early implementations of the system by
helping account for normal spacecraft behaviors that are infrequent
but occur at regular intervals.
EXPERIMENTS
For many spacecraft including SMAP and MSL, current anomaly
detection systems are difficult to assess. The precision and recall
of alarms aren’t captured and telemetry assessments are often performed manually. Fortunately, indications of telemetry anomalies
can be found within previously mentioned ISA reports. A subset of
all of the incidents and anomalies detailed in ISAs manifest in specific telemetry channels, and by mining the ISA reports for SMAP
and MSL we were able to collect a set of telemetry anomalies corresponding to actual spacecraft issues involving various subsystems
and channel types.
All telemetry channels discussed in an individual ISA were reviewed to ensure that the anomaly was evident in the associated
telemetry data, and specific anomalous time ranges were manually labeled for each channel. If multiple anomalous sequences and
channels closely resembled each other, only one was kept for the
experiment in order to create a diverse and balanced set.
We classify anomalies into two categories, point and contextual,
to distinguish between anomalies that would likely be identified
by properly-set alarms or distance-based methods that ignore temporal information (point anomalies) and those that require more
Figure 3: The encoding the of command information is demonstrated for a
telemetry stream containing a contextual anomaly that is unlikely to be identified using limit- or distance-based approaches. Using the encoded command
information and prior telemetry values for the channel, predictions are generated for the next time step with resulting errors. The one-step-ahead predictions and actual telemetry values are very close in this example as shown
in top time series plot. An error threshold is set using the non-parametric
thresholding approach detailed in Section 3.2, resulting in two predicted
anomalous sequences – one false positive and one true positive lying within
the labeled anomalous region. The false positive demonstrates the need for
pruning described in Section 3.3, which would reclassify that sequence as
nominal given that it is relatively close to values below the threshold (see
Figure 2).
Table 1: Experimental Data Information
Total anomaly sequences
Point anomalies (% tot.)
Contextual anomalies (% tot.)
Unique telemetry channels
Unique ISAs
Telemetry values evaluated
complex methodologies such as LSTMs or Hierarchical Temporal
Memory (HTM) approaches to detect (contextual anomalies) .
This characterization is adapted from the three categories previously mentioned – point, contextual, and collective . Since contextual and collective anomalies both require temporal context and are
harder to detect, they have both been combined into the contextual
category presented in the next section.
In addition to evaluating the performance of the methodologies
in Section 3, we also compare the post-prediction performance
of our error thresholding method to a parametric unsupervised
approach used in the top-performing algorithm for the recent Numenta Anomaly Benchmark .
No comparisons are made between the LSTM-based approach
and other predictive models as leaps forward in the underlying
prediction performance will more likely come from providing increasingly refined command-based features to the model. Given
the rise in prediction-based anomaly detection methods and related
research , we place increased emphasis on post-prediction
error evaluation methods that have received comparatively less
focus yet demonstrate significant impact on our results.
For each unique stream of data containing one or more anomalous
sequences with the primary anomaly occurring at time ta, we evaluate all telemetry values in a surrounding timeframe fromts = ta−3d
to tf = ta + 2d where d is days. A model is trained for each unique
stream using values and command data from tstrain = ts −2d to
tftrain = ts. Additional days were included if sufficient data was
not available in these timeframes. This 5-day span around anomalies was selected to balance two objectives: deeper insight into
precision and reasonable computational cost. Predicted anomalous
regions are also slightly expanded to facilitate the combining of
anomalous regions in close proximity – regions that overlap or
touch after expansion are combined into a single region to account
for situations where multiple anomalous regions represent a single
Each labeled anomalous sequence xa ∈xa of telemetry values
is evaluated against the final set of predicted anomalous sequences
identified by the system according to the following rules:
(1) A true positive is recorded if:
∈eseq ∈eseq : x(t)
for any xa ∈xa. In other words, a true positive results if any
portion of a predicted sequence of anomalies falls within any
true labeled sequence. Only one true positive is recorded
even if portions of multiple predicted sequences fall within
a labeled sequence.
(2) If no predicted sequences overlap with a positively labeled
sequence, a false negative is recorded for the labeled sequence.
(3) For all predicted sequences that do not overlap a labeled
anomalous region, a false positive is recorded.
For simplicity, we do not make scoring adjustments based on
how early an anomaly was detected or the distance between false
positives and labeled regions .
Batch processing. Telemetry values are aggregated into one
minute windows and evaluated in batches of 70 minutes mimicking
the downlink schedule for SMAP and our current system implementation. Each 70 minute batch of values is evaluated using h = 2100,
where h is the number of prior values used to calculate an error
threshold and evaluate the current batch. The system is also wellsuited to process values in a real-time, streaming fashion when
applicable.
Model Parameters and Evaluation
The same architecture and parameters are used for all models in
the experiment:
Model Parameters
hidden layers
units in hidden layers
sequence length (ls)
training iterations
batch size
input dimensions
25 (SMAP), 55 (MSL)
Each model is shallow with only two hidden layers and 80 units
in each layer. We found this architecture provided enough capacity
to predict individual channels well, and adding additional capacity
provided little to no prediction benefits while increasing model
sizes and training times. All channels do not necessarily require
this amount of capacity and future improvements could include
automated selection of appropriate model capacity based on channel
complexity. Similarly, a sequence lengthls = 250 provided a balance
between performance and training times. The difference in input
dimensions for SMAP and MSL results from the missions each
having different sets of command modules. Early stopping was used
to prevent overfitting during model training, and not all models
were trained for the full 35 iterations.
Once predictions were generated, anomaly thresholds for smoothed
errors were calculated using the method detailed in Section 3.2
with z = {2.5, 3.0, 3.5, ..., 10.0} and the minimum percent difference between subsequent anomalies p = 0.13. The p parameter
is an important lever for controlling precision and recall, and an
appropriate value can be inferred when labels are available. In our
setting, reasonable results were achieved with 0.05 < p < 0.20 (see
Figure 4).
Comparison with Parametric Thresholding. Using the raw
LSTM prediction errors, we also generate anomalies with the parametric error evaluation approach used in coordination with the
most accurate model from the Numenta Anomaly Benchmark .
This approach processes raw errors incrementally – at each step t a
window W of historical errors is modeled as a normal distribution,
and the mean µW and variance σ2
W are updated at each step t. We
set W ’s length lw = h = 2100 and use the same set of prediction errors for both approaches. A short-term average µs of length lshort
of prediction errors is then calculated and has a similar smoothing
effect as the EWMA smoothing in Section 3.2. The likelihood of an
anomaly L is then defined using the tail probability Q:
If L ≥1 −ϵnorm values are classified as anomalous. In the
next section, results generated using lshort = 10 and ϵnorm =
{0.01, 0.0001} are compared to the approach in Section 3.2. The
Table 2: Results for each spacecraft using LSTM predictions and various approaches to error thresholding.
Thresholding Approach
F0.5 score
Non-Parametric w/ Pruning (p = 0.13)
Non-Parametric w/out Pruning (p = 0)
Gaussian Tail (ϵnorm = 0.0001)
Gaussian Tail (ϵnorm = 0.01)
Gaussian Tail w/ Pruning (ϵnorm = 0.01,p = 0.13)
effects of pruning (detailed in Section 3.3) on this approach are also
Results and Discussion
As shown in Table 2, the best results in terms of F0.5 score are
achieved using the LSTM-based predictions combined with the
non-parametric thresholding approach with pruning. In terms of
prediction, The LSTM models achieved an average normalized absolute error of 5.9% predicting telemetry values one time step ahead.
Table 3: Telemetry Prediction Errors
Average LSTM Prediction Error
Parameters were tuned to balance precision and recall for experimentation, however in the current implementation precision is
weighted more heavily when tuning parameters because the precision results shown are overly optimistic compared to the actual
implementation of the system. There is an implicit assumption in
the experiment that anomalies occur once every five days, where
five days is the total number of days processed for each stream
containing an anomaly. The experiment also does not include processing for all streams not exhibiting anomalous behavior for a
given time window, which would further increase the number of
false positives. This decreased precision in the implemented system is offset by setting minimum anomaly scores via the methods
outlined at the end of Section 3.3.
Figure 4: Plot showing comparison of overall precision and recall results for
parametric approach and approach presented in this paper (labeled ’Nonparametric’) with various parameter settings.
Thresholding Comparisons. Results for the non-parametric
approach without pruning are presented to demonstrate pruning’s
importance in mitigating false positives. The pruning process is
roughly analogous to the pruning of decision trees in the sense that
it helps pare down a greedy approach designed to overfit in order to
improve performance. In this instance, pruning only decreases overall recall by 4.8 percentage points (84.8% to 80.0%) while increasing
overall precision by 38.6 percentage points (48.9% to 87.5%). The
84.8% recall achieved without pruning is an approximation of the
upper bound for recall given the predictions generated by the LSTM
models. If predictions are poor and resulting smoothed errors do
not contain a signal then thresholding methods will be ineffective.
The Gaussian tail approach results in lower levels of precision
and recall using various parameter settings. Pruning greatly improves precision but at a high recall cost, resulting in an F0.5 score
that is still well below the score achieved by the non-parametric
approach with pruning. One factor that contributes to lower performance for this method is the violation of Gaussian assumptions
in the smoothed errors. Using D’Agostino and Pearson’s normality
test , we reject the null hypothesis of normality for all sets of
smoothed errors using a threshold of α = 0.005. The error information lost when using Gaussian parameters results in suboptimal
thresholds that negatively affect precision and recall and cannot be
corrected by pruning (see Figure 4 and Table 2).
Performance for Different Anomaly Types. The high proportion of contextual anomalies (41%) provides further justification
for the use of LSTMs and prediction-based methods over methods
that ignore temporal information. Only a small subset of the contextual anomalies – those where anomalous telemetry values happen
to fall in low-density regions – could theoretically be detected using
limit-based or density-based approaches. Optimistically, this establishes a maximum possible recall near the best result presented
here and obviates extensive comparisons with these approaches.
Not surprisingly, recall was lower for contextual anomalies but the
LSTM-based approach was able to identify a majority of these.
Table 4: Recall for different anomaly types using LSTM predictions with nonparametric thresholding and pruning.
Recall - point
Recall - contextual
Performance for Different Spacecraft. SMAP and MSL are
very different missions representing varying degrees of difficulty
when it comes to anomaly detection. Compared to MSL, operations
for the SMAP spacecraft are routine and resulting telemetry can be
more easily predicted with less training and less data. MSL performs
a much wider variety of behaviors with varying regularity, some of
which resulted during rover activities that were not present in the
limited training data. This explains the lower precision and recall
performance for MSL ISAs and is also apparent in the difference
between the average LSTM prediction errors - average error in
predicting telemetry for SMAP was 5.5% versus 6.8% for MSL at JPL, managed by the California Institute of Technology on behalf of NASA. The authors would specifically like
to thank Sonny Koliwad, Chris Ballard, Prashanth Pandian, Chris
Swan, and Charles Kirby for their feedback and support.