I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
Published Online July 2017 in MECS ( 
DOI: 10.5815/ijmecs.2017.07.02
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the
Art Review
Sara Ashraf, Shabib Aftab
Department of Computer Science, Virtual University of Pakistan
Email: {sara22.ashraf, shabib.aftab}@gmail.com
Abstract—Owing to a big deal of benefits that Agile
process models offer to the software industry, they have
been the center of attention for a couple of decades for
researchers. Scrum has emerged as one of the most
prevalent contemporary Agile approaches. It's adaptive
and versatile nature makes it appropriate for adoption.
Experts have been experimenting and tweaking the
practices for last many years to enrich the Scrum. This
paper is intended to provide the latest insightful
understanding of how the Agile Scrum tailored and
adapted in different areas for software process
improvement that in turn lead to increased productivity
and product quality. A research strategy has been
designed to extract the literature since 2016, based on
pragmatic transformations of Scrum, subsequently
gaining the in-depth perception that is presented in the
paper as a comprehensive review and the outcomes are
discussed. This work will contribute a state-of-the-art
objective summary from which advance research
activities can be planned and carried out.
Index Terms—Agile, Scrum, Tailored Scrum, Improved
Scrum, Transformations in Scrum, Customized Scrum,
Systematic Literature Review.
I. INTRODUCTION
Adapting to inconsistent environments is essential.
Thus, Agile philosophies emerged as a remedy for the
orthodox customs of development . Agile
software development models have proven their claim
valid for better handling of the dynamic business
environment [14, 15, 16, and 18]. Agile Software
Development Ecosystems (ASDEs) comprising of
Extreme Programming (XP), Scrum, Feature Driven
Development (FDD), Crystal Clear, Test Driven
Development (TDD) etc. They share the common
philosophy based on 04 values and 12 principles
collectively named as Agile Manifesto . Hence,
Scrum is not the only Agile, though it has won the Agile
war . According to Schwaber et al. , the formal
definition of Scrum is:
“A framework within which people can address
complex adaptive problems while productively and
creatively delivering products of the highest possible
With increased productivity, reduced time to market
the product, better collaboration, continuous feedback,
and ability to embrace change, Scrum is recognized as
most used agile model currently . According to ,
61% of respondents who were from 76 countries use
Scrum. For dealing with growing complexity of projects,
Scrum offers an extensive range of management practices
 . However, in case of engineering practices, it gives
the liberty of adaptations by not defining them explicitly.
Configuring a standard software process by adapting it in
compliance with a project or organization’s particularities
is called tailoring . Projects are unique in nature,
so same method fits all philosophy doesn’t exist .
Hence, tailoring of Scrum process model is required for
accomplishing a project successfully and meeting the
objectives. Planning, design, software quality assurance,
testing, team performance, and communication are some
key areas where practitioners confront challenges that
need to be tackled prudently as Scrum process practices
do not support them formally. Different researchers and
practitioners have been making efforts to evolve Scrum
for last decade to address these challenges. Most of them
tried to optimize the traditional Scrum with a more
pragmatic adoption of agile philosophy.
In this paper, a comprehensive analysis of the latest
enhancements in Scrum process model is being presented
in such a way that Section II abridges some related work,
Section III elaborates the protocol of Systematic
Literature Review (SLR), Section IV presents the critical
review of the selected empirical studies of tailored Scrum
versions, Section V discusses the results, and Section VI
will conclude the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Different secondary and tertiary studies have been
conducted within the domain of Agile Software
Development (ASD) during last years. Some of these
tertiary studies emphasized on investigating Agile
practices along with their corresponding effects on
project constraints , some premeditated the role of
Agile for Global Software Engineering (GSE) and current
trends , while others identified several research areas
within ASD .
Certain systematic reviews examined the pieces of
evidence that support the benefits and weaknesses of
agile methods [24, 29, and 47]. Some explored their
integration with User-Centered-Design (UCD) 
and Requirements Engineering (RE) . Karvonen et al.
 examined the area of Agile Release Engineering
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
(ARE). Pedreira et al. presented a literature review
for identification of software process tailoring approaches.
Various secondary studies were mainly focused on
Scrum, its evolution, adoption, and usage trends in the
industry . Some consolidated empirical evidence
to reveal the association between Scrum and increased
productivity . Pino et al. studied Scrum in
context of Software Process Improvement (SPI) for small
organizations, similarly, they analyzed the prevailing SPI
approaches for SMEs . Hossain et al. conducted
an SLR that seeks to identify challenges that are
encountered while using Scrum in GSD. Jalali et al. 
addressed the similar area by discussing agile practices in
GSD. Communication is one of the major challenges for
GSD , has identified communication practices in
investigated
transformations can fulfil the needs of large-scale
distributed development . It has been found that
no study is evident yet which has systematically reviewed
the latest pragmatic transformations in Scrum.
III. RESEARCH PROTOCOL
In a systematic literature review, the evidence-basedparadigm supports objective assessment and empirical
result generation in relevance to a specified research
question .
The research protocol specifies the procedure to be
followed for review; it is a detailed plan to be adopted
along with any boundary conditions or any criteria to
apply while selecting primary studies, quality measures,
etc. .
Taking into account the guidelines presented by
Kitchenham and Charters , for SLR in SE, a
research protocol has been designed. Different steps of
our SLR are: i) formulating research questions, ii)
identifying keywords to form the Query string, iii)
identifying the search space, iv) establishing selection
criteria, v) applying these criteria for literature extraction,
vi) quality assessment, vii) data extraction and synthesis,
and vii) presenting the outcomes, as can be seen in fig. 1.
A. Research Questions
At this step of SLR, research objectives are defined in
terms of research questions. There are following
Research Questions (RQ) of our study:
 RQ1: What are the improved or tailored models of
 RQ2: Do tailored models provide any practical
 RQ3: What are the recent transformations in Scrum?
 RQ4: What are the key areas in which Scrum
process model has been improved?
 RQ5: What are the practices, roles, or events that
have been introduced or innovated in Scrum?
B. Search Space and Query String
Some key terms are derived from our research
questions formulated in the preceding step. The keywords
have been connected using Boolean operators to design
the search string: (agile AND (scrum AND (process OR
method) AND (improved OR tailored OR adapted OR
customization)))
Fig.1. Steps of SLR
As a next step of the process, search space is identified
i.e. actually the selection of databases or libraries to
consult from. In our case, we’ve opted for IEEE Xplore,
ACM Digital Library, and SpringerLink as can be seen in
Table 1. It is important to note that each of these libraries
has different characteristics of their search engines. For
that reason, slight adjustments were made into query
string to make appropriate searches in each of these
libraries.
Table 1. Search Space
Digital Library
Search Scheme
IEEE Xplore
title, abstract and
2017-03-20
title, abstract and
2017-03-22
SpringerLink
title, abstract and
2017-03-25
C. Selection Criteria
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
We established the selection criteria for extracting the
related literature. Selection of papers is based on the
following inclusion and exclusion criteria:
Inclusion Criteria (IC):
Inclusion criteria are based on the following
propositions:
IC1: Papers published in 2016 till to date.
literature
conferences, proceedings of conferences, and
workshops.
IC3: Papers that include variants of Scrum with a
figure of the improved model.
IC4: Papers that have empirical evaluations of the
customized Scrum.
Exclusion Criteria (EC):
Exclusion criteria are based on the following
propositions:
EC1: Papers not written in English.
EC2: Papers published before 2016.
EC3: Papers published in a journal other than
ACM, IEEE, or Springer.
EC4: Papers under peer review, thesis reports, and
those of which full text is not available.
EC5: Specific book chapters or full books.
EC6: Papers that contain reviews, surveys, or
analysis of previous work.
EC7: Papers including agile Scrum but not
improved process models.
EC8: Papers that do not include any figure of the
tailored Scrum.
EC9: Papers based on proposals or just ideas,
guidelines or recommendations, and lessons
EC10: Papers that introduced tools to improve
agile Scrum process.
EC11: Papers that improve Scrum by integrating
other models into it or proposing hybrid models.
EC12: Papers that involve empirical studies of
Scrum in other disciplines.
As a result of an initial search based on keywords, we
found a large number of articles i.e. aggregate results =
26920. Then, search results were narrowed down by
applying selection criteria. A step-wise screening was
carried out as shown in fig. 2.
D. Quality Assessment
In order to be effective, quality assessment needs to be
ascertained. A quality standard has been acquired for
comprehending crucial results of pertinent studies.
1. Highly-reputed scientific databases have been
selected and most recent work and researches have
been included to infer upon.
2. Data extraction and assessment has been done
without biases and obscure assertions.
Fig.2. Search Process
E. Data Extraction & Synthesis
After applying selection criteria eight most relevant
papers have been retrieved, given in Table 2. Extraction
of data is carried out in line with the template given in
Table 2. Distribution of Research Works by Source
Scientific
Researches
 , , 
 , , 
J: Journal, C: Conference, W: Workshop,
Table 3. Data Extraction & Synthesis Format
Description
Bibliographic Details
Publication year, author, title, type,
(journal, conference, workshop),
publisher details
Extraction of Data
(Objective Results of Study)
Apply selection criteria
Scan based on Title
Scan based on Abstract
Scan based on General Study of literature
Scan full text manually
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
Methodology
(case-study, survey, experience)
Nature of case-study
small, large / academic, industrial
Model title/ name
Name of Project
Synthesis of Data
(Objective Results of Study)
Roles/ Artifacts/ events
evolved/ introduced
PO, SM, QA, etc. / Product Backlog,
Sprint Backlog, etc. / Daily-standup,
Sprint Review, etc.
Areas addressed
Identification of Areas where
improvements are made.
Success factors achieved.
IV. TRANSFORMED OR TAILORED VERSIONS OF SCRUM
As far as the communication channel is concerned, the
models were published in scientific journals, workshops
or conference proceedings. Out of eight, six of the
conference
proceedings, one in a scientific journal and one appeared
in a workshop. A comprehensive review of the selected
eight transformed Scrum models is given as under:
Scrum-Hero is a gamified Scrum process for project
monitoring and planning. The customized Scrum is aimed
at achieving customer satisfaction, on-time releases, and
efficiency and motivation of the team. Souza et al. 
customized the Scrum framework by mapping the process
as a game based on Role Playing Game RPG. The authors
proposed the model to increase people involvement by
making their tasks amusing so that they would get enough
motivation to complete their tasks. They introduced a
new taxonomy of game terminologies in Scrum e.g.
characters, scores, rewards, challenges, and medals etc.
The roles of typical Scrum are mapped as players:
Development team as Warriors, Product Owner PO as
Product Oracle, Scrum Master SM as Scrum Healer, and
Scrum team as Clan’s life where the customers interact as
mystical entities. Impediments are termed as Stone
Monsters and Sprints as Quests. In Scrum-Hero, there are
3 types of scores: a player has Skill score/ Points SP,
Clan has no score, Score points are earned when players
accomplish their daily tasks. The players gain Experience
Points XP by fulfilling their achievements. There are
certain rewards such as medals for related skills, trophies
for achievements, and there are real awards given at the
end of game or Quest. By achieving these rewards, the
players grow in their levels like Hero, Ninja, Knight,
Guardian, and Newbie. Scrum-Hero maps the artifacts as:
Product backlog is now a wish list of Mystical entities,
Sprint backlog is termed as Task-list of Quests, Increment
refers to Offerings, Burn down chart remains same,
validated increment is Offering accepted. Similarly, the
ceremonies of Scrum are mapped as: Quests are the
Sprints such that each with a goal and tasks that Warriors
perform. Sprint Planning is now a Quest Planning. Daily
Scrum is Daily Challenge, Sprint Review and Sprint
Retrospective are now Quest Challenge and Clan-
Improvement meeting respectively. The gamified model
was then evaluated in real practical settings with 4 Quests
and 4 team members i.e. 1 Product Oracle, 2 Warriors,
and 1 Scrum Healer. A software prototype named as
Scrum–Hero
management
including Wishes, Skills, Scores, Quests, etc. of players.
In order to assess the impact of gamification on team’s
motivation, on-time releases, historical data and results of
the company are compared with that of the current
feedback gathered through the questionnaires and Scrum-
Hero Manager. It has been found that in 75% of the
Quests, the releases were on-time which was previously
Limitations:
Scrum-Hero model needs prior training and learning
for appropriate adaptation. No explicit guidelines
regarding product quality are mentioned within the
proposed model. It needs to have a friendly environment
for employing this model. It is for small projects and
teams only. Results for customer satisfaction and team
motivation are not delivered in the paper.
Gupta et al. presented a transformed Scrum model
by incorporating innovative practices for any legacy
product’s development team employing agile. They
analyzed their model through the case study of a multilocation software product. The model was tailored in a
way to cope up the challenges of scaling business,
technical debt, collaboration, communication, and testing
principally. The product under consideration is very
complex and has a history of ten years, with huge
investments but no improvement in output. The
development is distributed mainly at three sites India,
Germany, and US. The authors identified three critical
factors along with technical competency needed for the
product i.e. communication, collaboration, and culture of
high performance and continuous improvement. They
customized the traditional roles and responsibilities for
the adoption of Scrum e.g. Chief Product Owner (CPO),
Part Product Owner (PPO), Chief Scrum Master (CSM),
Scrum Master-cum-Part-Product Owner (SMPO), and
Test Coach. Additional responsibilities of Scrum Masters
and Test Coaches are defined. They defined some new
events designed to improve collaboration each with a
time limit like daily, weekly, and bi-weekly Scrum-of-
Scrums. Similarly, some other events are dedicated daily
collaboration, virtual testing Stand-up, and peer feedback.
In order to repay the technical debt, the authors adapted a
4-stage pragmatic approach of . Identifying technical
debt, defining strategy, executing action plan, and
validating or handling the technical debt are the 4 stages
of this approach. The paper contributes an agile testing
strategy that extends the traditional testing (limited to
system, integration, and regression testing) to load, unit,
API, and performance testing. The pragmatic studies
revealed that the modified taxonomy and ceremonies of
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
transformed Scrum have positive impact on product
quality and team’s performance. The pragmatic approach
helped to decrease technical debts. The time-boxed
ceremonies resolved conflicts, improved collaboration
that in turn improved team’s competency and motivation.
The testing strategy has improved product’s stability and
quality. Also, users scaling, early product delivery, code
quality, and customer satisfaction are some other benefits
Limitations:
The management needs to have better visibility of
tasks rolling from one end to the other. Practices are
needed to incorporate in order to improve visibility and
transparency. There is no shortcut to deal with critical
issues appearing in between the Sprints except waiting
for the next sprint to get ranked. Also, practices are
needed to improve the team’s performance.
Scrum has been scaled by different researchers for
distributed development and teams but these variants of
Scrum are not competent to manage the synchronized
releases across different platforms i.e. same application
needs different front-ends across different platforms
simultaneously. Sithole and Fritz customized the
Scrum for synchronized cross-platform releases. The
proposed model is, in fact, an extension of the model
Scrum at Scale by Brown and Sutherland which is a
modular framework with ten such modules that offer
flexibility by supporting context-based solutions. The
authors introduced a set of optional practices that may
application
synchronized
development. The synchronized Scrum model was
validated through a case study based on Android and iOS
client applications development for the South African
government department. The client demands for a
concurrent release of the above-mentioned applications.
There were 2 teams each of 3 developers working on
each client application. The authors of the model tweaked
nine modules out of ten to make them work for
synchronized releases. Different practices customized
among these modules are: empowered product owner in
strategic vision module, product-owner team partnering
in backlog prioritization module, requirement analysis
teams in backlog decomposition and refinement module,
and the practices of flexible synchronized releases and
tightly managed deliverables in release planning and
management module. In team level process module,
different Scrum Masters were assigned to the client and
server-side development teams. In feedback module, the
practice of product owner filtration was selected so that
synchronized teams and customers can have a single
communication
Continuous
improvement
module uses sprint retrospective, and impediments
removal module includes daily Scrum, team level
resolutions, center of excellence, and executive level
practices. Cross-team coordination module enforces
norms, shared standards and guidelines among teams.
Shared dashboard serves the transparency module and
metrics module uses ad hoc practice so that team may
choose metrics and tools randomly. By applying
Mulder’s success criterion the synchronized Scrum
model was evaluated for its compliance and found
82.22% rating that is quite satisfactory. Different metrics
were used to measure the performance of the teams
categorized under 4 different levels: a) the input b)
activity c) output d) outcome. During this case-study
certain challenges were encountered that may put
synchronized releases at risk, some of them are team
dynamics and difference in team profiles, and lack of
team interference regulation.
Limitations:
The current study is confined to a limited set of
principles so can be extended further with more practices
and parameters. Moreover, it is evaluated for two small
teams with synchronized releases, so needs to be
validated for large-scale synchronized developments.
Rahayu et al. enriched the Scrum by incorporating
usability testing into it. The proposed model is intended
to cope up the 3 key challenges encountered in Scrum
process that are: a) longer user feedback loops, b) no user
involvement in testing, and c) lack of quality product. A
research methodology comprising of 5 stages was
designed to investigate if Scrum combined with usability
testing can handle the above-mentioned challenges.
According to this strategy, at first, identify the research
problem, then review the literature, develop and gather
data, then analyze the solution and finally infer the results.
The authors integrated the usability testing within the
Sprint Review event of Scrum, thereby inviting both the
users and stakeholders for collecting the feedback from
them. In this way, the results of usability testing will
guide the development team and in turn, lead to improved
product quality. This feedback can help in refining
product backlog and in next Sprint planning meeting.
Similarly, the output of next Sprint will have better
customer satisfaction. For tailored Scrum model’s
evaluation, a case-study based on ‘Lembaga Asisten’
information system was conducted. Testing Strategy was
supported by 2 instruments i.e. Post-Study System
Usability Questionnaire PSSUQ and usability scenario.
Firstly, the users followed a set of activities planned in
usability testing scenario then they are asked about
PSSUQ. It has been found that feedback obtained from
users is more comprehensive than the key stakeholders’
feedback. Moreover, the usability testing response is
more structured. Rather than waiting for the end product
and then making changes, the development team gets an
earlier insight of the product and ensures its success. It
has not only improved the user involvement but also
builds their trust and confidence in the product. Also, the
team gets motivated through the user’s acknowledgment.
Thus, the model has successfully achieved most of its
Limitations:
The assessment tool PSSUQ for usability testing needs
to be improved by adding more indicators into it.
Automated testing tools should be used.
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
Hanssen et al. presented a variant of Scrum, named
as SafeScrum, which supports the development of a
safety-critical software by borrowing some XP practices.
The SafeScrum ascertains that the developed software is
in accordance with the safety standard IEC61508. The
model maintains two backlogs, one for functional
requirements and the other for security requirements.
Also, analyzes the dependence of former on the latter. By
satisfying
safety-critical
development an additional overhead is introduced that
may compromise the concept of light-weight of an agile
framework. Automated tools were required to be
introduced in the process for making it efficient and
effective. Therefore, the authors have designed a toolchain to support the SafeScrum that includes the tools for
documentation, quality management, workflow, and
process traceability. The authors have been employing
and adapting the SafeScrum for an industry project of fire
and gas detection system for almost two years, with the
intention to attain a Safety-Integrity-Level SIL3 of the
aforementioned standard. The data was collected through
meetings’ observations, interviews of the team, and
documentation.
organization played a role of external assessor in the
process. The process was initiated simply with a team of
5 co-located members, while Sprint was spanned over 4
weeks. The process was refined gradually with each
Sprint, after a few Sprints automated tools replaced the
manual effort for managing workflow, team collaboration,
documentation, and quality assurance. By configuring the
tool-chain in the process the team was successfully
producing and maintaining the required information. But
after a few months, there was a need to reinforce the QA
function as it was overloaded and needs to be addressed.
Hence, authors recommended adding the QA role in the
Scrum team explicitly to avoid adding more work to the
method. Furthermore, QA is supposed to perform four
simple and specific tasks for checking test coverage,
documentation coverage, code-traceability, and codemetrics values.
Limitations:
The role of QA is very crucial for carrying out the
SafeScrum process successfully in compliance with to the
standard so needs to be refined and streamlined. The
project has not completed yet therefore, the developed
software is not certified.
Ardito et al. improved the Scrum framework by
integrating Human-Centered Design HCD practices into
it. This tailored HCD-SCRUM is aimed at minimizing
the limitations of Scrum by systematically incorporating
stakeholder’s feedback and input into the development.
The authors discovered four common principles between
HCD and Agile software development which are: i) user
involvement, ii) prototyping, iii) continuous testing, and
iv) iterative design. The HCD-SCRUM was evaluated
through a case study in SER&P, an Italian Small-Medium
Enterprise SME with the main focus on rapid code
development, iterative refinement, constant customer
involvement, and high frequency of releases. The key
features of the HCD-SCRUM are: a) Customer
Committee comprising of 1 PO selected from Scrum
Team, 2 or more people from customers, and a businessdomain expert, b) Inception: evaluate and rank the
features to be built, c) Sprint n.0: a high-level prototype is
developed, d) SCRUM island: it’s a working desk of 4
seats, e) 1 week time-boxed Sprint, f) (IN)Sprint Review:
a Verification & Validation V&V continues throughout
the Sprint, g) Project Retrospective contains Sprint
Retrospective. For the Scrum-based process management,
SER&P employs Application-Lifecycle Management
ALM tool. Moreover, Kiuwan tool is being used for
product quality assessment. The tailored Scrum was
applied to develop a web portal related to Public-
Accounts Project in SER&P. It’s an 18-month project
with 5 people working on it. Seventeen Sprints have been
completed within 10 months of the project, to this end the
quality evaluation results show that all the quality
characteristics are satisfactory except maintainability and
portability. Findings of the experiment reveal that model
improves the customer involvement and their feedback is
vital for HCD.
Limitations:
The tailored model HCD-SCRUM doesn’t provide
portability and maintainability. It is appropriate only for
small teams. Larger and distributed teams cannot use it
without further alterations.
Harvi and Agah contributed a novel approach to
inspiration
command. According to authors, mission command and
software engineering both have the same complex and
persistently varying nature. They hypothesized that
communicating,
prioritizing
requirements in a software development process can be
improved through incorporating the military command
based approach. Targeted Scrum is a variant of Scrum
software process model and reflects 03 inspirations from
Mission-Command i.e. Targeting, Line of Effort, and End
State. Targeted Scrum targets the challenges of
preliminary planning and overall design architecture.
Before creating Product Backlog, an initial-planning
meeting is introduced in the tailored model. Afterward,
an architecture of the program is planned and assessed to
develop Product backlog along with the prioritization of
requirements to develop further Sprint Backlogs. Here,
Line of Effort (LOEs) plays a vital role in communicating
prioritization and
architecture
ultimately to the end state. Authors claimed that Targeted
Scrum is better in 04 ways: 1) by establishing Product
Design framework, 2) by grooming Product Backlog
through Product Design Meeting and LOEs, 3) by
improving Sprint Planning through LOEs, and 4) by
communicating the progress of Product to stakeholders to
synchronize the efforts. Agenda for the preliminary
Product Design Meeting and subsequent Product Design
Meeting is described by the authors. Former is no more
than 02 hours, and latter is limited to 01 hour. To evaluate
the contribution of Targeted Scrum, authors conducted a
case-study through undergraduate level students of
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
software engineering. Two projects of almost same
difficulty level were developed by students. There were
total 26 divided into 3-4 per team, 04 of the groups
followed Targeted Scrum and rest of the 03 groups
employed Traditional Scrum. They had a 01-month timebox to complete and 02-week sprint. Authors through a
methodologies on the software development team.
architecture
development,
requirements prioritization, and communicating progress
were analyzed for both the methodologies. Similarly,
developed products were analyzed along with their source
code. Results were in favor of Targeted Scrum for the
planning and requirements prioritization. On the other
hand, Targeted Scrum could not improve product quality
communications
development teams. However, product quality assisted by
Targeted Scrum, revealed improvement signs in the
middle of the continuum.
Limitations:
The limited dataset, academic calendar, and academic
environment were the limitations of this empirical study.
Due to military setup, more meetings and more formalism
are there that may seem to affect the process agility. The
experiment was conducted with 26 students for the period
of one semester. Although it provided a great insight into
Targeted Scrum but the same transformed model should
be evaluated through real-time experiments with more
software developers. A survey with a large set of
questions can be helpful in the analysis of robust data set.
Padmini et al. acquainted Scrum framework with
the concept of User Acceptance Testing (UAT) to
increase efficiency, productivity, and faster delivery. As
most of the UAT happenings are actually an integral part
of agile practices, therefore, it was easy to incorporate the
UAT in Scrum as well as in the field. Business users
conduct UAT to confirm product fitness, while this
testing involves both functional as well as non-functional
aspects of testing. The paper mainly focuses the
functional testing. The authors systematically gathered
and analyzed the data to improve the process and
streamline UAT into it. They identified the major causes
of less productivity and low level of efficiency of the
quality assurance team. Therefore, the proposed approach
stresses on team-wise transformation and subsequently
improving the process. Authors assessed the tailored
model to a complex, large-scale Revenue Management
System (RMS) with 100 domain experts as UAT team.
The system comprising of a web portal with multiple
back-end applications planned in 3 phases. The case
study is confined to phase-1 encompassing development
of 16 modules. Initially, training sessions and workshops
were conducted to enhance the team’s knowledge about
their roles and responsibilities. Separate backlogs were
maintained as Release backlogs, Module backlogs and
Scenario backlogs for each release and modules in that
release. There were 2-week sprints defined within a
release sprint of 4-week. The ceremonies of the Scrum
process were followed with slight changes. The process
elaborated defect management tracking. The quality of
UAT process was also evaluated in 4 steps. According to
the follow-up survey findings, there was a significant
increase in team’s performance, analyzed by using
Defect-to-Remark ratio (DRR). The process gradually got
streamlined. Authors recommended introducing UAT
earlier in the process to avoid project failure. Providing
early feedback, reduces the risk of failure to fulfil user
needs and managing change in technology as well as user
requirements, reduces time and cost of rework, helps
improving client’s trust, satisfies business needs. Also,
team performance was improved in terms of their
motivation, efficiency, and productivity.
Limitations:
The project has not completed yet, the findings of
assessment are taken from the first release only. Rest of
2nd and 3rd releases are under process. The testing
procedure needs to be refined further.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We have found 08 papers through the search process
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria stated in
Section III. By in-depth exploration and analysis of the
selected papers, we have found the following answers to
the given Research Questions (RQs):
RQ1: What are the improved or tailored models of
The retrieved 08 papers are the most appropriate
and are strictly in compliance with our selection criteria.
These researches have proposed improvements and
tailored the traditional Scrum process model 
i) POS for
restaurant
ii) veterinary
Roles added/
Oracle, Scrum
Healer, Clan’s
Coach, CPO,
Single SM for
all teams, PO
team-partnering
usability tester
QA engineer
UAT planning
team (Domain
experts), UAT
execution team,
Practices/
introduced/
Quests, Quest
Challenge,
Challenge and
Improvement
Daily, weekly,
dedicated daily
collaboration,
virtual testing
Stand-up, and
peer feedback.
Joint daily
stand-ups, PO
filtration,
shared sprint
retrospective,
testing during
Sprint Review
tasks involving
QA function
Sprint n.0,
Scrum Island,
no Dailystandup, IN-
Sprint Review,
Retrospective,
weekly Sprint
weekly meeting,
Sprint planning,
trainings,
Preliminary &
subsequent
Product Design
Meetings, LOEs,
Wish-List,
Task-List,
Common Product
Backlog, shared
dashboards
Functional-
training plans,
review repot,
defect log
Line-Of-Effort
7-8 members
2 distributed
teams, each of
3 developers
15 usability
100 domain
experts as a
3-4 per team, total
team members 26,
Team location
co-located
distributed
distributed
co-located
co-located
co-located
co-located teams co-located teams
organization
India, Germany,
department of
South Africa
University of
Autronica Fire
& Securitym
Practices,
organization of
University of
Kansas, KS
2-week Sprint
within a 4-week
Success factors
Product quality,
performance,
users scaling,
early product
delivery, code
quality, and
satisfaction
satisfaction,
teams’ highlevel of
synchronization
performance
involvement,
customer trust
in team and
product, quality
product, team
motivation
product, safety
standard, better
documentation
, traceability
Usability,
efficiency,
portability
Team morale,
efficiency,
productivity,
and faster
visualization,
requirements
planning and
prioritization,
Latest Transformations in Scrum: A State of the Art Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 7, 12-22
Table 5. Areas improved in Scrum/ Challenges Addressed
VI. CONCLUSION
A Systematic Literature Review (SLR) has been
conducted to find out the most recent transformations in
Scrum process model while keeping intact the quality of
research protocol and the literature included. Eight papers
are identified as most relevant to our criteria. A
comprehensive analysis of these studies revealed the
areas where adaptations in practices and infrastructure of
Scrum may enhance its adoption and applicability.
Furthermore, the outcomes of these transformations
introduced in Scrum process are presented.
It is evident that practitioners have made efforts to
optimize the traditional Scrum process with a more
pragmatic adoption of agile and lean principles. It is
concluded that Scrum transformations have been
undergone in pursuit of delivering better, faster and
cheaper software product. However, more empirical
studies are needed for the evaluation of these
transformations under various project settings to explore
new dimensions of research and improvements.
In future, it is intended to further investigate the
transformations and their corresponding outcomes that
are introduced through integration of other agile process
models with Scrum.