BULLETIN (New Series) OF THE
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
Volume 42, Number 4, Pages 521–527
S 0273-0979(05)01061-X
Article electronically published on April 1, 2005
Spatial deterministic epidemics, by Linda Rass and John Radcliﬀe, Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs, vol. 102, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2003,
x+261 pp., $69.00, ISBN 0-8218-0499-5
Bioterrorism: Mathematical modeling applications in homeland security, H. T.
Banks and Carlos Castillo-Chavez (Editors), SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2003,
x+240 pp., $78.00, ISBN 0-89871-549-0
1. Epidemics galore
Some ﬁfty years ago, the World Health Organization expected that the frightening aspects of infectious diseases would soon belong to history and that the threats
of the future would lie in non-infectious diseases like cancer and cardiovascular
aﬀections. Now, while newcomers like HIV-AIDS and SARS make the headlines,
old-timers like malaria and TB again make victims by the millions. On top of that
our livestock is hit by BSE, foot-and-mouth disease, classical swine fever and avian
ﬂu, causing gigantic economic losses despite draconic control measures which are
highly debatable from an ethical point of view. Plant improvement is pretty much
an arms race against co-evolving pests. Finally, the prospect of bacteria developing
resistance against ALL available antibiotics is terrifying indeed.
No doubt, therefore, that infectious agents and their propagation deserve our
attention. For future oriented speculations see Ewald and Garrett ,
but don’t underestimate the role they played in the past in shaping the world as
we know it now; see Diamond , McNeill , Winslow .
2. About outbreaks and control
Infectious agents may cause epidemic outbreaks or circulate continuously (with
a prevalence that may be roughly constant or may show considerable ﬂuctuations,
with a periodic or even chaotic pattern).
There are multiple reasons why the
outbreak situation is of special interest. First, from the perspective of the agent,
the “virgin” host population constitutes the ideal world, as the amount of “fuel”
is not yet diminished by provoked immunity. Or, in other words, an agent that
cannot make it in a virgin host population can, as a rule, not make it at all. , but their relevance for
actual host-microparasite systems is yet to be demonstrated; for macroparasites
(worms) that mate inside a (primary) host the phenomenon of positive density
dependence (meaning that individuals beneﬁt from higher population density) is
certainly relevant; see N˚asell .) The second reason derives from this rule: if
we want to drive an endemic agent to extinction, we should create conditions in
which it would have failed to establish itself. So the potential impact of control
measures can be ascertained in thought experiments in which we pretend that the
agent enters a virgin host population, even though in reality the agent has a ﬁrm
foothold. A third reason is that the agent may very well create a large outbreak, yet
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 92D30; Secondary 92D25, 62P10.
⃝2005 American Mathematical Society
Reverts to public domain 28 years from publication
BOOK REVIEWS
fail to become endemic. This may be due to immunity, when there exists a major
timescale diﬀerence between the rise and fall of the epidemic on the one hand and
the demographic turnover of hosts on the other hand ). But it may also be due to
control measures, such as in the case of foot-and-mouth disease in Britain in 2001;
see Keeling et al. and Ferguson, Donnelly and Anderson . In such
situations we have to deal with possibly repeated outbreaks rather than endemic
prevalence levels.
3. Transients count
An agent that provokes immunity in a host that has a life span which is rather
long compared to the time scale of transmission from one host to the next may
trigger an epidemic outbreak that burns like a ﬁre in which ﬂames and heat reach
enormous heights; yet, like the ﬁre, it is bound to go extinct eventually due to lack of
fuel. So the dynamics is rather simple if we ignore demography all together: a steady
state, called 0 and corresponding to the virgin host population, is unstable, and any
biologically realizable perturbation (an introduction of the agent), no matter how
small, gives rise to a sequence of events (an orbit) which ends in another steady
state, which we call x∞. Despite the dynamical simplicity one can ask a diﬃcult
question: how long will the transition from 0 to x∞eﬀectively take? The sting is in
the adverb “eﬀectively”, which makes the mathematically correct answer “it takes
an inﬁnite amount of time” inappropriate. The mathematical theory of dynamical
systems centers around the asymptotic, for large time, behaviour of trajectories
and, in particular, the classiﬁcation of structure and stability of invariant sets.
Transients are the Cinderellas which do the work but which are hardly ever regarded
as interesting by themselves.
The initial phase of the transition is governed by the linearization near 0, the
intermediate phase by the nonlinearity of the contact process underlying transmission, and the ﬁnal phase by the linearization near x∞. Each has its characteristic
timescale. But a farmer ﬁnding his cornﬁeld invaded by a rust wants to know how
much of the ﬁeld is aﬀected at harvest time in order to decide whether the costs of
spraying are (far) less than the economic loss when nothing is done. This limits the
time window of interest but adds a spatial dimension to the problem. At ﬁrst sight,
this only seems to complicate the matter but, as we will see, it actually enables us
to bring asymptotics back into play.
4. Spreading like wildfire
Do infectious diseases spread spatially like wildﬁre? Some do. For instance, many
fungal infections expand with an almost constant speed in agricultural crops if not
opposed by pesticide application. And the Black Death in medieval Europe spread
similarly, though of course inﬂuenced by the inhomogeneities of mountains, lakes,
etc. and for more general “pictures” Cliﬀand Haggett ).
So assume, as an idealization, that the ﬁeld extends inﬁnitely far in all directions
and is both homogeneous and isotropic. Then we can rephrase the question and
ask: how fast does the region in which the local state is near x∞grow?
In 1975 D.G. Aronson and H.F. Weinberger introduced, in the context of nonlinear diﬀusion equations, the notion of the “asymptotic speed of propagation” of
disturbances. The idea is to inﬂate a ball such that its radius increases with speed
BOOK REVIEWS
c and to restrict attention to either the inside or the outside. If c0 is such that,
asymptotically for large time,
the local states in the inside are near x∞if c < c0 and
the local states in the outside are near 0 if c > c0, provided we limit the
introduction to a compact set,
we call c0 the asymptotic speed of propagation (of disturbances). The notion is
both easily formulated precisely in mathematical terms and excellently adapted
to the biological substratum. So clearly we should answer our question with “the
speed equals c0” if such an asymptotic speed of propagation exists. But does it
exist? And if so, how can we characterise c0 in a way that allows us to compute it
(numerically, if necessary)?
The (assumed!) homogeneity implies that the problem is invariant under translation. A self-similar solution is a solution such that the progress of time is captured
by a translation in space for the general idea). Or, in other
words, a self-similar solution is a travelling plane wave
u(t, x) = w(x.ν −ct)
with proﬁle w, speed c and direction ν. The (assumed!) isotropy implies that the
direction ν is irrelevant: if such a solution exists for a particular ν, it exists for any
ν. So the problem amounts to ﬁnding a function w of one variable (the proﬁle)
and a real number c (the speed). This is substantially easier than ﬁnding arbitrary
solutions that are functions of the TWO variables t and x. Our interest in these
special solutions derives from the idea that an observer moving with the right speed
might be able to study the transients. Or, in other words, in a moving coordinate
system the transients may look like a “frozen” spatial transition.
The book by Rass and Radcliﬀe centers around a robust fact (highlighted already
by Aronson and Weinberger): travelling plane wave solutions exist for all speeds
c exceeding some c0, and the minimal wave speed c0 IS the asymptotic speed of
propagation of disturbances. The following argument (due to J.A.J. Metz) makes
the result intuitively understandable. By manipulating the initial condition suitably, we can produce travelling waves in much the same way as one can create the
illusion of steady movement in an array of electric lights by turning them on (and
oﬀ) appropriately. In other words, a pre-arranged ignition pattern shows up as a
travelling wave. Only one thing can spoil this game: if we try to make the speed
too low, the inherent “infection” mechanism of our excitable medium takes over.
In other words, if a spot ignites its neighbour, we can’t pre-arrange the ignition.
Therefore this inherent infection speed is exactly the lowest possible wave speed!
The convergence of solutions of the Initial Value Problem towards travelling wave
solutions is a subtle matter when there is a continuum of wave speeds; see Bramson
 and van Saarloos . The notion of “asymptotic speed of propagation”
avoids the technical complications of convergence of proﬁles while providing the
relevant biological information!
It is an experimental fact, derived from simulation studies, that the quantity
c0 is highly relevant for a description of propagation in FINITE (but large) ﬁelds
during FINITE time intervals. In his book from 1979 G.I. Barenblatt writes:
“Self-similar solutions also describe the ‘intermediate asymptotic’ behaviour of
solutions of wider classes of problems in the range where these solutions no longer
BOOK REVIEWS
depend on the details of the initial and/or boundary conditions, yet the system is
still far from being in a limiting state.”
If we think again about a fungal pest of an agricultural crop, we are describing
the expansion of a focus in one ﬁeld.
Occasionally spores may rise high above
the canopy and travel, blown by the wind, over large distances.
So if we are
interested in spread on a larger geographical scale, we need to incorporate rare
but very inﬂuential events, such as what happened in the case of SARS, where, on
top of the common local transmission, air travel provided incidental large distance
transmission. In other words, the regular wavelike expansion doesn’t always tell the
full story. A related point is that we should worry about demographic stochasticity.
Deterministic statements concerning a small FRACTION of a large host population
ignore the initial phase in which a small NUMBER may or may not grow to a small
fraction. This initial phase should be described by a branching process which, even
when supercritical, may go extinct; see Haccou, Jagers and Vatutin .
5. The pioneers
The work of Aronson and Weinberger had its roots in the work by Fisher 
and Kolmogorov, Petrovsky and Piscounov , and that of Skellam . Fisher and KPP were interested in the speed with which an advantageous
allele (created at some position by mutation) would spread. Skellam wanted, among
other things, to understand the population wave of invasion into “empty” territory
 and Shigesada and
Kawasaki ). In the epidemic context, Kendall was the pioneer, later
followed by his student Mollison ; rumour has it that Kendall obtained his results during the Second World War but that he postponed publication, fearing that
they might trigger exactly the kind of situation that motivates the contributions to
the book edited by Banks and Castillo-Chavez.
6. The methods
For diﬀusion equations, one can use phase plane analysis to ﬁnd travelling plane
waves as heteroclinic orbits; see Aronson and Weinberger . The information
obtained from the phase plane analysis can also be used to construct lower solutions
that allow us to derive strong conclusions through a comparison method based on
the maximum principle.
Rass and Radcliﬀe deal with host-vector models (the “vector” is the carrier,
or secondary host (for instance a mosquito), that brings the parasite from one
primary host to the next) and spatial redistribution described by integral operators
 ). Still the comparison method is the key tool, but many
aspects require a new approach. Figuring out what tools are needed (or, at least, do
the job) is as always the key to success. Would you guess that Ikehara’s Tauberian
Theorem, Feller’s Renewal Theorem and a rather abstract convolution inequality
are featured in various proofs?
7. The context
For an excellent introduction to the varied mathematical approaches (and their
equally varied ecological motivations) in spatial ecology in general, see Dieckmann,
Law and Metz, eds. . The books Cantrell and Cosner and Okubo and
BOOK REVIEWS
Levin focus on diﬀusion models, and Tilman and Kareiva is intended
for the less-mathematically minded ecologist.
Concerning the epidemiology of infectious diseases, Anderson and May ,
Becker , Diekmann and Heesterbeek , Hethcote and Part 3 of
Thieme can be consulted for introductory surveys of various aspects and a
wealth of references ).
Understanding the evolutionary battleground between parasite and host is quite
a challenge (our intuition isn’t trained to look at short-term selﬁshness from a
long-term perspective). The carefully edited collection of papers Dieckmann et al.
 provides an overview.
8. Comparing the two books
The qualitative understanding of the spatio-temporal pattern arising in the context of idealized models is one thing; deciding about control actions on the basis
of rather limited (perhaps even inconsistent) data is quite another thing. Without
any doubt (and as testiﬁed by the Rass-Radcliﬀe book), mathematics is rather eﬃcient in providing the ﬁrst. The book edited by Banks and Castillo-Chavez explores
hesitantly the usefulness of mathematics to aid the second, in particular when an
infective agent would be introduced deliberately in what is called the “homeland”.
The two books form the two extremes of a spectrum. Where Rass and Radcliﬀe
are concerned with a well-established understanding based on rigorous and highly
nontrivial mathematical analysis of one particular aspect of the epidemiology of
infectious diseases, Banks and Castillo-Chavez address the challenge of preparing
for the unknown by way of models and methods yet to be developed.
In Rass-Radcliﬀe we see the pure form of applied math at its best: a meaningful biological problem is reduced to its mathematical essence, the right concepts
(in particular the notion of “asymptotic speed of propagation”) are introduced,
ingenious techniques to analyse the problem are developed, the key result (here
“minimal wave speed = asymptotic speed of propagation”) is ﬁrst proved in the
simplest situation and subsequently generalized to more complicated situations (like
host-vector).
The “dirty but useful” form of applied math aims to draw conclusions from data
and helps to choose, when confronted with a problem in real life (as opposed to “in
mathematics” where “problems” are often “nice” or even “beautiful”), from various
possible actions on the basis of a convincing rationale. It requires a diﬀerent form
of ingenuity and exerts a diﬀerent form of appeal.
Will the twain meet in the long run? In any case, they should be confronted.
For it is at the interfaces where usually the most interesting progress is made.
Does the monitoring by the Centers for Disease Control lead to an alert when
needed, and do we have models to guide our actions? It is clear that surveillance,
modelling and data analysis require knowledge, tools and ingenuity and that the
timescale at which action may be needed can be so short that any preparation
pays oﬀ. But the word that occurs most frequently in the bioterrorism book is
“potential”, so let’s hope that we shall never have to ﬁnd out whether or not this
book has anything to oﬀer and that the science ﬁction of Margaret Atwood (see
 remains something one should not discuss in
the Bulletin of the AMS.
BOOK REVIEWS