> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
INTRODUCTION
Fifth-generation (5G, sometimes referred to as 5G
New Radio (NR)) wireless networks represent new
capabilities for system developers, namely, the potential
to tailor systems with end-to-end latency of 1 ms for
ultra-reliable low latency communications (uRLLC
applications), 1 million terminals per square kilometer
for massive machine-type communications (mMTC
applications), and a per-user data rate exceeding 50
Mbps for enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB
applications) . These capabilities will play an
essential role in designing future industrial, aeronautic,
and consumer systems. However, to fully leverage 5G,
communications networks need to be customized within
the overall system from the start. This tailored approach
relies upon generic hardware with specialized software
to tailor the network to an application’s needs and the
use of artificial intelligence.
I. O-RAN BACKGROUND
A. O-RAN Origins
To meet these challenges and opportunities, the O-
RAN Alliance was formed in February 2018. The O-
RAN Alliance resulted from the merger of the cloud-
RAN (C-RAN) Alliance and the extensible-RAN
(xRAN) Forum. The groups found similar interest in
harnessing open interfaces, Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms, and
virtualization as means to meet the 5G International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) requirements. Given
these overlapping goals, the O-RAN Alliance formally
started in June 2018, with the first Work Group meetings
occurring in September 2019 .
B. O-RAN Advantages
The overarching goals of O-RAN are twofold: 1)
integrate proven, cloud-scale economics to RAN, and 2)
provide newfound agility to RAN deployments through
AI/ML algorithms . Open-source software serves as a
foundation for O-RAN compliant functions that meet 5G
standard requirements . O-RAN maintains an agile
architecture, deployment flexibility, and real-time
responsiveness based on changing communication
parameters .
O-RAN specifically aims to reduce the cost of
network deployment by using low-cost, White-box
hardware for radio components. This White-box
hardware (or Commercial-Off-The-Shelf, COTS) utilizes
generic hardware components for processing and radio
operations, which employs the aforementioned software.
In essence, software supplants hardware, where possible,
as a cost-savings mechanism. This is in contrast to
previous generations of wireless networks (e.g., 3G, 4G)
that relied upon specialized hardware, which came at a
greater cost , . Further discussion of White-box
hardware can be found in Section III(B).
In addition, open interfaces allow for multi-vendor
deployments on the RAN. To build an expanded
ecosystem, an open-source, multi-vendor approach is
taken. These open interfaces are designed for
information exchange between AI/ML elements of the
O-RAN . A mixed operator environment on the RAN
fosters an environment for varied network services
through sharing spectral resources. Further discussion of
O-RAN Architecture, including open-interfaces, can be
found in Section III(A).
The use of generic hardware, however, mandates the
use of software for network management across various
hardware implementations. The O-RAN alliance seeks
to achieve its goals through optimizing traffic steering
and load balancing via AI/ML algorithms, prioritizing
Quality of Experience (QoE) and Quality of Service
(QoS) parameters, and optimizing the beamforming and
physical resource block (PRB) usage elements of
massive Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO)
Artificial Intelligence in Open Radio Access
Paul H. Masur and Jeffery H. Reed, Fellow, IEEE
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
operations . These goals address issues ranging from
the Physical to Networking Layers. Each goal represents
a particular (or modular) AI/ML implementation. O-
RAN implements a chained model approach, as each
implementation interoperates within the context of
providing user services. This will be further discussed in
Section IV.
II. O-RAN ARCHITECTURE
The network architecture design of O-RAN
intentionally includes the use of COTS. Open (i.e., nonproprietary) interfaces and network components defined
at a system level allow for the generic hardware
envisioned by O-RAN. The network design and network
functions of O-RAN utilize acronyms and a structure
similar to the 5G NR standard family, but there are some
differences. This section seeks to provide an overview of
O-RAN Architecture.
A. Higher Level View of O-RAN Architecture
The network layout of O-RAN relies upon a
disaggregated base station model, with different parts of
the network stack handled by a variety of different
logical and physical units. The radio protocol stack
processing is split between the multi-Radio Access
Technology (RAT) Central Unit (CU), Distributed Unit
(DU), and Radio Unit (RU) . As shown in Fig. 1, the
multi-RAT CU handles the upper-level radio stack
operations, namely Radio Resource Control (RRC),
Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP), and Service
Data Application Protocol (SDAP). The multi-RAT CU
(or O-CU) is responsible of L2 and Network Layer (L3)
operations. The DU (or O-DU) operations, which
encompass Medium Access Control (MAC) Layer (L2),
include MAC, Radio Link Control (RLC), channel
coding, scrambling, and modulation control. Lastly, the
RU (or O-RU) handles the RF fronthaul (FH) operations
(which lie between baseband processing and the radio
equipment), including Physical Layer (L1), digital
beamforming and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)/Inverse
Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) processing. Important
interfaces within O-RAN include: the E2 interface for
passing data between RAN Intelligent Controllers
(RICs), the O1 interface to provide management
between O-RAN upper and lower elements, and the A1
interface for interaction between the Near-Real-Time
(Near-RT) RIC and Non-Real-Time (Near-RT) RIC .
In particular, the E2 and A1 interfaces are critical for
AI/ML operations, which are further discussed in
Section IV.
Additionally, a flexible RF FH allows for the O-DU
and RU to exchange responsibility for different elements
of the protocol stack. As more functions are handled by
the O-RU, FH bandwidth requirements are reduced, but
RF complexity increases, function extendibility becomes
more complex, and multi-vendor interoperability
becomes more difficult. Alternatively, more functions in
the O-DU requires more RF FH bandwidth, but with the
added benefit of reduced RF component complexity, and
easier extendibility and multi-vendor interoperability
 . Depending on conditions and cost requirements of
the RF FH, the O-RU and O-DU exchange capabilities.
This flexibility allows for O-RAN to achieve the 1 ms
latency of 5G.
B. White-box Hardware
As noted, White-box hardware offers potential for
network components within O-RAN to be deployed using
generic hardware. The O-RAN Open Fronthaul Interfaces
Workgroup (WG4) proposes adopting several split
architectures between the O-DU and O-RU to specifically
accommodate White-box hardware , . O-RAN
adopts split architecture options 6, 7-2, and 8, derived
from the 8 different FH split architectures scenarios
defined by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).
Option 6 defines all L1 functions within the O-RU and all
L2 functions in the O-DU. Option 7.2, as detailed below,
seeks to split L1 between the O-DU and O-RU. Option 8
performs all L1 and L2 functions in the O-DU, thus
Fig. 1: O-RAN Architecture .
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
limiting the O-RU to performing RF to baseband
conversion .
Fig. 2 displays Option 7.2, representing a balanced
separation of functionality between the O-DU and O-RU
 . This split allows for low Physical Layer operation in
the O-RUs and higher physical layer operation in the O-
DUs. This is intended to accommodate the 200-300 Gb
data transfer required between the O-DU and O-RU,
while balancing the processing requirements for handling
by generic hardware . The data transfer between the
O-DU and O-RU is handled by a fiber-based, RF FH (or
O-RAN FH Interface).
As can be seen in Fig. 2, the O-DU7-2 allows for generic
processing components: a digital processing unit, and a
Precision Time Protocol (PTP or IEEE 1588) enabled
ethernet interface (for timing with the O-RU7-2). The
generic hardware is intended to reduce the cost of
deployment. As noted previously, O-RAN accommodates
a flexible RF FH, which can be integrated into the O-
RU7.2 directly or be a standalone piece of white box
hardware as well .
Additionally,
performance indicators (KPIs) for indoor Picocell and
outdoor microcell deployment, which O-DU7-2 seeks to
satisfy. These KPIs include peak data rate, peak spectral
efficiency, bandwidth, control plane latency, user plane
latency, and QoS at user speed . Within mobile
communication network operations, KPIs are used to
performance
determination. Meeting these KPIs in actual deployment
scenarios is critical for achieving 5G use cases.
III. MACHINE LEARNING PRINCIPLES AND TYPES
While Fourth generation (4G) Long Term Evolution
(LTE) deployments originated the use of high-speed,
packet-based wireless links, the uplink/downlink
(UL/DL) design was a general-purpose radio frame (i.e.,
single sub-carrier spacing and slot sizes). As a new
generation of RAN is designed with varying
configurations in the radio frame, engineers seek to rely
upon ML techniques to achieve greater efficiencies in
RAN design and Physical Layer operation. Moreover,
ML techniques allow for a greater variety of use cases
within the same spectral resources (e.g., through network
slicing). For O-RAN development, these ML techniques
are categorized into supervised learning, unsupervised
learning, and reinforcement learning. The sections below
provide a brief overview of these categories.
A. Supervised Learning
Supervised learning defines several ML techniques
that seek to learn a mapping function between a known
input data set and a known output data set. A training
phase is heavily relied upon to build a generalization
capability of the supervised learning technique. The
training phase uses known inputs and creates its own
labeling algorithm to map the data to the desired output
scenario. The ML technique is then tested against a
subsequent data set with the same distribution as the
original training data set. From this analysis, a training
error can be evaluated, which is used to further hone and
train the supervised learning algorithm .
Supervised learning is used for classification: relating
input data sets to output data sets . Supervised
learning techniques are expected to be used for QoE
optimization, traffic steering, QoE-based traffic steering,
and Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) handover management
 . One can easily see that V2X handover management
relies on many conditions that dictate when a handover
should occur, and expediting this process is critical to
achieving the 1ms latency requirement of 5G. Moreover,
QoE and traffic steering generally operate according to
several routing and scheduling rules. Supervised
learning is well suited to learn, implement, modify, and
eventually optimize these rules .
B. Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning uses unstructured input data
and provides a relationship between the data set to
perform a particular task . Unsupervised learning is
used to discover relationships between points within the
unlabeled input data set. Unlike supervised learning,
there is no uniform theoretical basis underpinning
unsupervised learning. Instead, the algorithm seeks to
learn by observation without any explicit feedback .
While the O-RAN Alliance defines many
unsupervised learning techniques in its early standard
documentation, the defined uses for this family of ML
techniques are for future study (FFS) . However, it
has been noted that unsupervised learning shows
promise in resource allocation in network design and
resource allocation management . Given the scarcity
Fig. 2:O-DU7.2 with split PHY layer functionality
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
of spectral resources, further optimizations in this
domain are highly lucrative.
C. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning relies upon elements of
supervised and unsupervised learning . As with
supervised learning, reinforcement learning begins with
a known input training data set and creates mapping
rules for a known output data set. The goal of
reinforcement learning is to optimize long-term
conditions . To achieve this end, the algorithm
interacts with environmental data, which is theoretically
similar to unsupervised learning. Through this
environmental interaction, feedback loops are used to
periodically update based on changes to the wireless
network environment . Allowing for data set changes
over time bestows the opportunity to modify and
optimize operation .
The family of reinforcement learning techniques
shows much promise for future network implementation.
Since wireless networks already have metrics to define
clear outcomes, e.g., channel conditions, signal strength,
throughput, latency, QoE, QoS, the feedback loop of
reinforcement learning offers an untapped opportunity to
tweak network settings to achieve optimal output .
Moreover, given the transient nature of spectral usage
over time and geography, ML techniques extend the
opportunity for enhanced network planning.
IV. AI APPLIED TO O-RAN DEPLOYMENT
ML techniques are best suited to handle the vast
number of parameters and options that apply to planning
and operating a wireless communications network.
Indeed, the likely early deployment of ML techniques
will combine supervised, unsupervised, and
reinforcement learning algorithms to expedite the
identification and rectification of network issues .
Applying ML to improve channel estimation/detection,
channel coding, modulation, layer mapping, antenna precoding, OFDM signal generation, and beamforming has
been the focus of previous research efforts. Further, ML
techniques have been found to improve MAC
operations, including dynamic resource allocation, link
adaptation, beam management, and hybrid automatic
repeat request (HARQ) , , . An important
topic in this area is balancing spectral efficiency and
fairness to specific network services/users . As ML
techniques are further introduced, further optimization in
these areas is expected.
The AI/ML applications within O-RAN are applied
according to four overarching principles. First, offline
learning must occur before deployment within the
network, as most current algorithms need a certain level
of seeding before deployment. Second, AI/ML models
are trained through a combination of supervised,
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. Third, AI/ML
algorithms are implemented in a modular manner to
allow for independence. Lastly, O-RAN and its open
interfaces allow for vendor-specific AI/ML algorithms
within each module . While the AI/ML algorithms
have independence, the A1 and E2 interfaces and
parallel operation of xApps (further discussed in Section
V(B)) allow cross-layer interaction. While this crosslayer interaction may offer stability through redundancy
checking, optimizing the interaction offers additional
challenges.
AI/ML incorporation into the RAN itself is not
without challenges. While Physical layer and MAC
operations are distinct within the logical OSI model,
there is a significant interplay between these operations,
and one’s performance affects the other. Communication
and signaling on the E2 and A1 interfaces are essential,
as these interfaces tie together the training loops (See
Fig. 3). Therefore, orchestration between these
techniques is critical for proper deployment. Proper
coordination, updating, and training to the AI/ML
algorithms are essential. O-RAN must handle cross-layer
communication of data for AI/ML while protecting
previous cross-layer communications . The crosslayer communications and separation of the AI/ML
elements present a harmonization challenge .
A. ML Modeling within O-RAN
The O-RAN specification currently defines different
types of ML model design. These include chained
modeling, singular modeling, and chained modeling with
Fig. 3: AI Control Loops within O-RAN .
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
common inputs. Chained modeling allows modular ML
models to be separately implemented and chained
together to create a single output. Singular modeling is a
standalone implementation allowing for many inputs to
an ML algorithm with a single output. A chained model
with common inputs allows later stages of the chain to
access earlier stage outputs and inputs .
The chained model approach allows for the reuse of
existing models and chaining to provide a single
determination, e.g., QoE determination. Furthermore, an
interference host can communicate between separated
yet parallel models . This implementation allows for
xApp deployment and for coordinating between xApps
to make simultaneous determinations at the non-RT RIC
and near-RT RIC (see the section below).
B. Non-Real-Time (Non-RT) RIC
Non-RT data is readily available from existing
network management systems, which provides an
opportunity to model and simulate existing planning
algorithms . As shown in Fig. 3 and Table I, the
control loop timing of Non-RT RIC is greater than one
second, and in some instances, much, much greater.
Table I shows the timescale differences between the AI
Control Loops within O-RAN. The current focus of
NRT RIC applications includes cell planning, frequency
reuse, and meeting capacity based on time of day. These
improvements have been long sought after and show
great promise, particularly at predicting and mitigating
congestion . The Non-RT RIC yields an opportunity
for long-term network planning and optimization.
A COMPARISON OF AI CONTROL LOOPS IN O-
Area of Influence
Supervisory function,
spectral use, and
cell/network planning
10ms ≤ x ≤
Radio Frame Setting,
L2/L3 Operations, PBCH
FFS – NR Numerology
(or frame structure)
setting, L1/L2 Operations,
Synchronization
Since the non-RT RIC operates on a longer time
duration (greater than 1 s) than the near-RT RIC,
supervisory functionality is also supported. Furthermore,
the non-RT RIC orchestrates data collection and drives
data inputs for the near-RT RIC. This process provides a
more efficient operation of the near-RT RIC . The
communication between the Non-RT RIC and Near-RT
RIC occurs over the A1 interface, as shown in Fig. 3.
C. Near-Real-Time (Near-RT) RIC
Near-RT RIC shows an opportunity for handling user
plane and control plane management. The control loop
operates on a 10 ms interval . Current techniques in
physical layer handling and MAC scheduling are the
results of traditional design iterations. While these
human-led techniques have been honed and refined over
decades, ML promises improvement on these techniques
and newfound adaptability. A timeframe of 10 ms to 1 s
provides a level of agility for the network to operate.
However, data collection for Near-RT RIC needs to be
obtained from the E2 interface through existing user
equipment (UE), cell, and network parameter
measurement . Therefore, the Near-RT is dependent
on other functions to meet its operational requirements.
Given the timescale shown in Table I, the near-RT
would be expected to handle operations at or above the
timescale of a 5G NR radio frame (which has a 10 ms
length). Information disseminated in the Physical
Broadcast Channel (PBCH, sent every 40ms), including
the Master Information Block (MIB) could be tuned
according to the near-RT RIC Controller. Additionally,
slow fading can be handled on this timescale using L2
operations like link adaptation and beam management.
The Near-RT RIC contains several xApps (or
different applications) running on Application
Programmable Interfaces (APIs), shown in Fig. 4. These
xApps may run in parallel to one another. The xApps
further handle many management and/or ML functions,
as they may connect via the A1 interface and/or E2
interface. Conflict mitigation and subscription
management are used to coordinate and manage xApp
outputs. This functionality must coordinate between
xApps for timing demands, monitor for proper
configuration, balance processing resources, and handle
messaging . As noted previously, this is a logical
implementation of the interference host for ML
modeling configurations.
The use of xApps allows for the non-RT RIC to take
a modular approach to ML algorithms. In essence, each
xApp assumes responsibility for a different ML
algorithm application. The non-RT RIC or near-RT RIC
can then perform hosting operations for the xApps – to
either collect data for further use or implement changes
in network operation. The use of Deep Reinforcement
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
Learning (DRL) as an xApp has been shown to yield
20% gains in both spectral efficiency and buffer
occupancy .
D. O-DU and O-RU AI Control Loop
The control loop operations at the O-DU and O-RU
are largely considered to be FFS. This operation occurs
on a transmission time interval (TTI) basis, so on the
order of 10 ms or less . As shown in Table I, this
operates on the smallest timescale envisioned by O-
RAN. Given the length of a 5G NR radio frame,
operations could occur on the frame, sub-frame, or even
PRB level.
On this small-time scale, channel estimation and PRB
usage offer potential areas for future ML applications.
Fast fading, where the channel impulse response changes
faster than symbol duration, is another potential
application. An ML application with prior access to
channel conditions (e.g., a Radio Environment Map
(REM)) could offer a proactive response to fast fading at
the UE and O-DU. L2 operations, including
synchronization and 5G numerology (or frame structure)
setting, are likely areas to be influenced by the O-DU
loop. 5G NR relies more heavily on TDD spectrum, so
UL/DL slot setting is crucial for achieving latency and
bandwidth requirements. Proper use of synchronization
signals enables UL/DL setting, and the O-DU loop could
play a greater role in this regard. Additionally, the
numerology setting of a 5G NR radio frame affects slot
length (and thus latency and bandwidth), so effective,
timely tuning of this setting is also important. Lastly,
measurement signal setting and reporting fall under L1
operations, which would allow for expedited radio
parameter setting.
While the O-DU and O-CU are seen as the elements
of a real-time control loop, the UE could also perform
operations . An astute observer might notice that O-
RAN outlines functionality and requirements for RAN
but is silent regarding the UE. Traditionally,
functionality is added to the RAN before the UE,
because the RAN design is not as susceptible to power,
size, and component cost requirements as UEs.
However, given round trip time (RTT), eventually
harnessing the UE for some AI Control Loop decision
making through the E2 interface makes sense. Moving a
UE beyond a data reporter/collector could further reduce
latency in decision-making. For applications like V2X,
any time saved translates into saved lives. The
developing field of Cognitive Radios (CRs) offers
potential for realizing the UE’s future inclusion into the
AI Control Loops of O-RAN.
The introduction of the UE to the AI Control Loops
begs some interesting questions. Could this be an area to
identify and rectify self-interference at the UE? Use
cases in 5G mandate a 1ms latency and high accuracy, so
retransmission (HARQ) due to self-interference in a fullduplex model should be avoided wherever possible.
Each radio subframe within 5G contains several
reference and measurement signals (e.g., the Channel
State Information Reference Signals, CSI-RS). The O-
DU and O-RU may adjust modulation, power, and
beamforming to assist with self-interference
identification and mitigation at the UE.
E. ML and Security: Solutions and Issues
The use cases of 5G, from self-driving vehicles to
smart power grids, make security a paramount concern.
Moreover, the use and availability of hardware devices,
whether COTS or specialized, come with their own
security concerns. The supply chain of
telecommunications equipment raises many security
concerns . O-RAN is seen as an effort to counteract
these concerns, as it offers the ability to meet 5G
requirements while using as much generic hardware as
possible. A concern has been raised about whether an
open-sourced internet sponsored by Western countries
and a closed-source internet implemented by others may
bifurcate the internet entirely, erasing many of the
openness gains that have been achieved through the
years . That said, the supply chain security concerns
have no easy solution.
Devices within O-RAN present the ability to run
software that does not trust its underlying hardware. The
Fig. 4. Detailed view of near-RT RIC .
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
hardware is validated through hardware signaling checks
and software validation . Additionally, the opensource software aspects from O-RAN allow for
defensive (i.e., encryption) and offensive (i.e.,
proactively securing resources when faced with
jamming) capabilities at devices . Open-source
software presents security challenges regarding its open
nature but has the advantage of rigorous testing, varied
testing, and customization against threats.
Adversarial learning is an area that applies to ML and
security within O-RAN. Adversarial learning develops
attacks to thwart or modify existing ML algorithms
without detection. One could easily see how targeted
attacks could result in denial-of-service (DoS) within the
O-RAN network. One such vulnerable area includes CSI
feedback parameters used for communication parameter
setting and allocation of resources . Additionally,
certain Adversarial attacks include synthetic data to fool
existing traffic steering ML models . Jamming
attacks are another avenue of adversarial ML, where an
attack is only initiated if an acknowledgment (ACK) is
predicted . Lastly, Trojan horse attacks can be
deployed on modulation symbol classification by
altering training data, thus degrading communication
ability .
The above attacks introduce vulnerability to the non-
RT RIC (for traffic steering models) and the near-RT
RIC (for CSI feedback modification) operations within
O-RAN. Therefore, as the O-RAN standard is
developed, it is incumbent upon designers to anticipate
these issues. As previously noted, CR and more
advanced UEs may provide some potential solutions in
the future. The ability to crowdsource data may allow for
the network to identify and mitigate bad actors.
Further, future works should answer these critical
questions:
Can a network run on zero-trust hardware?
Can algorithms be developed to find illicit
monitoring?
intelligence
performed to modify illicit monitoring results,
effectively
counterintelligence? This need appears to be a
future application of adversarial learning.
Can countries employ their own monitoring
without being subject to counterintelligence?
There are two sides to this coin.
V. CONCLUSION
The future of wireless network design lies firmly with
AI/ML techniques . O-RAN offers a promising
future for wireless communications, as ML techniques
are built directly into the operation of the network
architecture itself. The direct integration of these ML
techniques allows for their presence to be optimized
within the network instead of layering them on top of an
existing architecture. Furthermore, the allowance of
White-box hardware and open-source software lowers
the entry cost into the market. Given the vast possibility
of consumer offerings through the use of network slices,
O-RAN serves as a potential backbone for the type of
fast yet agile network deployment that is needed to meet
or exceed the lofty use case requirements of 5G.
Past network design relied on human processes: data
collection, modeling, and testing. Future
implementations are poised to harness powerful learning
techniques (both supervised and unsupervised) to
produce the network layouts that will foster network
services. Simply put, ML yields a faster and more
accurate method of optimizing RAN layout to individual
communication parameters. As noted earlier, O-RAN’s
use of AI/ML offers an attractive business opportunity to
provide a multi-vendor environment, plus unique
properties for improved system designs.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Tarun Cousik and Dr.
Vijay Shah of Wireless@VT for their constructive
feedback. The authors additionally acknowledge Dr.
Brian Agee for his comments and suggestions.
VII. REFERENCES
 A. Zappone, M. Di Renzo, and M. Debbah, “Wireless
Networks Design in the Era of Deep Learning:
Model-Based,
Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 10, pp.
7331–7376,
10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2924010.
 Sadayuki Abeta, Toshiro Kawahara, Anil Umesh, and
Matsukawa,
Standardizationn
Technical Journal, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 38–45, Jul. 2019.
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN: Towards an Open
and Smart RAN,” White Paper, Oct. 2018. [Online].
Available: 
 L. Bonati, M. Polese, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T.
Melodia, “Open, Programmable, and Virtualized 5G
Networks: State-of-the-Art and the Road Ahead,”
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
Computer Networks, vol. 182, p. 107516, Dec. 2020,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107516.
 S. K. Singh, R. Singh, and B. Kumbhani, “The
Evolution of Radio Access Network Towards Open-
RAN: Challenges and Opportunities,” in 2020 IEEE
Communications
Networking
Conference Workshops (WCNCW), Apr. 2020, pp.
1–6, doi: 10.1109/WCNCW48565.2020.9124820.
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Use Cases and
Deployment Scenarios,” White Paper, Feb. 2020.
Available:
 
 “TIP OpenRAN: Toward Disaggregated Mobile
Networking,”
 , Dec. 2019,
1066–1073,
10.1109/CSCI49370.2019.00203.
 Anil Umesh, Tatsuro Yajima, Toru Uchino, and
Suguru Okuyama, “Overview of O-RAN Fronthaul
Specifications,” NTT DOCOMO Technical Journal,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 46–59, Jul. 2019.
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN White Box Hardware
Architecture and Requirement (FR1 Only),” White
Paper 01.00, Apr. 2020. Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020.
Available:
 
 J. Cavazos, “O-RAN is transforming 5G network
design and component interoperability,” EDN, Oct.
 .
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN White Box Hardware
Working Group Deployment Scenarios and Base
Station Classes,” White Paper 02.00, Jul. 2020.
Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available:
 
 O. Simeone, “A Very Brief Introduction to Machine
Learning With Applications to Communication
Transactions
Communications and Networking, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
10.1109/TCCN.2018.2881442.
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Working Group 2
AI/ML workflow description and requirements,”
Available:
 
 “Leveraging AI for RAN optimization in 5G,”
Ericsson.com,
 
 .
 S. Ali, Saad, Walid, and Steinbach, Daniel, “White
paper on machine learning in 6G wireless
communication networks,” University of Oulu, White
Available:
 
 Yannan
Intelligent
Controller: Unleash potential of customized RAN,”
presented at the Open Air Interface Fall 2019
Workshop, Beijing, China, Dec. 04, 2019, [Online].
Available:
 
Fall2019Workshop-Beijing/Talks/2019-12-04-
 T. Taleb et al., “White paper on 6G networking,”
University of Oulu, White Paper, Jun. 2020. [Online].
Available: 
 S. Niknam et al., “Intelligent O-RAN for Beyond 5G
and 6G Wireless Networks,” arXiv:2005.08374 [cs,
eess], May 2020, Accessed: Oct. 14, 2020. [Online].
Available: 
 “Non Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC
non-RT).” O-RAN Software Community, Jul. 17,
Available: 
viewpage.action?pageId=3604819.
 O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Working Group 3
Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller Near-RT
RIC Architecture,” White Paper v01.01, Nov. 2020.
Available:
 
 L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, M. Polese, S. Basagni, and T.
Melodia, “Intelligence and Learning in O-RAN for
Data-driven
Networks,”
 
Available:
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
Paul H. Masur and Jeffrey H. Reed are with the Wireless@VT, the Bradley Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
 ; ).
 T. C. Clancy, “5G and the Front Lines of the U.S.-
China Great Power Competition,” Jan. 2020,
Accessed: Dec. 09, 2020. [Online]. Available:
 
 5G Americas, “Security-Considerations-for-the-5G-
Era-2020-WP-Lossless.pdf,” White Paper, Jul. 2020.
Accessed: Nov. 18, 2020. [Online]. Available:
 
 Q. Liu, J. Guo, C. Wen, and S. Jin, “Adversarial
attack on DL-based massive MIMO CSI feedback,”
Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 22,
10.1109/JCN.2020.000016.
 M. Usama, A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, and A. Al-Fuqaha,
“Black-box Adversarial Machine Learning Attack on
Network Traffic Classification,” in 2019 15th
International Wireless Communications Mobile
Computing Conference (IWCMC), Jun. 2019, pp.
84–89, doi: 10.1109/IWCMC.2019.8766505.
 T. Erpek, Y. E. Sagduyu, and Y. Shi, “Deep Learning
for Launching and Mitigating Wireless Jamming
Transactions
Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
2–14, Mar. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2018.2884910.
 K. Davaslioglu and Y. E. Sagduyu, “Trojan Attacks
on Wireless Signal Classification with Adversarial
Machine Learning,” in 2019 IEEE International
Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
10.1109/DySPAN.2019.8935782.
 C.-X. Wang, M. D. Renzo, S. Stanczak, S. Wang, and
E. G. Larsson, “Artificial Intelligence Enabled
Wireless Networking for 5G and Beyond: Recent
Advances and Future Challenges,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 16–23, Feb.
2020, doi: 10.1109/MWC.001.1900292.