Ofﬂine Evaluation of Online Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Travis Mandel1, Yun-En Liu2, Emma Brunskill3, and Zoran Popovi´c1,2
1Center for Game Science, Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
2EnlearnTM, Seattle, WA
3School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{tmandel, zoran}@cs.washington.edu, , 
In many real-world reinforcement learning problems, we
have access to an existing dataset and would like to use it to
evaluate various learning approaches. Typically, one would
prefer not to deploy a ﬁxed policy, but rather an algorithm
that learns to improve its behavior as it gains more experience. Therefore, we seek to evaluate how a proposed algorithm learns in our environment, meaning we need to evaluate how an algorithm would have gathered experience if it
were run online. In this work, we develop three new evaluation approaches which guarantee that, given some history,
algorithms are fed samples from the distribution that they
would have encountered if they were run online. Additionally, we are the ﬁrst to propose an approach that is provably
unbiased given ﬁnite data, eliminating bias due to the length
of the evaluation. Finally, we compare the sample-efﬁciency
of these approaches on multiple datasets, including one from
a real-world deployment of an educational game.
Introduction
There is a growing interest in deploying reinforcement learning (RL) agents in real-world environments, such as healthcare or education. In these high-risk situations one cannot
deploy an arbitrary algorithm and hope it works well. Instead one needs conﬁdence in an algorithm before risking
deployment. Additionally, we often have a large number of
algorithms (and associated hyperparameter settings), and it
is unclear which will work best in our setting. We would
like a way to compare these algorithms without needing to
collect new data, which could be risky or expensive.
An important related problem is developing testbeds on
which we can evaluate new reinforcement learning algorithms. Historically, these algorithms have been evaluated
on simple hand-designed problems from the literature, often
with a small number of states or state variables. Recently,
work has considered using a diverse suite of Atari games as
a testbed for evaluating reinforcement learning algorithms
 . However, it is not clear that these
artiﬁcial problems accurately reﬂect the complex structure
present in real-world environments. An attractive alternative
is to use precollected real-world datasets to evaluate new RL
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
algorithms on real problems of interest in domains such as
healthcare, education, or e-commerce.
These problems have ignited a recent renewal of interest
in ofﬂine policy evaluation in the RL community ,
where one uses a precollected dataset to achieve high-quality
estimates of the performance of a proposed policy. However, this prior work focuses only on evaluating a ﬁxed policy learned from historical data. In many real-world problems, we would instead prefer to deploy a learning algorithm that continues to learn over time, as we expect that
it will improve over time and thus (eventually) outperform
such a ﬁxed policy. Further, we wish to develop testbeds for
RL algorithms which evaluate how they learn over time, not
just the ﬁnal policy they produce.
However, evaluating a learning algorithm is very different
from evaluating a ﬁxed policy. We cannot evaluate an algorithm’s ability to learn by, for example, feeding it 70% of the
precollected dataset as training data and evaluating the produced policy on the remaining 30%. Online, it would have
collected a different training dataset based on how it trades
off exploration and exploitation. In order to evaluate the performance of an algorithm as it learns, we need to simulate
running the algorithm by allowing it to interact with the evaluator as it would with the real (stationary) environment, and
record the resulting performance estimates (e.g. cumulative
reward). See ﬁgure 1.1
A typical approach to creating such an evaluator is to build
a model using the historical data, particularly if the environment is known to be a discrete MDP. However, this approach can result in error that accumulates at least quadratically with the evaluation length . Equally important, in practice it can result in very
poor estimates, as we demonstrate in our experiments section. Worse, in complex real-world domains, it is often unclear how to build accurate models. An alternate approach is
to try to adapt importance sampling techniques to this problem, but the variance of this approach is unusably high if
we wish to evaluate an algorithm for hundreds of timesteps
 .
1In the bandit community, this problem setup is called nonstationary policy evaluation, but we avoid use of this term to prevent
confusion, as these terms are used in many different RL contexts.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)
Figure 1: Evaluation process: We are interested in developing evaluators that use a previously-collected dataset to interact with an arbitrary reinforcement learning algorithm as
it would interact with the true environment. As it interacts,
the evaluator produces performance estimates (e.g. cumulative reward).
In this paper, we present, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst methods for using historical data to evaluate how an RL algorithm would perform online, which possess both meaningful
guarantees on the quality of the resulting performance estimates and good empirical performance. Building upon stateof-the-art work in ofﬂine bandit algorithm evaluation , we develop three evaluation
approaches for reinforcement learning algorithms: queuebased (Queue), per-state rejection sampling (PSRS), and
per-episode rejection sampling (PERS). We prove that given
the current history, and that the algorithm receives a next observation and reward, that observation and reward is drawn
from a distribution identical to the distribution the algorithm
would have encountered if it were run in the real world. We
show how to modify PERS to achieve stronger guarantees,
namely per-timestep unbiasedness given a ﬁnite dataset, a
property that has not previously been shown even for bandit evaluation methods. Our experiments, including those
that use data from a real educational domain, show these
methods have different tradeoffs. For example, some are
more useful for short-horizon representation-agnostic settings, while others are better suited for long-horizon knownstate-space settings. For an overview of further tradeoffs see
Table 1. We believe this work will be useful for practitioners who wish to evaluate RL algorithms in a reliable manner
given access to historical data.
Background and Setting
A discrete Markov Decision Process (MDP) is speciﬁed by
a tuple (S, A, R, T , sI) where S is a discrete state space, A
is a discrete action space, R is a mapping from state, action,
next state tuples to a distribution over real valued rewards, T
is a transition model that maps state, action, next state tuples
to a probability between 0 and 1, and sI denotes the starting
state2. We consider an episode to end (and a new episode to
begin) when the system transitions back to initial state sI.
2Our techniques could still apply given multiple starting states,
but for simplicity we assume a single starting state sI
We assume, unless otherwise speciﬁed, that the domain
consists of an episodic MDP M with a given state space S
and action space A, but unknown reward model R and transition model T . As input we assume a set D of N transitions,
(s, a, r, s′) drawn from a ﬁxed sampling policy πe.
Our objective is to use this data to evaluate the performance of a RL algorithm A. Speciﬁcally, without loss of
generality3 we will discuss estimating the discounted sum
of rewards obtained by the algorithm A for a sequence of
episodes, e.g. RA(i) = L(i)−1
γjrj where L(i) denotes
the number of interactions in the ith episode.
At each timestep t = 1 . . . ∞, the algorithm A outputs a
(possibility stochastic) policy πb from which the next action
should be drawn, potentially sampling a set of random numbers as part of this process. For concreteness, we refer to this
(possibly random length) vector of random samples used by
A on a given timestep with the variable χ. Let HT be the
history of (s, a, r, s′) and χ consumed by A up to time T.
Then, we can say that the behavior of A at time T depends
only on HT .
Our goal is to create evaluators (sometimes called replayers) that enable us to simulate running the algorithm A in
the true MDP M using the input dataset D. One key aspect
of our proposed evaluators is that they terminate at some
timestep. To that end, let gt denote the event that we do not
terminate before outputting an estimate at timestep t (so gt
implies g1, . . . , gt−1). In order to compare the evaluator to
reality, let PR(x) denote the probability (or pdf if x contains continuous rewards4) of generating x under the evaluator, and PE(x) denote the probability of generating x in the
true environment (the MDP M). Similarly, ER[x] is the expected value of a random variable x under the evaluator, and
EE[x] is the expected value of x under the true environment
evaluators.
limitations,
sketches: full proofs are in the appendix (available at
 
What guarantees do we desire on the estimates our evaluators produce? Unbiasedness of the reward estimate on
episode i is a natural choice, but it is unclear what this
means if we do not always output an estimate of episode
i due to termination caused by the limited size/coverage of
our dataset. Therefore, we show a guarantee that is in some
sense weaker, but applies given a ﬁnite dataset: Given some
history, the evaluator either terminates or updates the algorithm as it would if run online. Given this guarantee, the
empirical question is how early termination occurs, which
we address experimentally. We now highlight some of the
properties we would like an evaluator to possess, which are
summarized in Table 1.
1. Given some history, the (s, a, r, s′) tuples provided to
A have the same distribution as those the agent would
3It is easy to modify the evaluators to compute other statistics
of the interaction of the algorithm A with the evaluator, such as the
cumulative reward, or the variance of rewards.
4In this case, sums should be considered to be integrals
Unbiased estimate of i-th
episode performance
sampling distribution
Does not assume Markov
Computationally
×(Variants:✓)
Not always
Table 1: Desired properties of evaluation approaches, and a comparison of the three evaluators introduced in this paper. We did
not include the sample efﬁciency, because although it is a key metric it is typically domain-dependent.
receive in the true MDP M. Speciﬁcally, we desire
PR(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT , gT ) = PE(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT ) so that
PR(HT +1|HT , gT ) = PE(HT +1|HT ). As mentioned
above, this guarantee allows us to ensure that the algorithm is fed on-policy samples, guaranteeing the algorithm behaves similarly to how it would online.
2. High sample efﬁciency. Since all of our approaches only
provide estimates for a ﬁnite number of episodes before
terminating due to lack of data in D, we want to make
efﬁcient use of data to evaluate A for as long as possible.
3. Given an input i, outputs an unbiased estimate of RA(i).
Speciﬁcally, ER[RA(i)] = EE[RA(i)]. Note that this is
non-trivial to ensure, since the evaluation may halt before
the i-th episode is reached.
4. Can leverage data D collected using an unknown sampling distribution πe. In some situations it may be difﬁcult
to log or access the sampling policy πe, for example in the
case where human doctors choose treatments for patients.
5. Does not assume the environment is a discrete MDP with
a known state space S. In many real world problems, the
state space is unknown, partially observed, or continuous,
so we cannot always rely on Markov assumptions.
6. Computationally efﬁcient.
Related work
Work in reinforcement learning has typically focused on
evaluating ﬁxed policies using importance sampling techniques . Importance sampling is widely-used
in off-policy learning, as an objective function when using policy gradient methods or as a way to re-weight samples
in off-policy TD-learning methods . Additionally, this approach has
recently enabled practitioners to evaluate learned policies
on complex real-world settings . However, this
work focuses on evaluating ﬁxed policies, we are not aware
of work speciﬁcally focusing on the problem of evaluating
how an RL algorithm would learn online, which involves
feeding the algorithm new training samples as well as evaluating its current performance. It is worth noting that any
of the above-mentioned off-policy learning algorithms could
be evaluated using our methods.
Our methods do bear a relationship to off-policy learning
work which has evaluated policies by synthesizing artiﬁcial
trajectories . Unlike our work,
this approach focuses only on evaluating ﬁxed policies. It
also assumes a degree of Lipschitz continuity in some continuous space, which introduces bias. There are some connections: our queue-based estimator could be viewed as related to their work, but focused on evaluating learning algorithms in the discrete MDP policy case.
One area of related work is in the area of (possibly contextual) multi-armed bandits, in which the corresponding problem is termed “nonstationary policy evaluation”. Past work
has showed evaluation methods that are guaranteed to be unbiased , or have low bias , but only assuming an inﬁnite data stream. Other work
has focused on evaluators that perform well empirically but
lack this unbiasedness . Work
by Mandel et al. 2015 in the non-contextual bandit setting
show guarantees similar to ours, that issued feedback comes
from the true distribution even with ﬁnite data. However,
in addition to focusing on the more general setting of reinforcement learning, we also show stronger guarantees of
unbiasedness even given a ﬁnite dataset.
Algorithm 1 Queue-based Evaluator
1: Input: Dataset D, RL Algorithm A, Starting state sI
2: Output: RA s.t. RA(i) is sum of rewards in ep. i
3: Q[s, a] = Queue(RandomOrder((si, ai, r, s′) ∈D,
s.t. si = s, ai = a)), ∀s ∈S, a ∈A
4: for i = 1 to ∞do
s = sI, t = 0, ri = 0
Let πb be A’s initial policy
while ¬(t > 0 and s == sI) do
if Q[s, ab] is empty then return RA
(r, s′) = Q[s, ab].pop()
Update A with (s, a, r, s′), yields new policy πb
ri = ri + γtr, s = s′, t = t + 1
RA(i) = ri
Queue-based Evaluator
We ﬁrst propose a queue-based evaluator for evaluating algorithms for episodic MDPs with a provided state S and action A space (Algorithm 1). This technique is inspired by the
queue-based approach to evaluation in non-contextual bandits . The key idea is to place feedback
(next states and rewards) in queues, and remove elements
based on the current state and chosen action, terminating
evaluation when we hit an empty queue. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst
we partition the input dataset D into queues, one queue per
(s, a) pair, and ﬁll each queue Q(s, a) with a (random) ordering of all tuples (r, s′) ∈D s.t. (si = s, ai = a, ri =
i = s′) To simulate algorithm A starting from a known
state sk, the algorithm A outputs a policy πb, and selects an
action a sampled from πb(sk).5
The evaluator then removes a tuple (r, s′) from queue
Q[sk, a], which is used to update the algorithm A and its policy πb, and simulate a transition to the next state s′. By the
Markov assumption, tuples (r, s′) are i.i.d. given the prior
state and selected action, and therefore an element drawn
without replacement from the queue has the same distribution as that in the true environment. The evaluator terminates
and outputs the reward vector RA, when it seeks to draw a
sample from an empty queue.6
Unlike many ofﬂine evaluation approaches (such as importance sampling for policy evaluation), our queue evaluator does not require knowledge of the sampling distribution
πe used to generate D. It can even use data gathered from a
deterministic sampling distribution. Both properties are useful for many domains (for example, it may be hard to know
the stochastic policy used by a doctor to make a decision).
Theorem 4.1. Assuming the environment is an MDP with
state space S and the randomness involved in drawing from πb is treated as internal to A, given any history of interactions HT , if the queue-based evaluator produces a (s, a, r, s′) tuple, the distribution of this tuple
and subsequent internal randomness χ under the queuebased evaluator is identical to the true distribution the
agent would have encountered if it was run online. That
is, PR(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT , gT ) = PE(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT ), which
gives us that PR(HT +1|HT , gT ) = PE(HT +1|HT ).
Proof Sketch. The proof follows fairly directly from the
fact that placing an (r, s′) tuple drawn from M in Q[s, a]
and sampling from Q without replacement results in a sample from the true distribution. See the appendix (available at
 
Note that theorem 4.1 requires us to condition on the fact
that A reveals no randomness, that is, we consider the randomness involved in drawing from πb on line 8 to be considered as internal, that is (included in χ). This means the guarantee is slightly weaker than the approaches we will present
in sections 5 and 6, which condition on general πb.
Per-State Rejection Sampling Evaluator
Ideally, we would like an evaluator that can recognize when
the algorithm chooses actions similarly to the sampling distribution, in order use more of the data. For example, in the
extreme case where we know the algorithm we are evaluating always outputs the sampling policy, we should be able
5Note that since we only use πb to draw the next action, this
does not prevent A from internally using a policy that depends on
more than s (for example, s and t in ﬁnite horizon settings).
6For details about why this is necessary, see the appendix (available at 
to make use of all data, or close to it. However, the queue
method only uses the sampled action, and thus cannot determine directly whether or not the distribution over actions
at each step (πb) is similar to the sampling policy (πe). This
can make a major difference in practice: If πb and πe are both
uniform, and the action space is large relative to the amount
of data, we will be likely to hit an empty queue if we sample
a fresh action from πb. But, if we know the distributions are
the same we can simply take the ﬁrst sampled action from
πe. Being able to take advantage of stochastic distributions
in this way is sometimes referred to as leveraging revealed
randomness in the candidate algorithm .
To better leverage this similarity, we introduce the Per-
State Rejection Sampling (PSRS) evaluator (see Algorithm 2), inspired by approaches used in contextual bandits . PSRS divides data
into streams for each state s, consisting of a (randomized)
list of the subsequent (a, r, s′) tuples that were encountered
from s in the input data. Speciﬁcally, given the current state
s, our goal is to sample a tuple (a, r, s′) such that a is sampled from algorithm A’s current policy πb(s), and r and s′
are sampled from the true environment. We already know
that given the Markov property, once we select an action a
that r and s′ in a tuple (s, a, r, s′) represent true samples
from the underlying Markov environment. The challenge
then becomes to sample an action a from πb(s) using the
actions sampled by the sampling distribution πe(s) for the
current state s. To do this, a rejection sampling algorithm7
samples a uniform number u between 0 and 1, and accepts a
sample (s, a, r, s′) from D if u <
Mπe(a|s), where πb(a|s)
is the probability under the candidate distribution of sampling action a for state s, πe(a|s) is the corresponding quantity for the sampling distribution, and M is an upper bound
on their ratio, M ≥maxa
πe(a|s). M is computed by iterating over actions8 (line 8). It is well known that samples
rejection sampling accepts represent true samples from the
desired distribution, here πb .
surprisingly,
self-idempotent),
the streams is preserved (see appendix, available at
 
Still, in the face of stochasticity PSRS can be signiﬁcantly
more data-efﬁcient than the Queue-based evaluator.
Theorem 5.1. Assume the environment is an MDP with
state space S, πe is known, and for all a, πe(a) > 0 if
πb(a) > 0. Then if the evaluator produces a (s, a, r, s′) tuple, the distribution of (s, a, r, s′) tuple returned by PSRS
7One might wonder if we could reduce variance by using an importance sampling instead of rejection sampling approach here. Although in theory possible, one has to keep track of all the different
states of the algorithm with and without each datapoint accepted,
which is computationally intractable.
8This approach is efﬁcient in the since that it takes time linear
in |A|, however in very large action spaces this might be too expensive. In certain situations it may be possible to analytically derive a
bound on the ratio to avoid this computation.
Algorithm 2 Per-State Rejection Sampling Evaluator
1: Input: Dataset D, RL Algorithm A, Start state sI, πe
2: Output: Output: RA s.t. RA(i) is sum of rewards in ep. i
3: Q[s] = Queue(RandomOrder((si, ai, r, s′) ∈D s.t.
si = s)), ∀s ∈S
4: for i = 1 to ∞do
s = sI,t = 0, ri = 0
Let πb be A’s initial policy
while ¬(t > 0 and st == sI) do
(a, r, s′) = Q[s].pop()
if Q[s] is empty then return RA
Sample u ∼Uniform(0, 1)
Mπe(a|s) then
Reject sample, go to line 9
Update A with (s, a, r, s′), yields new policy πb
ri = ri + γtr, s = s′, t = t + 1
RA(i) = ri
(and subsequent internal randomness χ) given any history
of interactions HT is identical to the true distribution the
agent would have encountered if was run online. Precisely,
PR(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT , gT )
PE(s, a, r, s′, χ|HT ), which
gives us that PR(HT +1|HT , gT ) = PE(HT +1|HT ).
distribution
 
Algorithm 3 Per-Episode Rejection Sampling Evaluator
1: Input: Dataset of episodes D, RL Algorithm A, πe
2: Output: Output: RA s.t. RA(i) is sum of rewards in ep. i
3: Randomly shufﬂe D
4: Store present state A of algorithm A
5: M = calculateEpisodeM(A, πe) (see the appendix)
6: i = 1, Let πb be A’s initial policy
7: for e ∈D do
p = 1.0, h = [], t = 0, ri = 0
for (o, a, r) ∈e do
p = p πb(a|h)
Update A with (o, a, r), output new policy πb
h →(h, a, r), ri = ri + γtr
Sample u ∼Uniform(0, 1)
Roll back algorithm: A = A
Store present state A of algorithm A
M = calculateEpisodeM(A, πe)
RA(i) = ri, i = i + 1
21: return RA
Per-Episode Rejection Sampling
The previous methods assumed the environment is a MDP
with a known state space. We now consider the more general
setting where the environment consists of a (possibly high
dimensional, continuous) observation space O, and a discrete action space A. The dynamics of the environment can
depend on the full history of prior observations, actions, and
rewards, ht = o0, . . . , ot, a0, . . . , at−1, r0, . . . , rt−1. Multiple existing models, such as POMDPs and PSRs, can be represented in this setting. We would like to build an evaluator
that is representation-agnostic, i.e. does not require Markov
assumptions, and whose sample-efﬁciency does not depend
on the size of the observation space.
We introduce the Per-Episode Rejection Sampler (PERS)
evaluator (Algorithm 3) that evaluates RL algorithms in
these more generic environments. In this setting we assume
that the dataset D consists of a stream of episodes, where
each episode e represents an ordered trajectory of actions,
rewards and observations, (o0, a0, r0, o1, a1, r1, . . . , rl(e))
obtained by executing the sampling distribution πe for l(e)−
1 time steps in the environment. We assume that πe may
also be a function of the full history ht in this episode up
to the current time point. For simplicity of notation, instead
of keeping track of multiple policies πb, we simply write πb
(which could implicitly depend on χ).
PERS operates similarly to PSRS, but performs rejection
sampling at the episode level. This involves computing
the ratio of
t=0πb(at|ht)
t=0πe(at|ht), and accepting or rejecting the
episode according to whether a random variable sampled
from the uniform distribution is lower than the computed
ratio. As M is a constant that represents the maximum
possible ratio between the candidate and sampling episode
probabilities, it can be computationally involved to compute M exactly. Due to space limitations, we present
approaches for computing M in the appendix (available at
 
Note that since the probability of accepting an episode is
based only on a ratio of action probabilities, one major
beneﬁt to PERS is that its sample-efﬁciency does not
depend on the size of the observation space. However, it
does depend strongly on the episode length, as we will see
in our experiments.
Although PERS works on an episode-level, to handle
algorithms that update after every timestep, it updates A
throughput the episode and “rolls back” the state of the algorithm if the episode is rejected (see Algorithm 3).
Unlike PSRS, PERS is self-idempotent, meaning if A always outputs πe we accept all data. This follows since if
πe(at|ht) = πb(at|ht), M = 1 and
t=0πb(at|ht)
t=0πe(at|ht) = 1.
Theorem 6.1. Assuming πe is known, and πb(e) > 0 →
πe(e) > 0 for all possible episodes e and all πb, and PERS
outputs an episode e, then the distribution of e (and subsequent internal randomness χ) given any history of episodic
interactions HT using PERS is identical to the true distribution the agent would have encountered if it was run online.
That is, PE(e, χ|HT ) = PR(e, χ|HT , gT ), which gives us
that PR(HT +1|HT , gT ) = PE(HT +1|HT ).
distribution
 
Unbiasedness Guarantees in the
Per-Episode case
Our previous guarantees stated that if we return a sample, it
is from the true distribution given the history. Although this
is fairly strong, it does not ensure RA(i) is an unbiased estimate of the reward obtained by A in episode i. The difﬁculty
is that across multiple runs of evaluation, the evaluator may
terminate after different numbers of episodes. The probability of termination depends on a host of factors (how random
the policy is, which state we are in, etc.). This can result in
a bias, as certain situations may be more likely to reach a
given length than others.
For example, consider running the queue-based approach
on a 3-state MDP: sI is the initial state, if we take action a0
we transition to state s1, if we take action a1 we transition
to s2. The episode always ends after timestep 2. Imagine the
sampling policy chose a1 99% of the time, but our algorithm
chose a1 50% of the time. If we run the queue approach
many times in this setting, runs where the algorithm chose
a1 will be much more likely to reach timestep 2 than those
where it chose a0, since s2 is likely to have many more samples than s1. This can result in a bias: if the agent receives a
higher reward for ending in s2 compared to s1, the average
reward it receives at timestep 2 will be overestimated.
One approach proposed by past work is to assume T (the maximum
timestep/episode count for which we report estimates) is
small enough such that over multiple runs of evaluation we
usually terminate after T; however it can be difﬁcult to fully
bound the remaining bias. Eliminating this bias for the statebased methods is difﬁcult, since the the agent is much more
likely to terminate if it transitions to a sparsely-visited state,
and so the probability of terminating is hard to compute as
it depends on the unknown transition probabilities.
However, modifying PERS to use a ﬁxed M throughout
its operation allows us to show that if PERS outputs an estimate, that estimate is unbiased (Theorem 7.1). In practice
one will likely have to overestimate this M, for example by
bounding p(x) by 1 (or (1 −ϵ) for epsilon-greedy) and calculating the minimum q(x).
Theorem 7.1. If M is held ﬁxed throughout the operation
of PERS, πe is known, and πb(e) > 0 →πe(e) > 0 for
all possible episodes e and all πb, then if PERS outputs an
estimate of some function f(HT ) at episode T, that estimate
is an unbiased estimator of f(HT ) at episode T, in other
words, ER[f(HT )|gT , . . . , g1] = 
HT f(HT )PE(HT ) =
EE[f(HT )]. For example, if f(HT ) = RA(T), the estimate
is an unbiased estimator of RA(T) given gT , . . . , g1.
Proof Sketch. We ﬁrst show that if M is ﬁxed, the probability that each episode is accepted is constant (1/M). This
allows us to show that whether we continue or not (gT )
is conditionally independent of HT −1. This lets us remove
the conditioning on HT −1 in Theorem 6.1 to give us that
PR(HT |gT , . . . , g1) = PE(HT ), meaning the distribution
over histories after T accepted episodes is correct, from
which conditional unbiasedness is easily shown.
Although useful, this guarantee has the downside that the
estimate is still conditional on the fact that our approach
does not terminate. Theorem 7.2 shows that it is possible
to use a further modiﬁcation of Fixed-M PERS based on
importance weighting to always issue unbiased estimates
for N total episodes. For a discussion of the empirical
downsides to this approach, see the appendix (available at
 
Theorem 7.2. Assuming for each T, RA(T) is divided by
by φ = 1 −Binomial(N, 1/M).cdf(k −1), and after terminating at timestep k we output 0 as estimates of reward
for episodes k + 1, . . . , N, and M is held ﬁxed throughout
the operation of PERS, and πe is known, and πb(e) > 0 →
πe(e) > 0 for all possible episodes e and all πb, then the
estimate of reward output at each episode T = 1 . . . N is an
unbiased estimator of RA(T).
Proof Sketch. Outputting an estimate of the reward at an
episode T by either dividing the observed reward by the
probability of reaching T (aka P(gT , ..., g1)), for a run of
the evaluator that reaches at least T episodes, or else outputting a 0 if the evaluation has terminated, is an importance
weighting technique that ensures the expectation is correct.
Experiments
Any RL algorithm could potentially be run with these evaluators. Here, we show results evaluating Posterior Sampling
Reinforcement Learning (PSRL) , which has shown good empirical and theoretical performance in the ﬁnite horizon case. The standard version of
PSRL creates one deterministic policy each episode based
on a single posterior sample; however, we can sample the
posterior multiple times to create multiple policies and randomly choose between them at each step, which allows us to
test our evaluators with more or less revealed randomness.
Comparison to a model-based approach We ﬁrst
compare PSRS to a model-based approach on SixArms
 , a small MDP environment.
Our goal is to evaluate the cumulative reward of PSRL
run with 10 posterior samples, given a dataset of 100
The model-based approach uses the dataset to build an
MLE MDP model. Mean squared error was computed
against the average of 1000 runs against the true environment. For details see the appendix (available at
 
In Figure 2a we see that the model-based approach starts
fairly accurate but quickly begins returning very poor
estimates. In this setting, the estimates it returned indicated
that PSRL was learning much more quickly than it would in
reality. In contrast, our PSRS approach returns much more
accurate estimates and ceases evaluation instead of issuing
poor estimates.
Mean Squared Error
(a) PSRS tends to be much more accurate than a model-based approach.
Number of episodes per run
Percent of runs
Fixed-M PERS
(b) Comparing on Treefrog Treasure with
3 timesteps and 1 PSRL posterior sample.
Number of episodes per run
Percent of runs
Fixed-M PERS
timesteps and 10 PSRL posterior samples.
Figure 2: Experimental results.
Figure 3: Treefrog Treasure: players guide a frog through a
dynamic world, solving number line problems.
Length Results All three of our estimators produce samples from the correct distribution at every step. However,
they may provide different length trajectories before termination. To understand the data-efﬁciency of each evaluator,
we tested them on a real-world educational game dataset, as
well as a small but well-known MDP example.
Treefrog Treasure is an educational fractions game (Figure 3). The player controls a frog to navigate levels and
jump through numberlines. We have 11 actions which control parameters of the numberlines. Our reward is based
on whether students learn (based on pretest-to-postest improvement) and whether they remain engaged (measured
by whether the student quit before the posttest). We used
a state space consisting of the history of actions and
whether or not the student took more than 4 tries to pass
a numberline (note that this space grows exponentially
with the horizon). We varied the considered horizon between 3 and 4 in our experiments. We collected a dataset
of 11,550 players collected from a child-focused educational website, collected using a semi-uniform sampling
policy. More complete descriptions of the game, experimental methodology, method of calculating M, and details of PSRL can be found in the appendix (available at
 
Figure 2 shows results on Treefrog Treasure, with histograms over 100 complete runs of each evaluator. The
graphs show how many episodes the estimator could evaluate the RL algorithm for, with more being better. PERS does
slightly better in a short-horizon deterministic setting (Figure 2b). Increasing the posterior samples greatly improves
performance of rejection sampling methods (Figure 2c).
 
Given deterministic policies on this larger state space, all
three methods are more or less indistinguishable; however,
revealing more randomness causes PERS to overtake PSRS
(mean 260.54 vs. 173.52). As an extreme case, we also tried
a random policy: this large amount of revealed randomness
beneﬁts the rejection sampling methods, especially PERS,
which evaluates for much longer than the other approaches.
PERS outperforms PSRS here because there are small
differences between the random candidate policy and the
semi-random sampling policy, and thus if PSRS enters a
state with little data it is likely to terminate.
The ﬁxed-M PERS method does much worse than the
standard version, typically barely accepting any episodes,
with notable exceptions when the horizon is short (Figure
2b). Since it does not adjust M it cannot take advantage of
revealed randomness (Figure 2c). However, we still feel that
this approach can be useful when one desires truly unbiased
estimates, and when the horizon is short. Finally, we also
note that PERS tends to have the lowest variance, which
makes it an attractive approach since to reduce bias one
needs to have a high percentage of runs terminating after
the desired length.
The state space used in Treefrog Treasure grows exponentially with the horizon. To examine a contrasting case
with a small state space (6 states), but a long horizon (20),
we also test our approaches in Riverswim , a standard toy MDP environment.
The results can be found in the appendix (available at
 
but in general we found that PERS and its variants suffer
greatly from the long horizon, while Queue and PSRS
do much better, with PSRS doing particularly well if
randomness is revealed.
Our conclusion is that the PERS does quite well, especially if randomness is revealed and the horizon is short. It
appears there is little reason to choose Queue over PSRS,
except if the sampling distribution is unknown. This is surprising because it conﬂicts with the results of Mandel et al.
2015. They found a queue-based approach to be more efﬁcient than rejection sampling in a non-contextual bandit setting, since data remained in the queues for future use instead
of being rejected. The key difference is that in bandits there
is only one state, so we do not encounter the problem that
we happen to land on an undersampled state, hit an empty
queue by chance, and have to terminate the whole evaluation
procedure. If the candidate policy behaves randomly at unvisited states, as is the case with 10-sample PSRL, PSRS can
mitigate this problem by recognizing the similarity between
sampling and candidate distributions to accept the samples
at that state, therefore being much less likely to terminate
evaluation when a sparsely-visited state is encountered.
Conclusion
We have developed three novel approaches for evaluating
how RL algorithms perform online: the most important differences are summarized in Table 1. All methods have guarantees that, given some history, if a sample is output it comes
from the true distribution. Further, we developed a variant
of PERS with even stronger guarantees of unbiasedness.
Empirically, there are a variety of tradeoffs to navigate between the methods, based on horizon, revealed randomness
in the candidate algorithm, and state space size. We anticipate these approaches will ﬁnd wide use when one wishes
to compare different reinforcement learning algorithms on
a real-world problem before deployment. Further, we are
excited at the possibility of using these approaches to create real-world testbeds for reinforcement learning problems,
perhaps even leading to RL competitions similar to those
which related contextual bandit evaluation work enabled in that setting . Future
theoretical work includes analyzing the sample complexity
of our approaches and deriving tight deviation bounds on the
returned estimates. Another interesting direction is developing more accurate estimators, e.g. by using doubly-robust
estimation techniques .
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the NSF BIG-
DATA grant No. DGE-1546510, the Ofﬁce of Naval Research grant
N00014-12-C-0158, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation grant
OPP1031488, the Hewlett Foundation grant 2012-8161, Adobe,
Google, and Microsoft.