Memory & Cognition
1990. 18 (6). 638-650
Common processes underlie enhanced recency
effects for auditory and changing-state stimuli
ARTHUR M. GLENBERG
Uniuersity of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
For some stimuli, dynamic changes are crucial for identifying just what the stimuli are. For
example, spoken words (or any auditory stimuli) require change over time to be recognized.
Kallman and Cameron have proposed that this sort of dynamic change underlies the enhanced recency effect found for auditory stimuli, relative to visual stimuli. The results of three
experiments replicate and extend Kallman and Cameron's finding that dynamic visual stimuli
(that is visual stimuli in which movement is necessary to identify the stimuli), relative to static
visual stimuli, engender enhanced recency effects. In addition, an analysis based on individual
differences is used to demonstrate that the processes underlying enhanced recency effects for auditory and dynamic visual stimuli are substantially similar. These results are discussed in the
context of perceptual grouping processes.
Do stimuli that undergo dynarnic transformations lead
to improved memory? That is the claim of the Campbell
and Dodd changing-state hypothesis: The enhanced
recall of recently presented auditory information, compared with the recall of recently presented visual information, is due to the dynarnic nature of spoken words.
Kallman and Cameron generated support for this
hypothesis using a clever comparison. Subjects recalled
sequences of directions (e.g., up, down, left, right) conveyed by a static orthographic presentation of words (e.g.,
"up") or by a dynarnic visual stimulus that moved in the
appropriate direction (a box, presented on a computergenerated display, that moved up, down, left, or right).
Kallman and Cameron found an enhanced recency effect
in this moving-box condition.
The research reported here asks (and answers) three
questions about Kallman and Cameron's effect. First, can
the effect be replicated? (Yes.) Second, if the effect is
replicated, can it be extended using a variant of their
procedure? (Yes.) Third, are the processes that produce
the enhanced recency effect for dynamic visual stimuli
the same as the processes that produce enhanced recency
effects for auditory stimuli? (Yes.)
This article has the following organization. The remainder of the introduction presents a brief review of tests
of the Campbell and Dodd changing-state hypothesis, and
a consideration of what it takes to demonstrate that the
same processes contribute to two empirical effects (e.g.,
This research was funded by National Science Foundation Grant BNS
8416300 and University of Wisconsin Graduate Schoo1Grant 890200
awarded to the author. Thanks are due Ronald Bamhart and David
Bensinger for their contributions to this research, and William Epstein,
Margaret Intons-Peterson, Howard KalIman, and James Nairne for their
comrnents on an earlier draft of this paper. Requests for reprints may
be sent to Arthur Glenberg, Department of Psychology, 1202 West
Johnson SI.. Madison. Wisconsin 53706.
do the same processes contribute to the auditory recency
effect and the moving-box recency effect?). Following the
introduction are four experiments that provide the answers
to the questions listed above. The General Discussion contains some far-fetched, but interesting, speculation relating recency and modality effects to perceptual grouping
processes.
The modalityeffectis generally defined as the enhanced
recall of recently presented auditory information, compared with the recall of recently presented visual information. Reviews of the literature are provided by Naime
 and Penney . A number of explanations for the effect have been proposed, but, for now, the
focus will be on the changing-state hypothesis. Initial support for the hypothesis came from the demonstration that
the recency effect for lip-read words (in which the visual
stimulus changes state) is more similar (in size) to memory
for auditory words thanto memory for orthographic stimuli
 . As Kallman and Cameron
 point out, however, a number of other explanations of the modality effect can account for this finding.
Crowder attempted several direct tests of the
changing-state hypothesis. For example, in one experiment orthographically presented words moved across a
computer screen, thereby changing state. In other experiments, the words were presented letter by letter. None
of the manipulations enhanced recall of the visual stimuli,
leading Crowder to conclude that the changing-state
hypothesis was disconfirmed.
In contrast, Kallman and Cameron appear to
have uncovered a critical variable that controls when
changing-state stimuli enhance recall. They proposed that
changes in the stimulus enhance memory only when the
changes are used in identifying the stimulus. Thus, the
dynamic changes in a spoken word or a lip-read word are
essential to identifying the particular word, and these
changes enhance memory .
Moving an orthographically presented word, as in Crowder's experiments, does not contribute to the
word's identification, and so no improvement in memory is to be expected.
Kallman and Cameron tested their proposal using
aserial recall paradigm, in which subjects attempted to
recall lists of seven directions. In the orthographic condition, the lists were composed of the stimuli "up,"
"down," "left," and "right" presented centered on a
computer screen. Each stimulus in the moving-box condition consisted of a rectangle, initially presented in the
center of the screen, which then moved in one of the four
directions. Note that, in this condition, the movement is
necessary to identify the stimulus. The most interesting
finding was that the moving-box condition produced a
small, but statistically significant, enhancement of the
recency effect, compared with that produced by the orthographic condition.
Experiment I was designed to achieve two goals. The
first was to replicate the finding of an enhanced recency
effect in a conditioncomparable to Kallman and Cameron's
moving-box condition. The second goal was to determine
if the cognitive processes that produce the recency effect
in the moving-box condition are the same as the processes
that produce the recency effect for auditory stimuli. That
is, the moving-box recency effect may represent a new,
unrelated finding that in itself needs explaining. Altematively, there may be only one recency effect (that is, one
set of processes that produces recency effects). In this
case, the moving-box version and the auditory version of
the effect should mutually constrain explanations.
Determining whether or not the same cognitive processes contribute to two empirical phenomena is a tricky
enterprise. The standard methodology has been to search
for various types of dissociations. Thus, if an independent variable has an effect in one task and an opposite
effect in another task, it would seem that the two tasks
tap different processes. Dunn and Kirsner discuss
a number of flaws in this reasoning, however, and they
propose a new method they call reversed association. To
use this method, performance in one task (e.g., recall of
auditory stimuli) is plotted as a function of performance
in the other task (e.g., recall of rnoving-box stimuli) across
at least three levels of some other variable (e.g., serial
position). According to Dunn and Kirsner's analysis, if
the resulting function is nonmonotonic, the two tasks must
have some processes that are not in common. Unfortunately, the reversed-association method has several
drawbacks. First, a monotonie function does not guarantee that the tasks tap the same processes. Second, because
most memory tasks tap multiple processes, some ofwhich
may be common to two tasks and some unique, the
reversed-association procedure may produce nonmonotonie functions even when the two tasks do share some
processes of interest.
Another method of determining if two phenomena tap
the same process(es) uses a correlational analysis. The
DYNAMIC STIMULI
analysis is based on the following logic. First, suppose
that there are stable individual differences in efficiency
(e.g., speed, accuracy, or capacity) of cognitive processes.
Second, suppose that performance is a function ofthe efficiencies ofthe cognitive processes contributing to a task.
It follows, then, that if two tasks tap the same processes,
performance on the two tasks will be correlated. This procedure must be used with some caution because the correlation can be affected by various statistieal artifacts and
general performance level. Precautions taken to avoid these
problems are described in the results section. Variants of
this procedure are discussedby Crowder , Glenberg,
Jona, and Curran , and Underwood .
EXPERIMENT 1
Experiment I was modeled after Kallman and Cameron's study. Each trial required subjects to serially recall seven directional stimuli (up, down, left, and
right). Each subject participated in four different presentation conditions, although all stimuli on a particular trial
were in the same presentation condition. In the auditory
condition, the stimuli were reconstructed from digitized
exemplars of the spoken direction words. In the orthographic condition, each stimulus word was presented in
the middle of a video display screen. For each stimulus
in the moving-box condition, a reetangle was presented
in the middle of the screen, and it appeared to move in
one of the four directions. Finally, in the stationary-box
condition, for each stimulus a reetangle was presented in
a location displaced up, down, left, or right of a fixation
point, but the box did not move during its presentation.
On the basis of past results, the expectation is that the
largest recency effect will be found in the auditory condition. If the KaIlman and Cameron result replicates, then
the moving-box condition will produce the next largest recency effect, and that recency effect should be larger than
the effects produced by the orthographie and stationarybox conditions. Furthermore, ifthe moving-box recency
effect and the auditory recency effect are tapping the same
cognitive processes, then the recency effects from these
two tasks will correlate significantly. Finally, the correlation between the auditory recency effect and the movingbox recency effect should be larger than the correlation
of the auditory recency effect with either the orthographic
recency effect or the stationary-box recency effect.
Subjects. The subjects were 24 undergraduates (9 men, 15
women) from the University of Wisconsin-Madison who participated in the study to receive extra credit in an introductory psychology course. Experimental participation was one option for acquisition of the extra credit.
Design and Apparatus. All events in the experiment were timed
and controlled by an Apple Macintosh II computer and an App1e
AppleColor monitor.
The subjects participated in all four presentation conditions,
receiving 20 trials (plus practice) in each condition. The order of
the four presentation conditions was counterbalanced over subjects.
The structure of a trial was identical in each condition. The trial
began with a ready signal (e.g., "Get ready for auditory words")
presented on the monitor for 1,000 msec. The ready signal always
indieated the modality of the upcorning trial. Next, seven stimuli
chosen from the set of direction terms ("up," "down," "left,"
and "right") were presented. The stimuli were randomly chosen,
except for the constraint that each occur once in the first four serial
positions. Each stimulus was presented for 700 msec. There was
a 300-msec pause between each stimulus, during whieh time the
screen was blank. In the auditory condition, the stimuli were created
by digitizing speech at a rate of 11,264 sampies per second and
converting each sampie into I of 128 values. On playback using
the speaker built into the Macintosh, the digitized words were between 300 and 400 msec in duration. An extra pause was inserted
after each stimulus so that the total stimulus onset asynchrony was,
as in the other conditions, 1,000 rnsec. In the orthographie condition, the direction words appeared, one at a time, 0.5 cm above
a fixation point in the center of the monitor. In the stationary-box
condition, each stimulus consisted of a 1.8 cm x 1.8 cm box that
appeared about 2 cm above, below, to the left of, or to the right
of the fixation point. In the moving-box condition, boxes of the
same dimensions started in the center of the screen and moved about
2 cm up, down, to the left, or to the right. The boxes moved during the 700-msec presentation time only.
The response method was the same for alIofthe conditions. After
the last stimulus of a trial was presented, seven dashes appeared
on the monitor screen. Each time a subject pressed the up, down,
left, or right arrow key on the keyboard, one of the dashes was
replaced with a letter (U, 0, L, or R) to recreate the sequence.
The arrow keys were contiguous and were arranged on the keyboard in a pattern analogous to the directions. That is, the up arrow
key was the topmost, the down arrow key was directly below it,
and the left and right arrow keys were to the left and right of the
down arrow key, respectively. This arrangement should promote
stimulus-response compatibility. Responding was self-paced. If a
subject believed that he or she bad made a rnistake, the subject could
delete and reenter the responses. When satisfied with his or her
response, the subject pressed an end key to register the responses
and present the next trial.
Procedure. The subjects partieipated individually. Each subject
provided written consent before participating in the experiment. The
subject was seated approximately 50 cm from the monitor screen
in a soundproof chamber. Ouring the instruction period, the subject viewed one example of each of the presentation conditions and
then completed four practiee trials in the first presentation condition. The first block of 20 trials followed. Before each successive
block of 20 trials, the subjects participated on two trials using the
presentation condition of the upcorning block.
The number of stimuli eorreetly reealled (out of 20)
were eountedfor eaeh serial position. Two types of analyses will be presented. First, analysesof varianee on the
mean recall will be diseussed. These analysesdetermine
whether or not there is an enhaneed reeeney effeet in the
moving-box eondition. The second set of analyses are
designed to determine if the moving-box and auditory
reeeney effeets are produced by the same mechanisms.
Figure 1illustrates the serial-position eurvesin the four
presentation eonditions. As is typieal, there were strong
serial-position effects, including a reeeney effect (improvement in reeall between Serial Positions 6 and 7).
Alsoas is typieal, the receney effectwasmorepronounced
for auditory presentationthan for orthographie presentation. There was also a hint that the receney effect in the
moving-box conditionwas slightlylarger thanwas theeffeet in the orthographie and stationary-box eonditions.
Statistieally, the maineffectof presentation eondition was
not signifieant(usinga Type I error rate of .05, as in all
analysesreported), but the maineffect for serial position
was [F(6,138) = 33.91, MSe = 9.09]. Also, the interactionbetweenpresentationeonditionand serial position
was significant [F(18,414) = 4.15, MSe = 2.78].
Planned eomparisonswere used to test for specifieeffeets. First, the reeeney effect (difference in reeall between Serial Positions6 and 7) in the auditory eondition
exeeeded the receney effect in the other conditions
Serial Position
Figure 1. Number recalled from each serial position in Experiment 1.
DYNAMIC STIMULI
EXPERIMENT 2
Orthographie
Correlations Among the Recency Scores in Experiment 1
-- .---_...
Stationary
Moving Box
The data from Experiment 1 are not as strong statistically as one would like. In particular, there is little evidence that the size of the moving-box recency effect is
much greater than the size of the orthographic or the
stationary-box recency effect. Also, the correlation between the moving-box and auditory recency scores is just
barely significant. Thus, replication seems in order.
A second reason for Experiment 2 is that there is a possibility that the correlation between the moving-box and
auditory recency scores may have little to do with the dynamic quality of the moving-box stimuli. In particular,
the moving-box condition can be quite difficult, and subjects may mouth or whisper the direction words in the
To the extent that the efficiency of the extra process is
not perfectly correlated with processes contributing to
recall of the middle items, the partialed score is a measure of the contribution of the extra process to recall.
For the sake of argument, assurne that the extra process
is highly correlated with processes contributing to recall
of the middle items. In that case, the partialed score would
reflect only noise, and there would beno significant correlations. The significant correlations (discussed shortly)
found in these experiments allow us to discount this
possibility .
Now assume that an extra process does contribute to
recency effects, but that the process contributes to all
recency effects. In that case, recency scores in all of the
conditions should correlate equally weil. That was not the
case, however, indicating that different processes contribute to different recency effects.
A recency score was formed for each subject in each
condition. The correlations among the recency scores are
presented in Table I. Note that the auditory recency score
and the moving-box recency score are significantly correlated, whereas the auditory recency score does not
correlate significantly with any of the other recency
scores. This finding can be interpreted as follows: The
processes that generate the auditory recency effect have
a substantial overlap with the processes that generate the
moving-box recency effect.
Less weight is given to the other correlations, even those
close in size to the significant one, because they are not
consistent across the three experiments reported here.
Comparisons across the experiments are discussed in the
Subsidiary Analyses section, following the discussion of
Experiment 3.
Orthographie
Moving Box
[F(l,23) = 5.49, MS. = 3.04]. Second, the recency effect
for the moving-box condition was significant [F(l,23) =
23.49, MS. = 2.04]. However, the recency effect for the
moving-box condition was not significantly greater than
the recency effects in the orthographic and stationary-box
conditions [F(l,23) = 1.92, MS. = 1.85]. Thus, considering this result alone, there is little statistical evidence for
an enhanced recency effect in the moving-box condition.
It is likely that this is a Type 11 error. Results from Experiments 2 and 3 will demonstrate statistical support for
an enhanced recency effect in the moving-box condition.
Furthermore, the results from this experiment and Experiments 2 and 3 will support the conclusion that the
recency effect in the moving-box condition is different
in kind from the recency effect in the orthographie and
stationary-box conditions. Thus, the conclusion that there
is an enhanced recency effect in the moving-box condition is likely to be correct, regardless of the outcome of
this specific comparison.
The second set of analyses was designed to determine
if the recency effect in the moving-box condition is
produced by the same processes as is the recency effect
in the auditory condition. The basic idea is to correlate
a measure of the size of the recency effect (corrected for
overall level of performance) in the two conditions. A significant correlation is taken as evidence that the same
processes are contributing to the two recency effects.
A commonsense measure of the size of the recency effect is the difference in recall between Serial Positions
6 and 7, as used above. Unfortunately, the difference score
is plagued with problems. First, the difference score is
less reliable than either of the components entering into
it , thus reducing the size of any
correlations. Second, although the difference score seems
to bea measure of improvement corrected for overall level
of performance (by subtraction of recall at Position 6),
in most cases, the simple difference is an overcorrection
 . Third, the correlation of two
difference scores may be grossly affected by their joint
correlation with overall performance .
Fortunately, there is a measure of the size of recency
that overcomes these problems. This score is recall at
Serial Position 7, with recall of Serial Position 6 partialed
out. The score is formed by calculating the regression
equation, using recall at Serial Position 6 as the predictor
variable and recall at Serial Position 7 as the dependent
variable. This equation is used to predict, for each subject, the subject's recall at Serial Position 7, using his/her
recall at Position 6 as the predictor variable. This predicted
recall is then subtracted from the actual recall at Serial
Position 7, giving a partialed, or residual, score. This partialed score will be referred to as the recency score.
Consider what this recency score represents. Virtually
all theories of recency effects assurne that something
different, an extra process or an extra representation, is
affecting the encoding, storage, or retrieval of information presented at the end, rather than the middle, of a list.
moving-box condition in an effort to enhance memory. 1
Other research has dernonstrated that mouthing produces effects very similar to those
found with the auditory modality. Thus, the corre1ation
between the moving-box and auditory conditions may
reflect nothing more than subjects' tuming the movingbox condition into an auditory-1ike condition by mouthing. In Experiment 2, mouthing was prevented by requiring articulatory suppression throughout the presentation
of stimuli in all of the conditions.
The method and design of Experiment 2 were identical to those
of Experiment I, except in two details. First, 36 subjects (19 men,
17 wornen), selected from the same source as those in Experiment I,
were used. Second, the subjects were instructed to engage in articulatory suppression. On each trial, starting with the ready signal and ending with the recall signal, the subjects repeated out loud
the word "the" two to three times per second.
The means of recall at each serial position are presented
in Figure 2. There was a main effect of presentation
[F(3,105) = 2.68, MSe = 36.51]. Also, there was a main
effect of serial position [F(6,21O) = 39.41, MSe = 8.93].
The interaction between presentation condition and serial
position was also significant [F(18,630) = 2.70, MSe =
4.56]. Components of this interaction, as revealed by
p1anned comparisons, are of most interest.
The recency effect (improvement in recall from Position 6 to Position 7) in the auditory condition exceeded
the receney effect in the other conditions [F(1,35) ==
13.52, MSe = 3.46]. Also, the recency effect in the
moving-box condition was significant [F(1,35) = 28.58,
MSe = 3.43]. In contrast to the data from Experiment 1,
the reeeney effect in the moving-box eondition was 1arger
than the receney effeet in the stationary-box and orthographieeonditions[F(1,35) = 6.55,MSe = 2.15]. Thus,
there is evidence for an enhanced reeency effect in the
dynamic moving-box condition.
Table 2 contains the corre1ations among the eonditions
using the receney scores. As in Experiment 1, the movingbox condition is the on1y condition to correlate significantly with the auditory eondition. The moving-box
recency scores were also signifieantly correlated with the
orthographic recency scores. However, this correlation
is not found consistently aeross the experiments.
The results from Experiment 2 are important in three
respects. First, they confirm that there is an enhanced
reeency effect in the moving-box eondition, thereby adding statistical support to the finding from Experiment 1
and replicating Kallman and Cameron . Second,
the important correlational results from Experiment 1
were also replicated. Apparently, the processes that produce the auditory recency effect are substantially similar
to those that produce the moving-box recency effect. Also,
whatever it is that produces the auditory recency effeet
(see General Discussion), it is more closely related to
processes active in the moving-box condition than to
processes active in the stationary-box condition and the
orthographie condition. Third, beeause the subjects were
engaged in articulatory suppression, it is unlike1y that
covert articulations in the moving-box condition were the
cause of the enhanced moving-box recency effect and the
correlation with the auditory condition.
EXPERIMENT 3
Kallman and Cameron have proposed that the
critical feature that produces the enhanced receney effect
in the moving-box eondition (and in auditory eonditions)
orthoqraphic
slalionary box
moving box
Serial Position
Figure 2. Number recalled from each serial position in Experiment 2.
Correlations Among the Recency Scores in Experiment 2
Stationary
Orthographie
Moving Box
The method was similar to that used in the previous experiments,
except for the followingdifferences. First, data were collectedfrom
a new group of24 subjects(12 men, 12 women). Second,the strrnU!1
were the three speed terms: fast, medium, and slow. In the audiis that dynamic information is crucial in identifying the
stimuli. Experiment 3 provides converging evidence for
this proposal by using a different task in which dynamic
information is used in identifying the stimuli. In this experiment, the seven-item lists were compose~ of three
speed terms: fast, medium, and slow. In the auditory condition, the terms were presented by digitized speech. In
the orthographie condition, the words were presented on
the monitor screen. In the moving-box condition, the box
appeared to move across the screen at a fast, medium,
or slow rate. Thus, the rate of movement was used in identifying the stimulus. In the stationary-box condition, the
words "fast," "medium," and "slow" were presented
on the screen, and a box appeared under the appropriate
word for the duration ofthe stimulus. Support for Kallman
and Cameron's position will take the form of an enhanced
recency effect in the moving-box condition. Additionall~,
we might expect a larger correlation between the aud~­
tory and moving-box conditions than between the auditory condition and the other conditions.
Orthographie
Moving Box
DYNAMIC STIMULI
tory condition, the speech was digitized at a rate of 22,528 sampies per second; on playback, each stimulus was exactly 500 msec
in duration. In the box conditions, the size ofthe box wasdecreased
to approximately .5 cm a side. In the moving-box condition,. the
box movedduring the 7oo-msecstimulusduration from left to nght
approximately 5, 10, and 20 cm, to indicate the fast, medium, and
slow stimuli,respectively. In the stationary-box condition,the words
"fast," "medium," and "slow" wereon thedisplayscreenthroughout the trial. These words were located at approximately 5, 10, and
20 cm from the leftedge of the displaymonitor.To indicatea speed,
the box appeared under the appropriate word for the 7oo-msec duration of the stimulus.
Mean recall is illustrated in Figure 3. There were significant main effects of presentation condition [F(3,69) =
9.31, MSe = 10.46] and serial position [F(6,138) =
31.30, MSe = 6.21]. The interaction was also significant
[F(l8,414) = 3.50, MSe = 2.43].
As in the previous experiments, the planned contrasts
are of most interest. First, the auditory recency effect
was significantly larger than the others [F(l,23) = 8.00,
MSe = 4.25]. Second, the recency effect in the movingbox condition was significant [F(l,23) = 16.82, MSe =
2.19]. Third, the recency effect in the moving-box condition was significantly greater (at the .06 level) than the
recency effect in the orthographie and stationary-box conditions [F(l,23) = 3.75, MSe = 1.20]. Thus, the data indicate a larger recency effect with dynamic visual stimuli
than with static visual stimuli.
Table 3 contains the results of the correlational analyses of the recency scores. Again, the auditory recency
scores correlate most highly with the moving-box recency
scores. Thus, these data support the claim that the
processes that contribute to the auditory recency effect
also contribute to the moving-box recency effect much
more than to the stationary-box recency effect. It now
orthoqraprnc
stalionary box
rnovrnq box
Senal Position
Figure 3. Number recaIled from each serial position in Experiment 3.
Correlations Among the Recency Scores in Experiment 3
SUBSIDIARY ANALYSES
FOR EXPERIMENTS 1-3
seems to be a good bet that some process sensitive to dynarnic information is contributing to both effects.
Arguments are presented in the results section of Experiment 1 for using the recency score. In the interest of
checking on those arguments, a number of other analyses
were conducted and are reported in this section. In addition, an analysis is reported to deterrnine if the process
common to the auditory and moving-box conditions is
specific to the recency portion of the serial-position curve.
Whenever multiple analyses are conducted, there is the
danger of making Type I errors more frequently than is
indicated by the nominal Type I error rate. When the analyses are distributed across three experiments, that danger
would seem to be enhanced even further. Fortunately,
having three similar experiments also provides an alternative method of assessing the reliability of a finding,
namely its consistency across the three experiments. Consider the data presented in Tables 1-3. The correlation
between the auditory and moving-box conditions is completely consistent in that it is significant in all three experiments. Although two other conditions also correlate
significantly (orthographic and moving-box conditions in
Experiment 2; moving-box and stationary-box conditions
in Experiment 3), neither of these effects is consistent in
that neither is significant in more than one experiment.
To limit Type I errors, this notion of consistency, in addition to standard levels of significance, will be applied
to the following analyses.
One altemative to the recency score is recall in the last
serial position. A problem with using the last serial position as an index of recency is that correlations across the
conditions will reflect individual differences in general
memory ability (i.e., good subjects will tend to recall more
than will poor subjects in all conditions). Thus, we would
expect many significant and consistent correlations, but
they may indicate nothing more than stable individual
differences in general memory ability. Consistent with this
reasoning, of the six pairs of conditions, five correlated
significantly and consistently (that is, in at least two of
the three experiments). The one pair that never produced
a significantcorrelation was the auditory and the stationarybox condition.
To correct for general memory ability, one could subtract from recall at the last serial position recall at the
penultimate position. As noted in the results section of
Experiment 1, this correction is less than optimal for a
number of reasons-one of which is that the resulting
difference score is not as reliable as either of the individual
scores. If reliability is a problem, then the correlations
may be inconsistent across the experiments. In fact, using
the difference in recall between Serial Positions 6 and 7
as the dependent variable, four pairs of conditions correlated significantly, but none was consistent. That is, no
pair of conditions produced a significant correlation in
more than one experiment.
Another measure ofthe size ofthe recency effect (corrected for overall level of performance) is the proportion
of all errors that occur at the last serial position .2 I will refer to this as the error score.
Like the simple difference, the error score will tend to
be less reliable than recall at any specific position. The
problem is that the error score reflects variability in the
last serial position, as well as variability in all of the other
serial positions. Thus, we are led to expect low and inconsistent correlations. Using the error score as the dependent variable, most of the correlations were low (in
fact, five were negative); however, one correlation was
significant in two of the three experiments. The correlations between the stationary-box and moving-box conditions were .76, .67, and.1O in Experiments 1,2, and 3,
respectively. It is uncertain as to why this correlation is
substantial in two experiments and not even close to significant in the third.
Up to this point, the analyses have been guided by the
question of whether there is a common process underlying the enhanced recency effects found in the auditory
and the moving-box conditions. When the recency score
is used as the dependent variable, the significant (and consistent) correlation between these conditions has suggested
an affirmative answer. However, there has been little to
suggest that the relationship between the two conditions
is specific to the recency portion of the serial-position
curve. One way to exarnine the specificity of the relationship is to perform a similar analysis at another serial position. Analogous to the recency score, a primacy score
could be formed by partialing recall at Serial Position 2
from recall at Serial Position 1. Unfortunately, this score
would likely lead to no significant (or at least few consistent) correlations. The problem is that recall at Serial Position 1 and recall at Serial Position 2 are likely to reflect
sirnilar processes . To the extent that this is correct, partialing
recall at Serial Position 2 from recall at Serial Position 1
removes much of the interesting (and stable) variance.
Thus, this primacy score would primarily reflect noise
in the data and would result in inconsistent correlations.
In fact, when this score was formed, four pairs of conditions resulted in significant correlations, but none were
consistent (none found in more than one experiment).
To overcome this problem, a primacy score was formed
by partialing from Serial Position 1 recall at Serial Position 7. This procedure should remove contributions of
general level of performance; however, if the recency ef-
Stationary
Orthographie Moving Box
Orthographie
Moving Box
feet and the primaey effeet refleet substantially different
processes, mueh of the stable varianee should be left in
these primaey scores. Using these primaey scores, three
eorre1ations were eonsistent aeross the experiments. The
eorrelations between the auditory and orthographie conditions were .49, .35, and .38 in Experiments 1,2, and
3, respeetively. Apparently, the same eognitive process
underlies the primaey effeet in the auditory and orthographie eonditions, and it seems likely that this process
is some form of verbal rehearsal. The eorrelations between the auditory and the stationary-box eonditions were
.53, .34, and .21 (n.s.); the eorrelations between the
stationary-box and the moving-box eonditions were .53,
.33, and .04 (n.s.). Although not as eonsistent aeross experiments, these eorrelations may also refleet eommon
process eontributing to primaey effeets.
Interestingly, for the primaey scores, the eorrelations
between the auditory and the moving-box eonditions were
.23, .09, and -.37 (p = .068). That is, the eonsisteney
noted for the receney scores (in the auditory and movingbox eonditions) is notably absent for the primaey scores.
Thus, it seems safe to eonclude that the underlying process
in eomrnon between the auditory and moving-box conditions is speeifie to the reeeney portion of the serialposition eurve.
EXPERIMENT 4
The data from Experiments 1-3 lead to the eonclusion
that the receney effects found in the auditory and movingbox eonditions are produeed by the same underlying
process that is sensitive to dynarnie ehanges in the stimuli.
However, there is an alternative interpretation. In all three
experiments, the eonsistent eorrelation in the reeeney
scores was found between the eonditions having the largest reeeney effeets (auditory and moving box). Might
the eorrelation be an artifaet of the size of the reeeney
effeets? Experiment 4 tested this alternative. Subjeets
free1y recaUed auditory stimuli, orthographie stimuli, and
the names of pietorial stimuli. All three of these conditions should produee substantially 1arger reeeney effeets
than those found in the serial
reeall of the smal1vocabu1ary 1ists used in Experiments 1-3. If the eorrelation between the reeeney scores is an artifaet of the size
of the receney effect, then we should observe many eorrelations among the eonditions. On the other hand, if the
eorrelations observed in Experiments 1-3 reflect a process
based on dynarnie stimulus information, then the auditory receney scores should not eorrelate highly with either
the orthographie or the pietorial reeeney scores.
Subjects. A total of36 subjects (10 men, 26 women) participated
in the experiment.
Materials and Design. The to-be-recalled materials consisted of
216 items selected from the Snodgrass and Vanderwart 
norms. The items were those with the highest name agreement between subjeets. The items were randomly divided into 18 12-item
Iists. Three versions of eaeh list were ereated. One version con-
DYNAMIC STIMULI
sisted of slides of the drawings of eaeh item (pieture lists), a second version eonsisted of slides of the names of eaeh drawing (orthographie lists), and the third version was a recording of the spoken
names (auditory lists). Eaeh pieture list and eaeh orthographie list
was preeeded by a slide displaying a row of asterisks as a ready
signal and ended with a slide displaying a row of question marks
as a reeall signal. Auditory lists were preceded by a reeording of
the spoken word "ready" and followed by a recording of a tone,
whieh was the reeall signal.
Eaeh subject studied and freely reealled six pieture lists, six orthographie lists, and six auditory lists. The six lists in eaeh presentation eondition were blocked, The order of the blocks was counterbalanced over subjects. Within eaeh block, half of the subjects were
presented the Iistsin the order I-6; the other subjects were presented
the lists in the order 4-6, 1-3. In addition, all iterns served equally
often in pieture lists, orthographie lists, and auditory lists.
Procedure. The subjeets partieipated individually. After hearing general instruetions, eaeh block of lists was preceded by specifie
instruetions eoneerning the modality of presentation, ready signal,
and reeall signal. In all eases, eaeh item was presented for 1.5 sec
(including the ready and reeall signals). The subjects were given
90 see for written free reeall immediately following the recall signal for eaeh list.
Mean reeall (out of a possible six) is displayed in
Figure 4. The main effeet for presentation eondition was
signifieant [F(2,70) = 4.26, MSe = 1.99]. The means
were 3.67 for the auditory lists, 3.56 for the pietures lists,
and 3.39 for the orthographie lists. A1though the differenee between pietures and orthographie presentation in
mean reeall was not signifieant [F(l,35) = 2.29, MSe =
2.77], reeall of pietures did exeeed reeall of the words
in 9 of the 12 serial positions, providing some replieation of the standard pieture-word superiority effect . The main effect of serial position was signifieant
[F(l1,385) = 42.87, MSe = 2.00], as was the interaction
of presentation eondition and serial position [F(22,770) =
3.10, MSe = 1.21].
The modality effect is an enhaneed receney effect, relative to that found in the orthographie eondition. In Experiments 1-3, the reeeney effeet was measured by the
differenee in recaUbetween the last and second-to-1astpositions. Using that definition in Experiment 4 resulted in
an enhanced receney effect for the auditory eondition, relative to the orthographie eondition [F(l,35) = 3.80, MSe =
.81,p = .06], but there was less evidence for an enhanced
receney effect for the pieture eondition, relative to the orthographie eondition [F(l,35) = 2.44, MSe = .82, p =
.13]. Judging from Figure 4, it appears that a better measure of the receney effect for these data would take into
aeeount recall in the last four positions. In particular, the
linear eontrast over the last four positions seems to aceurately eapture the notion of receney . With this measure, there was evidenee for an enhanced receney effect
for both the auditory and pieture eonditions. That is, the
linear eontrast for the auditory lists was significantlygreater
than was the eontrast for the orthographie lists [F(l,35)
= 10.64, MSe = .90], and the linear contrast for the pie-
orthographic
Serial Position
Figure 4. Number recalled from each serial position in Experiment 4.
Correlations Among the Recency Scores in Experiment 4
ture lists was significantly greater than was the contrast
for the orthographic lists [F(l,35) = 4.40, MSe = .89].
Now, the question is whether these large recency effects will produce significant correlations. Two scores
were computed for each subject in each condition. These
scores were the linear contrast over the last four positions
and the sum of recall in the middle positions (Positions
5-8). Recall from the middle positions was then partialed
from the linear contrasts. As in the previous experiments,
the residual score will be referred to as the recency score
(the recency effect over and above what can be predicted
by performance in the middle of the list),
The correlations among the recency scores are presented
in Table 4. There was a significant correlation between
the pieture and orthographie recency scores; however,
neither the pieture nor the orthographie recency scores
correlated significantly with the auditory recency scores.
Apparently, large recency effects are not sufficient to
produce significantcorrelations among the recency scores.
Two additional analyses of recency scores were performed. In one, the recency scores were formed by partialing the sum of recall in the middle positions from the
sum of recall in Positions 9-12 (as opposed to the linear
contrast for these positions). In the second, the recency
scores were formed by partialing the sum of recall in
Serial Positions 5-8 from the sum of recall in Positions
Orthographie
Orthographie
10-12. Both of these analyses produced patterns of significant and nonsignificant correlations identical to those
in Table 4.
The results from these analyses are clear enough: Drawings of objects do produce an enhanced recency effect,
but that enhanced effect is not strongly related to the
recency effect found with auditory presentation. Again,
the data are consistent with the claim that the auditory
recency effect is due, at least in part, to processes sensitive to dynamic information.
Finally, several analyses of primacy scores were conducted. In the basic analysis, the primacy scores were
formed by summing recall in Serial Positions 1-3 and partialing from this sum the sum of recall in Serial Positions
9-12 (similar to the most informative analyses of primacy
scores for Experiments 1-3). Correlations among these
scores were computed, and they are reported in Table 5.
Note that the pattern of correlations for the primacy scores
is quite different from the pattern of correlations for the
recency scores (Table 4). In partieular, the auditory
primacy scores correlate with both the orthographie and
the picture primacy scores. As for Experiments 1-3, a
plausible explanation is that the primacy effect (as measured by the primacy scores) reflects a verbal rehearsal
process, which is commonly applied regardless ofthe input modality.
A second primacy score was formed by partialing from
the sum of Positions 1-3 the sum of Positions 5-8. The
pattern of correlations was similar to that in Table 5,
although all of the correlations were reduced (e.g., the
correlation between the auditory and picture conditions
was reduced to .32). Primacy scores were also formed
by constructing the linear contrast across Positions 1-3
and partialing from the contrast various indices of mid-
DYNAMIC STIMULI
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Correlations Among the Primacy Scores in Experiment 5
die and recency effects. These various primacy scores also
produced patterns similar to the pattern in Table 5.
The results of these experiments provide answers to the
three questions posed in the introduction. First, Kallman
and Cameron's effect can be replicated: When dynamic information is used in stimulus identification, there
is an enhanced recency effect. In Experiment 1, the
recency effect for the moving-box condition was numerically greater than that for the other visual conditions, but
the difference was not statistically significant. However,
a statistically significant enhancement was found in Experiments 2 and 3.
Second, the effect can be extended. In Experiment 3,
speed of movement, rather than direction of movement,
was the dynamic information used in identifying the stimulus, and this dynamic information engendered an enhanced
recency effect. Furthermore, the results from Experiment 3 help to converge on the conclusion that it was the
dynamic quality of the stimuli that was important. Because
the to-be-remembered stimuli in Experiment 3 were terms
referring to speed of movement rather than direction of
movement (as in Kallman and Cameron and Experiments
1 and 2), we can be certain that use of direction terms
is not a necessary component of the effect.
Given the enhancement associated with dynamic information, the third question is whether or not that enhancement can be attributed to the same processes as those that
produce the enhanced recency effect with auditory presentation. There are many possible sources of recency effects,
including recall based on a high-fidelity short-term or
working memory , modalityspecific sensory registers ,
modality-specific coding ,
grouping processes , temporal distinctiveness , as well as processes
based on dynamic qualities of stimuli . Thus, it is not the case that auditory recency effects and recency effects produced by dynamic visual
stimuli must be based on the same processes or mechanisms. In fact, as discussed shortly, the data indicate that
there may well be multiple sources for recency effects.
The method used to decide if the same cognitive processes underlie multiple recency effects is based on an
individual difference correlational analysis, using partialed
scores (the recency score). As noted previously, the partialed score is preferred to the simple difference score for
several psychometric reasons.
Across the experiments, there was one consistent correlation, the correlation between the auditory recency scores
and the recency scores in the moving-box condition. These
correlations were significant and numerically sirnilar (.40,
.43, and .43) in the first three experiments. At the same
time, the auditory recency scores never correlated significantly with the stationary-box recency scores, and the
size of those correlations were numerically small (.15,
-.02, and .01). The results of Experiment 4 rule out the
possibility that the significant correlations are an artifact
of the size of the recency effects. Furthermore, the subsidiary analysis of the primacy scores indicates that the
relationship between the auditory and moving-box conditions is specific to the recency portion of the serialposition curve. Thus, the evidence seems particularly
strong that some process is contributing to both the auditory recency effect and the moving-box recency effect,
but that process does not contribute to the stationary-box
recency effect nor to primacy effects.
Now, what is that process? One possibility was suggested by Nairne . He proposed that memory traces
consist of two types of features, modality-independent and
modality-dependent. According to Nairne, the enhanced
auditory recency reflects the use of modality-dependent
features in the reconstruction of information from traces.
Furthermore, there is little visual (orthographic) recency
effect because the visual modality-dependent features are
overwritten by the postpresentation visual environment.
Finally, Nairne suggests that movement produces modalitydependent features that are not overwritten by the postpresentation environment, leading to an enhanced recency
effect in the moving-box condition.
While Naime's account neatly explains the enhanced
moving-box recency effect, by itself, it offers little explanation of when there is and when there is not a correlation
between the recency scores. For example, one might grant
the additional assumption that the correlation reflects the
use of modality-dependent (either auditory or movementbased) features in reconstructing trace information. Note,
however, there is also a recency effect in the stationarybox condition (see Figures 1-3), and yet those recency
scores do not correlate with the auditory recency scores.
Perhaps, one might assume further that the stationary-box
recency effect, being no larger than the orthographic
recency effect, is based on modality-independent features
only, and, therefore, one would not expect it to correlate
strongly with recall based on modality-dependent features.
This argument runs afoul of the data from Experiment 4
(but to be fair, Nairne's account is meant to apply only
to immediate serial recall, not free recall as in Experiment 4). In Experiment 4, the picture recency effect is
enhanced, relative to the orthographie recency effect.
Thus, according to Nairne's framework, the picture
recency effect represents the use of modality-dependent
features, and, by the first additional assumption given
above, the picture recency scores should correlate with
the auditory recency scores. However, they do not
Orthographie
Orthographie
(r = .12; see Table 4). To surnmarize, Naime's framework suggests an explanation for the enhanced recency
effect found in the moving-box condition, but it will require further specification to account for the pattem of
correlations among the recency scores.
An altemative account is that both the auditory and the
moving-box recency effects reflect an enhancement based
on perceptual grouping processes. In outline, the argument is as follows. An important (perhaps primary) function of perceptual processes is to deliver representations
of objects in the environment, where objects are unified
collections of properties, features, and parts. One clue
that the perceptual system uses to construct objects is common dynamic changes among the components-that is,
coherent movement signals objectness. Dynamic information in the auditory condition specifies the existence
of a single object, a speaker, undergoing successive transformations. Dynamic information in the moving-box condition specifies the existence of a single object, the box,
undergoing successive transformations. Finally, recall of
information about a single object is superior to recall of
information about multiple objects. The next few paragraphs flesh out this argument.
The case for objects has been made by Treisman . She proposed that an object is represented by an "object file;" a type of episodic
memory trace that represents, initially, the perceptible
characteristics of an object, such as its shape, location,
and color. Perceptible changes in the object cause the object file to be updated (rather than the creation of a new
object file), so that the identity ofthe object is maintained.
Additional information (e.g., the object's name) may be
added to the file from memory. Kahneman and Treisman
adduce evidence indieating that the number of objects in
a display (as opposed to the number of features) determines
the perceptualload and that attention seems to be directed
toward objects, rather than features. Thus, for example,
Stroop interference (interference in naming the color of
ink used to write a color name) is decreased ifthe to-benamed color and the color word are spatially separated,
forming two objects. Also, some forms of repetition priming are enhanced when the prime and the target can be
treated as the same object, rather than as mere physieally
identical instances of the same dass .
Cornmon dynamic transformations among features are
an important and powerful clue indieating that the features belong to the same object. In the visual domain, one
illustration of this is the kinetic depth effect . When the shadow ofa threedimensional object is projected onto a two-dimensional
screen, it is difficult to determine the three-dimensional
shape of the object from the shadow. However, when the
object is rotated while casting a shadow, the threedimensional shape is readily apparent. Thus, dynamic information is used in constructing representations of objects. In fact, there is evidence to support the assertion
that the information in dynamically changing optical arrays is the primary (ontogenetically prior) source of information for maintaining a three-dimensional representation of the distal stimulus .
In the auditory domain, stimuli with appropriate frequency and rhythrnic relations are grouped into a unitary
experience representing a particular auditory object, such
as a musical instrument or a particular person's voice.
These groups are called auditory streams . Note that dynamic qualities of the stimuli, frequency and rhythrn, contribute to grouping into perceptual objects.
The next step in the argument is that grouping facilitates
memory in general and recall in particular. Kahneman and
Treisman describe an experiment in which subjects viewed displays consisting of a word and a box with
a gap on one side. The distance between the word and
the gap was always the same, but, in one condition, the
word appeared to be in the box and, in the other condition, the word appeared to be outside ofthe box. Following a mask, subjects were to report the word and the 10cation ofthe gap. Recall (or identification) ofthe location
of the gap was greater when the word and box formed
a single object (84% correct) than when the word and box
formed two separate objects (73% correct). Of course,
that grouping (or chunking or organization) facilitates
longer term memory performance is as close to an undisputed fact as can be found in the memory literature.
Importantly, a number oflines of evidence are converging on the conclusion that grouping processes, in addition to improving recall, underlie the auditory recency
advantage. Frankish has demonstrated that grouping produced by temporal pauses during presentation
facilitates recall of auditory items more than it facilitates
recall of visual items. Penney reviewed evidence
indicating that auditory items have automatie access to
an ••A code" that preserves temporal order. Glenberg and
Femandez and Greene and Crowder found
that auditory presentation leads to more accurate temporal
order judgments than does visual presentation. Given that
one interpretation of memory for temporal order is that
it is based on associative or grouping processes , these results indicate enhanced grouping for auditory items, relative to visual items. A related
line of evidence comes from the study of modality effects
in rhythrn-perception tasks. Glenberg, Mann, Altman,
Forman, and Proeise demonstrated that rhythrns
conveyed by auditory stimuli are easier to code than are
rhythrns conveyed by visual stimuli. Also, using a correlational analysis sirni1arto the one used here, Glenberg,
Mann, et al. demonstrated that the grouping processes involved in coding auditory rhythrns are sirnilar to the
processes underlying the modality effect with verbal
materials. Finally, Kahneman and Henik have suggested that suffix effects arise when the suffix is entered
into the same perceptual group as the to-be-remembered
The argument advanced so far is that dynamic information is used by both the auditory system and the visual
system to form representations of objects and that recall
of information from a single objeet exeeeds reeall of information from multiple objeets. Given that both auditory and visual pereeption use dynamie information to
identify stimuli, why is there an enhaneed reeeney effeet
for auditory presentation, relative to the usual orthographie eondition? In the typical memory experiment, the
auditory stimuli ean be pereeptually grouped (streamed)
to represent an objeet, the speaker. Easy aeeess to the
stimuli in the stream produees the reeeney effeet. With
orthographie presentation, the separate stimuli (words) do
not form a unitary pereeptual object; eaeh word is its own
object. Grouping of these separate objeets requires intentional eognitive intervention .
In the moving-box eondition, movement induees the
pereeptual system to treat the seven stimuli as instantiations of the same object: a box that moves from the center
of the sereen (in Experiments I and 2) toward the periphery. Furthermore, it is hypothesized that this identifieation results in grouping the stimuli such that the group
represents seven sueeessive transformations of the same
objeet, just as the seven auditory stimuli are seven words
spoken by the same speaker. In the stationary-box eondition, the box makes diserete jumps from one location to
another, unlike any real objeet. In this ease, the perceptual system is offered few eues that would lead to grouping these stimuli. Thus, eaeh box is treated as aseparate
pereeptual object, mueh as with the orthographie stimuli.
The eorrelation between the auditory receney scores and
the moving-box reeeney scores eould arise in at least two
ways. First, the eorrelation may represent eonstraints on
grouping processes, eonstraints that are similar in the two
modalities. Second, the eorrelation may reflect eonstraints
on processes used to seareh or retrieve information from
an organization.
This pereeptual grouping aeeount would seem eapable
of addressing the enhaneed reeeney effeets found with
signed stimuli , lip-read stimuli
 , and mouthed stimuli . In all of these cases, the perceptual
system ean use information to group the stimuli into a
representation of a single objeet or a single objeet undergoing sueeessive transformations. The aceount makes the
following predietions. First, all of these types of enhaneed
reeency effeets should eorrelate with one another using
analyses similar to those performed here. Second, all of
these forms of reeeney effects should be disrupted by
manipulations that force different grouping of the stimuli.
For example, the reeeney effeet for auditory words (or
lip-read words, ete.) presented by different speakers
should be redueed, relative to the effeet for a single
speaker. In a moving-box eondition, the reeeney effeet
should be disrupted ifthe box ehanges (e.g., in color, size,
or shape), so that the pereeptual system no longer treats
the stimuli as instantiations of the same objeet.
The explanation of the eorrelation between the auditory and moving-box reeeney scores is one issue. A
related, but separate, issue is the number of sources of
DYNAMIC STIMULI
reeeney effeets. If we trust the inferenees based on the
eorrelational analyses presented here, then we have evidenee for multiple sources eontributing to receney effects.
One of these sources contributes to both auditory and
moving-box reeeney effeets. Another may eontribute to
orthographie and pieture receney effeets (see data in Table 4). Battaeehi, Pelamatti, and Umiltä also eoncluded that there are multiple sources of reeency effeets,
although they used the sort of dissociation logie that has
been eritieized by Dunn and Kirsner . In any event,
a eontribution of the work reported here is that it describes
a relatively easy-to-use eorrelational methodology for investigating hard questions about when similar-looking
results are produeed by the same underlying mechanisms.