NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS
Charles F. Manski
Working Paper 7580
 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
This research was supported in part by NSF grant SBR-9722846. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Analysis of Social Interactions
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 7580
March 2000
Economists have long been ambivalent about whether the discipline should focus on the
analysis of markets or should be concerned with social interactions more generally. Recently the
discipline has sought to broaden its scope while maintaining the rigor of modern economic analysis.
Major theoretical developments in game theory, the economics of the family, and endogenous
growth theory have taken place. Economists have also performed new empirical research on social
interactions, but the empirical literature does not show progress comparable to that achieved in
economic theory. This paper examines why and discusses how economists might make sustained
contributions to the empirical analysis of social interactions.
Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan University
Evanston, IL 60208
 
1. Introduction
Economists have long been ambivalent about what social interactions constitute the proper
domain of the discipline. The narrower view has been that economics is primarily the study of
markets, a circumscribed class of institutions in which persons interact through an anonymous
process of price formation. The broader view has been that economics is defined fundamentally by
its concern with the allocation of resources and by its emphasis on the idea that persons respond to
incentives. In this view, economists may properly study how incentives shape all social interactions
that affect the allocation of resources.
Throughout much of the 20th century, mainstream economics traded breadth for rigor. In the
first half of the century institutional economics, which thought broadly but loosely about social
interactions, gradually gave way to the neoclassical theory of general competitive equilibrium, which
formalized the analysis of idealized competitive markets . From the
perspective of general equilibrium theory, non-market interactions were not phenomena of intrinsic
interest. Instead they were problems of incomplete markets that may prevent the economy from
achieving a social optimum. Welfare economics prescribed that the externalities created by nonmarket interactions should, if possible, be eliminated by setting property rights that would permit
trade to take place .
From the vantage of today, it is clear that the narrowing of economics ended by the 1970s.
Since then a new phase has been underway, in which the discipline seeks to broaden its scope while
maintaining the rigor that has become emblematic of economic analysis. Major theoretical
developments in microeconomics, labor economics, and macroeconomics have played important
1 See Lazear and Myerson for two recent perspectives on the broadening of
economic theory. These authors differ substantially in their emphases but agree that the broadening
is well underway.
roles in launching this new phase. 1
In microeconomics, perhaps the defining event of the late 20th century was the adoption of
non-cooperative game theory as a language and set of tools for the study of market and other
interactions. The concepts of dynamic game theory developed in the 1970s and 1980s enabled
economists to describe and analyze a broad range of market structures, and so gave new life to the
field of industrial organization. A more radical consequence of the game theory revolution was that
it broke down the sharp distinction that economists had maintained between markets and other social
interactions. Game theory encouraged economists to see all interactions as games, markets being
special cases. As a result, economic theorists have in recent years studied phenomena as far from
traditional economic concerns as the evolution of social norms .
A second pivotal development was the transformation of labor economics from a field
narrowly concerned with work for pay into one broadly concerned with the production and
distributional decisions of families and households . Modern labor economists
study a wide range of family and household behaviors that earlier economists thought peripheral to
or outside the domain of the discipline; marriage and fertility, education and health care, drug
addiction and criminal activity, inter vivos transfers and bequests. Much of the research of labor
economists on these subjects has viewed the family or household as a single utility maximizing
entity, thus abstracting from the complex interactions that may occur among the members of this
entity. A considerable body of work, however, uses non-cooperative game theory to model families
2 Social interactions in schooling is also a major concern of microeconomic research on
schooling. For example, research on the effect of class size on learning is concerned with the
congestion problem that may arise because a classroom of students share a common resource, the
teacher . Research on vouchers has been concerned with the
effect of these subsidies on class composition, which may affect efficiency of learning .
and households as groups whose members may have differing objectives .
A third important development was the emergence in macroeconomics of endogenous growth
theory. Whereas classical growth theory assumed that the production technology available to an
economy is exogenous, endogenous growth theory supposes that today’s technology may depend on
earlier investments in human capital or R&D, which themselves may have been influenced by the
past output of the economy . Endogenous growth theory has also
generated study of cross-sectional and dynamic spillovers in the production of human capital:
children may learn more when they share school classes with high achievers or when they have welleducated parents .2 Many of the interactions in R & D and human
capital formation emphasized in endogenous growth theory occur in non-market environments.
Hence new research on macroeconomic growth shows a concern for externalities that was absent
from classical growth theory.
The broadening of economic theory has coincided with the performance by economists of
new empirical research on social interactions. Unfortunately, the empirical literature does not show
much progress. Empirical studies that seek to maintain a tight connection with economic theory
typically impose auxiliary assumptions that severely diminish the credibility of the reported findings.
Other studies maintain little or no connection to theory. Many recent empirical investigations seek
only to determine whether statistical associations among the experiences of different persons indicate
the presence of some loosely specified form of interaction amongst them.
The weak state of empirical research on social interactions should be a matter of strong
concern to economists who want the discipline to contribute effectively to the formation of public
policy. For years economists and others have speculated about the role of non-market interactions
in determining such matters of public interest as schooling outcomes, employment patterns,
participation in welfare programs, crime rates, and residential segregation. To inform policy, we
need to replace speculation with empirical analysis that is both relevant and credible.
The weak state of empirical research should also be disturbing to economists performing
theoretical analyses of social interactions. The canonical theoretical study hypothesizes some class
of interaction processes and seeks to characterize their implied outcomes. There are countless
logically distinct interaction processes that a theorist might entertain. To the extent that theorists
want their research to be useful to economic practice, they need to know what classes of processes
are prevalent in the real world. In the absence of a connection to reality, economic theory risks
reduction to a self-contained exercise in mathematical logic.
Why is it that empirical analysis of social interactions has achieved so little? I believe that
two difficulties have combined to produce the status quo. One part of the problem is an unfortunate
dearth of clear thinking in the empirical literature. Borrowing jargon from sociology and social
psychology, empirical economists may write that they are studying “peer influences,” “neighborhood
effects,” “social capital,” or some other form of social interaction. Yet empirical analyses commonly
fail to define these concepts with any precision, and they often explain only obliquely how the
reported findings shed light on the interactions being studied.
The other part of the problem is the inherent difficulty of inference using the forms of data
that economists commonly bring to bear to study social interactions. The prevailing practice has
been to try to infer the presence of interactions from observations of the outcomes experienced in
a population of interest. However, inference on interactions from observed outcomes is a rather
subtle problem. In usual empirical settings, the observed outcomes of the population can plausibly
be generated by many different interaction processes or, perhaps, by processes acting on individuals
in isolation.
How might economists progress in the empirical analysis of social interactions? Empirical
researchers will need to become much more specific about the questions they address. Clear
thinking, however, will not suffice. I also see a compelling need to enrich the data that researchers
bring to bear. Empirical analysis would particularly benefit from performance of well-designed
experiments in controlled environments and from careful elicitation of persons’ subjective
perceptions of the interactions in which they participate.
In what follows, I flesh out the story begun here. In Section 2, I exposit the economic
perspective on social interactions and compare it with that of sociology. In Section 3, I describe
empirical practices and elaborate on the two difficulties preventing progress. This discussion leads
in Section 4 to a discussion of new data collection that would, I think, improve prospects for
economics to make sustained contributions to the empirical analysis of social interactions. Section
5 gives conclusions.
3 Indeed, the distinctiveness of economics is institutionalized in the name of the major unit
of the National Science Foundation that houses the NSF Economics Program – the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences.
2. Perspectives on Social Interactions
Coherent study of social interactions requires a clear conceptualization of interaction
processes. What are the units that interact with one another? How do they interact?
The various disciplines that refer to themselves as social sciences have yet to form a common
set of answers to these basic questions. There does, however, seem to be a consensus that the
perspective of economics is so distinct as to separate economics from the other social sciences. 3
Section 2.1 describes what I see as the main elements of economic thinking on social interactions.
Section 2.2 compares the economic perspective with that of sociology.
2.1. Social Interactions in Economics
The particularity of economics begin with its conceptualization of agents as decision makers
endowed with preferences, forming expectations, and facing constraints. Preferences are given
formal expression through utility functions, expectations through subjective probability distributions,
and constraints through choice sets. Economists usually go on to assume that agents maximize
expected utility, but we shall not require this degree of specificity for the present discussion.
In economic terms, agents are the units who interact with one another. The notion of an
agent embraces persons, firms, and other entities such as non-profit organizations and governments.
The essential characteristic of an economic agent is not its physical form but rather its status as a
decision maker.
The concept of an agent as a decision maker carries within it a straightforward answer to the
question: How do agents interact? Agents interact through their chosen actions; an action chosen
by one agent may affect the constraints, expectations, and/or preferences of other agents.
Constraint Interactions
Markets form the classical economic illustration of constraint interactions. The decisions of
agents to purchase certain commodity bundles collectively determine prices, which in turn determine
the bundles that are feasible for agents to purchase.
Another familiar form of constraint interaction is congestion, which may occur when multiple
agents share a common resource. Whereas market analysis imagines agents endowed with money
budgets who purchase commodities having money prices, congestion analysis often imagines agents
endowed with time budgets who choose activities that consume time. The time cost of some
activities depends on the number of agents choosing them; road travel, web surfing, and restaurant
dining are examples. The decisions of agents to engage in these activities collectively determine
their time costs, which in turn determine the activity bundles that are feasible for agents to choose.
Markets and congestion exemplify negative constraint interactions; the more that some agents
choose a commodity or activity, the less available it is to others. In contrast, decisions by agents to
engage in research and development may generate positive constraint interactions. R & D enlarges
the production set of the agent performing it. To the extent that findings are public knowledge, R
& D by one agent enlarges the production sets of other agents as well.
4 Some studies assumes that only actions are observable while others assume that actions and
subsequent outcomes are observable. In general, economists have assumed that agents do not
directly observe the expectations of other agents.
Expectations Interactions
Economic analysis supposes that an agent facing a decision problem will form expectations
of the outcomes that would follow from choosing different actions. An agent forming expectations
may seek to draw lessons from observation of the actions chosen and outcomes experienced by
others.4 Such observational learning generates expectations interactions.
Expectations interactions pervade the modern economics of information. A central concern
is to understand the interactions of agents who possess private information; that is, knowledge not
directly available to one another. A recurring theme is that observation of chosen actions may reveal
private information; for example, health insurance purchases may reveal consumers’ health status
and acceptance of job offers may reveal workers’ skills . This theme takes
particularly strong form in the theory of efficient markets, where observation of prices suffices to
reveal all relevant private information.
Statistical discrimination is an information interaction . An
employer who observes the job performance of current employees with certain demographic
attributes may use this information to forecast the performance of new job applicants with similar
attributes. A provider of insurance may likewise use data on the claims paid to current current policy
holders with certain covariates to forecast the claims that would be payable to new applicants with
these covariates.
It should be said that economists have not been unanimous in the view that expectations
interactions form an important subject for study. A very large part of modern economic analysis
presumes that agents have rational expectations, wherein agents’ subjective beliefs about future
events are the best predictions possible given the available information. Studies assuming rational
expectations typically do not attempt to explain how agents may come to form such optimal
forecasts. This fundamental question is addressed only in a relatively small literature seeking to
characterize when observational learning processes will or will not generate rational expectations
 .
Preference Interactions
Preference interactions occur when an agent’s preference ordering over the alternatives in
his choice set depends on the actions chosen by other agents. Such everyday ideas as conformism,
jealousy, and paternalism suggest forms of preference interaction. Neoclassical consumer theory
long rejected these ideas in favor of a presumption that agents care only about their own
consumption, or perhaps only about the consumption of their families. Yet there is nothing in the
logic of economic thought that mandates this narrow view of preferences .
Preference interactions are at the heart of non-cooperative game theory. The standard setup
considers a set of agents who simultaneously choose actions, each from his own choice set. The
utility that each agent receives depends on the actions chosen by the other agents. Hence an agent’s
preference ordering on the alternatives in his choice set depends on the actions chosen by the other
A simple example is the Schelling model of residential segregation. Here the
choice set is a set of alternative neighborhoods in which one might reside. Schelling supposed that
the utility a person associates with each neighborhood may depend on the racial distribution of the
persons who choose to reside there. Another simple example is the formation of driving conventions
in the absence of road laws, as discussed by Young . Each driver chooses between driving
on the right or the left side of the road. The utility of driving on one side or the other clearly depends
on the choices made by other drivers sharing the same road.
Equilibrium
If economics were content to describe how agents may interact, an extended version of the
above verbal discussion might suffice. The discipline has, however, set for itself a much more
ambitious objective. Economists want to characterize the outcomes of interactions processes.
Words do not suffice for this purpose. Mathematical formalization seems essential. So economists
commonly pose formal models of agent behavior and explicit specifications of the manner in which
chosen actions may affect constraints, expectations, and preferences. This done, analysis of the
outcomes of interaction processes may begin.
The discipline has long focused attention on equilibrium outcomes; that is, outcomes that
occur when agents’ actions are mutually consistent. Much of the theoretical literature has been
concerned with basic qualitative questions that can be addressed in considerable generality: Do
equilibria exist? If so, is equilibrium unique? Of course, economists want to go further and
characterize as fully as possible the nature of such equilibria as may exist. Pursuing this objective,
researchers have reported illuminating algebraic or graphical analyses of some simple interaction
processes. At the same time it has become clear that many processes of substantive interest are too
complex to be analyzed abstractly. Hence researchers have increasingly used numerical methods to
characterize the equilibria of specific processes, as well as to study their dynamics .
More General Processes
I have briefly described here a wide variety of social interactions that may be studied with
standard economic tools. Much more is possible. I have restricted attention to processes in which
agents affect each other through their actions. A more general class of interactions permits the
preferences, expectations, and constraints of one agent to affect the preferences, expectations, and
constraints of another agent in ways that are not mediated through actions.
Consider preference interactions. It is one thing to say that my preferences depend on your
actions, and another to say that my preferences depend on your preferences. Or consider
expectations interactions. The processes that we have discussed suppose that agents extract
information from observation of the actions chosen and outcomes experienced of others. Agents
may also obtain information directly from one another. After all, humans do communicate about all
sorts of things.
Going beyond the question of how agents interact, our discussion has been incomplete in the
more basic sense that we have not considered how agents come to be. Economics has given much
attention to the entry and exit of firms in markets, and some to the formation and evolution of
families. The discipline has done less, however, to explain the creation and dissolution of
governments, non-profit organizations, and other decision making entities.
5 A different sense of the particularity of economics comes from comparing the discipline
with psychology, which does not begin from the premise that humans have well-defined preferences
and expectations. Comparison of economics with psychology is enlightening, but is not as germane
to the topic of this article as is comparison with sociology.
2.2. Social Interactions in Sociology
An enhanced sense of the particularity of economic thinking emerges when one compares
economics with sociology.5 The sociologist Charles Camic has written engagingly on how the
discipline of sociology emerged out of economics . According to Camic, separate
university departments of sociology came into being as a consequence of the triumph of neoclassical
economics over institutional economics in the 1920s and 1930s. As neoclassical economists sought
to formalize analysis of market interactions, they disparaged the broad but loose study of social
interactions characteristic of institutional economics. Sociology departments emerged to study the
range of non-market interactions that neoclassical economists judged to be outside the proper domain
of the discipline.
Sociology has had a substantial period of time within which to develop as a separate
discipline, so one might expect a coherent sociological analysis of social interactions to have
developed by now. Not so. Examination of recent sociological research does not reveal a shared,
discipline-wide perspective. Some sociologists describe interactions in language that suggests
economic thinking. Others give prominence to concepts that play little or no role in modern
economics: class, community, culture, influence, status, gender roles, and so on. Indeed, an
economist reading sociological research is struck by the sheer number of concepts that sociologists
employ. Economics has sufficed with a remarkably small set of basic concepts . James Coleman
sought to lay the foundations for a mathematical representation of sociological theory in Coleman
 . The Journal of Mathematical Sociology began publication in 1971. The sociological
methodologist Otis Dudley Duncan worked with the econometrician Arthur Goldberger to develop
a common empirical approach to analysis of market and non-market interactions . For whatever reason, the transformation did not take hold. Indeed, sociology today
appears no more rigorous a discipline than thirty years ago.
expectations, constraints, equilibrium). Why does sociology require so many more concepts?
I believe that the abundance of concepts in sociology is connected closely to the dearth of
formal analysis in the discipline. Whereas the typical research article in economic theory uses
mathematical language to define concepts and then goes on to state and prove propositions, most
articles in sociological theory begin and remain verbal throughout. 6 Verbal reasoning may be more
evocative than mathematical argument, but it is also less precise. The ambiguity of words permits
a proliferation of concepts. Readers of verbal sociological research can never be certain that they
understand a concept in the way that an author intends, nor the relationship among concepts. Hence
they cannot readily distinguish between concepts that are truly basic and ones that are derivative or,
worse, ill-defined.
An apt illustration is the term “social capital,” which came into vogue in the 1990s. There
is some uncertainty about the origin of the term. Many associate it with Coleman and Putnam
 , but Durlauf credits it to Loury and Glaeser et al. date it back to Jacobs
 . The origin of “social capital” should be a resolvable matter, but the meaning of the term may
not be. So many authors have sought to define the term in so many ways that I shall make no attempt
to provide a definition here; the interested reader may want to see Bowles , Durlauf ,
Glaeser et al. , and Portes for varying perspectives.
The only salient question, as I see it, is whether this vague term conveys an idea that is
missing in modern economic thought; an idea that cannot be expressed using the core concepts of
preferences, expectations, constraints, and equilibrium. If so, the ongoing efforts to interpret “social
capital” may be productive. If not, social scientists should use “social capital” only as a lesson in
the ambiguity of words.
3. Empirical Analysis of Observed Outcomes
Throughout the modern development of economics, empirical analysis of social interactions
has lagged far behind theory, with distressing consequences. Even the most ambitious economic
theory does not aim to give a complete description of reality. Each leaves the magnitudes of critical
quantities – demand elasticities, returns to scale in production, time discount rates, risk preferences,
and so on – to be determined empirically. Alternative theories put forward different visions of
reality. Empirical analysis is essential to determine which theories should be taken seriously as
descriptions of the world as it is, rather than as it might hypothetically be.
The practice in empirical economics has been to infer the nature of an interaction process
from observations of its outcomes. This presents a rather subtle problem of identification. In usual
empirical settings, the observed outcomes can plausibly be generated by many alternative interaction
processes acting on constraints, expectations, or preferences. Or the observed outcomes may be the
result of processes acting on agents separately. Outcome data typically have only limited power to
7 The reason is simple. Observation of an equilibrium (price, quantity) reveals only that
demand and supply intersect at this point. There are innumerable pairs of linear functions that
intersect at any given point.
distinguish among the alternative plausible hypotheses.
Most every student in economics receives instruction on one instance of the problem of
identification of social interactions, this being inference on supply and demand from observations
of prices and quantities in competitive markets in equilibrium. I begin with this familiar case and
then move on to inference on other interaction processes.
3.1. Econometric Analysis of Markets
The theory of equilibrium in markets with price-taking consumers and price-taking (or
quantity-taking) firms was well under development over a century ago, but the corresponding
problem of empirical inference on demand and supply was only dimly understood until the 1940s.
At that time, econometric analysis of the simultaneity problem developed under the maintained
assumption that the quantity of product demanded by consumers varies linearly with price, and
similarly that supply functions are linear. Of course economic theory gives no reason to think that
demand and supply functions are generally linear. Nevertheless, it was reasonable for early
econometricians to begin with the study of linear models if only because they are relatively easy to
The central finding of early structural econometrics was that observation of equilibrium
prices and quantities does not suffice to untangle the market interaction of consumers and firms,
even if one somehow knows a priori that demand and supply functions are linear.7 Some further
prior information is necessary if one is to distinguish demand and supply from one another. This
further information can take various forms, but the essential requirement is expressed well in the
familiar idea of exclusion restrictions; a priori knowledge that some factor, an instrumental variable,
affects supply but not demand, while some other factor affects demand but not supply. Economists
have become well aware that credible exclusion restrictions or other identifying assumptions are
elusive in practice. Thus, the early econometrics literature on identification of linear simultaneous
equations has made economists appreciate the subtlety of inference on social interactions.
It has now been a half-century since the codification of econometric analysis of linear
simultaneous equations in the work of the Cowles Commission .
How has structural econometric analysis of market interactions progressed since then? The answer
has two parts, presently in much tension with one another.
Part of the answer is that the scope of econometric analysis of markets has enlarged
substantially over time, as a result of the development of econometric methods for estimation of
nonlinear models of consumer and firm behavior. Econometric research on discrete choice analysis
has enabled empirical researchers to analyze the demand for consumer durables, schooling, and other
differentiated products typically purchased in discrete units . Discrete choice analysis, research on maximum likelihood estimation of
limited dependent variable models, and work on method of moments estimation has combined to
enable empirical analysis of firm pricing behavior in oligopolistic markets . Thus, the early restriction of empirical analysis to market
settings that can reasonably be represented by linear simultaneous equations has been overcome.
The other part of the answer is that structural analysis of markets remains as subtle an
8 The empirical literature shows a curious asymmetry in the concern researchers show about
the realism of different assumptions. The realism of exclusion restrictions is a recurrent theme, with
much criticism befalling the researcher who uses an “invalid” instrumental variable. Yet researchers
often regard functional form and distributional assumptions in models of consumer and firm
behavior as convenient approximations that do not materially affect inference. In fact, exclusion
restrictions, functional form, and distributional assumptions all play essential roles in prevailing
approaches to structural econometric analysis. This can be seen by unbundling the various
assumptions and determining their identifying power in isolation from one another .
inferential problem as it was fifty years ago. Modern developments in econometric method do not,
indeed cannot, resolve the basic identification problem that economists have long appreciated. The
fact remains that observation of market transactions reveals only so much about the behavior of
consumers and firms. Today, as fifty years ago, structural econometric research interprets data on
transactions with the assistance of exclusion restrictions and through the lens of tightly specified
models of consumer and firm behavior, chosen in large part for their tractability. Today, as fifty
years ago, empirical findings are only as credible as the particular exclusion restrictions and
modeling assumptions imposed. 8
Juxtaposition of the two parts of the answer indicates that modern empirical researchers can
analyze a wide range of interesting market interactions if they are willing to maintain strong
assumptions that may be difficult to motivate. This appears to pose a stark choice: report findings
that may lack credibility, or retreat from the objective of econometric analysis of market interactions.
The result has been much controversy in empirical economics, with researchers segmenting into
camps that advocate one or the other of these unpleasant alternatives. In macroeconomics, the
controversy has taken the form of a debate about calibration; see the recent Journal of Economic
Perspectives symposium with contributions by Kydland and Prescott , Hansen and Heckman
9 For example, Manski examines the simultaneity problem under the sole assumption
that demand functions slope downward. Manski and Pepper examines the inferences that are
possible when the classical notion of an instrumental variable is replaced with a weaker but more
credible notion of a monotone instrumental variable.
 , and Sims . In labor economics, empirical researchers using data on observed
outcomes to perform structural econometric analysis have become estranged from ones who hold
that empirical research should be based as closely as possible on the paradigm of randomized
experimentation; for example, compare the analysis of the returns to schooling in Willis and Rosen
 with that of Angrist and Krueger .
I do not want the reader of this article to have the impression that I have been a disinterested
observer, regarding the various camps from a distance. I have for more than a decade advocated a
mode of empirical research that explicitly recognizes the tension between strength of assumptions
and credibility of findings. As described in Manski , one begins with a conservative analysis
that imposes only assumptions enjoying considerable consensus. Such assumptions typically imply
bounds on parameters of interest, not point identification. 9 One then invokes further assumptions
that yield stronger findings at the cost of diminished credibility.
3.2. Econometric Analysis of Games
A wide spectrum of social interactions, from divorce proceedings to union-management
negotiations, can usefully be thought of as non-cooperative games, each player choosing an action
from some set of feasible alternatives. It is common to assume that the players have reaction
functions specifying the action that each would choose as a function of the action chosen by the
others. An equilibrium of the game is a set of mutually consistent actions.
The problem of inference on players’ reaction functions from observation of game equilibria
has much the same structure as the problem of inference on supply and demand from observations
of market equilibria. Hence econometric research on the analysis of markets has found considerable
application in the analysis of non-market games as well. Consider, for example, labor economists
studying interactions within the family. McElroy has interpreted data on the labor supply of
husbands and wives as the equilibrium of a game in which the hours worked by each spouse varies
with the hours worked of the other spouse. Rosenzweig and Wolpin has applied game theory
to interpret data on intra-family monetary transfers. Flinn and Del Boca has interpreted data
on child custody outcomes in divorce proceedings as the equilibrium outcome of a game in which
the separating spouses and the government are the players.
The fundamental identification problem that shadows econometric analysis of competitive
markets persists in econometric analysis of non-market games. Hence empirical research on games
generates the same tension between assumptions and credibility. Indeed, many games are much
more complex than competitive markets. Players may be uncertain of each other’s strategies,
equilibria may not exist or may not be unique, and so on. These complexities, when taken seriously,
10 See Jovanovic and Tamer for analysis of the problem of inference on games
with multiple equilibria.
intensify the inferential problem considerably. 10
Crime and Punishment
An illuminating illustration of the difficulty of empirical inference on games arises in the
economics of crime, which has long sought to learn the deterrent effect of sanctions on criminal
behavior. In the early 1970s, it became common for economists to analyze observed crime rates and
sanction levels as equilibrium outcomes of two-person games in which criminals (player 1) choose
a crime rate and society (player 2) chooses sanctions. Linear reaction functions were used to specify
the crime rate that criminals would choose given specified sanctions, and the sanctions that society
would choose given a specified crime rate.
The simultaneity problem in inference on deterrence became a concern beyond the academic
community when the Solicitor General of the United States argued to the Supreme Court that a study
by Isaac Ehrlich provided empirical evidence on the deterrent effect of capital punishment. Ehrlich
 used annual data on murders and sanctions in the United States to estimate a "murder supply"
function specifying the murder rate that would occur as a function of sanctions levels, including the
risk of capital punishment faced by a convicted murderer. He concluded : “In
fact, the empirical analysis suggests that on the average the tradeoff between the execution of an
offender and the lives of potential victims it might have saved was of the order of 1 for 8 for the
period 1933-1967 in the United States.”
This finding, and its citation before the Supreme Court as evidence in support of capital
11 Jones provides an economic perspective on experimental social psychology.
punishment, generated considerable controversy. A constructive outcome was the establishment by
the National Research Council (NRC) of a panel to investigate in depth the problem of inference on
deterrence . The NRC Panel on Research on Deterrent and
Incapacitative Effects focused much of its attention on the simultaneity problem and stressed the
difficulty of finding plausible exclusion restrictions to identify deterrent effects. Regarding the
deterrent effect of capital punishment, the Panel concluded (p. 62) "The current evidence on the
deterrent effect of capital punishment is inadequate for drawing any substantive conclusion."
Understanding the deterrent effects of sanctions remains an important unresolved problem
today. An account of the evolution of Ehrlich’s thinking on the subject has appeared recently in
Ehrlich .
3.3. Experimental Research
Econometric analysis of markets and other games has generally sought to analyze data on
outcomes generated as the world turns. A distinct tradition of experimental research analyzes data
on outcomes generated through purposeful interventions.
As long as fifty years ago, social psychologists reported provocative experimental findings
on interactions in small groups .11 The 1980s and 1990s saw a blossoming of
experimental research in economics, the primary objective being to ascertain the realism of
equilibrium concepts developed in game theory . Recently, economists
have begun to perform experiments seeking to shed light on the expectations interactions commonly
12 Occasionally, one can learn something about social interactions from “natural
experiments;” that is, naturally occurring outcomes that can credibly be viewed as arising from
randomized experiments. For example, Angrist and Lavy uses random variation in school
class sizes, induced by institutional rules, to examine how class size may affect educational
called “trust” .
Experimental research clearly has limitations. Only some kinds of interactions are amenable
to experimental manipulation and, even then, only in somewhat artificial settings. A longstanding
criticism of the experiments conducted by psychologists, and more recently by experimental
economists, is that the groups whose interactions are observed are formed artificially for the sake of
the experiment. This raises obvious questions about the credibility of extrapolating findings from
experimental settings to populations of interest.
It is often suggested that experimental research would be more credible if the experiments
were performed on randomly selected subjects. This is difficult to achieve. The unit of analysis for
a study of social interactions is the group that interacts, not the individuals that comprise the group.
Harris and Garfinkel et al. discuss issues that arise in randomization of groups and
offer some suggestions for practice. 12
The limitations of experimental research should not dissuade researchers from judicious use
of experiments to complement observation of naturally occurring outcomes. I expect that economists
will make increasing use of experimental data in the years ahead.
3.4. Why do Persons in the Same Group Tend to Behave Similarly?
Whatever their difficulties, econometric and experimental analysis of markets and games at
least aim to analyze well-defined forms of social interactions. Much recent empirical research
conceptualizes interaction processes only in broad terms that lack the clarity of markets and games.
A common objective has been to learn whether some form of interaction may explain the often
reported descriptive finding that persons belonging to the same group tend to behave similarly.
Many social scientists have hypothesized that this empirical regularity is due to interactions
in which the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies positively with the prevalence of
this behavior in the group. Such interactions may be called “social norms,” “peer influences,”
“neighborhood effects,” “conformity,” “imitation,” “contagion,” “epidemics,” “bandwagons,” or
“herd behavior.” See, for example, Hyman , Merton , and Granovetter . Some,
however, have hypothesized that similarity in behavior is due to processes operating entirely at the
level of the individual Jencks
and Mayer describe the long running debate about the nature of neighborhood effects.
Stripped to its basics, empirical research has sought to distinguish among three hypotheses:
endogenous interactions, wherein the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies with the
behavior of the group.
contextual interactions, wherein the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies with
exogenous characteristics of the group members.
13 Tiebout made economists sensitive to the idea that residential location decision
processes will tend to produce communities made up of families with similar attributes.
14 Juxtaposition of endogenous and contextual interactions reveals a disciplinary contrast
between economics and sociology. A central objective of economists has been to understand the
correlated effects, wherein persons in the same group tend to behave similarly because they have
similar individual characteristics or face similar institutional environments.
Endogenous and contextual interactions express distinct ways that persons might be influenced by
their social environments, while correlated effects express a nonsocial phenomenon. Consider, for
example, the high school achievement of a teenage youth. There is an endogenous interaction if, all
else equal, individual achievement tends to vary with the average achievement of the students in the
youth's high school, ethnic group, or other reference group. There is a contextual interaction if
achievement tends to vary with, say, the socioeconomic composition of the group. There are
correlated effects if youth in the same school tend to achieve similarly because they are taught by the
same teachers, or because they have similar family backgrounds. 13
Distinguishing among endogenous interactions, contextual interactions, and correlated effects
has been thought important because these hypotheses imply different predictions for the impact of
public policy. Consider, for example, an educational intervention providing tutoring to some of the
students in a school but not to the others. If individual achievement increases with the average
achievement of the students in the school, then an effective tutoring program not only directly helps
the tutored students but, as their achievement rises, indirectly helps all students in the school, with
a feedback to further achievement gains by the tutored students. Contextual interactions and
correlated effects imply no such feedbacks. 14
feedbacks generated by endogenous interactions. Some sociologists share this objective but modern
sociological research has emphasized contextual interactions, which lack feedbacks. Contextual
interactions became an important concern of sociologists in the 1960s, when substantial efforts were
made to learn the effects on youth of school and neighborhood environment . The recent resurgence of interest in spatial concepts of the
underclass has spawned new empirical studies .
The Reflection Problem
Unfortunately, outcome data do not readily differentiate among endogenous interactions,
contextual interactions, and correlated effects. In Manski I examined a
familiar linear-in-means regression model in which individual behavior is permitted to vary linearly
with mean behavior in the group (expressing endogenous interactions), with the mean values of
exogenous attributes of group members (expressing contextual interactions), and with personal
characteristics that may be similar across group members (expressing correlated effects). In this
setting, I found that data on equilibrium outcomes cannot distinguish endogenous interactions from
contextual interactions. The researcher may be able to distinguish these two forms of interactions
from correlated effects, but even this limited form of inference is possible only in some situations;
the exogenous attributes of individuals must vary within and across groups in certain ways.
This identification problem arises because mean behavior in the group is itself determined
by the behavior of group members. Hence data on outcomes do not reveal whether group behavior
actually affects individual behavior, or group behavior is simply the aggregation of individual
behaviors. This reflection problem is similar to the problem of interpreting the almost simultaneous
movements of a person and his reflection in a mirror. Does the mirror image cause the person's
movements or reflect them?
Brock and Durlauf , Manski , and Moffitt investigate
15 The need for prior information on group composition also arises in studies of markets and
games. In market analyses, the researcher must a priori specify the relevant consumers and firms.
Games are not well-defined until the players are specified.
16 Empirical evidence on group composition may be elicited from group members. This
practice has a long history in sociology , but economists
typically do not collect or use such data. A recent exception is Woittez and Kapteyn .
alternatives to the linear-in-means model that open other possibilities for identification, in principle
if not in practice. One alternative supposes that individual behavior varies with lagged rather than
contemporaneous values of group mean behavior. This resolves the identification problem if one
a priori knows the appropriate lag length. Another alternative supposes that individual behavior
varies in a specified nonlinear manner with group mean behavior. This resolves the identification
problem if one a priori knows the correct nonlinear function. A third alternative supposes that
individual behavior varies with some feature of group behavior other than the mean; the median say.
This resolves the identification problem if one a priori knows the relevant feature of group behavior.
These and other alternative models may sensibly be applied in some settings but here, as in
econometric analysis of market interactions, empirical findings are only as credible as the identifying
assumptions imposed.
The discussion thus far assumes that the researcher a priori knows the group, or groups, with
whom a person may interact. Outcome data do not reveal group composition, so researchers must
somehow obtain this information in other ways.15 Lacking empirical evidence, economists have
typically made assumptions about group composition and then proceeded with analysis.16 For
example, the Borjas analysis of “ethnic capital” presumes that persons interact with members
of their own ethnic group. The Glaeser et al. study of social interactions in crime applies an
abstract spatial model of neighbors on a lattice to precinct and city-level data, the Case study
17 This is easy to show. Let the hypothesized group be all persons with attributes x. Let y
denote the behavior or other outcome of interest. Let E(y*x) be the mean of y in group x. Suppose
that a researcher hypothesizes the linear regression model y = a + bE(y*x) + u, with E(u*x) = 0.
Taking expectations of both sides yields E(y*x) = a + b E(y*x). Hence the linear model holds
tautologically with a = 0 and b = 1.
of demand interactions measures strength of the interaction by distance, and the Case and Katz
 study of inner-city youth defines neighborhoods as units one or two square blocks in size.
Often, however, it is not obvious what the relevant groups should be. Consider, for example, the
definition of “neighborhood” in studies of neighborhood effects. Considering the geography of
residences, should the neighborhood be assumed to be an apartment house, a block, a census track,
or a city? Or might the relevant geography be that of schools, workplaces, or church parishes? And
what of telecommunications that may diminish the importance of physical geography entirely?
However severe the reflection problem may be when group composition is known, the
problem becomes insurmountable when group composition is unknown. Mean group behavior is,
by definition, the average of the individual behaviors in the group. It follows that, given any
specification of group composition, the regression of individual behavior on group mean behavior
is linear with coefficient one.17 Hence, when observed outcomes constitute the only empirical
evidence available, a researcher who conjectures the presence of endogenous interactions within any
hypothesized group cannot be proved wrong.
4. Inside Endogenous Interactions
Suppose that an empirical researcher is able to find credible evidence indicating the presence
of endogenous interactions. How much does this accomplish? From the perspective of economics
or policy, not very much.
The concept of endogenous interactions is too broad to be very useful. This concept
aggregates all three of the basic economic processes described in Section 2.1 – preference,
expectations, and constraint interactions. Each of these processes describes a distinct channel
through which group behavior may affect individual behavior; hence each is endogenous. If
empirical analysis is to be useful, it needs to do more than show the presence of endogenous
interactions writ large.
To make the point concretely, consider the public concern about high rates of drug use among
youth in areas of concentrated poverty. Suppose that credible empirical evidence for endogenous
interactions should emerge. Such evidence would leave open basic questions about the processes
at work. Does the stigma associated with drug use fall as the prevalence of use rises (a preference
interaction)? Or do youth learn about the attractiveness of drug use by observing it in their environs
(an expectations interaction)?
Understanding interactions at a deeper level seems essential to evaluate the effectiveness of
anti-drug initiatives providing information on the deleterious effects of drug addiction. Consider the
crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980s, which appears to have subsided during the 1990s. A plausible
explanation of the course of the epidemic begins with positive expectations interactions as youth of
the ‘80s may have observed some of their peers initiate crack usage and apparently enjoy it. There
also may have been positive preference interactions of the stigma-reducing type. Eventually,
however, youth of the ‘90s may have observed the devastating long-term outcomes experienced by
addicts of the ‘80s, and subsequently may have chosen not to initiate crack use themselves. If this
18 Explanation of imitation as an expectations interaction has been a recurring theme in
theoretical research on observational learning. See, for example, Conlisk , Bannerjee ,
Bickchandani et al. , and Manski . However, Bernheim models imitation as
a preference interaction. Among empirical researchers, Foster and Rosenzweig , Munshi
 and Munshi and Myaux have been careful to separate imitation based on preference
and expectations interactions.
story of observational learning is correct, then an information campaign warning of the devastating
effects of crack addiction might have been effective in the early stages of the epidemic but
superfluous later on.
Abstracting from the case of drug use, it is important in general to distinguish preference
interactions from the expectations interactions generated by observational learning. The
phenomenon of interest may be epidemics in drug use or queuing for tables at well-regarded
restaurants or herd behavior in stock trading. In these and many other situations, one person may
“imitate” another because the former person prefers to act like the latter, or because he believes the
latter person to have superior information.18 These explanations are distinct and have differing
implications for policy. Interventions that provide new information may alter the nature of
expectations interactions or even cause them to disappear, but should have no effect on preference
interactions.
Subjective Data for Subjective Concepts
Preferences and expectations are the core subjective concepts of economics. Having devoted
much of my own research to revealed preference analysis of discrete choice behavior, I have become
keenly aware that observation of the action that a person chooses places only mild restrictions on the
19 The theory of reveal preference analysis pioneered by Samuelson in the 1940s posed a
thought experiment in which a person with perfect foresight chooses an action from each of many
distinct choice sets. A researcher observing the set of chosen actions can then infer the person’s
preferences. The Savage theory of subjective expected utility posed such a thought
experiment in a setting where the person does not know the state of nature. Savage found that, if
the set of chosen actions adheres to certain axioms, the observer can infer the person’s preferences
and expectations.
Empirical applications of revealed preference analysis do not have the extensive data
presumed available in the Samuelson and Savage thought experiments. The empirical researcher
usually observes a sample of heterogeneous persons, each of whom makes a single choice from a
single choice set. Observation of a single choice from a single choice set reveals something, but not
much, about a persons’s preferences and expectations.
20 Interestingly, economists do not apply this reasoning to self-reports of “objective” data.
Empirical researchers routinely accept as fact survey respondents’ reports of their socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics, choices, and experiences.
person’s preferences and expectations.19 Rather than try to infer preferences and expectations from
observations of chosen actions, why not elicit them directly?
Pose this question to an economist, and chances are that one will receive an instant hostile
response. Economists tend to be deeply skeptical of subjective statements. Early in their careers,
they are taught to believe only what people do, not what they say. Economists often assert that
respondents to surveys have no incentive to answer questions about their preferences or expectations
carefully or honestly; hence, there is no reason to believe that subjective responses reliably reflect
respondents’ thinking.20 As a result, the profession has enforced something of a prohibition on the
collection of subjective data.
In the absence of data on preferences and expectations, economists have compensated by
imposing assumptions. The profession has shown a striking asymmetry in its attitude toward
preference and expectations assumptions. Economists tend to show discomfort imposing
assumptions on preferences. Yet researchers easily impose severe assumptions on expectations,
21 A concrete instance may be helpful to have in mind. In Manski , I pointed out that
youth forming earnings expectations as they contemplate schooling choices confront the same
inferential problems as do labor economists when they study the returns to schooling. The literature
on labor economics exhibits much debate on the credibility of various assumptions and many
disagreements about findings. If experts disagree on the returns to schooling, is it plausible to
assume that youth have rational expectations?
22 During the 1950s, economists reported negative evidence on the usefulness of a certain
type of qualitative questioning about expectations in predicting consumer behavior. This narrow
finding appears to have led economists to draw the broad, but unsubstantiated conclusion that all
expectations data are suspect. Dominitz and Manski discuss this history.
There seems to be a similarly narrow basis for the hostility of economists towards elicitation
of preferences. In this case, the available negative evidence largely concerns the practice of
often without comment. It has become especially commonplace to impose rational expectations
assumptions.
My experience in econometrics has led me to conclude that there is only limited scope for
productive theorizing about preferences and expectations alike. Rational expectations assumptions
should be particularly suspect. Agents forming forecasts of the consequences of choosing alternative
actions confront the same difficult inferential problems that economists face as they attempt to
perform empirical research. Research in econometric method emphasizes that empirical findings
depend on the data available and the assumptions maintained. How can a theorist presume to know
what data individuals have available and what assumptions they maintain? And what reasoning
justifies the rational-expectations assumption that individuals share a correct understanding of the
structure of the economy, when examination of the state of economic science shows substantial
disagreement among professional economists? 21
Unable to answer these questions, about ten years ago I began to question seriously the
conventional economic wisdom about elicitation of expectations. I sought to determine the scientific
basis underlying economists’ hostility, and found it to be meager. 22 I subsequently began a program
contingent valuation, where respondents are asked about their willingness to pay for public goods
 .
of research eliciting economic expectations in the form of subjective probabilities . Research along similar lines has been initiated by others .
Enough has already been accomplished to make clear that the conventional wisdom is
unfounded. Survey respondents do provide coherent, useful information when queried about their
expectations. However, the new literature on elicitation of expectations is still in its infancy.
Research needs to move beyond its current focus on measurement of expectations to the more
challenging task of eliciting information on how persons form their expectations. Only when that
happens will it be possible to assess the contribution that collection of subjective data can make to
our understanding of expectations interactions.
5. Wanted: Clear Thinking and Adequate Data
Development of an informative, cumulative body of empirical research on social interactions
will require clear thinking and adequate data. The very first step must be to get the concepts right.
The core concepts of present-day economics – preferences, expectations, constraints, and equilibrium
– offer a coherent framework within which one can define rigorously and analyze constructively
many interaction processes. These economic concepts may not suffice to characterize all of the ways
that humans interact with one another, but I cannot envision how social science might flourish
without them.
The next step must be to respect both the logic and the credibility of scientific inference.
Empirical researchers obviously need to understand how the conclusions of an empirical analysis
depend logically on the data and assumptions brought to bear. They must also appreciate how the
strength of the assumptions they maintain affects the credibility of the empirical findings that they
Clear thinking is a prerequisite for productive empirical analysis but it does not suffice. The
data brought to bear must be adequate to make credible inference possible. The practice has been
to infer interaction processes from observations of their outcomes. The discussion of Section 3
makes plain that outcome data do not, per se, provide an adequate foundation for empirical research.
Sustained progress will require richer data. In Manski , I concluded that experimental and
subjective data will have to play important roles in future efforts to learn about social interactions.
Having observed the subsequent evolution of empirical research, I feel even more strongly about this