International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
© by IRIE – all rights reserved
www.i-r-i-e.net
ISSN 1614-1687
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
In this paper I argue that in certain circumstances robots can be seen as real moral agents. A distinction is
made between persons and moral agents such that, it is not necessary for a robot to have personhood in
order to be a moral agent. I detail three requirements for a robot to be seen as a moral agent. The first is
achieved when the robot is significantly autonomous from any programmers or operators of the machine.
The second is when one can analyze or explain the robot’s behavior only by ascribing to it some predisposition or ‘intention’ to do good or harm. And finally, robot moral agency requires the robot to behave in a way
that shows and understanding of responsibility to some other moral agent. Robots with all of these criteria
will have moral rights as well as responsibilities regardless of their status as persons.
Morality and human robot Interactions .................................................................................................. 24
Morality and technologies .......................................................................................................... 24
Categories of robotic technologies ............................................................................................. 25
Philosophical views on the moral agency of Robots ................................................................................. 26
The three requirements of robotic moral agency ..................................................................................... 28
Autonomy ................................................................................................................................ 28
Intentionality ........................................................................................................................... 28
Responsibility ........................................................................................................................... 28
Conclusions ......................................................................................................................................... 29
Assistant Prof. Dr. John P. Sullins III:
Sonoma State University, Philosophy Department, 1801 East Cotati Avenue, Rohnert
Park, California 94928-3609, USA
707.664.2277, , 
email and personal homepage:
707.664.2277,
 ,
www.sonoma.edu/users/s/sullinsj/
Relevant publications:
- Ethics and artificial life: From modeling to moral agents, J. Sullins, Ethics and Information Technology, 7:139-148.
- Fight! Robot, Fight! The Amateur Robotics Movement in the United States, J.Sullins, International Journal of Technology, Knowledge and Society, Volume 1, Issue 6, , pp.75-84.
- Building Simple Mechanical Minds: Using LEGO® Robots for Research and Teaching in Philosophy, J. Sullins, In Cyberphilosophy, Moor, J, and Bynum, T. Eds. pp. 104-117, Blackwell Publishing, .
- Knowing Life: Possible Solutions to the Practical Epistemological Limits in the Study of Artificial
Life, J. Sullins, in The Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 13 .
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
© by IRIE – all rights reserved
www.i-r-i-e.net
ISSN 1614-1687
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
Robots have been a part of our work environment
for the past few decades but they are no longer
limited to factory automation. The additional range
of activities they are being used for is growing.
Robots are now automating a wide range of professional activities such as; aspects of the healthcare
industry, white collar office work, search and rescue
operations, automated warefare, and the service
industries.
A subtle, but far more personal, revolution has
begun in home automation as robot vacuums and
toys are becoming more common in homes around
the world. As these machines increase in capability
and ubiquity, it is inevitable that they will impact our
lives ethically as well as physically and emotionally.
These impacts will be both positive and negative
and in this paper I will address the moral status of
robots and how that status, both real and potential,
should affect the way we design and use these
technologies.
Morality and human robot
Interactions
As robotics technology becomes more ubiquitous,
the scope of human robot interactions will grow. At
the present time, these interactions are no different
than the interactions one might have with any piece
of technology, but as these machines become more
interactive they will become involved in situations
that have a moral character that may be uncomfortably similar to the interactions we have with
other sentient animals. An additional issue is that
people find it easy to anthropomorphize robots and
this will enfold robotics technology quickly into
situations where, if the agent were a human rather
than a robot, the situations would easily be seen as
moral situations. A nurse has certain moral duties
and rights when dealing with his or her patients.
Will these moral rights and responsibilities carry
over if the caregiver is a robot rather than a human?
We have three possible answers to this question.
The first possibility is that the morality of the situation is just an illusion. We fallaciously ascribe moral
rights and responsibilities to the machine due to an
error in judgment based merely on the humanoid
appearance or clever programming of the robot. The
second option is that the situation is pseudo-moral.
That is, it is partially moral but the robotic agents
involved lack something that would make them fully
moral agents. And finally, even though these situations may be novel, they are nonetheless real moral
situations that must be taken seriously. In this
paper I will argue for this later position as well as
critique the positions taken by a number of other
researches on this subject.
Morality and technologies
To clarify this issue it is important to look at how
moral theorists have dealt with the ethics of technology use and design. The most common theoretical schema is the standard user, tool, and victim
model. Here the technology mediates the moral
situation between the actor who uses the technology and the victim. In this model we typically blame
the user, not the tool, when a person using some
tool or technological system causes harm.
If a robot is simply a tool, then the morality of the
situation resides fully with the users and/or designers of the robot. If we follow this reasoning, then
the robot is not a moral agent at best it is an instrument that advances the moral interests of
But this notion of the impact of technology on our
moral reasoning is much too anaemic. If we expand
our notion of technology a little, I think we can
come up with an already existing technology that is
much like what we are trying to create with robotics
yet challenges the simple view of how technology
impacts ethical and moral values. For millennia
humans have been breading dogs for human uses
and if we think of technology as a manipulation of
nature to human ends, we can comfortably call
domesticated dogs a technology. This technology is
naturally intelligent and probably has some sort of
consciousness as well, furthermore dogs can be
trained to do our bidding, and in these ways, dogs
are much like the robots we are striving to create.
For arguments sake let’s look at the example of
guide dogs for the visually impaired.
This technology does not comfortably fit our standard model described above. Instead of the tool
user model we have a complex relationship between
the trainer, the guide dog, and the blind person for
whom the dog is trained to help. Most of us would
see the moral good of helping the visually impaired
person with a loving and loyal animal expertly
trained. But where should we affix the moral praise?
Both the trainer and the dog seem to share it in
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
fact. We praise the skill and sacrifice of the trainers
and laud the actions of the dog as well.
An important emotional attachment is formed between all the agents in this situation but the attachment of the two human agents is strongest
towards the dog and we tend to speak favourably of
the relations ships formed with these animals using
terms identical to those used to describe healthy
relationships with other humans.
The website for the organization Guide Dogs for the
Blind quotes the American Veterinary Association to
describe the human animal bond as:
“The human-animal bond is a mutually beneficial and dynamic relationship between people
and other animals that is influenced by the behaviours that are essential to the health and
well being of both, this includes but is not limited to, emotional, psychological, and physical
interaction of people, other animal, and the environment.”1
Certainly, providing guide dogs for the visually
impaired is morally praiseworthy, but is a good
guide dog morally praiseworthy in itself? I think so.
There are two sensible ways to believe this. The
least controversial is to consider things that perform
their function well have a moral value equal to the
moral value of the actions they facilitate. A more
contentious claim is the argument that animals have
their own wants, desires and states of well being,
and this autonomy, though not as robust as that of
humans, is nonetheless advanced enough to give
the dog a claim for both moral rights and possibly
some meagre moral responsibilities as well.
The question now is whether the robot is correctly
seen as just another tool or if it is something more
like the technology exemplified by the guide dog.
Even at the present state of robotics technology, it
is not easy to see on which side of this disjunct
reality lies.
No robot in the real world or that of the near future
is, or will be, as cognitively robust as a guide dog.
But even at the modest capabilities robots have
today some have more in common with the guide
dog than a hammer.
1 Found on the website for Guide Dogs for the Blind,
 
In robotics technology the schematic for the moral
relationship between the agents is:
Programmer(s) ¼ Robot ¼ User
Here the distiction between the nature of the user
and that of the tool can blur so completely that, as
the philosopher of technology, Cal Mitcham argues,
the, “…ontology of artefacts ultimately may not be
able to be divorced from the philosophy of nature”
 . Requiring us to think
aobut technology in ways similar to how we think
about nature.
I will now help clarify the moral relations between
natural and artificial agents. The first step in that
process is to distinguish the various categories of
robotic technologies.
Categories of robotic technologies
It is important to realize that there are currently two
distinct varieties of robotics technologies that have
to be distinguished in order to make sense of the
attribution of moral agency to robots.
There are telerobots and there are autonomous
robots. Each of these technologies has a different
relationship to moral agency.
Telerobots
Telerobots are remotely controlled machines that
make only minimal autonomous decisions. This is
probably the most successful branch of robotics at
this time since they do not need complex artificial
intelligence to run, its operator provides the intelligence for the machine. The famous NASA Mars
Rovers are controlled in this way, as are many deepsea exploration robots. Telerobotic surgery will
soon become a reality, as may telerobotic nurses.
These machines are also beginning to see action in
search and rescue as well as battlefield applications
including remotely controlled weapons platforms
such as the Predator drone and the SWORD, which
is possibly the first robot deployed to assist infantry
in a close fire support role.
Obviously, these machines are being employed in
morally charged situations. With the relevant actors
interacting in this way:
Operator ¼ Robot ¼ Victim
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
The ethical analysis of telerobots is somewhat
similar to that of any technical system where the
moral praise or blame is to be born by the designers, programmers, and users of the technology.
Since humans are involved in all the major decisions
that the machine makes, they also provide the
moral reasoning for the machine.
There is an issue that does need to be explored
further though, and that is the possibility that the
distance from the action provided by the remote
control of the robot makes it easier for the operator
to make certain moral decisions. For instance, a
telerobotic weapons platform may distance its
operator so far from the combat situation as to
make it easier for the operator to decide to use the
machine to harm others. This is an issue that I will
address in future work but since these machines are
not moral agents it is beyond the scope of this
paper. For the robot to be a moral agent, it is
necessary that the machine have a significant degree of autonomous ability to reason and act on
those reasons. So we will now look at machines that
attempt to achieve just that.
Autonomous robots
For the purposes of this paper, autonomous robots
present a much more interesting problem. Autonomy is a notoriously thorny philosophical subject. A
full discussion of the meaning of ‘autonomy’ is not
possible here, nor is it necessary, as I will argue in a
later section of this paper. I use the term ‘autonomous robots’ in the same way that roboticists use
the term and I am not trying to make any robust
claims for the autonomy of robots. Simply,
autonomous robots must be capable of making at
least some of the major decisions about their actions using their own programming. This may be
simple and not terribly interesting philosophically,
such as the decisions a robot vacuum makes to
decide exactly how it will navigate a floor that it is
cleaning. Or they may be much more robust and
require complex moral and ethical reasoning such as
when a future robotic caregiver must make a decision as to how to interact with a patient in a way
that advances both the interests of the machine and
the patient equitably. Or they may be somewhere
in-between these exemplar cases.
The programmers of these machines are somewhat
responsible but not entirely so, much as one’s
parents are a factor, but not the exclusive cause in
one’s own moral decision making. This means that
the machine’s programmers are not to be seen as
the only locus of moral agency in robots. This
leaves the robot itself as a possible location for
moral agency. Since moral agency is found in a web
of relations, other agents such as the programmers,
builders and marketers of the machines, as well as
other robotic and software agents, and the users of
these machines, all form a community of interaction.
I am not trying to argue that robots are the only
locus of moral agency in such a community, only
that in certain situations they can be seen as fellow
moral agents in that community.
The obvious objection is that moral agents must be
persons, and the robots of today are certainly not
persons. Furthermore, this technology is unlikely to
challenge our notion of personhood for some time to
come. So in order to maintain the claim that robots
can be moral agents I will now have to argue that
personhood is not required for moral agency. To
achieve that end I will first look at what others have
said about this.
Philosophical views on the moral
agency of Robots
There are four possible views on the moral agency
of robots. The first is that robots are not now moral
agents but might become them in the future. Daniel
Dennett supports this this position and argues in his
essay, “When HAL Kills, Who is to Blame?” That a
machine like the fictional HAL can be considered a
murderer because the machine has mens rea, or a
guilty state of mind, which comes includes: motivational states of purpose, cognitive states of belief, or
a non-mental state of negligence .
But to be morally culpable, they also need to have
“higher order intentionality,” meaning that they can
have beliefs about beliefs and desires about desires,
beliefs about its fears about its thoughts about its
hopes, and so on . Dennett does not believe
we have machines like that today, But he sees no
reason why we might not have them in the future.
The second position one might take on this subject
is that robots are incapable of becoming moral
agent now or in the future. Selmer Bringsjord
makes a strong stand on this position. His dispute
with this claim centres on the fact that robots will
never have an autonomous will since they can never
do anything that they are not programmed to do
 . Bringsjord shows this with an
experiment using a robot named PERI, which his lab
uses for experiments. PERI is programmed to make
a decision to either drop a globe, which represents
doing something morally bad, or holding on to it,
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
which represents an action that is morally good.
Whether or not PERI holds or drops the globe is
decided entirely by the program it runs, which in
turn was written by human programmers. Bringsjord argues that the only way PERI can do anything
surprising to the programmers requires that a
random factor be added to the program, but then its
actions are merely determined by some random
factor, not freely chosen by the machine, therefore
PERI is no moral agent .
There is a problem with this argument. Since we
are all the products of socialization and that is a kind
of programming through memes, then we are no
better off than PERI. If Bringsjord is correct, then
we are not moral agents either, since our beliefs,
goals and desires are not strictly autonomous, since
they are the products of culture, environment,
education, brain chemistry, etc. It must be the case
that the philosophical requirement for robust free
will, whatever that turns out to be, demanded by
Bringsjord, is a red herring when it comes to moral
agency. Robots may not have it, but we may not
have it either, so I am reluctant to place it as a
necessary condition for morality agency.
A closely related position to the above argument is
held by Bernhard Irrgang who claims that, “[i]n
order to be morally responsible, however, and act
needs a participant, who is characterized by personality or subjectivity” . As he believes
it is not possible for non-cyborg robots to attain
subjectivity, it is impossible for robots to be called
into account for their behaviour. Later I will argue
that this requirement is too restrictive and that full
subjectivity is not needed.
The third possible position is the view that we are
not moral agents but Robots are. Interestingly
enough at least one person actually held this view.
In a paper written a while ago but only recently
published Joseph Emile Nadeau claims that an
action is a free action if an only if it is based on
reasons fully thought out by the agent. He further
claims that only an agent that operates on a strictly
logical theorem prover can thus be truly free
 . If free will is necessary for moral
agency and we as humans have no such apparatus
operating in our brain, then using Neduau’s logic,
we are not free agents. Robots on the other hand
are programmed this way explicitly so if we built
them, Nadeau believes they would be the first truly
moral agents on earth .2
The forth stance that can be held on this issue is
nicely argued by Luciano Floridi and J W Sanders of
the Information Ethics Group at the University of
Oxford . They argue that the way around the
many apparent paradoxes in moral theory is to
adopt a ‘mind-less morality’ that evades issues like
free will and intentionality since these are all unresolved issues in the philosophy of mind that are
inappropriately applied to artificial agents such as
They argue that we should instead see artificial
entities as agents by appropriately setting levels of
abstraction when analyzing the agents . If
we set the level of abstraction low enough we can’t
even ascribe agency to ourselves since the only
thing an observer can see are the mechanical operations of our bodies, but at the level of abstraction
common to everyday observations and judgements
this is less of an issue. If an agent’s actions are
interactive and adaptive with their surroundings
through state changes or programming that is still
somewhat independent from the environment the
agent finds itself in, then that is sufficient for the
entity to have its own agency . When these
autonomous interactions pass a threshold of tolerance and cause harm we can logically ascribe a
negative moral value to them, likewise the agents
can hold a certain appropriate level of moral consideration themselves, in much the same way that one
may argue for the moral status of animals, environments, or even legal entities such as corporations
 .
My views build on the fourth position and I will now
argue for the moral agency of robots, even at the
humble level of autonomous robotics technology
2 One could counter this argument from a computationalist standpoint by acknowleding that it is unlikely we have a theorem prover in our biological brain,
but in the virtual machine formed by our mind,
anyone trained in logic most certainly does have a
theorem prover of sorts, meaning that there are at
least some human moral agents.
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
The three requirements of robotic
moral agency
In order to evaluate the moral status of any
autonomous robotic technology, one needs to ask
three questions of the technology under consideration:
- Is the robot significantly autonomous?
- Is the robot’s behaviour intentional?
- Is the robot in a position of responsibility?
These questions have to be viewed from a reasonable level of abstraction, but if the answer is ‘yes’ to
all three, then the robot is a moral agent.
The first question asks if the robot could be seen as
significantly autonomous from any programmers,
operators, and users of the machine. I realize that
‘autonomy’ is a difficult concept to pin down philosophically. I am not suggesting that robots of any
sort will have radical autonomy; in fact I seriously
doubt human beings have that quality. I mean to
use the term ‘autonomy,’ in the engineering sense,
simply that the machine is not under the direct
control of any other agent or user. The robot must
not be a telerobot or be temporarily behaving as
one. If the robot does have this level of autonomy,
then the robot has a practical independent agency.
If this autonomous action is effective in achieving
the goals and tasks of the robot, then we can say
the robot has effective autonomy. The more effective autonomy the machine has, meaning the more
adept it is in achieving its goals and tasks, then the
more agency we can ascribe to it. When that
agency3 causes harm or good in a moral sense, we
can say the machine has moral agency.
Autonomy as described is not sufficient in itself to
ascribe moral agency. Thus entities such as bacteria, or animals, ecosystems, computer viruses,
simple artificial life programs, or simple autonomous
robots, all of which exhibit autonomy as I have
described it, are not to be seen as responsible moral
agents simply on account of possessing this quality.
They may very credibly be argued to be agents
3 Meaning; self motivated, goal diriven behavior.
worthy of moral consideration, but if they lack the
other two requirements argued for next, they are
not robust moral agents for whom we can credibly
demand moral rights and responsibilities equivalent
to those claimed by capable human adults.
It might be the case that the machine is operating in
concert with a number of other machines or software entities. When that is the case we simply raise
the level of abstraction to that of the group and ask
the same questions of the group. If the group is an
autonomous entity, then the moral praise or blame
is ascribed at that level. We should do this in a way
similar to what we do when describing the moral
agency of group of humans acting in concert.
Intentionality
The second question addresses the ability of the
machine to act ‘intentionally.’ Remember, we do
not have to prove the robot has intentionality in the
strongest sense, as that is impossible to prove
without argument for humans as well. As long as
the behaviour is complex enough that one is forced
to rely on standard folk psychological notions of
predisposition or ‘intention’ to do good or harm,
then this is enough to answer in the affirmative to
this question. If the complex interaction of the
robot’s programming and environment causes the
machine to act in a way that is morally harmful or
beneficial, and the actions are seemingly deliberate
and calculated, then the machine is a moral agent.
There is no requirement that the actions really are
intentional in a philosophically rigorous way, nor
that the actions are derived from a will that is free
on all levels of abstraction. All that is needed is
that, at the level of the interaction between the
agents involved, there is a comparable level of
personal intentionality and free will between all the
agents involved.
Responsibility
Finally, we can ascribe moral agency to a robot
when the robot behaves in such a way that we can
only make sense of that behaviour by assuming it
has a responsibility to some other moral agent(s).
If the robot behaves in this way and it fulfils some
social role that carries with it some assumed responsibilities, and only way we can make sense of
its behaviour is to ascribe to it the ‘belief” that it has
the duty to care for its patients, then we can ascribe
to this machine the status of a moral agent.
International Review of Information Ethics
Vol. 6 
John P. Sullins:
When Is a Robot a Moral Agent?
Again, the beliefs do not have to be real beliefs,
they can be merely apparent. The machine may
have no claim to consciousness, for instance, or a
soul, a mind, or any of the other somewhat philosophically dubious entities we ascribe to human specialness. These beliefs, or programs, just have to
be motivational in solving moral questions and
conundrums faced by the machine.
For example, robotic caregivers are being designed
to assist in the care of the elderly. Certainly a
human nurse is a moral agent, when and if a machine caries out those same duties it will be a moral
agent if it is autonomous as described above, behaves in an intentional way and whose programming is complex enough that it understands its role
in the responsibility of the health care system that it
is operating in has towards the patient under its
direct care. This would be quiet a machine and not
something that is currently on offer. Any machine
with less capability would not be a full moral agent,
though it may still have autonomous agency and
intentionality, these qualities would make it deserving of moral consideration, meaning that one would
have to have a good reason to destroy it or inhibit
its actions, but we would not be required to treat it
as a moral equal and any attempt by humans who
might employ these lesser capable machines as if
they were fully moral agents should be avoided. It
is going to be some time before we meet mechanical entities that we recognize as moral equals but
we have to be very careful that we pay attention to
how these machines are evolving and grant that
status the moment it is deserved. Long before that
day though, complex robot agents will be partially
capable of making autonomous moral decisions and
these machines will present vexing problems.
Especially when machines are used in police work
and warfare where they will have to make decisions
that could result in tragedies. Here we will have to
treat the machines the way we might do for trained
animals such as guard dogs. The decision to own
and operate them is the most significant moral
question and the majority of the praise or blame for
the actions of such machines belongs to the owner’s
and operators of these robots.
Conversely, it is logically possible, though not probable in the near term, that robotic moral agents may
be more autonomous, have clearer intentions, and a
more nuanced sense of responsibility than most
human agents. In that case there moral status may
exceed our own. How could this happen? The
philosopher Eric Dietrich argues that as we are more
and more able to mimic the human mind computationally, we need simply forgo programming the
nasty tendencies evolution has given us and instead
implement, “…only those that tend to produce the
grandeur of humanity, we will have produced the
better robots of our nature and made the world a
better place” .
There are further extensions of this argument that
are possible. Non-robotic systems such as software
“bots” are directly implicated, as is the moral status
of corporations. It is also obvious that these arguments could be easily applied to the questions
regarding the moral status of animals and environments. As I argued earlier, domestic and farmyard
animals are the closest technology we have to what
we dream robots will be like. So these findings have
real world applications outside robotics as well, but I
will leave that argument for a future paper.
Conclusions
Robots are moral agents when there is a reasonable
level of abstraction under which we must grant that
the machine has autonomous intentions and responsibilities. If the robot can be seen as autonomous from many points of view, then the machine is
a robust moral agent, possibly approaching or
exceeding the moral status of human beings.
Thus it is certain that if we pursue this technology,
then future highly complex interactive robots will be
moral agents with the corresponding rights and
responsibilities, but even the modest robots of today
can be seen to be moral agents of a sort under
certain, but not all, levels of abstraction and are
deserving of moral consideration.