PubChem as a public resource for drug discovery
Qingliang Li, Tiejun Cheng, Yanli Wang*, and Stephen H. Bryant*
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20894, USA
PubChem is a public repository of small molecules and their biological properties. Currently, it
contains over 25 million unique chemical structures and 90 million bioactivity outcomes
associated with several thousand macromolecular targets. To address the potential utility of this
public resource for drug discovery, we systematically summarized the protein targets in PubChem
by the function, three-dimensional (3D) structure and biological pathway. Moreover, we analyzed
the potency, selectivity and promiscuity of the bioactive compounds identified for these biological
targets, including the chemical probes generated by the NIH Molecular Libraries Program (MLP).
As a public resource, PubChem lowers the barrier for researchers to advance the development of
chemical tools for modulating biological processes and drug candidates for disease treatments.
PubChem; Drug target; High-throughput screening; Chemical probe; Drug discovery
PubChem ( is a public repository for chemical
structures and their biological properties. The bioactivity results in PubChem are contributed
by over a hundred organizations, with the majority data coming from the screening center
network under the NIH Molecular Libraries Program (MLP) . This program aims to
expand the use of small molecules as chemical probes, which offer dynamic, reversible and
tunable perturbations for biological systems , to study the functions of genes and proteins
in physiology and pathology. Unlike the pharmaceutical industry and biotechnology
companies, which primarily focus on the “druggable genome” to screen the “drug-like”
small molecules against relatively limited types of targets, such as kinases, G proteincoupled receptors (GPCRs), enzymes, ion channels and nuclear hormone receptors, an
extensive collection of biological targets and chemical compounds are being investigated by
3Corresponding author: Yanli Wang ( ): Bldg. 38A, Room 5S506, NLM, NIH, 8600 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20894, Tel: (+1)301-435-7811, Fax: (+1)301-435-7793. 4Corresponding author: Stephen H. Bryant
( ): Bldg. 38A, Room 5S504, NLM, NIH, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894, Tel:
(+1)301-435-7792, Fax: (+1)301- 480-9241 or 301- 435-7793.
1Qingliang Li ( ): 8600 Rockville Pike, Building 38A, Room 8N811F, Bethesda, MD 20894, Phone:
(+1)301-496-7152, Fax: (+1)301-480-4637
2Tiejun Cheng ( ): 8600 Rockville Pike, Building 38A, Room 8N811A, Bethesda, MD 20894, Phone:
(+1)301-402-9527, Fax: (+1)301-480-4637
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available online.
Teaser: PubChem, as a public resource for drug discovery, lowers the barrier for researchers to advance the development of new
chemical tools for modulating biological processes and drug candidates for disease treatments.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Drug Discov Today. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 December 1.
 
Drug Discov Today. 2010 December ; 15(23-24): 1052–1057. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2010.10.003.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the MLP to answer a wide scope of biological questions, from identifying inhibitors of a
specific enzyme to looking for small molecules that affect protein-protein interactions or
modulate splicing events . With the rapid growth in data capacity, PubChem is becoming
a valuable resource for drug development and has attracted significant interest from
researchers in both academia and industry.
PubChem consists of three interconnected databases: Substance, BioAssay and Compound.
The Substance database contains the descriptions of molecules (primarily small molecules)
provided by depositors; the BioAssay database contains the screening results of substances
by assay providers; and the Compound database contains unique chemical structures derived
by structural standardization of the records in the Substance database. Currently, over 25
million unique chemical structures were in the Compound database, which were derived
from a collection of 70 million substances. As of April 2010, the BioAssay database
comprised over 2,700 bioassays associated with more than one million compounds tested
against several thousand molecular targets. In addition, several bioassays from RNAi
screening experiment also have been deposited in the BioAssay database.
A review of this public resource allows the community to better understand the information
content and utilize the data in PubChem, which may ultimately help to advance the
development of new chemical tools and drug candidates by enabling researchers to study the
structure-activity relationship, investigate the interaction mechanisms between small
molecules and their targets and gain insights into the chemical and biological space in
their research area. In this work, we provide a comprehensive summary of the protein targets
in PubChem with respect to the functional classification, the availability of threedimensional (3D) structure and biological pathway. Meanwhile, the potency, selectivity and
promiscuity of the bioactive compounds including the chemical probes developed by the
MLP, which are associated with those protein targets, are also investigated as well.
Bioassay targets in PubChem
Target identification is one of the key steps for drug development . Tremendous efforts
have been made in the past decades by pharmaceutical industries and biotechnology
companies that focus on the druggable genome to identify novel drug targets for drug
discovery. However, only a few drug targets are successfully used in current therapies .
The human genome project has identified about 20,000 to 25,000 genes and an even larger
number of transcripts and proteins, which provides great opportunities for drug target
investigation . Currently, PubChem records two major types of molecular targets for
research, i.e. protein targets for small molecules and gene targets from RNAi reagents,
which represent a great diversity of types of assays, including, for example, enzyme
inhibitor identification, protein-protein interactions, tumor cell growth inhibition and even
organismal phenotypes. As the protein targets are of particular interest to researchers in drug
discovery and the majority of bioassays in PubChem focus on enzymes or other proteins, we
will focus on the analysis of protein targets in this study. Hence, a collection of 2,206
protein targets was compiled from PubChem at the time of this work.
Functional families
To look into the potential functions of these bioassay targets, we performed sequence
similarity search against the annotated functional domains in the NCBI Conserved Domain
Database (CDD, by using the
reverse position specific BLAST (RPS-Blast) tool . We found that the 2,206 protein
targets fell into 671 unique protein super-families (Fig. 1a). About 15% of them belonged to
the protein kinase super-family. Other super-families such as nuclear receptor, trypsin-like
serine protease, src homology protein and zinc-dependent metalloprotease comprised about
Drug Discov Today. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2–3% of the bioassay targets, respectively. The rest of the super-families (67%, 450/671)
contained only one or two bioassay targets for each member. In particular, the highthroughput screening (HTS) assays under the MLP contributed 450 protein targets,
scattering into 312 protein super-families (Fig. 1c). Although the protein kinase super-family
still dominated this subset, it accounted for 5% of the MLP target set. The other superfamilies, such as seven transmembrane (7TM) GPCRs and DNA-binding domain of nuclear
receptors (NR-DBD) accounted for 2–3% on average. These results suggest that the
bioassay targets in PubChem represent a relatively broader functional diversity compared to
the known druggable targets. Thus, it allows researchers to study the mechanisms of proteinligand interactions on a wider scope and to identify novel molecular targets from PubChem
for potential treatments.
Three-dimensional structures
The 3D structures of macromolecular targets are important to the study of the mechanisms
of protein-protein and protein-ligand interactions. To link the protein targets to relevant 3D
structures, we used the BLAST tool to search against the protein sequences derived
from the Protein Data Bank (PDB, . We found that 78% of these
targets have corresponding 3D structures with 100% sequence identity in PDB database
(Fig. 1b). When looking into the possibility of inferring related structures from the similarity
search, another 8% of these targets found related structures in PDB database with sequence
identity over 90%. Given the fact that protein structures tend to be highly conserved at this
level of sequence identity, this analysis suggests that over 86% of the molecular targets in
PubChem have related structural information in PDB. On the other hand, less than 2% of
these targets could not be linked to any relevant 3D structures, or were only able to be linked
to the related protein structures with the sequence identity below 30%. As to the 450 protein
targets from the MLP, over 60% either have corresponding 3D structures with sequence
identity of 100% or can be linked to related structures with sequence identity of 90% or
above (Fig. 1d).
Related pathways
Most diseases occur due to the misregulation of multiple genes that are involved in mutual
interactions, including genes, transcripts and proteins, in a dynamic network. During the past
decade, high-throughput technologies have been widely used in biological research and
generated a tremendous amount of experimental data, which make it possible to the study
the functions of genes or proteins at biological system level. Drug development is inherently
a complicated process that drugs and their targets are engaged in a complex system, which is
far from being thoroughly understood. Moreover, approximately 35% of the known drugs or
drug candidates are active against more than one target , which makes the interactions
more sophisticated. Therefore, it is essential to investigate the connections of the drug, drug
target and disease in the context of biological system.
In this study, we mapped 507 (23%) out of the 2,206 protein targets from PubChem to 287
pathways in the KEGG database ( . We observed that
some pathways, such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway,
were related to multiple protein targets in PubChem. On the other hand, some bioassay
targets were involved in multiple KEGG pathways. A list of top 20 pathways that contain
multiple bioassay targets and top 20 targets that are involved in multiple pathways are
provided in Table S1 and S2, respectively, as a supplementary. Targets involved in the same
pathway are likely to play similar roles in regulating a specific biological process. Thus,
selectively inhibiting or activating a target in the same pathway might effectively modulate a
specific biological process or restore the function from a disease state back to a normal one.
Drug Discov Today. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Thus, the wealth of bioactivity data in PubChem may facilitate the researches in chemical
biology and drug development at the system level.
Bioactive compounds in PubChem
The characteristics of small molecules make them not only as drugs that modulate
physiological functions, but also as chemical tools that interrogate the functions of novel
genes, pathways and cells . The purpose of the NIH MLP is to develop chemical probes
for modulating biological process and facilitate the development of new drugs by offering
the capacity of the HTS to the public sector . Currently, more than one million
compounds were tested against several thousand targets and deposited in PubChem. About
two hundred thousands of them were reported active, among which there were 116 chemical
probes generated by the MLP projects at the time of this work.
A large fraction of the bioactive compounds (91,022) in PubChem were assayed with a
confirmed potency measurement, which were associated with 1,771 out of the 2,206 protein
targets in total. The distribution of bioactivity potency was analyzed, with the results
showing that nearly 10% of the compounds have a potency of • 1 µM (Fig. 2a). These
compounds were associated with over 60% of the1771 targets, i.e. each of these targets had
at least one bioactive compound with a potency of • 1 µM. On the other hand, we found that
about 40% of the targets had no active compound with the potency better than 10 µM (Fig.
2a), which indicates that there are great chances to develop highly potent compounds for
these targets through further study by medicinal chemistry approaches. When focusing on
the 116 MPL chemical probes, we found that most of them demonstrated much higher
potency in the range of 0.001 ~ 1 µM (Fig. 2b). The MLP probes will be discussed in detail
in the following section of “Chemical probes”.
Selectivity and promiscuity
It is essential to understand the selectivity and promiscuity of small molecules, when fully
exploiting the therapeutic potential and minimizing toxic effects of drugs or drug candidates
 . To evaluate these properties of a compound, a straightforward approach is to
investigate the bioactivity profile by screening this compound across a broad panel of
targets, however, which could be expensive when applying to a large compound library. On
the other hand, as more data is available in PubChem, it will be possible to derive such kind
of bioactivity profiles for a particular chemical compound, as well as to investigate the
selectivity and promiscuity against a specific target by combining the assay results
contributed by many organizations. In particular, the projects under the MLP, which share a
common library of over 340,000 compounds, make it feasible to systematically derive target
profiling information for many bioactive compounds.
We performed an across-target activity analysis for all the 189,807 active compounds in
PubChem to identify the selective as well as promiscuous compounds following the
procedure described previously . As a result, 38% (71,627) of those compounds were
observed as potentially selective with bioactivity outcome reported active against a single
target, while the rest of them (62%) demonstrated active against multiple targets with a
portion of them hitting multiple but otherwise related targets (Fig. 3a). Many bioassay
targets in PubChem are biologically related as revealed by sequence homology analysis .
In particular, the MLP projects usually take a secondary screening against related targets in
the search for compounds with higher specificity. Thus, it is not surprising to often observe
common hits for related targets. On the other hand, there are many other causes of the
promiscuity of a compound . To address this issue, the MLP has developed several
Drug Discov Today. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
profiling bioassays for evaluating aggregation effects, filtering chemical reactivity and
identifying interference molecules including screenings for luciferase inhibitors by multiple
laboratories. In summary, all the information has made PubChem a valuable resource for
studying the promiscuity of chemical compounds and investigating the polypharmacology
properties of chemical compounds in system-based drug discovery .
As it would be necessary to assess the selectivity and promiscuity properties in the context
of tested targets, we looked into those potentially selective compounds (71,627) and
observed that about 80% of them were tested against at least 50 distinct protein targets and a
significant portion (60%) was highly selective as tested against more than 150 targets (Fig.
3b). On the other hand, we observed that 14% (316) of the 2,206 targets were associated
with at least one of these selective compounds. Among this subset of targets, more than 60%
of them were associated with highly selective compounds that were tested broadly across
more than 250 distinct protein targets (Fig. 3b). These results indicate that compounds with
potentially high selectivity are available for a great portion of protein targets in PubChem.
Additionally, we evaluated the potency of these selective compounds by dividing them into
several selectivity groups based on the number of targets tested (Fig. 4). This analysis
provides further insights into both the selectivity and potency of the bioactive compounds in
this subset. It allows one to apply a certain selectivity threshold to identify the compounds
with a desired potency and to track down the molecular target associated with the compound
as well, which may serve as a starting point for a medicinal chemist to further optimize the
bioactive compound towards a chemical probe or a drug candidate.
Chemical probes
At the time of this work, the MLP project has generated 116 chemical probes. The detailed
descriptions about the characterizations of the probes are publically available for the
community to review ( These MLP chemical probes
were associated with 67 individual protein targets, which fell into 89 CDD super-families
(some targets belonged to more than one super-family) according to the CDD functional
domain annotations. Among them, 36 protein targets had corresponding 3D structures with
sequence identity of 100% in PDB database and 41 were mapped to 155 relevant conserved
pathways in KEGG database. The distribution of the bioactivity potency of these MLP
chemical probes with their corresponding targets is shown in Fig. 2b. The chemical probes
with potency in the range of 0.001 ~ 1 μM have been found for over 60% of the protein
targets (43/67), which indicates varying quality of the probes with respect to potency.
Compared to other bioactive compounds in PubChem, the MLP probes demonstrate
relatively higher potency and significantly better selectivity for the respective targets in
general. As several literature-based bioactivity databases become publicly available ,
it is also possible to gain insights into the novelty of the MLP probes by comparing them
with the prior art. The detailed information of the MLP chemical probes, including
bioactivity potency, biological pathways and related 3D structures of their targets is
provided in Table S3 as a supplementary.
Recently, there have been intensive discussions on the criteria/principles of defining a
chemical probe and some contradictory opinions have been raised . Though, only a
portion of the MLP chemical probes seem to have medium or high quality based on a
crowdsourcing evaluation andmost of them have low citation rates by bibliometric
method , it would probably take more time to find out their merits in future studies.
On the other hand, researchers in both academia and industry can help and are highly
encouraged to assess and improve the MLP chemical probes through their own research. To
this end, the efforts undertaken by the MLP to further characterize the probes and make the
data publicly accessible through PubChem would help make it happen.
Drug Discov Today. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 December 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Concluding remarks
PubChem is growing rapidly with new data being deposited on a daily basis, which makes it
feasible and imperative to evaluate the properties of a particular bioactive compound, a drug
candidate or even a known drug on a large scale to identify potentially new functions or offtarget effects. It starts to emerge as a valuable resource to explore the functions of genes and
proteins in physiology and pathology. A summary of the public services and tools are listed
in Table S4 as a supplementary to facility the utilization of the data in PubChem.
As a public molecular information resource at NIH, the free availability of PubChem will
undoubtedly lower the barrier for researchers from chemical biology, medicinal chemistry
and drug discovery to advance the development of new chemical tools for interrogating the
biological functions and potential drug candidates for disease treatments. It also provides
great opportunities for researchers in bioinformatics and cheminformatics to tackle the
problems in those research fields with computational approaches.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the National Institutes of Health Fellows Editorial Board for providing editorial assistance. This work is
supported by Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine.