A large-scale comparison of cortical thickness and volume methods for
measuring Alzheimer's disease severity
Christopher G. Schwarza,⁎, Jeffrey L. Guntera,b, Heather J. Wistec, Scott A. Przybelskic, Stephen D. Weigandc,
Chadwick P. Warda, Matthew L. Senjema,b, Prashanthi Vemuria, Melissa E. Murrayd, Dennis W. Dicksond,
Joseph E. Parisie, Kejal Kantarcia, Michael W. Weinerf, Ronald C. Peterseng, Clifford R. Jack Jr a,
for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative1
aDepartment of Radiology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA
bDepartment of Information Technology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA
cDepartment of Health Sciences Research, Division of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA
dDepartment of Neuroscience (Neuropathology), Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Jacksonville, FL, USA
eDepartment of Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA
fVeterans Affairs, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
gDepartment of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
Article history:
Received 11 December 2015
Received in revised form 29 April 2016
Accepted 27 May 2016
Available online 30 May 2016
Alzheimer's disease (AD) researchers commonly use MRI as a quantitative measure of disease severity. Historically, hippocampal volume has been favored. Recently, “AD signature” measurements of gray matter (GM) volumes or cortical thicknesses have gained attention. Here, we systematically evaluate multiple thickness- and
volume-based candidate-methods side-by-side, built using the popular FreeSurfer, SPM, and ANTs packages, according to the following criteria: (a) ability to separate clinically normal individuals from those with AD; (b) (extent of) correlation with head size, a nuisance covariatel (c) reliability on repeated scans; and (d) correlation with
Braak neuroﬁbrillary tangle stage in a group with autopsy. We show that volume- and thickness-based measures
generally perform similarly for separating clinically normal from AD populations, and in correlation with Braak
neuroﬁbrillary tangle stage at autopsy. Volume-based measures are generally more reliable than thickness measures. As expected, volume measures are highly correlated with head size, while thickness measures are generally not. Because approaches to statistically correcting volumes for head size vary and may be inadequate to deal
with this underlying confound, and because our goal is to determine a measure which can be used to examine age
and sex effects in a cohort across a large age range, we thus recommend thickness-based measures. Ultimately,
based on these criteria and additional practical considerations of run-time and failure rates, we recommend an
AD signature measure formed from a composite of thickness measurements in the entorhinal, fusiform,
parahippocampal, mid-temporal, inferior-temporal, and angular gyrus ROIs using ANTs with input segmentations from SPM12.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
( 
1. Introduction
Accurate, reliable quantitative measures of disease severity from
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been a mainstay of research
in the imaging of Alzheimer's disease (AD) for many years. Based on arguably the most dominant feature of visual examination, hippocampal
volume quickly emerged as the prevailing standard MRI biomarker for
quantifying AD severity from MRI . Of the two major
proteinopathies characteristic of AD, ß-amyloid and tau, spatiotemporal
patterns of neurodegeneration and atrophy, as well as temporal progression of clinical symptoms, correspond with the spatiotemporal pattern of tau deposition much more than with that of ß-amyloid . Because pathological studies suggest
that the regions ﬁrst affected by tau in the typical disease progression
are speciﬁcally those in layers II and IV of the entorhinal cortex followed
by the subiculum/CA1 of the hippocampus 802–812
⁎ Corresponding author at: Mayo Clinic, Diagnostic Radiology, 200 First Street SW,
Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
E-mail address: (C.G. Schwarz).
1 A portion of data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such,
the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI
and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: 
uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf.
 
2213-1582/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage: Clinical
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl
Gómez-Isla et al., 1996; Hyman et al., 1984), volume of the entorhinal
cortex was also soon proposed as an AD imaging biomarker, and the relative merits of hippocampal volume versus entorhinal cortex volume
have been debated .
Some studies have found superior or comparable separation or predictive power of the entorhinal cortex ,
while others have favored hippocampal volumes with the explanation
that greater reliability of measuring hippocampal volumes compensates
for its slightly later stage of being affected by the disease . Methods using machine
learning classiﬁers were later proposed to analyze volume-based features of voxels/regions across the whole brain in search of a measure
based on a “signature” region of interest (ROI) (i.e. a set of voxels, or a
set of ROIs combined into a meta-ROI) to measure Alzheimer's disease
 , regional thickness values, particularly in the
entorhinal cortex, were quickly proposed as measures of AD severity
 . Thickness of the (whole) hippocampus is generally not
considered as an option : the structure of the
hippocampal cortex folds upon itself and appears bulbous, rather than
thin and ribbon-like as in the rest of the cortex. Some software methods
have been designed to segment hippocampal subﬁelds, but these do not
produce thickness measures . The use of cortical thickness measurements combined from multiple regions into an “AD Signature” meta-ROI has also been proposed
 . Others have proposed longitudinal AD signature methods based on tensor-based morphometry features , but longitudinal measures will
not be the focus of this manuscript.
Since the introduction of hippocampal volumes, these and other volume measurements have been normalized by or corrected for intersubject variation in brain size or head size . Most commonly, head size is deﬁned and measured as total intracranial volume
(TIV), and volume measurements are applied as a ratio after dividing
by TIV ,
as a residual after adjusting for TIV in a regression model , or simply as a covariate in a regression
model. However, there has been no universal agreement on how to adjust volume measures for TIV, and differing methods have been shown
to produce differing analyses .
Although cortical thickness and surface area seem to be biologically
distinct quantities , GM volume measurements
are a combination of both that is dominated by surface area much
more than thickness . Because surface area is highly correlated with TIV , it follows that volume
(which is highly correlated with surface area) is also highly correlated
with TIV, while thickness (which is much less correlated with surface
area) is not. This has led to previous recommendations to adjust for
head size when using volume, but not thickness, measurements
 . Despite these methodological differences, hippocampal volume and entorhinal cortical thickness
offer similar diagnostic separability performance, and thus the degree
of nuisance correlation with TIV becomes an important practical
difference.
Our goal in this study is to produce a measure suitable for epidemiological assessment of disease burden over the entire age range, which
includes examining the effects of sex. To assess their suitability for this
purpose, we perform large-scale comparisons of several distinct techniques (volume measurements based on SPM12 and on FreeSurfer,
and cortical thickness measurements based on ANTs and FreeSurfer)
for creating volume- and thickness-based meta-ROI “signature” measures of AD according to a variety of desirable properties. Our evaluation
criteria are the following: (a) separation of clinically normal (CN) older
adults from AD patients according to clinical diagnosis; (b) (extent of)
correlation with TIV in CN older adults; (c) reliability in a single-site
short-time repeat-scan study of CN subjects of varying ages and in a
larger, multi-site 3-month repeat-scan study of older CN subjects; and
(d) correlation of these in-vivo measurements with Braak neuroﬁbrillary tangle stage at autopsy.
2. Methods
First, we describe each of the four datasets used in this work. Additional characteristics of the subjects included in each are provided in
Supplementary Table S1. All studies were approved by their respective
institutional review boards and all subjects or their surrogates provided
informed consent compliant with HIPAA regulations. Next, we describe
all employed software pipelines. MRI scanning parameters are described later, in Section 3.
2.1. Subject characteristics
2.1.1. Mayo clinical diagnostic separability dataset
This dataset includes scans of 216 subjects from the Mayo Clinic
Study of Aging (MCSA) and the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) studies. MCSA is an epidemiological study of cognitive aging in Rochester, Olmsted County, Minnesota . The ADRC study recruits and follows subjects
initially seen as patients at the Mayo Clinic Behavioral Neurology practice. 108 subjects were clinically diagnosed with either AD dementia
or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) according to established criteria,
and 108 clinically normal control subjects were matched one-to-one
to the MCI/AD subjects according to age, sex, and TIV. The MCI/AD subjects were documented to be amyloid positive and the CN subjects amyloid negative, to create an impaired group within the AD pathway and
a non-impaired group not in the AD pathway . Amyloid
positivity was determined from late uptake PET scans of each subject
with Pittsburgh compound B . PET image analysis
was performed using a previously-described in-house automated pipeline using structural MRI to perform two-class partial volume correction and provide ROI placement . An
amyloid-PET standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) was calculated as
the median uptake over voxels in the prefrontal, orbitofrontal, parietal,
temporal, anterior cingulate, and posterior cingulate/precuneus regions
divided by the median uptake from the cerebellar GM .
A previously determined cut point of SUVR 1.4 was used to denote amyloid positive/negative .The clinical diagnosis criteria
for normal subjects were: no cognitive complaints, normal neurological
exam, no active psychiatric or neurological conditions, no psychoactive
medications, and prior resolution of any previous neurological or psychiatric conditions. Subject ages were between 60 and 91 years, median
77. Two subjects, one with a diagnosis of MCI and one with AD, failed
FreeSurfer processing (deﬁned as either program failure to produce an
output, or a produced output with a portion of cortical ribbon placed incorrectly) and were excluded from all FreeSurfer-based volume and
thickness analyses.
2.1.2. Mayo Clinic reliability dataset
This dataset includes scans of 21 clinically normal control subjects
from the Mayo Clinic MCSA/ADRC studies, pooled from two groups. It
includes eight subjects, ages 30–47, with pairs of baseline and followup scans on the same scanner within a range of 5.9–8.2 months, and
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
thirteen subjects, ages 75–90, with pairs of baseline and follow-up scans
on the same scanner within two weeks.
2.1.3. ADNI reliability dataset
We identiﬁed a total of 133 ADNI subjects with pairs of serial T1weighted MRI scans on the same scanner within a median of 3.0 months
(range 1.8–3.9 months) with a clinical diagnosis of CN that remained for
at least 12 months after the baseline scans. Subject ages were 59–88,
median 72. The data used in this dataset were obtained from the
Alzheimer's
Neuroimaging
Initiative
(adni.loni.usc.edu). For up-to-date information, see the ADNI homepage
 .
2.1.4. Mayo Clinic pathology (Braak-stage) correlation dataset
This dataset includes scans of 82 subjects, ages at death ranged from
51 to 101, median 84, from Mayo Clinic MCSA/ADRC studies with Braak
neuroﬁbrillary tangle stage determined at autopsy and a usable in-vivo structural MRI scan within ﬁve years before
death (range 0.2 to 4.5, median: 2.3 years). These subjects were determined to be part of the AD spectrum based on their pathology; subjects
with high likelihood of other dementia (i.e. DLB, FTD, vascular, etc.)
were not included. One subject failed FreeSurfer processing and was excluded from all FreeSurfer-based volume and thickness analyses.
2.2. Common preprocessing
Mayo-study data were acquired with gradient distortion correction
in the sagittal plane performed on the scanner. Through plane correction was performed as part of image processing .
For ADNI data, distortion correction was applied on the scanner as available, with ofﬂine correction as necessary using the same method as
above, to create datasets also with full 3D correction. After this step,
the images entered each of the ﬁve software pipelines (two for gray
matter volume, and three for cortical thickness) described below.
2.3. Volume and thickness methods
2.3.1. SPM12 GM volume methods
calculated
preprocessed T1-weighted image using the “Segment” (formerly
“New Segment” in SPM8) implementation of the Uniﬁed Segmentation
algorithm included in the original release
version of SPM12 (revision 6225). Inhomogeneity (B0 bias-ﬁeld) correction was performed as part of this process. In order to produce
more accurate segmentations for older-adult populations, we altered
several parameters in SPM12 from their defaults. Firstly, we used an
in-house customized population-speciﬁc template, tissue priors, and
atlas labels (see Section 2.5). Secondly, we used two Gaussians to
model white matter (WM) intensities, rather than the default of one,
to account for the increased variance in WM intensities due to higher
prevalence of WM disease in these populations. We also reduced each
of the stiffness penalty parameters of the nonlinear normalization of
the segmentation priors to half of their defaults, allowing for increased
inter-subject variability due to increased prevalence and severity of atrophy and other pathologies. Formal validation of these parameter alterations is beyond the scope of this manuscript, but will be presented
separately in a future publication. Output tissue segmentations from
this method were used directly to produce the regional values in the
SPM GM volume pipeline. The bias-corrected T1 and segmentation outputs produced by this process were also used as inputs to some of the
following pipelines, where speciﬁed.
2.3.2. FreeSurfer GM volume methods
FreeSurfer GM volumes were produced using the recon-all script, in
cross-sectional mode, of FreeSurfer version 5.3 on each
T1-weighted scan. We used the recon-all ﬂag -3T, which alters
FreeSurfer's internal N3 bias ﬁeld correction parameters to be more appropriate for 3T MRI and uses a
3T-based atlas for Talairach alignment . Use of this ﬂag improved diagnostic separability and reduced
failure rates of FreeSurfer cortical thicknesses during preliminary internal testing (data not presented). Volumes in each ROI of FreeSurfer's
atlas were obtained directly from FreeSurfer's output aseg.stats and
aparc.stats ﬁles. FreeSurfer segmentation outputs were each visually
inspected for severe errors. When severe errors occurred, or when
FreeSurfer crashed without providing outputs and this was not ﬁxed
by repeated attempts, FreeSurfer analyses of those scans were omitted,
and we noted these instances in Section 2.1. No manual correction of
FreeSurfer segmentations was performed.
2.3.3. FreeSurfer cortical thickness methods
FreeSurfer cortical thickness values were also output by the same
recon-all script executions that produced GM volumes as described in
Section 2.3.2. Thicknesses in each ROI of FreeSurfer's atlas were obtained from FreeSurfer's output *.aparc.stats ﬁles. Internally, FreeSurfer's
cortical thickness algorithm calculates the mean distance between vertices of a corrected, triangulated estimated GM/WM surface and GM/
CSF (pial) surface .
2.3.4. ANTs cortical thickness methods
antsCorticalThickness.sh script, dubbed the ANTs Cortical Thickness Processing Pipeline . This was applied to the biascorrected, preprocessed image as output by our customized SPM12
pipeline described in Section 2.3.1, because preliminary internal testing
showed slightly increased diagnostic separability by using the biascorrected image as input (despite then-redundant correction by N4
later within the pipeline), rather than the preprocessed input corrected
only for gradient-warping (data not presented). Improvement by this
double-bias correction may reﬂect an additive combination of two
methods with highly-differing assumptions, but it may also reﬂect a
combination of both methods' errors producing increased disease-dependent errors. We include in our comparison this variant that produced superior separation in order to compare each method with its
optimal parameters, but we leave further exploration of bias correction
methods and their effects to future work. Because the ANTs package
does not include a stock template or segmentation priors, we used our
in-house population-speciﬁc template/priors, which we describe in
Section 2.5 and show in Supplementary Fig. S1.
Internally, the ANTs cortical thickness pipeline performs its own bias
correction using the N4 algorithm , segmentation
using ANTs' Atropos algorithm , and ﬁnally cortical
thickness calculation using these segmentations as input. ANTs' cortical
thickness algorithm, DiReCT, performs a nonlinear registration between
a mask of voxels segmented as WM and a mask of voxels segmented as
either GM or WM, measuring the distance from start to ﬁnish at each
GM-segmented location. This can be thought of as growing the WM/
GM surface (outer contour of the WM-segmented voxels) across the
GM ribbon to reach the GM/CSF surface (outer contour of a mask of
GM voxels + WM voxels) and measuring the distance moved . We compiled the most recent ANTs package source code
from the public repository at the time, February 25, 2014.
2.3.5. SPM12 segmentations input to ANTs thickness (SPM+DiReCT) cortical thickness methods
While the ANTs cortical thickness pipeline provides an end-to-end
solution to produce cortical thickness values, it is also possible to run
only the cortical thickness algorithm (DiReCT) using directly-input tissue segmentations. For this approach, we used the SPM12 GM and
WM tissue segmentations produced as described in Section 2.3.1 directly as input into ANTs' DiReCT algorithm 802–812
KellyKapowski software), after relabeling subcortical GM structures as
WM, mirroring the standard ANTs thickness pipeline's process. Parameters to KellyKapowski matched those used in antsCorticalThickness.sh.
2.4. TIV calculation methods
TIV obtained from FreeSurfer was used in assessing correlations between FreeSurfer methods and TIV. Internally, FreeSurfer TIVs are calculated using the warp parameters calculated for transforming subject
scans to a template, a method which has been previously described
and validated .
SPM and the ANTs cortical thickness pipeline do not provide standard measures of TIV. To calculate TIV values used for assessing correlation of TIV with volume and thickness measures from each pipeline, we
calculated TIV from SPM12 segmentations as follows. The segmentation
output images for GM, WM and CSF were summed and thresholded at
0.5 to form a binary image. Empirically, this image may contain some
extra-cranial voxels if they are particularly isointense to the intra-cranial tissues. The binary images were eroded with three passes of a 27-connected kernel. The largest connected component was selected, and all
smaller components were removed. Four passes of image dilation
were performed using a 27-connected kernel. Any voxels in the dilated
mask which were not included in the original binary image were excluded. Lastly, a 3D hole-ﬁll was performed to arrive at a ﬁnal TIV
mask. TIV then measured as the product of voxel size and the number
of voxels in the ﬁnal mask. The ﬁrst steps of this independently-developed method, prior to the morphological cleanup steps, match a previously validated method using SPM5 that was shown to be more reliable
than TIV estimates from FreeSurfer 3.0.2 . Similar
TIV estimation methods based on thresholded SPM12 segmentations
have also been shown to have signiﬁcantly higher agreement with
ground truth than those from either FreeSurfer 5.1.0 or SPM8 .
2.5. Atlas and ROI parcellation methods
For methods based on SPM and ANTs, we employed a common anatomical template/atlas to parcellate each method's output per-voxel,
native-space measurements into a set of ROIs. Rather than employ popular public templates derived from younger populations, we used an inhouse template, speciﬁc to our study population, called MCSA202. This
template was created from scans of 202 subjects in the Mayo Clinic
Study of Aging and the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer's Disease Research Center
studies . Brieﬂy, each subject's
T1-weighted MRI was segmented using the SPM12 software with default settings and a custom template was created from these segmentations using the DARTEL groupwise, nonlinear registration algorithm as
included in SPM12 . For each input T1-weighted
image in this work, we calculated a nonlinear registration between it
and our MCSA202 template using the ANTs SyN registration algorithm
 using multiple channels including the T1-weighted
images, segmented tissue probabilities, and a mask of TIV. In the space
of the MCSA202 template, we have produced a set of 122 anatomically-deﬁned gray matter ROIs that we call our ADIR122 atlas. The ROIs de-
ﬁned in this template space were then warped and resampled with the
nearest-neighbor method to the space of each input T1-weighted
image. These subject-space atlas labels were then used to parcellate
voxel-wise volume/thickness measurements into a set of ROIs. For volumes, we calculated the sum of the segmented GM probabilities pervoxel, and for thicknesses we calculated the mean thickness value
across voxels segmented as GM by each method. The MCSA202 template, its associated tissue priors, and the ADIR122 atlas will be fully described as part of a subsequent publication, and are visualized in Fig. S1
in the Supplementary material.
For methods based on FreeSurfer, we directly used the volume and
thickness values provided by FreeSurfer, which are calculated using
FreeSurfer's native Desikan-Killiany atlas .
3. Experiments
This section provides descriptions of the experiments performed
using each dataset. All scans used were validated in-house by expert analysts to conﬁrm acceptable image quality and lack of signiﬁcant confounding pathology. All segmentation, cortical thickness, and ROI
parcellation outputs from each method were examined to assess failure
rates and exclude subjects from each analysis where necessary. Descriptions of subject characteristics and any failure-based exclusions were
noted in Section 2.1.
3.1. Mayo clinical diagnostic separability dataset
T1-weighted MRI scans were performed on 3T scanners (models
Discovery MR750, Signa Excite, Signa Excite, Signa HDx, Signa HDxt)
manufactured by General Electric (GE) using a Sagittal 3D magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient recalled echo (MP-RAGE) sequence. Repetition time (TR) was ≈2300 ms, echo time (TE) ≈3 ms,
dimensions
≈1.20 × 1.015 × 1.015 mm.
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC)
with 95% conﬁdence limits was calculated using this dataset to assess
the ability of volume or thickness measures produced by each method
to separate clinically normal subjects from those diagnosed with either
MCI or AD. Spearman rank correlations with 95% conﬁdence limits were
used to assess correlations between volume or thickness measures and
TIV among the CN subjects in this dataset.
3.2. Mayo Clinic reliability dataset
MRI acquisition parameters for these subjects were the same as
those in Section 3.1.
Intraclass correlation coefﬁcients (ICC) with 95% conﬁdence limits
were calculated using this dataset to assess repeatability of the volume
and thickness measures produced by each method. It is assumed that
these subjects should not have signiﬁcant structural changes within
such a small time window, and thus all differences between serial measurements can be attributed to measurement error.
3.3. ADNI reliability dataset
Details of ADNI-standard acquisitions have been previously published . Scans were included from three manufacturers: 34 GE-scanned subjects, 77 Siemens-scanned subjects, and 22
Philips-scanned subjects.
We used this dataset to assess repeatability of each method's measurements in a multi-site, multi-vendor setting using publically available data. Again, we assume no signiﬁcant neurological changes
occurred and thus all differences between serial measurements can be
attributed to noise and error. ICCs were calculated within manufacturers as well as among all manufacturers combined.
3.4. Mayo Clinic pathology (Braak-stage) correlation dataset
Neuropathologic sampling followed recommendations of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD). Further
details were previously published . MRI parameters were identical to those in Section 3.1. For each method, volume or
thickness values were taken only from the hemisphere on which pathological assessment was performed.
Spearman rank correlations with 95% conﬁdence limits were calculated using this dataset to assess the ability of each method's
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
measurements to predict pathology-based AD severity staging at later
autopsy. Braak neuroﬁbrillary tangle stages worsen from 1–6. For
reporting purposes, to show positive correlation coefﬁcients, correlations between volume or thickness measures and negative Braak stage
are shown. We include data for all ROIs, including those for which
high correlation with Braak stage is expected (e.g. entorhinal cortex, fusiform, etc.) and those for which low correlation with Braak stage is expected (e.g. postcentral, supplementary motor, etc.), according to
accepted biological models of AD.
3.5. Meta-ROI deﬁnition and evaluation
We formed an “AD-signature” composite or “meta ROI” for each
method to compare our evaluation criteria across all methods. Meta-
ROIs were created by combining volume or thickness measures across
the top six performing individual ROIs on the diagnostic separability
criteria (i.e. highest AUROC values). Volume measures were summed
across ROIs, FreeSurfer thicknesses were averaged across ROIs, and
ANTs and SPM+DiReCT thicknesses were averaged across ROIs and
weighted by each ROI's size. We describe the rationale for using the
top six ROIs below in Section 4.1.
Pair-wise differences in the evaluation criteria were tested across all
methods for the meta-ROIs. AUROCs between methods were tested
using the Delong standard error method . Bootstrap methods with 10,000 bootstrap samples were used to test the differences in the magnitude of correlation between the meta-ROI
thickness and TIV and the differences in ICC between each pair of
methods. Choi's test was used to assess the difference in
dependent correlations between the meta-ROI thickness and negative
Braak stage.
4. Results and discussion
First, in Section 4.1 we describe our selection of signature meta-ROIs
for each method. Next, we discuss in Section 4.2 the comparative performance of these meta-ROIs on each criterion. Finally, in Section 4.3 we
compare other practical considerations (failure rate and runtimes) of
each method.
4.1. Selection of meta-ROIs for each method
First, we describe the rationale by which we chose our recommended meta-ROIs according to our goals (see Section 3.5). For economy of
presentation, we present the data used in their selection only in Supplementary material.
For most methods, including more regions in the meta-ROI after the
top-performing ROI alone did not strongly improve diagnostic separability, but did often improve reliability and correlation with Braak
stage. Based on these data, we wished to design a signature measure
that would maximize performance according to each criterion, while
also including a large enough area to increase the power of the measure
to quantify a wider range of disease stages (i.e. increase the dynamic
range of the measure). Using these criteria, we selected and recommend
using the top six ROIs for each method, ranked according to their diagnostic separability. For most methods, these six ROIs generally covered
an area large enough to be reliably measured without compromising diagnostic separability or correlation with -Braak stage. In Fig. 1, we show
the performance of the top six individual component ROIs for each
method that make up its meta-ROI. For visualization purposes, we also
provide a ﬁgure of the regions included for the SPM+DiReCT method
in Fig. 2.
The top six ROIs from each method were generally a mixture of limbic and inferior lateral temporal regions. The hippocampus and amygdala regions performed highly for volume-based methods, but these
are not quantiﬁed by thickness-based methods, which favored the entorhinal cortex. These regions are highly consistent with those regions
commonly associated with tau deposition in Alzheimer's disease at pathology , and in in-vivo studies using Tau-PET
imaging .
4.2. Performance of meta-ROIs for each method
We present in Fig. 3 the performance of each meta-ROI for each
method, according to each of our performance criteria. Conﬁdence intervals are presented in the ﬁgure, but we also provide a table of pvalues of each pairwise comparison in Supplementary Table S2.
4.2.1. Clinical diagnostic separability criterion
According to clinical diagnostic separability AUROCs, FreeSurfer
thickness had the highest performance of all signature meta-ROI measures, but its performance was not signiﬁcantly better (with a signiﬁcance threshold of p b 0.05) than the next-best method, FreeSurfer
volumes (p = 0.12). Its performance was, however, signiﬁcantly better
than that of SPM volumes (p = 0.04) and SPM+DiReCT thickness (p =
0.02). ANTS thickness had the worst performance, which was signiﬁcantly worse than the FreeSurfer thickness (p b 0.001) and FreeSurfer
volume (p = 0.01) methods.
4.2.2. Correlation with TIV criterion
Both volume methods were similarly highly correlated with TIV
(p = 0.85) and signiﬁcantly more correlated with TIV (p b 0.001 for
all) than all three thickness measures. This result is expected, and agrees
with previously reported studies . Although some
previous studies have suggested that the method of TIV calculation
used in FreeSurfer is more accurate than methods based on segmented
T1 images, such as that we use for our SPM- and ANTs-based pipelines
 , we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences in
the level of correlation between each volume-based signature and its
respective TIV measurement, suggesting that the differences in TIV calculation methodology are not relevant to each signature measure's level
of correlation with TIV. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the correlation with TIV across the three thickness measures (p ≥0.13).
4.2.3. Reliability criterion
Volume measures were very reliably measured and generally more
reliable than thickness measures, likely due to the increased computational challenge in measuring thickness from MRI. SPM volumes were
the most reliable, and this difference was signiﬁcant versus FreeSurfer
volumes in the ADNI dataset (p b 0.001), but was not signiﬁcant in the
Mayo dataset (p = 0.15). FreeSurfer volumes were signiﬁcantly more
reliable than FreeSurfer thickness in all datasets (p ≤0.002).
SPM+DiReCT was the most reliable among thickness methods: it was
not signiﬁcantly worse than FS volumes (p ≥0.11), but it was signiﬁcantly more reliable than FS thicknesses in the ADNI dataset
(p b 0.001), although this difference was not signiﬁcant for the Mayo
dataset (p = 0.24). The reliability of ANTS thicknesses was inconsistent
across datasets, making it difﬁcult to draw conclusions about them.
4.2.4. Correlation with Braak stage (pathology)
FreeSurfer thickness and SPM+DiReCT thickness had the largest inverse correlations with Braak stage at pathology; however, these correlations were not signiﬁcantly higher than the correlations seen with the
volume measures (p ≥0.14) and were not signiﬁcantly different from
each other (p = 0.68). ANTS thickness had by far the worst performance. This difference was only signiﬁcant versus the FreeSurfer and
SPM+DiReCT thickness methods (p = 0.001 and 0.01, respectively),
but not versus either volume (p ≥0.23).
4.3. Comparison of practical considerations between methods
While ease-of-use concerns are difﬁcult to quantify and are not an
explicit criteria for differentiating methods in this manuscript, we
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
Fig. 1. Performance of individual ROIs included in meta-ROIs for each of the ﬁve methods. For each method, regions in each row are ordered best to worst by their performance in the
diagnostic separability (CN vs. MCI/AD) criteria, measured as an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), and plotted in the leftmost column. We show the six
regions with the highest AUROC for each method, which together form the meta-ROIs. The second column plots the Spearman rank correlation (rho) between the ROI and total
intracranial volume (TIV). The following two columns plot reliability of the measure in each ROI across successive scans, in the two Mayo and ADNI datasets respectively, as measured
by intraclass correlation coefﬁcients (ICC). In the ADNI reliability dataset, the ICCs are shown by manufacturer and indicated by colored points. The rightmost column plots the
Spearman rank correlation between the ROI and negative Braak stage at autopsy. 95% conﬁdence intervals are shown for all but the per-manufacturer Reliability-ADNI data. AUROC,
rho, and ICC values are shown to the right of each panel. Numeric volumes listed for the ADNI reliability panel are for all manufacturers combined. Larger values (toward the right) are
preferred in all columns with exception of the second, correlation with TIV, for which values near zero are preferred. Plots of performance for the top 20 ROIs by each method are
included in the Supplementary material.
Fig. 2. Regions included in our recommended AD signature meta-ROIs using the SPM+DiReCT thickness method: entorhinal cortex, fusiform, parahippocampal, mid-temporal, inferior
temporal, and angular gyrus.
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
recognize that these can play an important role in many analyses and
discuss them here.
4.3.1. Failure rates
For FreeSurfer we deﬁne failures either as failing to produce thickness values for a given scan, or producing cortical ribbon segmentations
that are signiﬁcantly misplaced (i.e. located outside the true cortical ribbon) for a given scan. After carefully running our datasets through
FreeSurfer under a variety of runtime ﬂags that appeared reasonable according to the documentation, we determined the optimum method of
running recon_all for both failure rate and diagnostic separability: using
the -3T ﬂag, but not the -MPRAGE ﬂag, on our 3T, MPRAGE scans which
had not undergone other preprocessing. With this we achieved a
FreeSurfer failure rate of only three subjects across all datasets (3 /
(216 + 21 + 133 + 82) = 3/452 ≈0.66%). FreeSurfer failures, when
encountered, occurred in scans of brains more impacted by AD and vascular pathologies (Supplementary Fig. S12). This suggests, but does not
prove, that FreeSurfer failure rates are inﬂuenced by the severity of disease in input brain scans, and thus are a potentially biasing source of
missing data. Regardless, we did not encounter any such failures for
the SPM volume, ANTS thickness, or SPM+DiReCT pipelines. We hypothesize that such differences in failure rates, and possibly systematic
sources of missing data, would be a possible consideration when designing clinical trials with MRI-based endpoints.
4.3.2. Program runtime
Runtime is another practical consideration that can inﬂuence choice
of algorithm. In Fig 4 we plot the comparative runtimes for each method
while varying the number of processor cores used. A random Mayo subject was chosen for this experiment, because it is not feasible to run a
large number of subjects using all of these variations on multi-user computing grids while keeping each run isolated from each other and from
other users' jobs. However, these results are typical to our anecdotal experiences running each algorithm. Runtime testing was performed
using multiple identical systems each with 2 Intel XEON X5670 (6
core) hyperthreaded processors, for a total of 12 physical cores, or 24
with hyperthreading, and 24GB DDR3 1333 MHz RAM. These systems
were free of other signiﬁcant computing load at the time of testing.
Values for the SPM pipeline include the time to generate a warp to the
template using the ANTS algorithm for atlas propagation. Values for
SPM+DiReCT include the time for the SPM pipeline, which produces
the required input segmentations and nonlinear transformations to
the standard atlas. Values for FreeSurfer are given once for both volume
and thickness, because the surface-based algorithm that produces thickness values is also what produces the cortical parcellation for gray matter volumes.
Although it does not use multiple cores, the SPM volumes pipeline,
without DiReCT for thicknesses, was the fastest (approximately
80 min). SPM+DiReCT using a single core ran in about 70% of the
time required for FreeSurfer (approximately 7 h vs. 10 h). If more processing cores were allowed, FreeSurfer required approximately 7 h
(using the -openmp recon-all ﬂag), while SPM+DiReCT required
approximately 2 h (increasing the ITK_GLOBAL_DEFAULT_NUMBER_
OF_THREADS environment variable). ANTS thickness pipeline runtimes
were similar to those of SPM+DiReCT, also using the same environment
variable. All multi-core-enabled algorithms reached diminishing
speedups or began to slow down with more than six cores, potentially
because there were six cores per each of two processors on the test systems. Overall, for volumes-only, SPM was far faster than FreeSurfer.
Among thickness pipelines, ANTS and SPM+DiReCT were comparable
Fig. 3. Comparative performance summary of AD Signature Meta-ROIs. A table of pair-wise
p-values for comparisons between methods by each criterion is provided in
Supplementary Table S2.
Fig. 4. Runtimes for candidate methods run on a single random Mayo subject scan.
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
and both clearly faster than FreeSurfer, ranging from 2–5 h faster at each
number of cores allocated.
5. Discussion
5.1. Discussion
In this work we have tested many methods for a meta-ROI-based
“signature” measure of AD severity suitable for broad spectrum use
which includes epidemiological studies. While many of the methods
performed well, ultimately we and other groups must choose one.
In the diagnostic separability criterion, volume- and thickness-based
methods generally performed comparably to each other, while in the
pathology-correlation criterion, the FreeSurfer and SPM+DiReCT thickness measures outperformed both volume-based methods, although
those differences were not statistically signiﬁcant. Volume-based measures were generally more reliable than thickness-based measures,
and SPM volumes were signiﬁcantly more reliable than all other
methods. SPM+DiReCT was the most reliable of all thickness-based
measures, and its reliability was not signiﬁcantly worse than FS volumes, the second-most reliable method. The strongest ﬁnding was
that volume measures are signiﬁcantly more correlated with TIV than
thickness measures, which conﬁrms previous studies .
The absence of an estrogen protective effect may also contribute. Additionally, the increased prevalence of disease with age naturally reduces
the correlation between volumes and TIV in older populations. These
factors suggest that attempts to correct volume measurements for TIV
should also be dependent upon both age and sex, i.e. more complex
than the traditional, simple linear regression method or ratio division
by TIV. Because a hypothetical multivariate correction requires a more
complex statistical model with interaction terms, these parameters
must be ﬁne-tuned and validated. However, attempts to do this become
inherently circular, because it is impossible to separate sex-based differences in relative risk factors from biases due to imaging-based volume
measurements being correlated with TIV. Such a process has limitations
because over/under-correction could introduce artifactual age/sex effects or hide true age/sex effects in an analysis. Furthermore, because
the amount of correlation between volume and TIV varies across regions
 , these age- and sex-dependent corrections must also be
created and validated separately for each ROI, making them even more
unwieldy in a multi-ROI environment. It has been demonstrated that
differing methods of estimating TIV and normalizing volume measurements by TIV can produce associates that can depend on gender, age,
and atrophy , can
affect study power , and can depend on the study
populations and ﬁne-tuning of algorithm parameters (Sargolzaei et al.,
For these reasons, we propose that the best solution for any researcher desiring an epidemiological assessment of neurodegeneration
in regions characteristic of Alzheimer's disease in a cohort with a large
age range is to use thickness measurements rather than volumes, because thickness is sufﬁciently uncorrelated with TIV to render this challenging correction unnecessary. This choice allows for a measure
capable of investigating sex differences. It is important to note that
our recommendation here is limited to this epidemiological use case
for subjects across the entire age spectrum, and we are not challenging
the use of hippocampal volumes or other volume-based measures as a
diagnostic measure in older impaired individuals. Volume-based measures, unlike thickness, also allow measurement of values in regions
such as the hippocampus, amygdala, cerebellum, etc. that are not typically available in thickness pipelines either due to resolution constraints, or challenging anatomic shape. They also allow measurement
of structures that are not composed of gray matter, such as the pons
and midbrain. However, for typical AD most of the excluded structures
are less relevant, so this less of a concern.
Among thickness methods, ANTS thicknesses (using the ANTs Cortical Thickness Pipeline as described in Sec. 2.3.4) had the worst performance in the separability and pathology-correlation criteria, while
performing comparably in the other criteria versus the other thickness
measures. Therefore, this ANTs method is not recommended. Among
the remaining two candidates, FreeSurfer thickness signiﬁcantly
outperformed SPM+DiReCT in the diagnostic separability criteria, although the two were not signiﬁcantly different in the correlation with
TIV or in the pathology-correlation criteria. SPM+DiReCT was more reliable than FreeSurfer thickness, which was signiﬁcant in the ADNI
dataset, but not in the Mayo dataset.
Overall, the FreeSurfer and SPM+DiReCT thickness-based signatures both performed well in our analyses. However, our group and
others must make a choice between them. Although somewhat worse
in diagnostic separability than FreeSurfer thickness (0.79 versus 0.86),
our group will ultimately use and recommend the SPM+DiReCT cortical
thickness method because of its superior reliability and runtime/failure
rates, while achieving similar performance in pathology- and TIV- correlation measures. For this method we recommend a meta-ROI combining
values from the entorhinal cortex, fusiform, parahippocampal, midtemporal, inferior temporal, and angular gyrus regions. Other groups
may choose to use FreeSurfer because it is a publically available, supported, end-to-end package: with this we recommend an AD signature
based on cortical thickness estimates from the entorhinal cortex, inferior temporal, mid-temporal, inferior parietal, fusiform, and precuneus
It is important to note that the AD signature we describe here is that
of typical late onset AD characterized by a predominantly amnestic
onset evolving to a multi-domain clinical presentation. Since clinical
phenotype closely matches the topographic pattern of atrophy in neurodegenerative diseases, MRI signatures of atypical AD (e.g. logopenic
aphasia or posterior cortical atrophy syndromes) could be developed
using a similar approach.
5.2. Strengths and limitations of current study
The strength of this study lies primarily in providing a thorough
comparison of modern, popular methods for designing a “signature”
composite severity measure of AD-related neurodegeneration. We provide testing for both accuracy and precision (reliability) measures, and
we include correlation with Braak stage at later autopsy, which is ultimately the gold standard measurement of AD severity, in a large cohort
of 82 subjects. We carefully tested each method in preliminary analyses
to modify parameters and optimize accuracy, and we provide details of
these optimizations as a further beneﬁt to the ﬁeld.
C.G. Schwarz et al. / NeuroImage: Clinical 11 802–812
While this study tests several popularly available candidate methods
for volume and thickness, several others remain untested, such as GM
volumes provided by FSL segmentations or ANTs
ATROPOS segmentations , or thicknesses measured
by algorithms like CIVET or Brainsuite
 . One could also examine other combinations of segmentation methods input to thickness methods, or methods
that include a combination of volume, thickness, and/or other measures
together. These are left for future work. We also did not examine machine-learning-based feature selection methods for meta-ROI selection,
or selection of individual voxels using voxel-based morphometry, principle components analysis, etc., because such data-driven methods
would generally not have knowledge of biological plausibility to produce signature ROIs consistent with known pathophysiology of typical
AD (i.e. Braak staging), and imposing such constraints upon them via
statistical priors would severely limit their theoretical gains in performance. We also did not present an analysis of surface area or curvature
measures produced by FreeSurfer in order to limit manuscript length
and complexity, but these were examined internally using the diagnostic separability criterion, and their performances were sufﬁciently lower
than those of GM volumes and thicknesses such that we did not explore
them further. Surface area was, as expected, also highly correlated with
TIV, limiting its potential attractiveness. To limit manuscript complexity,
we also did not present the results of combinations of the FreeSurferand SPM-based signatures using the differing approaches to TIV from
each, because these would not represent the natural use cases for each
method. However, we did internally assess correlation between
FreeSurfer volumes using TIV measures from SPM at an earlier stage of
the analysis, and it did not alter the requirement that such volumes
would require correction by TIV.
Because autopsy is the gold-standard measurement of AD severity,
we examined correlation between Braak stage and each of our imaging-based measures. Between imaging and death, it is possible that
brain changes could have occurred that reduced these correlations.
However, this limitation was identical for all volume- and thicknessbased methods compared in this work, and thus should not have inﬂuenced comparisons across methods.
We also only tested the most-current release of each algorithm at
the time the work began. We recognize that at time of writing,
FreeSurfer 6 release is imminent. It is not known to us whether this version will contain updates to algorithms relevant to our comparisons.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank these funding sources: R01-
AG040042; R01-AG011378; R00-AG37573, P50-AG16574/P1; R01-
U01-AG24904;
U01-AG06786;
P50-AG16574;
AG034676; The Alexander Family Professorship of Alzheimer's Disease
Research, Mayo Clinic; the GHR Foundation.
Data collection and sharing for the ADNI dataset used in this project
was funded by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
(National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI
(Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI
is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions
following:
Alzheimer's
Association;
Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica,
Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Eisai Inc.;
Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. and its afﬁliated company Genentech, Inc.;
Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research & Development, LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical
Research & Development LLC.; Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck & Co., Inc.;
Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pﬁzer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and Transition
Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is providing
funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of
Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated
by the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for
Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at 
doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2016.05.017.