User Model User-Adap Inter 19:167–206
DOI 10.1007/s11257-008-9057-x
ORIGINAL PAPER
Interaction design guidelines on critiquing-based
recommender systems
Li Chen · Pearl Pu
Received: 19 September 2007 / Accepted in revised form: 25 August 2008 /
Published online: 3 October 2008
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
A critiquing-based recommender system acts like an artiﬁcial salesperson.
It engages users in a conversational dialog where users can provide feedback in the
form of critiques to the sample items that were shown to them. The feedback, in turn,
enables the system to reﬁne its understanding of the user’s preferences and prediction
of what the user truly wants. The system is then able to recommend products that
may better stimulate the user’s interest in the next interaction cycle. In this paper,
we report our extensive investigation of comparing various approaches in devising
critiquing opportunities designed in these recommender systems. More speciﬁcally,
we have investigated two major design elements which are necessary for a critiquingbased recommender system: critiquing coverage—one vs. multiple items that are
returned during each recommendation cycle to be critiqued; and critiquing aid—
system-suggested critiques (i.e., a set of critique suggestions for users to select) vs.
user-initiated critiquing facility (i.e., facilitating users to create critiques on their own).
Through a series of three user trials, we have measured how real-users reacted to
systems with varied setups of the two elements. In particular, it was found that giving
users the choice of critiquing one of multiple items (as opposed to just one) has
signiﬁcantly positive impacts on increasing users’ decision accuracy (particularly in
the ﬁrst recommendation cycle) and saving their objective effort (in the later critiquing
cycles). As for critiquing aids, the hybrid design with both system-suggested critiques
and user-initiated critiquing support exhibits the best performance in inspiring users’
decision conﬁdence and increasing their intention to return, in comparison with the
uncombined exclusive approaches. Therefore, the results from our studies shed light
L. Chen (B) · P. Pu
Human Computer Interaction Group, School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: 
e-mail: 
L. Chen, P. Pu
on the design guidelines for determining the sweetspot balancing user initiative and
system support in the development of an effective and user-centric critiquing-based
recommender system.
Critiquing-based recommender systems · Decision support · Preference
revision · User control · Example critiquing · Dynamic critiquing · Hybrid critiquing ·
User evaluation · Usability · Human–computer interaction
1 Introduction
According to adaptive decision theory , the human decision process
is inherently highly constructive and adaptive to the current decision task and decision
environment. In particular, when users are confronted with an unfamiliar product
domain or a complex decision situation with overwhelming information, such as the
current e-commerce environment, they are usually unable to accurately state their
preferences at the outset but likely construct them in a highly
context-dependent fashion during their decision process .
In order to assist people in making accurate as well as conﬁdent decisions, especially
in the complex decision setting, critiquing-based recommender systems have emerged
in the form of both natural language models and
graphical user interfaces . This type of system has been broadly recognized as an effective feedback
mechanism that may guide users to efﬁciently target at their ideal products, which is
particularly meaningful when users are searching for high-involvement products (e.g.,
computers, houses and cars) with the primary goal of avoiding any ﬁnancial damage.
Other terms for these systems are conversational recommender systems , conversational case-based reasoning systems , and
knowledge-based recommender systems .
More speciﬁcally, the critiquing-based recommender system mainly acts like an
artiﬁcial salesperson that engages users in a conversational dialog where users can
provide feedback in form of critiques (e.g., “I like this laptop, but prefer something
cheaper” or “with faster processor speed”) to one of currently recommended items.
The feedback, in turn, enables the system to more accurately predict what the user
truly wants and then return some products that may better interest the user in the next
conversational cycle. The main component of this interaction model is therefore that
of recommendation-and-critiquing, which is also called tweaking ,
critiquing feedback , candidate/critiquing , and navigation by proposing .
Toourknowledge,thecritiquingconceptwasﬁrstmentionedintheRABBITsystem
 as a new interface paradigm for formulating queries to a database. In recent years, it has evolved into two principal branches. One has been aiming
to pro-actively generate a set of knowledge-based critiques that users may be prepared
to accept as ways to improve the current product (termed system-suggested critiques in
this paper). This mechanism has been adopted in FindMe systems 
Interaction design guidelines
and more recent DynamicCritiquing agents .
The main advantage, as detailed in related literatures , is that system-suggested critiques can not only expose
the knowledge of remaining recommendation opportunities, but also potentially accelerate the user’s critiquing process if they can correspond well to the user’s intended
feedback criteria.
An alternative critiquing mechanism does not propose pre-computed critiques, but
provides a facility to stimulate users to freely create and combine critiques themselves
(so called user-initiated critiquing support in this paper). As a typical application, the
ExampleCritiquing agent has been developed for this goal, and its focus is showing
examples and facilitating users to compose their self-initiated critiques . In essence, the ExampleCritiquing agent is capable of allowing users to choose
which feature(s) to be critiqued and how to critique it (or them) under their own
control. Previous work proved that it enabled users to obtain signiﬁcantly higher
decision accuracy and preference certainty, compared to non critiquing-based systems
such as a ranked list .
In addition to characterizing the critiquing-based recommender system in terms of
its nature of critiquing support (i.e., system-suggested critiques or user-initiated critiquingsupport), another important factor is thenumber of items that thesystemreturns
during each recommendation cycle for users to critique. For example, FindMe and
DynamicCritiquing systems return one item, whereas ExampleCritiquing agents show
multiple k items (e.g., k = 7) at a cycle. Multi-item display provides users a chance to
choose the product to be critiqued after making a comparison between several options.
Thus, there are in nature two crucial design components contained in a critiquingbased recommender system. One is its critiquing aid: suggesting critiques for users
to select or aiding them to construct their own critiques. Another is the number of
recommended items (called critiquing coverage in this paper): suggesting a single vs.
multiple products for users to critique.
The options are inherently related to different levels of user control in either the
process of identifying the critiqued reference or the process of specifying concrete
critiquing criteria. As a matter of fact, perceived behavioral control has been regarded
as an important determinant of user beliefs and actual behavior . In the
context of e-commerce, it has been found to have a positive effect on customers’
attitudes including their perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness and trust . User control has been also determined
as one of the fundamental principles for general user interface design and Web usability .
However, there are few works having studied the effect of locus of user initiative
in critiquing-based recommender systems. There is indeed a complex tradeoff that
underlies the successful design: giving users too much control may cause them to
perform an unnecessary complex critiquing, whereas giving little or no control may
force users to accept system-suggested items even though they do not match users’
truly-intended choices. The goal of this paper is therefore to investigate the different
degrees of user control vs. system support in both critiquing aid and critiquing coverage, so as to identify the optimal combination of components that could positively
inﬂuence users’ actual decision performance and subjective attitudes.
L. Chen, P. Pu
To achieve our goal, we have conducted a series of three trials. In our ﬁrst user trial,
we compared two well-known critiquing-based recommender agents which respectively represent a typical setup combination of critiquing coverage and critiquing aid.
Concretely, one is the DynamicCritiquing system that shows one recommended product during each interaction cycle, accompanied by a user-initiated unit critiquing area
and a list of system-suggested compound critiques. Another is the ExampleCritiquing
system that returns multiple products in a display and stimulates users in building and
composing critiques to one of the shown products in their self-motivated way. The
experimental results show that the ExampleCritiquing agent achieved signiﬁcantly
higher decision accuracy (in terms of both objective and subjective measures) and
users’ behavioral intentions (i.e., intention to purchase and return), while requiring
lower level of interaction and cognitive effort.
Inthesecondtrial,wemodiﬁedExampleCritiquingandDynamicCritiquingtomake
their critiquing coverage (i.e., the number of recommended items during each cycle)
constant and keep the difference only on their critiquing aids. The results surprisingly
showed that there is no signiﬁcant difference between the two modiﬁed versions in
terms of both objective and subjective measures. Further analysis of participants’
comments revealed the pros and cons of system-suggested critiques and user-initiated
critiquing support. Additionally, combining the results with the ﬁrst trial’s, we found
that giving users the choice of critiquing one of multiple items (as opposed to just one)
has signiﬁcantly positive impacts on increasing their decision accuracy and conﬁdence
particularly in the ﬁrst recommendation cycle and saving objective effort in the later
critiquing rounds.
The third user trial was conducted to measure users’ performance in a hybrid critiquing system where system-suggested critiques and user-initiated critiquing aid was
combined on one screen. Analyzing users’ critiquing application frequency in such
system shows that the application of user-initiated critiquing support in creating users’
own critiques is relatively higher than picking suggested critique options. Moreover,
the respective practical effects of user-initiated and system-suggested critiquing facilities were identiﬁed. That is, they are both signiﬁcantly contributive to improve users’
decision conﬁdence and return intention, and system-suggested critiques are even
effective in saving effort perception.
Therefore, all of our trial results infer that giving users multiple recommended
products as critiqued options and providing them both system-suggested and userinitiatedcritiquingaidsforspecifyingconcretecritiquingcriteriacanobtainsubstantial
Another contribution of our work is that we have established a user-evaluation
framework. It contains both objective variables such as decision accuracy, task completion time and interaction effort, and subjective measures like perceived cognitive
effort, decision conﬁdence and trusting intentions. All of these factors are fundamentally important, given that a recommender system’s ultimate goal should be to allow
its users to achieve high decision accuracy and build high trust in it, and require them
to expend a minimal amount of effort to obtain these beneﬁts .
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst introduce existing critiquingbased recommender systems, with DynamicCritiquing and ExampleCritiquing as two
Interaction design guidelines
representatives. According to their respective characteristics, we summarize two main
elements that can be varied to reﬂect different degrees of user control. We then introduce a user evaluation framework with major dependent variables measured in our
experiments. Detailed descriptions of three user-trials then follow, including their
materials, recruited participants, experimental procedures, results analyses and discussions. Finally, we conclude our work and indicate its practical implications and
future directions.
2 Critiquing-based recommender systems
Our investigation of existing critiquing-based recommender systems revealed that they
basically follow a similar interaction model (see Fig. 1). The user ﬁrst speciﬁes her
initial preferences on product attributes. The system then returns one or multiple recommended items. Either the user selects an item as her ﬁnal choice and terminates the
interaction, or she makes critiques by picking system-suggested critiques or deﬁning
critiques herself. If critiques were made, the system updates the recommendation(s)
and the list of suggested critiques (if provided) in the next interaction cycle. This
process continues until the user decides that she has found her most preferred product.
Most of existing systems fall into two speciﬁc branches: one is called single-item
system-suggested critiquing since it recommends one item at a time and guides users
to provide feedback by selecting a system-suggested critique; another is called k-item
user-initiated critiquing, because it provides multiple items during each recommendation cycle and a critiquing aid that assists users in choosing one product to be critiqued
and creating their self-speciﬁed critiquing criteria to the product. In the following, we
will introduce both approaches in detail with two typical applications as examples.
2.1 Single-item system-suggested critiquing
The FindMe system was the ﬁrst known single-item system-suggested critiquing system . It uses knowledge about the product domain to help users
preferences
are elicited
One or multiple
outcomes are
Systemsuggested and/or
user-initiated
critiquing
Fig. 1 The typical interaction model of a critiquing-based recommender system
L. Chen, P. Pu
navigate through the multi-dimensional space. An important interface component in
FindMe is called tweaking, which allows users to critique the current recommendation
by selecting one of the proposed simple tweaks (e.g., “cheaper”, “bigger” and “nicer”).
When a user ﬁnds the current recommendation short of her expectations and responds
to a tweak, the remaining candidates will be ﬁltered to leave only those candidates
satisfying the tweak.
The critique suggestions in FindMe are called unit critiques since each of them
constrains on a single feature at a time. More recently, a so-called dynamic critiquing
method has been developed with the
objective of automatically generating a set of compound critiques, each of which can
operate over multiple features simultaneously (e.g., “Different Manufacture, Lower
Resolution and Cheaper”). A live-user trial showed that the integration of the dynamic
critiquing method can effectively reduce users’ intention cycles from an average of
29 in purely applying unit critiques to 6 . The compound
critiques can also perform as explanations, revealing the remaining recommendation
opportunities except for the current product . Therefore, we use
the DynamicCritiquing system as the representative to illustrate the main components
that a single-item system-suggested critiquing system may comprise.
2.1.1 DynamicCritiquing
Figure 2 shows a sample DynamicCritiquing interface where both unit and compound
critiques are available to users as feedback options . It can be seen that the DynamicCritiquing interface mainly contains
three components: a single item as the current recommendation, a unit critiquing
area and a list of compound critiques. In the ﬁrst recommendation cycle, an item
that best matches the user’s initially stated preferences is returned, and then after
each critiquing action, a new item that satisﬁes the user’s critique as well as being
most similar to the previous recommended product will be shown as the current
recommendation.
In the unit critiquing area, the system determines a set of main features, one of
which users can choose to critique at a time. For each numerical feature (e.g., price),
two critiquing directions are provided: increasing the value (e.g., more expensive) or
decreasing it (e.g., cheaper), and for discrete features (e.g., manufacture) all of the
relevant options are displayed under a drop-down menu. Therefore, this area performs
more like a user-initiated unit critiquing support, rather than a limited small set of unit
critique suggestions as in FindMe systems.
The list of three compound critiques are automatically computed by discovering
the recurring subsets of unit differences between the current recommended item and
the remaining products using a data mining algorithm called Apriori . More concretely, each remaining product, except the current recommendation,
is ﬁrst converted into a critique pattern indicating its differences from the current
recommended product in terms of all main features (e.g., {(manufacture, =), (price,
<), (weight, >),…}). Since there will be a number of critique patterns representing all of the remaining products, the Apriori algorithm is employed to discover the
frequent association rules among features within these patterns. A set of compound
Interaction design guidelines
One recommended
User-initiated unit
critiquing
System-suggested
compound critiques
Fig. 2 The DynamicCritiquing interface
critique options (as the frequent association rules) will be then produced. For example,
supposing the occurrence of heavier laptops is highly frequently associated with the
occurrence of cheaper prices in the remaining items, a compound critique with the
form of {[weight >], [price <]} (i.e., heavier and cheaper) will be generated. Thus, the
DynamicCritiquing agent uses the Apriori algorithm to discover the highest recurring
compound critiques representative of a given data set. It then favors those candidates
with the lowest support values (“support value” refers to the percentage of products
that satisfy the critique). Such selection criterion was motivated by the fact that presenting critiques with lower support values provides a good balance between their
likely applicability to the user and their ability to narrow the search .
In addition to functioning as critique suggestions, the dynamically generated compound critiques have been also regarded as explanations exposing the recommendation
opportunities that exist in the available products . They may help users be familiar with the product domain and understand the
relationship among different features within the alternatives. Users can be then stimulated to express more preferences or be prevented from making retrieval failures
 .
2.2 K-item user-initiated critiquing
Instead of suggesting pre-computed critiques for users to select, the purely userinitiated critiquing approach focuses on showing examples and stimulating users to
deﬁne critiques themselves. It does not limit the size of critiques a user can manipulate during each cycle, so that the user can post either unit or compound critiques
L. Chen, P. Pu
over any combination of features with freedom. In fact, the purpose of this type of
critiquing support is to assist users in freely executing tradeoff navigation, which is
a process shown to improve users’ decision accuracy and conﬁdence . The ExpertClerk , ATA (Automated Travel
Assistant) and SmartClient were all examples of such systems. Nguyen et al.2004 realized the idea mainly to support on-tour
recommendations for mobile users.
Such system is mainly composed of two components: a recommender agent that
computes a set of k items that best match the user’s current preference model, and
a critiquing component that allows the user to actively create critiquing criteria and
then examine a new set of k tradeoff alternatives. ExpertClerk and ATA display three
items at a time, whereas SmartClient returned seven items in its recent versions. Users
can select any of the displayed items and navigate to products that offer tradeoff
potentials. As for the critiquing aid, ExpertClerk provides a natural language dialog
to request for users’ feedback, ATA stated that it developed a graphical interface but
without detailed description, and SmartClient has constantly improved the usability
of its critiquing facility through user evaluations. We have chosen a latest version of
SmartClient, called ExampleCritiquing, to explain the typical constructs of a k-item
user-initiated critiquing system.
2.2.1 ExampleCritiquing
SmartClient was originally developed as an online preference-based search tool for
ﬁnding ﬂights . Its elementary model is
the example-and-critiquing interaction, which was subsequently applied to product
catalogs of vacation packages, insurance policies, apartments, and more recent commercial products such as tablet PCs and digital cameras .
In the latest ExampleCritiquing system, the recommendation part can be further
divided into two sub-components: the ﬁrst set of recommendations computed according to the user’s initial preferences, and the set of tradeoff alternatives recommended
after each critiquing process. For example, for product catalogs of digital cameras
and tablet PCs, k items (e.g., k = 7) are displayed in both cases. The number k was
determined according to that discussed the optimal number of
displayed solutions based on catalog sizes.
In the critiquing panel (see Fig. 3), three radio buttons are next to each main feature,
facilitating users to choose to “keep” its value, “improve” it, or accept a compromised
value suggested by the system (i.e., via “Take any suggestion”). In particular, users
can freely compose compound critiques by combining criteria on any set of multiple features. The interface also supports users to perform simple similarity-based
critiquing (e.g., “show similar products with this one”) by just keeping all current
values, or deﬁne concrete value improvements on features , since it is in nature to
Interaction design guidelines
k recommended
items (k = 7)
The product user
selected to critique
User-initiated
critiquing facility
for creating unit or
Fig. 3 The ExampleCritiquing interfaces
facilitate a user to specify tradeoff criteria: improving on one or several attributes that
are important to her, while accepting compromised values on less important ones.
Tradeoff process involving only one feature (unit critique) or multiple features (compound critique) are respectively termed as simple and complex tradeoffs by Pu and
Kumar .
The search engine of computing recommended alternatives is adjusted for different
decision environments. For conﬁgurable products, it employs sophisticated constraint
satisfaction algorithms and models user preferences as soft constraints . For multi-attribute products, it is in theory grounded on the Weighted Additive
sum rule (WADD), a compensatory decision strategy for explicitly resolving con-
ﬂicting values . As required by WADD, the user’s preferences are
structured as a set of (attribute’s acceptable value, relative importance) pairs.
After a user speciﬁes her initial preferences, all alternatives will be ranked by their
weighted utilities, and the top k items best matching the user’s stated requirements will
L. Chen, P. Pu
be returned. Among the initial set of recommendations, the user either accepts a result,
or takes a near solution to activate the critiquing panel (by clicking on the button “Value
Comparison” along with the product, see Fig. 3). Once the critiquing criteria have been
built in the critiquing panel, the system will reﬁne the user’s preference model and
adjust the relative importance of all critiqued attributes (i.e., the weight of improved
attribute(s) will be increased and that of compromised attribute(s) will be decreased).
The search engine will then apply a combination of elimination-by-aspect (EBA) and
WADD strategy . The combined strategy begins with EBA to ﬁrst
eliminate products that do not reach the minimal acceptable value (i.e., cutoff) of the
improved attribute(s), and WADD is then applied to examine the remaining alternatives
in more detail to select ones that best satisfy all of the user’s tradeoff criteria. This
example-and-critiquing process completes one cycle of interaction, and it continues
as long as the user wants to reﬁne the results.
3 Control variables
In a summary, the components contained by both DynamicCritiquing and E xample-
Critiquing can be categorized into two independent variables: the number of recommendations that users could examine at a time based on which to perform critiquing,
and the critiquing aid by which users could specify speciﬁc feedback criteria. As
introduced before, two typical combinations of the two variables are single-item
system-suggested critiquing and k-item user-initiated critiquing, but there should be
more combination possibilities. In this section, we mainly discuss each variable’s
possible values.
3.1 Critiquing coverage (the number of recommendations)
Here we refer the critiquing coverage to the number of example products that are
recommended to users for them to choose the ﬁnal choice or critiqued object. In the
ExampleCritiquing system, multiple examples are displayed during each recommendation cycle, because its objective is to stimulate users to make self-initiated critiques.
On the contrary, the FindMe and DynamicCritiquing agent only returns one product
based on which system-suggested critiques are generated. This simple display strategy has the advantage of not overwhelming users with too much information, but it
deprives users of the right of choosing their own interested critiquing product, and
potentially brings them the risk of engaging in a longer interaction session.
The critiquing coverage can be further separated into two sub-variables: the number
of the ﬁrst round’s recommendations right after users’ initial preference speciﬁcation
(called NIR), and the number of items (i.e., tradeoff alternatives) in the later cycle after
each critiquing action (called NCR). The two numbers can be equal or different. For
example, in DynamicCritiquing and ExampleCritiquing, they are both equal to 1 or 7.
It is also possible to set them differently, for example, NIR as 1 and NCR as 7 if users
are only interested in one best matching product according to their initial preferences,
but would like to see multiple alternatives comparable with their critiqued reference
once critiquing a product.
Interaction design guidelines
3.2 Critiquing aid
After recommended items are computed and displayed to the user, the critical concern
now should be how to aid users in providing critiques to the item.
As introduced before, there are principally two types of critiquing aids: the systemsuggested critiquing approach that generates and proposes a limited set of critiques
for users to select, and the user-initiated critiquing approach that does not offer precomputed critiques, but allows users to create and compose critiques on their own. The
user-initiated method is more ﬂexible to support various critique forms. For example,
in the ExampleCritiquing interface, users can choose to make similarity-based critiquing (e.g., “ﬁnd some cameras similar to this one”), quality-based (e.g., “ﬁnd a
similar camera, but cheaper”) or even quantity-based (e.g., “ﬁnd something similar
to this camera, but at least $100 cheaper”). However, the system-suggested critiquing
approach is limited in this respect given that it is the system to determine the form,
not the user. In fact, FindMe and DynamicCritiquing only suggest quality-based critiques (e.g., “cheaper,” “bigger,” or “Different Manufacture, Lower Resolution and
Cheaper”) which were viewed as a compromise between the detail provided by value
elicitation and the ease of feedback associated with preference-based methods .
In reference to the DynamicCritiquing interface, the critiquing aid can contain
two sub-components: unit critiquing (on a single feature) and compound critiquing
(on multiple features simultaneously) which are respectively termed UC and CC in
the following content. Each sub-component can be in either system-suggested or userinitiated style. For example, the UC in FindMe is system-suggested
(e.g., “cheaper”, “bigger”), whereas in DynamicCritiquing, it is more user-initiated
since users can choose which feature to critique and how to critique it. The CC support
in DynamicCritiquing, however, is purely system-suggested because a limited set of
compound critiques is proposed for users to select (usually three suggestions as shown
in Fig. 2).
In the ExampleCritiquing interface, both UC and CC are supported in the userinitiated way. Speciﬁcally, the user can improve or compromise one feature at a time
and leave the others unchanged (i.e., unit critique), or combine any set of unit critiques
into a compound critique.
Therefore, considering the degree of user control, the user-initiated method should
allow for a higher level given that the control is largely in the hands of users, relative to
the system-suggested critiquing approach where users can only “select”, not “create”.
However, it is hard to assert which method would certainly perform better in improving
on real-users’ decision performance and subjective attitudes.
Table 1 lists all of the discussed variables, with DynamicCritiquing and Example-
Critiquing as examples to see their typical values.
4 User evaluation framework
We have conducted a series of three user trials, in order to understand the effect of these
variables on users’ actual decision behavior and subjective perceptions. The ﬁrst trial
L. Chen, P. Pu
Table 1 Summary of control variables in a critiquing-based recommender system and the main differences
between DynamicCritiquing and ExampleCritiquing in respect of these aspects
Critiquing coverage
Critiquing aid
initial recommendations
recommended items
after each
critiquing (NCR)
critiquing
critiquing (CC)
DynamicCritiquing
 
Single item
Single item
User-initiated
System-suggested
ExampleCritiquing
 
k items (k = 7)
k items (k = 7)
User-initiated
User-initiated
was a comparative user study of the two typical applications: DynamicCritiquing and
ExampleCritiquing, with the purpose of identifying which one would perform more
effectively. In the second trial, we made some changes on the two systems to make
them different only on one dimension, the critiquing aid, in order to observe the single
element’s inﬂuence. The third trial measured users’ performance in a hybrid critiquing
system where the two types of critiquing aids: system-suggested and user-initiated,
were combined on the same screen. Combining the results from these three trials, we
expected to reveal the effects of different independent variables on users’ decision
performance and quality.
Therefore, before carrying out these experiments, it was necessary to ﬁrst deﬁne
concrete dependent variables that we were to measure. We have established an evaluation framework aimed to contain all of key standards. In fact, identifying the appropriate criteria for evaluating the true beneﬁts of a recommender system is a challenging
issue. Related work has primarily focused on users’ objective interaction effort, such as
their interaction sessions and task completion time, while
placing less emphasis on what actual decision accuracy users can eventually achieve
and how much cognitive effort users perceive to exert. In fact, the accuracy-effort
model has long been studied in the domain of classical decision theories , and it has been broadly accepted that they are
both important to determine the fundamental user beneﬁts of a decision support, since
the system’s ideal goal should be to enable its users to obtain high level of decision
accuracy with low amount of effort .
In addition, a recommender system’s ability in increasing user trust and convincing
them of its recommendations, such as which camera to purchase, is also a crucial
factor, particularly meaningful when the system is applied in the e-commerce environment. Two main trust-inspired behavioral intentions (called trusting intentions)
include intention to purchase indicating whether the system could stimulate its users
to purchase a product, and intention to return referring whether the system could
prompt users to return to it for future use so that a long-term relationship is established .
Therefore, motivated by these requirements, we have classiﬁed them into three
categories of dependent variables in our evaluation framework: decision accuracy,
decision effort and trusting intentions (see Fig. 4).
Interaction design guidelines
Fig. 4 User evaluation
framework for critiquing-based
recommender systems
Trusting Intentions
Decision Effort
Objective Effort
Perceived Effort
Decision Accuracy
Intention to Purchase
Intention to Return
Critiquing-Based Recommender Systems
Objective Accuracy
Perceived Accuracy
4.1 Decision accuracy
The foremost criterion of evaluating a recommender system should be the decision
accuracy that it enables users to eventually achieve. If a user can target her ideal choice
with the system, it means that the system assisted her in reaching 100% decision
accuracy. In our experiments, we not only measured the objective accuracy that a
participant may obtain, but also her subjectively perceived accuracy (i.e., conﬁdence
in choice).
Objective accuracy
The objective accuracy was quantitatively measured by the fraction of participants
who switched to a different, better option than the one chosen with the system, when
they were asked to view all alternatives in the database. This procedure is known as the
switching task, and has been practically applied by researchers in marketing science
to measure consumers’ decision quality . A lower switching
fraction means that the system supports higher decision accuracy since most of users
stood by their choice with it. On the contrary, a higher switching fraction implies
that the recommender is not very capable of guiding users to locate what they truly
want. For expensive products, inaccurate tools may cause both ﬁnancial damage and
emotional burden to a decision maker.
Perceived accuracy
Besides objective accuracy, we also measured the degree of accuracy users subjectively perceived while using the system, which is also called decision conﬁdence
 . The conﬁdence judgment may potentially impact on users’
perception of the system’s competence and even their intention to purchase the chosen
product. This variable was quantitatively assessed by asking subjects to respond to a
statement (e.g., “I am conﬁdent that the product I just ‘purchased’ is really the best
L. Chen, P. Pu
Table 2 Questions to measure subjective perceptions
Measured subjective variables
Questions each responded on a 5-point Likert scale from
“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”
Perceived decision accuracy
I am conﬁdent that the product I just “purchased” is really
the best choice for me.
Perceived effort
I easily found the information I was looking for.
Looking for a product using this interface required too
much effort (reverse scale).
Intention to purchase
I would purchase the product I just chose if given the opportunity.
Intention to return
If I had to search for a product online in the future and an interface
like this was available, I would be very likely to use it.
I don’t like this interface, so I would not use it again (reverse scale).
choice for me”) on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly
agree” see Table 2.
4.2 Decision effort
According to the accuracy-effort framework , another important
criterion is the amount of decision effort users expended in making their choice with
the system. Similar to decision accuracy, we not only measured how much objective
effort users actually consumed, but also their perceived cognitive effort which we hope
would indicate the amount of subjective effort people exerted.
Objective effort
The objective effort further includes two dimensions: task time and interaction effort.
The task time is the total time a subject spent from she started using the system till she
made her ﬁnal choice. The interaction effort mainly considers the amount of interaction
cycles (e.g., critiquing cycles) that a user was involved. The two variables have been
widely used as main measurements in related work to evaluate their recommender
systems .
Perceived effort
Perceived effort refers to the psychological cognitive cost of information-processing.
It represents the ease with which the subject can perform the task of obtaining and
processing the relevant information in order to arrive at her decision. Since it is a
subjective variable, two uniﬁed scale items (e.g., “I easily found the information I was
looking for”) were used to quantify its value (see Table 2 of concrete questions).
4.3 Accuracy and effort
The objective and subjective assessments of both decision accuracy and decision effort
can not only show their respective values, but also allow us to understand how the
concepts are interrelated.
Interaction design guidelines
According to , individuals typically settle for imperfect accuracy of their decisions in return for a reduction in effort used. Empirical evidence also
shows that because feedback on effort expenditure tends to be immediate while feedback on accuracy is subject to delay and ambiguity, the use of decision aids does not
necessarily enhance decision-making quality, but merely leads individuals to reduce
effort .
On the other hand, recent research claimed that online users will be willing to make
more effort if they perceive more beneﬁts from the decision aid .
These statements drove us to address a critical question: what is the tradeoff relationship between accuracy and effort in our evaluated critiquing-based recommender
systems? In particular, we were interested in identifying how much accuracy users
could obtain with the system and the corresponding effort they were willing to expend.
4.4 Trusting intentions
Lack of trust has been demonstrated as one of the most frequently cited reasons
for consumers not purchasing from Internet vendors .
Therefore, we included both intention to purchase and intention to return , to measure whether the
system could contribute to building user trust regarding inspiring them to purchase
the chosen product or return to the system for repeated uses. All associated questions
came from existing literatures , where they had
been repeatedly shown to exhibit strong content validity (see Table 2).
5 User evaluations
5.1 Experiment design
In Sect. 3, we have discussed four independent variables (NIR, NCR, UC, and CC)
conﬁgurable in a critiquing-based recommender system (see Table 1). Each of them
may have two or more options. In order to reduce the complexity of our experiment
setup but still be capable of revealing these variables’ respective impacts via user
studies, we have conducted three trials (see Table 3).
User Trial 1
ThistrialwasdesignedtoidentifythegeneralperformancedifferencebetweenDynamicCritiquing (DC) and ExampleCritiquing (EC), so as to understand which typical system design would be more effective regarding the measured objective and subjective
variables. The results would predict some underlying beneﬁts of giving user control
over one or more design variables.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Table 3 The experiment design of three user-trials
User Trial 1
DynamicCritiquing (DC: NIR=1,
NCR=1, user-initiated UC,
system-suggested CC)
ExampleCritiquing (EC: NIR=7,
NCR=7, user-initiated UC and CC)
User Trial 2
Modiﬁed DynamicCritiquing (MDC:
NIR=1, NCR=7, user-initiated
UC, system-suggested CC)
Modiﬁed ExampleCritiquing (MEC:
NIR=1, NCR=7, user-initiated UC
User Trial 3
Hybrid critiquing (HC: NIR=1, NCR=7, system-suggested CC, user-initiated
UC and CC)
User Trial 2
In the second trial, we modiﬁed DC and EC (respectively termed as MDC and MEC in
this trial) to make them different only on their critiquing aids, in order to distinguish
this single element’s impact. Thus, modiﬁcations were made on their critiquing coverage (i.e., NIR and NCR), which were changed constant between the two systems.
Moreover, each system was modiﬁed on one sub-variable (either NIR or NCR) so that
it was feasible to compare the modiﬁed version with its original one in respect of the
inﬂuence of the single sub-variable’s change.
User Trial 3
A hybrid critiquing aid (abbreviated as HC) was evaluated in this trial to measure users’
critiquing behavior when both types of aids (system-suggested and user-initiated) were
presented to them on the same screen. Additionally, two between-subjects analyses,
in combination with second trial’s results, were done to show the respective effects of
system-suggested compound critiques and user-initiated critiquing facility on users’
decision quality and subjective perceptions.
Therefore, three elements were controlled in these user-trials: NIR (1 vs. k), NCR
(1 vs. k) (k = 7) and the critiquing aid (user-initiated UC plus system-suggested
CC, user-initiated for both UC and CC, or hybrid of system-suggested CC and userinitiated critiquing facility). Note that system-suggested unit critiques (from FindMe
approach) were not included because we mainly emphasized on compound-critique
suggestions owing to their dynamic and explanatory strengths. The analysis of each
trial’s results and their combination would likely help us to realize the most effective
design direction for each element.
5.1.1 Experiment procedure
Thethreeuser-trials basicallyobeyedthesameexperiment procedure. Anonlineexperiment framework was implemented, by which users would easily follow the trial and
all of their actions could be automatically recorded for data analysis. Except for the
fact that the evaluated systems were different between the three trials, user tasks were
practically identical.
Interaction design guidelines
More concretely, for each participant, s/he was ﬁrst asked to complete a demographic questionnaire (her/his age, gender, education, profession, online shopping
experience, etc.), followed by a brief reading of the user study’s objective. The participant was then pointed to the assigned system’s entry and instructed to begin. The main
user task was to “ﬁnd a product you would purchase if given the opportunity”. After
the choice was made, the participant was asked to ﬁll in a post-study questionnaire
about her/his perceived cognitive effort, decision conﬁdence and trusting intentions
(see Table 2). Then the system’s decision accuracy was measured by revealing all alternatives in the product catalog to the participant to see whether s/he prefers another
product or stands by the choice just made using the system. If s/he was involved in
a within-subjects experiment setup, the participant was further required to evaluate
another system with same tasks, and ﬁnally a post-question was asked about her/his
preference over which critiquing system s/he would like to use for future search and
why s/he preferred it to another.
5.1.2 Participants and product catalogs
Groups of subjects participating in these user-trials were randomly recruited from the
same population range (Master and PhD students in our university), so they represented a similar demographical distribution (see Table 4). As to product catalogs, all
evaluated critiquing systems were developed with two product datasets: a tablet PC
catalog comprising 55 products each described by 10 main features (manufacturer,
price, processor speed, weight, etc.), and a digital camera catalog of 64 products each
characterized by 8 main features (manufacturer, price, resolution, optical zoom, etc.).
All products were extracted from a real e-commerce website.
In the following, we describe each trial’s detailed setup and main ﬁndings.
5.2 User Trial 1: DynamicCritiquing vs. ExampleCritiquing
DynamicCritiquing and ExampleCritiquing are the names of the two compared typical applications. We could term them respectively as single-item system-suggested
Table 4 Demographical distributions of three trials’ participants
User trial 1 (36 subjects)
User trial 2 (36 subjects)
User trial 3 (18 subjects)
Male (86%), Female
Male (78%), Female
Male (94%), Female (6%)
Average age
Nationality
12 countries (Switzerland,
Romania, Spain, etc.)
10 countries (Switzerland,
France, Italy, etc.)
5 countries (Switzerland,
Spain, Indian, etc.)
Master (75%), Ph.D.
Master (81%), Ph.D.
Master (72%), Ph.D.
Online shopping
experience
Yes (81%), No (19%)
Yes (89%), No (11%)
Yes (78%), No (22%)
L. Chen, P. Pu
compound critiquing system and k-item user-initiated critiquing system, but for the
sake of simplicity, the abbreviations of their names are used henceforth (i.e., DC and
5.2.1 Setup
As introduced in Sect. 2 the initial interaction with both DC and EC is identical with
a preference speciﬁcation page to obtain users’ initial preferences. Then in DC, a
single item that best satisﬁes the stated preferences is shown at the top, accompanied by a user-initiated unit critiquing area and three system-suggested compound
critiques (see Fig. 2). Once a critique is posted, a new item will be returned with
updated critique suggestions. In EC, seven products that best match users’ initially
speciﬁed preferences will be returned. If a user ﬁnds her target choice among the
seven items, she can proceed to check out. However, if she likes one product (called
the reference product) but wants some of its aspects improved, she can proceed to the
critiquing interface to create her critiquing criteria (see Fig. 3). Subsequently, a new
set of seven items will be recommended for the user to compare with the reference
In both systems’ interfaces, users can view the product’s detailed speciﬁcations
with a “detail” link. Users can also save all satisfactory solutions in a “saved list” to
facilitate comparing them before checking out with a ﬁnal choice.
The user study was conducted in a within-subject design. Each participant evaluated the two applications one after the other. In order to avoid any carryover effect, we
developed four (2x2) experiment conditions. The manipulated factors are systems’
order (DC ﬁrst or EC ﬁrst) and product catalogs’ order (tablet PC ﬁrst or digital camera
ﬁrst). About 36 participants were evenly distributed into the four experiment conditions, resulting in a sample size of 9 subjects per condition cell. The same administrator
supervised the experiment for all of the participants.
5.2.2 Results analysis
The result analysis would let us know which typical combination of control variables
(DC: NIR = 1, NCR = 1, user-initiated unit critiquing and system-suggested compound critiques; and EC: NIR = 7, NCR = 7, user-initiated unit and compound
critiquing) could achieve a better result in terms of the measured variables: decision
accuracy, decision effort and trusting intentions. The analysis tool is paired samples
t-test, with estimated power of 83%1 inferring that 83% chance would be expected to
yield a signiﬁcant difference for each dependent variable if it exists.
Table 5 shows all of the mean values with standard deviations and degrees of
freedom, and Fig. 5 illustrates differences respecting subjective perceptions which
were rated on the same scale.
1 The power was computed given the recruited sample size (i.e., 36 subjects) and assumptions of “medium”
effect size and two-tailed 0.05 Alpha (see 
Interaction design guidelines
Table 5 Comparison of DC and EC regarding all of the measured variables
p value (df = 35)
DC (NIR = 1, NCR = 1,
user-initiated UC,
system-suggested CC)
EC (NIR = 7, NCR = 7,
user-initiated UC and CC)
Decision accuracy
47.2%(0.51)
86.1%(0.35)
Perceived accuracy
3.36(0.96)
3.97(0.65)
Time consumption
3.91(2.46)
4.25(2.10)
Critiquing cycles
7.64(8.58)
2.08(1.89)
Perceived effort
2.47(0.93)
2.14(0.76)
Intention to purchase
3.31(0.89)
3.78(0.72)
Intention to return
3.43(1.07)
4.11(0.93)
The bold values indicate that they are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 level
perceived accuracy
Average Rating Scale (from 1 to 5)
return intention
purchase intention
perceived effort
Fig. 5 Subjective perceptions with DC and EC
Decision accuracy and decision effort
The decision accuracy of EC was shown to be signiﬁcantly different (p < 0.01, t =
3.39) from that of DC. Actually, 86.1% of participants found their target choice using
EC. DC allowed a relatively lower decision accuracy of 47.2%, given that the remaining 52.8% users switched to a different, better choice when they were provided the
opportunity to view all products in the catalog.
Moreover, participants were more conﬁdent that the products they “purchased” with
EC were really the best choice for them (3.97 against 3.36 with DC on the 5-point
Likert scale, p < 0.01, t = 3.11), inferring that they truly perceived EC to provide a
higher level of decision accuracy.
It was then interesting to know how much effort users expended in achieving the
corresponding accuracy. As introduced in Sect. 4, the decision effort was measured by
two aspects: the objective effort including task completion time and interaction effort,
and the subjective effort psychologically perceived by users.
L. Chen, P. Pu
The average task completion time was 4.25min with EC versus 3.91min with DC,
but this slight difference is not signiﬁcant (p = 0.4, t = 0.84). As to the objective
interaction effort, we mainly measured the critiquing cycles referring to how many
times users consulted with the critiquing aid to reﬁne their preferences. The results
indicate that the participant was on average involved in 2.08 critiquing cycles with
EC, compared to 7.64 cycles with DC (p < 0.001, t = −4.21).
On the other hand, users perceived EC easier to use in ﬁnding information and more
efﬁcient in looking for a product, resulting in a signiﬁcantly lower cognitive effort of
2.14 versus 2.47 with DC (p = 0.05, t = 2).
Computation of the correlation between perceived accuracy and perceived effort
indicated that they are signiﬁcantly negatively associated (correlation=−0.464, p <
0.01), implying that once users experienced more accuracy beneﬁted from the critiquing system, they may perceive less cognitive effort even though more objective
effort was actually spent in making the choice.
Trusting intentions
As for two trusting intentions, although both systems obtained positive appraises, the
mean rates for EC are all signiﬁcantly higher.
Concretely, participants on average indicated higher level of intention to purchase
the product that they chose in EC, had they been given the opportunity (3.78 against
3.31 in DC, p < 0.01, t = 3.01), and higher level of intention to return to EC for
future use (4.11 versus 3.43, p < 0.001, t = 3.68; see Fig. 5). The results infer that
EC is more likely to convince its users to purchase products and to establish a strong
long-term relationship with the users.
5.2.3 User comments
Participants’ responses to the ﬁnal post-question (about their preference over which
system they would like to use in the future) show that most participants (63.9%)
subjectively preferred EC to DC. Each participant was further required to write her/his
brief voting reasons, so it was possible to analyze these written protocols to reveal EC
and DC’s respective advantages.
Each written comment was broken into episodes and each episode contained at most
one concept. For EC, there are in total 24 episodes, among which 45.8% (11/24) were
favorable arguments about EC’s critiquing coverage. That is, it returned more results
during each recommendation cycle than DC, making participants feel “easier to get
an overview of all the different products”, “easier to compare between products”, and
“easier to ﬁnd a product that suits my needs”. In the remaining episodes, 20.8% (5/24)
were that EC overall gave users a feeling of “having more control” and “freedom”.
12.5% (3/24) were particularly related to the critiquing aid (e.g., “there were more
choices and options for optimizing my choices”, “the value comparison2 is nice”).
12.5% (3/24) were attributed to the higher decision conﬁdence with EC, and 8.3%
2 The “value comparison” is the button clickable to activate the critiquing aid.
Interaction design guidelines
Table 6 Participants’ favorable arguments for DC and EC
Main reasons of voting for DC (13 votes)
Main reasons of voting for EC (23 votes)
Favoring system-suggested compound critiques (5/13)
More items were displayed at a time (11/24)
Easier to use and more intuitive (5/13)
More freedom and control (5/24)
Higher decision conﬁdence (2/13)
Favoring user-initiated critiquing aid (3/24)
Faster (1/13)
Higher decision conﬁdence (3/24)
Missing product features in DC (2/24)
(2/24) blamed DC on its missing product features (e.g., digital camera lacks memory
card information).
As for the main reasons behind favoring DC, 13 episodes were collected and 38.5%
(5/13) were associated with its system-suggested compound critiques (e.g., “I liked
the option to reﬁne searches with the three proposed criteria at the bottom of the
page”). Another 38.5% (5/13) appreciated the ease of use of DC (“more intuitive”,
“less overwhelming”, “more clear”, etc.), and remaining 15.4% (2/13) and 7.7% (1/13)
were respectively related to the feeling of higher decision conﬁdence (“I really ﬁnd
what I wanted”) and “faster” accessing speed.
Table 6 summarized all of the mentioned aspects and their contributions to each
system’s success. It can be seen that the advantages of EC were mainly placed on
its critiquing coverage (k-item display strategy) and user-initiated critiquing aid and
those of DC were grounded on its suggested compound critiques and simple interface
5.2.4 Discussion
Thus, this user-trial revealed the performance difference of two typical critiquing systems (DC and EC) which are respectively of varied values on control variables. Results
show that EC (k-item user-initiated critiquing) outperformed DC (single-item systemsuggested compound critiquing) on most measured variables: objective/subjective
accuracy, objective interaction effort and perceived effort, and two trusting intentions.
Further analysis of users’ written protocols uncovered their respective advantages.
In particular, the primary factor leading to EC’s success would be its combination of
both k-item strategy and user-initiated critiquing aid, which gave users a higher degree
of control in comparing products and composing critiquing criteria. On the other hand,
DC’s compound critique suggestions and simple interface design were also favored
by a certain percentage (around 1/3) of participants.
Inthenexttwotrials,wehaveaimedatidentifyingtheexactroleofeachindependent
element and exploring the best way of combining the two systems’ strengths so as to
allow for further improvements on users’ decision performance.
5.3 User Trial 2: Modiﬁed DC vs. Modiﬁed EC
In the second trial, both DC and EC were modiﬁed to return the same amounts of NIR
(i.e., the number of recommendations in the ﬁrst round) and NCR (i.e., the number
L. Chen, P. Pu
of recommendations in each of later critiquing cycles), so that the two systems were
kept different only on their critiquing aids. Speciﬁcally, each system was changed on
one sub-variable of critiquing coverage: DC was modiﬁed to return seven items after
each critiquing process (NCR = 7), and EC was modiﬁed to show one item during the
ﬁrst recommendation cycle (NIR = 1). The modiﬁed versions (MDC and MEC) were
hence assigned with equal NIR (i.e., 1) and NCR (i.e., 7).
As to the critiquing aid, no change was made, so MDC provides user-initiated
unit critiquing plus system-suggested compound critiques (as in the original DC), and
MEC supports purely user-initiated critiquing (as in EC).
Therefore, given this experiment design, we could not only reveal the single impact
of critiquing aid through the comparative measurement of MDC and MEC, but also
identify effective designs respectively for NIR and NCR by comparing the modiﬁed
versions with their original ones which were evaluated in the ﬁrst trial.
Moreover, the reason of normalizing NIR on 1 and NCR on 7 (rather than in the
opposite way) was essentially driven by the assumption that users may attach more
importance and attraction to tradeoff alternatives (according to their critiquing criteria)
than the initial recommendation (according to their initial preferences), since their
initial preference can be uncertain and erroneous . In addition,
because the emphasis of this study is the “critiquing aid”, it makes sense to introduce
its function to users as early as possible (such as in the ﬁrst recommendation cycle
to be right along with one recommended item), so that users would likely be well
informed and motivated to apply it whenever they think it is necessary.
5.3.1 Setup
The entry to both MDC and MEC is still a preference speciﬁcation page to get the user’s
initial preferences, and then one product that best matches the stated preferences will
be returned. In MDC, this product is accompanied by a user-initiated unit critiquing
area and a list of three compound critique suggestions (like Fig. 2), and in MEC,
it is followed by a user-initiated critiquing panel for the user to freely create her
own critiques (like Fig. 3). The user can either choose this recommended product
and “check out”, or make critiques in the accompanying critiquing area. In the latter
condition, MDC and MEC will then both return a set of seven items as tradeoff
alternatives best satisfying the user’s critiquing criteria. The user could continue to
perform critiques based on one product selected from these items (by clicking the
button “Value Comparison” to evoke the critiquing aid).
The second trial followed the same experiment design as the ﬁrst one: a withinsubject design. About 36 new participants were recruited (see Table 4), and they were
evenly assigned to one of the four experiment conditions: (MDC ﬁrst or MEC ﬁrst) x
(tablet PC ﬁrst or digital camera ﬁrst).
5.3.2 Results analysis
The second user trial was targeted to identify which speciﬁc critiquing aid design
could be more effective in positively affecting users’ decision accuracy, decision effort
and trusting intentions. We also measured participants’ actual critiquing application
Interaction design guidelines
Table 7 Comparison of MDC and MEC regarding all of the measured variables
p value (df = 35)
MDC (NIR = 1, NCR = 7,
user-initiated UC,
system-suggested CC)
MEC (NIR = 1, NCR = 7,
user-initiated UC and CC)
Decision accuracy
52.8%(0.51)
47.2%(0.51)
Perceived accuracy
3.67(0.83)
3.50(0.74)
Time consumption
2.68(1.93)
3.14(3.18)
Critiquing cycles
1.44(1.70)
1.58(1.15)
Perceived effort
2.38(0.97)
2.57(0.91)
Intention to purchase
3.28(0.78)
Intention to return
3.54(0.96)
3.40(1.01)
respectively with the two compared critiquing aids. The paired samples t-test was
still used to analyze the user data (see Table 7 for measured variables’ mean values,
standard deviations and degrees of freedom).
Similar to the trial 1, this study was also estimated with power 83% (conditional on
its sample size and assumed “medium” effect size), which indicates a high likelihood
that it would detect a signiﬁcant effect provided one exists.
Critiquing application
In MEC, around 88.9% of participants consulted with the user-initiated critiquing
support to specify their tradeoff criteria, and the remaining 11.1% participants chose
the ﬁrst recommended product as their choice (without any critiquing action). In MDC,
72.2% participants performed critiquing at least once.
Moreover, the in-depth analysis of unit and compound critiquing application in
MDC shows that users were more frequently self-initiated to build unit critiques than
selecting suggested compound critiques (the average application time of UC is 0.86
vs. 0.58 of CC, t = 1.19, p = 0.24). In MEC, the application frequency of the two
types of critiques, however, is much closer (0.64 vs. 0.58, t = 0.25, p = 0.80), and
there were some participants just searching for “similar products” without concrete
critiquing criteria (average application time = 0.34).
Decision accuracy, decision effort and trusting intentions
In terms of all the dependent variables contained in our evaluation framework, the
experimental results, surprisingly, indicated that there is no signiﬁcant difference
between MDC and MEC. More speciﬁcally, regarding objective and subjective decision accuracy, the two systems reached similar levels. The objective accuracy in MDC
is 52.8%, against 47.2% in MEC (t = 0.63, p = 0.53), and the perceived decision
accuracy is respectively 3.67 and 3.5 (t = 0.95, p = 0.35).
Participants in MDC and MEC also consumed nearly equal amount of objective
and subjective effort. For instance, the average difference of task time consumption
between the two systems is only 0.45 seconds (2.68 with MDC vs. 3.14 with MEC,
L. Chen, P. Pu
t = −1.3, p = 0.20), and the difference respecting critiquing cycles is 0.14 (1.44 vs.
1.58, t = −0.56, p = 0.58). Perceived effort is slightly higher with MEC but still not
at a signiﬁcant level (2.57 vs. 2.38 with MDC, t = 1.11, p = 0.27).
As for two trusting intentions, both systems obtained positive responses. That is,
the user on average intended to purchase the chosen product in MDC and MEC (3.5
vs. 3.28, t = 1.35, p = 0.19), and to return to the system for repeated uses (3.54 to
MDC vs. 3.40 to MEC, t = 0.93, p = 0.36). The rates on MDC are all slightly higher
but without signiﬁcant phenomena.
5.3.3 User comments
At the end of the trial, each participant was asked about her/his preference over the critiquing interface design (“comparing the two interfaces you just used, which interface
design do you relatively prefer to use?”), given that it is the only difference between
the two compared systems.
It was shown that 21 out of 36 (58.3%) participants voted MDC, and the remaining
41.7% preferred MEC. Analysis of users’ written protocols showed that the major
reason (9/21 = 42.9%) behind favoring MDC was due to its compound critique suggestions (see Table 8), which made the interface “interesting”, “more useful”, “easier
to use” and helped users “access to what they want quickly”. In the remaining favorable episodes, ﬁve (out of 21) were general opinions on the interface’s ease of use
and usability, ﬁve were attributed to the product domain (e.g., “because I am more
interested in a computer than a digital camera”) and two were negative impressions
of MEC (“it was not practical” and “it did not give me exactly the kind of product I
The reason behind voting for MEC was largely placed on its user-initiated critiquing
facility (10/15 = 66.7%). Subjects felt that “it allowed for very detailed reﬁnements”,
“gave the chance to reﬁne search in a more intuitive way”, enabled them to “have more
control over the new search terms” and was “quicker to go through many products”.
The remaining four episodes were respectively about the interface’s ease of use (2/15),
the product domain (2/15) and the negative impression of MDC (1/15).
Table 8 Participants’ favorable arguments for MDC and MEC
Main reasons of voting for MDC (21 votes)
Main reasons of voting for MEC (15 votes)
Favoring system-suggested compound critiques
(9/21): more options, global view of products’
characteristics, useful, enable to access to
products more quickly, etc.
Favoring user-initiated critiquing aid (10/15):
support detailed reﬁnement, more intuitive to
reﬁne, give more control over search, easier to
adjust parameters, with the “improve” option,
Easier to compare products and easier to
understand (5/21)
Easier to use and easier to ﬁnd the product’s information (2/15)
Familiar with the product domain (5/21)
Familiar with the product domain (2/15)
Negative impression of MEC (2/21): not
practical, inaccurate recommendations
Negative impression of MDC (1/15): take long to
change preferences
Interaction design guidelines
Therefore, users’ qualitative comments imply that system-suggested critiques and
user-initiated critiquing aid both provide substantial advantages, which should be
why the corresponding two systems (MDC and MEC) performed equally as actively
in inﬂuencing users’ decision quality and subjective assessments. In addition, since
MDC also contains user-initiated unit critiquing and for most measures it performed
slightly (but not signiﬁcantly) better than MEC, it infers that the combination of both
the user-initiated and system-suggested critiquing options would potentially obtain
more beneﬁts. We experimentally explored this issue in the third trial.
5.3.4 MDC vs. DC and MEC vs. EC
As mentioned in the beginning of this section, another goal of this user-trial was to
identify the effect of single change on critiquing coverage through the comparison of
the modiﬁed version with its original one (e.g., MDC vs. DC). Since participants in
trials 1 and 2 were recruited from a similar population range and they followed the
same experiment procedure, it was feasible to do two between-group analyses (MDC
vs. DC, and MEC vs. EC) ).
Tables 9 and 10 respectively show the comparison results of MDC and DC, and of
MEC and EC. For each system, 18 participants who used it at their ﬁrst order were
considered in order to avoid any carryover biases. All of the signiﬁcant values (p)
were computed by Student t-test assuming unequal variances.
The only difference between MDC and DC is on their NCR (the number of recommended items after each critiquing action). MDC increased it from one to seven. The
results indicate that due to this change, participants expended signiﬁcantly less time
and effort in making their ﬁnal choice. Regarding the other variables such as objective accuracy, decision conﬁdence and trusting intentions, there was no signiﬁcant
The change from EC to MEC was the decrease of the number of the ﬁrst round’s
recommendations (NIR) from seven to one. Comparison analysis shows that this
decrease signiﬁcantly impacted subjects’ objective/subjective decision accuracy, perceived effort and two trusting intentions in a negative manner, while the task time was
reduced. Therefore, it implies that the ﬁrst set of items recommended according to the
user’s initial preferences should be a very important factor positively inﬂuential to the
user’s subjective perceptions of the system, which is contrary to our assumption when
setting NIR as 1 in the experiment design.
5.3.5 Discussion
The second trial mainly showed that when both systems (DC and EC) were different
only on their critiquing aids, users on average performed nearly identically in both
conditions. More speciﬁcally, the user-initiated unit critiquing plus system-suggested
compound critiques (MDC) and user-initiated unit and compound critiquing support
(MEC) enabled participants to reach similar levels in terms of decision accuracy,
decision effort and trusting intentions. Users’ written protocols qualitatively revealed
their respective strengths: MDC provides suggestions that accelerated users’ decision
L. Chen, P. Pu
Table 9 The comparison of DC and MDC (mean and SD for each dependent variable)
Decision accuracy
Decision effort
Trusting intentions
Objective accuracy
Perceived accuracy
Task time (mins)
Critiquing cycles
Perceived effort
Purchase intention
Return intention
DC (NCR=1)
33.3% (0.49)
3.5 (0.62)
0.5 (2.75)
9.89 (9.86)
2.67 (0.94)
3.17 (0.86)
3.36 (0.97)
MDC (NCR=7)
50% (0.51)
3.5 (0.92)
3.22 (2.2)
2.39 (1.06)
3.22 (0.88)
3.44 (1.11)
p value (df)
0.324 (34)
0.039 (32)
0.002 (18)
0.413 (33)
0.849 (34)
0.812 (33)
The bold values indicate that they are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 level
Table 10 The comparison of EC and MEC (mean and SD for each dependent variable)
Decision accuracy
Decision effort
Trusting intentions
Objective accuracy
Perceived accuracy
Task time (mins)
Critiquing cycles
Perceived effort
Purchase intention
Return intention
EC (NIR=7)
77.8% (0.43)
4.06 (0.42)
4.33 (2.2)
1.44 (1.42)
1.86 (0.7)
3.89 (0.68)
4.42 (0.86)
MEC (NIR=1)
38.9% (0.50)
3.33 (0.69)
2.88 (1.28)
1.56 (0.98)
2.69 (1.02)
3.11 (0.76)
3.39 (1.11)
p value (df)
0.017 (33)
0.001 (28)
0.023 (27)
0.787 (30)
0.008 (30)
0.003 (34)
0.004 (32)
The bold values indicate that they are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 level
Interaction design guidelines
process and made the critiquing action easier, and MEC allows for higher user-control
and detailed preference reﬁnement.
Combining with the ﬁrst trial’s results, we become clearer about the key factor
for EC’s success in the ﬁrst trial. That is, it should be largely attributed to its multiitem display strategy against single-item in DC, given the fact that the difference on
their critiquing aids did not produce any signiﬁcant impacts as shown in the second
study. Actually, with the two trials’ user data, we found that the increase of NCR can
signiﬁcantly reduce users’ objective effort including time consumption and critiquing
cycles, and the decrease of NIR can signiﬁcantly impair decision accuracy and all of
measured subjective perceptions. Therefore, it infers that both NCR and NIR should
be ideally kept at k (k > 1) as in the original EC.
5.4 User Trial 3: hybrid critiquing aid
The ﬁnal user trial investigated how to further improve on the critiquing interface,
in consideration of the respective advantages of system-suggested critiques and userinitiated critiquing derived from above two user-trials’ results. Analysis of participants’ comments revealed that the best approach would be to synthesize them in a
single system, so that the hybrid critiquing aid would support an optimal level of usercontrol: users can have the freedom to choose whether specifying their own critiquing
criteria, or selecting the suggested critiques if one of them matches their desires.
Therefore, in this trial, we measured users’ critiquing behavior in such hybrid
critiquing system (HC) that combines the critiquing aids from both DC and EC on
the same screen. The hypothesis was that the hybrid system would outperform the
uncombined exclusive approaches, since it enables users to have more freedom in
choosing the type of critiquing support they are willing to use in a certain situation.
5.4.1 Setup
Figure 6 shows the sample of the hybrid critiquing interface. The proposed critiques
are listed under the critiqued product and the bottom is the user-initiated critiquing area
with functions to facilitate creating either unit or compound critiques by users themselves. Once a critique was posted, the recommender algorithm is run adaptive to the
type of critiques users made. Speciﬁcally, it applies similarity and compatibility selectionstrategyifthedynamic-critiquingbasedcritiquesuggestionwaspicked , and employs EBA+WADD (elimination-by-aspect plus weighted additive sum rule) ranking mechanism if the critique was composed in the user-initiated
critiquing panel.
The system returns one initial recommendation (NIR = 1) and seven items after
each critiquing (NCR = 7) as MDC and MEC did, so that it is feasible to compare it
with both MDC and MEC only in respect of their critiquing aids’ difference. Among
the recommended item(s), if the user ﬁnds her target choice, she can proceed to check
out. Otherwise, if she likes one product but wants some values improved, she can
resume a new critiquing cycle. Similar to previously implemented systems, the hybrid
L. Chen, P. Pu
The product being
System-suggested
compound critiques
User-initiated
critiquing facility
Fig. 6 A hybrid critiquing interface with both system-suggested compound critiques and user-initiated
critiquing facility
one also provides the product’s detailed speciﬁcations accessible by a “detail” link
and a “save list” for the user to record products that interest her.
We randomly recruited 18 new volunteers from the same population range as in
trial 1 and 2 (see Table 4). Each of them was required to evaluate one system: the
hybrid critiquing with the main task of “ﬁnd a product you would purchase if given
the opportunity”. Each participant was randomly assigned one product domain (tablet
PC or digital camera) to search. After the choice was made, the participant was asked
to ﬁll in a post-study questionnaire about her/his perceived cognitive effort, decision
conﬁdence, and trusting intentions. Then her/his objective decision accuracy was measured by revealing all products to the participant to determine whether s/he prefers
another product in the catalog or stands by the choice that was just made with the
hybrid critiquing system.
5.4.2 Results analysis
Critiquing application
Amongthe18participants,88.9%conductedself-initiatedcritiquingand44.4%picked
the compound critique suggestions at least once. On average, the application time of
user-initiated critiquing per user is 2.5 against 1.1 of system-suggested compound
critiques (t = 2.11, p < 0.01 by paired-samples t-test). In addition, around 36% of
user-initiated critiques were compound critiques that involved maximal 7 features at
a time, 55.6% were unit critiques (one feature to be improved or compromised) and
8.9% were similarity-based critiquing without exact criteria.
Interaction design guidelines
Ordinal Critiquing Cycles
Critiquing Application (Number of
Decision Accuracy (%)
System-Suggested CC
User-Initiated Critiquing
Decision Accuracy
Fig. 7 Critiquing application in the hybrid critiquing interface on a per cycle basis
Figure 7 illustrates the critiquing application frequency on a per cycle basis. The left
vertical axis is the number of users who applied system-suggested compound critiques
or user-initiated critiquing facility in the corresponding cycle. It refers to those people
who did not stop before that cycle and continued making critiques. The right vertical
axis is the aggregated decision accuracy. It can be observed that during 84.6% (11/13)
of maximal critiquing cycles, the number of users who created critiques on their own
is all greater than (during 8 cycles) or equal to (3 cycles) the number of ones picking
suggested critiques.
Another ﬁnding is that 83.3% of participants ended their session by utilizing the
self-initiated critiquing feature. It infers that system-suggested critiques may be more
useful in the earlier cycles when users are less certain about their preferences or
have a superﬁcial understanding of the product domain. Later on, once users obtain
a certain degree of product knowledge and what they truly want, they will be more
likely self-motivated to make their own critiques that ultimately lead to their ﬁnal
Decision accuracy, decision effort and trusting intentions
The objective decision accuracy in the hybrid system was 66.7%, because 12 participants (out of 18) stuck with their choice by using the system when they had a chance
to view all of the alternatives (see Fig. 7 for the aggregated of decision accuracy with
the increase of critiquing cycles). We further examined the accuracy distribution corresponding to users’ critiquing application. The results indicate that 50% of decision
accuracy was contributed from participants who performed both system-suggested CC
and self-initiated critiquing, 41.67% from ones only applying self-initiated critiquing
and 8.33% from those who did not make any critiquing (the initial recommended item
L. Chen, P. Pu
was their choice). This distribution exhibits a signiﬁcant phenomenon (p = 0.03 by
Chi-square test).
As for the perceived decision accuracy, the average rate is above 3 indicating that
most of users (i.e., 88.9%) were conﬁdent that their choice was the best with the hybrid
critiquing system (mean = 4, median = 4).
In terms of the objective decision effort, the participant on average consumed
5.52min and 2.83 critiquing cycles. Moreover, responses to questions related to perceived effort show that they subjectively perceived a low level of cognitive effort
(mean = 2.06, median = 2).
Analysis of users’ answers to trusting intentions indicated that most of participants
expressed positive intention to purchase their chosen products (61.1% users, mean =
3.44, median = 4) and positive intention to return to the system for future use (77.8%
users, mean = 4.06, median = 4.5).
5.4.3 HC vs. MDC and HC vs. MEC
The hybrid system was further compared with MDC and MEC due to their exclusive
differences on the critiquing aid (NIR = 1, NCR = 7 in these three systems). Concretely, 18 subjects who used MDC and 18 who used MEC at their ﬁrst order were
respectively compared with the 18 participants using the hybrid critiquing system
(HC). Two between-group analyses were conducted using Student t-test assuming
unequal variances.
HC’s only deﬁning difference from MDC is that it provides user-initiated critiquing
facility for creating compound critiques (U-CC) while MDC does not, and the only
difference from MEC is that it contains system-suggested compound critiques (S-CC)
but MEC does not. Therefore, by comparing HC with MDC and MEC respectively,
we could reveal the respective role of U-CC and S-CC in the hybrid system, and more
importantly understand whether HC could perform better than both MDC and MEC
since it provides a combination of their critiquing aids.
Table 11 lists the comparison results of HC and MDC, which show that owing
to the add-on element U-CC in HC, users exhibited signiﬁcantly higher decision
conﬁdence and return intention, although they spent more time and critiquing cycles.
The application frequency of critiquing facilities that are provided by both systems did
not signiﬁcantly vary (system-suggested CC: 1.11 in HC vs. 0.61 in MDC, p = 0.12;
user-initiated UC: 0.78 in HC and 0.89 in MDC,p = 0.74), inferring that participants
did take extra time and critiquing effort with U-CC while using HC, which may directly
lead to their increased accuracy perception and intention to return.
The comparison between HC and MEC (see Table 12) also shows similar results
regarding S-CC. That is, its appearance stimulated users to reach signiﬁcantly higher
subjective perceptions including decision conﬁdence and return intention, although
more time and critiquing effort were expended. The extra objective effort was also
found mostly consumed with S-CC, since the user-initiated critiquing that is supported by both systems was applied at around equal frequency (1.72 in HC vs. 1.56
in MEC, p = 0.64). The objectively consumed effort, however, did not affect users’
subjective effort perception. The perceived effort was in fact signiﬁcantly lower in HC
Interaction design guidelines
Table 11 The comparison of MDC and HC (mean and SD for each dependent variable)
Decision accuracy
Decision effort
Trusting intentions
Objective accuracy
Perceived accuracy
Task time (mins)
Critiquing cycles
Perceived effort
Purchase intention
Return intention
MDC (without U-CC)
2.39(1.06)
3.22(0.88)
3.44(1.11)
HC (with U-CC)
66.7% (0.49)
5.52 (3.67)
2.83 (2.28)
2.06 (0.68)
3.44 (0.86)
4.06 (0.92)
p value (df)
0.324 (34)
0.052 (26)
0.030 (28)
0.048 (29)
0.273 (29)
0.447 (34)
0.081 (33)
The bold values indicate that they are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 level
Table 12 The comparison of MEC and HC (mean and SD for each dependent variable)
Decision accuracy
Decision effort
Trusting intentions
Objective accuracy
Perceived accuracy
Task time (mins)
Critiquing cycles
Perceived effort
Purchase intention
Return intention
MEC (without S-CC)
38.9% (0.50)
3.33 (0.69)
2.88 (1.28)
1.56 (0.98)
2.69 (1.02)
3.11 (0.76)
3.39 (1.11)
HC (with S-CC)
66.7% (0.49)
5.52 (3.67)
2.83 (2.28)
2.06 (0.68)
3.44 (0.86)
4.06 (0.92)
p value (df)
0.100 (34)
0.002 (31)
0.009 (21)
0.040 (23)
0.035 (30)
0.225 (34)
0.058 (33)
The bold values indicate that they are signiﬁcant at the 0.1 level
Table 13 Correlations between objective and subjective variables (by Pearson’s Correlation)
Critiquing
Objective accuracy
0.361∗∗∗(0.000)
0.138∗(0.081)
−0.094(0.233)
−0.310∗∗∗(0.000)
0.319∗∗∗(0.000)
0.293∗∗∗(0.000)
Perceived accuracy
0.361∗∗∗(0.000)
0.087(0.270)
−0.032(0.682)
−0.533∗∗∗(0.000)
0.476∗∗∗(0.000)
0.521∗∗∗(0.000)
0.138∗(0.081)
0.087(0.270)
0.392∗∗∗(0.000)
0.057(0.472)
0.033(0.678)
0.157∗∗(0.047)
Critiquing cycles
−0.094(0.233)
−0.032(0.682)
0.392∗∗∗(0.000)
0.146∗(0.064)
−0.032(0.686)
−0.050(0.523)
Perceived effort
−0.310∗∗∗(0.000)
−0.533∗∗∗(0.000)
0.057(0.472)
0.146∗(0.064)
−0.405∗∗∗(0.000)
−0.620∗∗∗(0.000)
Purchase intention
0.319∗∗∗(0.000)
0.476∗∗∗(0.000)
0.033(0.678)
−0.032(0.686)
−0.405∗∗∗(0.000)
0.336∗∗∗(0.000)
Return intention
0.293∗∗∗(0.000)
0.521∗∗∗(0.000)
0.157∗∗(0.047)
−0.050(0.523)
−0.620∗∗∗(0.000)
0.336∗∗∗(0.000)
***Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed); ** at the 0.05 level (2-tailed); * at the 0.1 level (2-tailed)
L. Chen, P. Pu
than in MEC, inferring that the integration of system-suggested critiques will likely
save users’ cognitive critiquing effort.
5.4.4 Discussion
The ﬁnal user-trial studied users’ decision behavior in a hybrid critiquing system that
combines critiquing aids from both DC and EC on the same screen. It was observed
that users behaved more actively in creating their own criteria with the self-initiated
critiquing aid, relative to their application of system-suggested critiques. Eventually,
the hybrid critiquing system enabled its users to obtain high level of decision accuracy
and subjective perceptions.
Furthermore, by respectively comparing the hybrid critiquing interface with MDC
and MEC, the respective roles of user-initiated compound critiquing (U-CC) and
system-suggested compound critiques (S-CC) were empirically validated. Both of
them were shown to signiﬁcantly contribute to enhancing users’ decision conﬁdence
and return intention and enabling the hybrid system to outperform MDC and MEC
with respect to the two important subjective aspects.
5.5 Other results: relationships between objective and subjective variables
We collected totally 90 users’ data from the three trials, including their objective/
subjective decision accuracy, objective/subjective decision effort, and trusting intentionswiththeevaluatedsystems.Basedonthecollection,wecalculatedthecorrelations
between the objective and subjective variables contained in our evaluation framework,
with the aim to see whether they were signiﬁcantly related to each other, and especially whether the improvement on users’ objective performance could have signiﬁcant
impact on their subjective perceptions. In particular, it would be interesting to know
whether objective decision accuracy and effort are respectively positively associated
with users’ subjectively perceived accuracy and cognitive effort, and how subjective
accuracy/effort further inﬂuences users’ trusting intentions with the system.
Table 13 gives the coefﬁcient values by Pearson’s Correlation. It shows that most of
the variables were signiﬁcantly positively or negatively correlated, except the relationship between objective decision effort and some subjective perceptions. Speciﬁcally,
both task time and critiquing cycles did not show signiﬁcant correlations with perceived accuracy and purchase intention. Moreover, there is no signiﬁcant relationship
between task time and perceived effort, between critiquing cycles and objective accuracy, and between critiquing cycles and return intention. These results imply that
the decrease of objective decision effort is not likely to result in increases in uses’
subjective perceptions, and vice versa.
We further calculated standardized path coefﬁcients to reveal these variables’ causal
relationships (Fig. 8). The path regression coefﬁcient measures the extent of the effect
of one variable on another in the path model using a correlation matrix as the input.
Our results indicate that the objective decision accuracy is highly signiﬁcantly
associated with users’ perceived accuracy (b = 0.38, p < 0.01), implying that the
increased level of a system’s recommendation accuracy will likely have a signiﬁcantly
Interaction design guidelines
Intention to
Critiquing
Intention to
Objective Variables
Subjective Variables
Fig. 8 Standardized path coefﬁcients and explained variances for the measured variables (** indicating
the coefﬁcient is at the p < 0.01 signiﬁcant level, * at the p < 0.1 level; explained variance R2 appearing
in italics over the box)
positive effect on users’ decision conﬁdence. Perceived decision accuracy was further
found signiﬁcantly positively related to users’ intention to purchase (b = 0.38, p <
0.01) and intention to return (b = 0.29, p < 0.01), which suggests that if a user is
more conﬁdent that she made the best choice, she will more likely purchase the chosen
product and return to the recommender system for future search.
The two trusting intentions are also signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the user’s perceived
cognitive effort (b = −0.22, p < 0.01 for intention to purchase, and b = −0.51, p <
0.01 for intention to return), indicating that the decrease of subjective effort in the
decision process will also likely lead to increases in purchase and return intentions. In
fact, both perceived accuracy and perceived decision effort account for approximately
19% and 35% respectively of the variance in intention to purchase (R2 = 0.19) and
intention to return (R2 = 0.35) ). 13% of the variance in perceived accuracy (R2 = 0.13)
can be further explained by objective decision accuracy.
The path coefﬁcient from actual task time to perceived effort does not show a
signiﬁcant relationship (b = 0, p = 0.996), and the number of critiquing cycles is
marginally signiﬁcantly associated with the perceived effort (b = 0.15, p = 0.085).
Therefore, even though less task time is spent on the interface, it may not predict that
users perceive the interface to be less demanding, whereas the saving of interaction
cycles will be relatively effective to affect effort perception.
6 Practical implications
To our knowledge, our study is the ﬁrst one to address user-control issues for critiquingbasedrecommendersystems.Wemainlyinvestigatedtwocrucialelements:thenumber
of items that are returned during each recommendation cycle to be critiqued (i.e., critiquing coverage), and the critiquing aid by which users can specify concrete feedback
criteria. Three user-trials were conducted to evaluate systems with different combinations of the two elements’ possible conﬁgurations, and according to these trials’ results,
L. Chen, P. Pu
we revealed their respective impacts on users’ decision performance and subjective
perceptions.
Other researchers have also studied control elements for some preference elicitation
systems. For instance, Ariely studied the role of information ﬂow control in
consumers’ decision-making and preferences. The information ﬂow control means
users can be free to choose which pieces of information (e.g., which camera and
which attribute of the camera) to view and for how long. Experimental results show that
controlling the information ﬂow can help consumers better match their preferences,
have better memory and knowledge about the domain and be more conﬁdent in their
judgment, but it takes the risk of creating demands on processing resources and having
detrimental effects on consumers’ ability to utilize information. As for collaborative
ﬁltering based recommender systems, McNee et al. found that asking users to
rate items out of their own selection in the sign up process resulted in more accurate
user preference models and user loyalty to the system, compared to asking them to
rate the system-proposed items.
However, few works have researched the role of user control in the conversational
recommender system, which kind of system indeed demands high involvement from
users to participate. The degree of control over the process of specifying preferences
and providing feedback should be essentially associated with the levels of accuracy
and subjective perceptions users can reach.
The ﬁndings of our empirical studies strongly support our overall suggestions for
improving the current critiquing-based recommender system, in terms of how to design
the critiquing coverage and the critiquing aid. In addition, we contribute an evaluation
framework applicable for the precise measurement of a recommender system’s true
beneﬁts to its users.
Critiquing coverage
Combining the results from the ﬁrst and the second trials showed that recommending
multiple k items (k = 7 in our experiments) for users to select a critiqued reference
product performed more effectively against showing just one. Speciﬁcally, multiple
NCR (the number of recommended items after each time users posted critiquing criteria) was found to signiﬁcantly save users’ task time and critiquing effort, and multiple
NIR (the number of recommendations in the ﬁrst cycle based on users’ initial preferences) signiﬁcantly improved users’ objective/perceived decision accuracy, perceived
effort and trusting intentions. Subjects also qualitatively commented that the multiitem display strategy made them feel to be of more freedom in comparing different
products, choosing critiqued object and speeding up the decision process, relative to
the single-item display.
Critiquing aid
As to the critiquing aid that supports the speciﬁcation of concrete feedback criteria, a
hybrid critiquing interface, that combines both system-suggested compound critiques
and a user-initiated critiquing facility, was found to outperform the uncombined exclusiveapproachesparticularlyinenhancingusers’subjectiveperceptions.Actually,users
Interaction design guidelines
reacted actively to both types of critiquing aids in the hybrid interface, and consumed
a certain amount of objective effort with each of them, with the resulting beneﬁt of
obtaining a higher level of decision conﬁdence. Moreover, they expressed stronger
intention to return to the hybrid system for future use. The respective advantages of
the two types of critiquing supports were also revealed: system-suggested compound
critiques provide a global view of available products and make the critiquing process
simpler and quicker, and the user-initiated critiquing support allows for detailed reﬁnement of preferences and more user control over specifying users’ own critiquing criteria. Therefore, the hybrid critiquing interface, where users can have much more
freedom in choosing which support they would like to apply at a time, should be ideally achievable. The user-trials experimentally proved its signiﬁcantly positive effect
on improving two important subjective standards: perceived decision accuracy and
return intention.
User evaluation framework
Another contribution of our work is the evaluation framework we have established
containing key criteria for assessing a critiquing-based recommender system. It was
grounded on the accuracy-effort model from the classical decision theory . We extended it to include more subjective variables for measuring accuracy/effort perceptions and trust-inspired behavioral intentions. More concretely, decision accuracy and decision effort are not only measured by traditional objective manners, but also subjectively deﬁned regarding how users perceive the accuracy of their
choice and the cognitive effort of information-processing. Two subjective intentions
induced by user trust were also contained. One is the intention to purchase, measuring whether the system could convince its users to purchase the chosen product,
and another is the intention to return about whether a long-term relationship could
be potentially built between the user and the system. We believe that this evaluation
framework will be certainly helpful for the evaluation of other types of online recommender systems. Related researchers may also beneﬁt from the assessment procedures
and questions we have developed through our practical experiences.
The causal relationships between objective and subjective variables were additionally identiﬁed based on all of user data collected from the three trials. Users’ decision
conﬁdence was found to be positively affected by objective decision accuracy, and perceived cognitive effort was marginally inﬂuenced by the number of critiquing cycles
users underwent in locating their ﬁnal choice. Furthermore, increased perceived accuracy or decreased cognitive effort will likely lead to increases in intention to purchase
and intention to return. Sharing these results and methods may potentially stimulate
more researches in this respect.
7 Limitations & future work
In the third trial, we found that participants more actively created critiques on their
own relative to their application frequency of system-suggested compound critiques,
inferring that the critique suggestion may have a poor prediction on users’ true needs.
L. Chen, P. Pu
Therefore, in the future, we are interested in exploring how to improve the prediction
accuracy of system-proposed critiques to make them more accurately match users’
desired feedback criteria, and investigating whether this improvement will in practice
have signiﬁcant impact on saving users’ critiquing effort.
Another issue arising from our experiment setup is whether it was valid to perform
comparisons (i.e., between-group analyses) among different user-trials given that they
were conducted at different time (with average four or ﬁve months elapsed between).
As a matter of fact, it is that the results from one trial did motivate us to conduct
a following-up study in order to verify the signiﬁcance of some of its interesting
observations. In order to ensure the whole experiment’s validity, we have obeyed
standard requirements for the comparison of multiple trials, which include recruiting
participants from the same range of population and asking them to follow uniform
experimental procedure. In the future, it will be desirable to conduct a validation
study where all of the varied conditions are comprised in a single trial.
Moreover, the role of system-suggested unit critiques has not been addressed in our
studies, since our focus is mainly compound critique suggestions due to their dynamic
and explanatory features. For the future, it should be of interest to perform more user
evaluations investigating whether unit critique suggestions will be also helpful to be
integrated in the hybrid critiquing interface.
It is also meaningful to study NIR (i.e., the number of initial recommendations)
and NCR (i.e., the number of displayed items after each critiquing) for different circumstances. Future work includes further investigation of their optimal setups being
adaptive to the product catalog as well as the screen size. For example, Nguyen et
al.2004 suggested changing the amount of returned items dependent on the mobile
device’s screen length in order to reduce users’ scrolling effort.
As for the user-scale of our experiments, we recruited in total 90 university students,
and each of them was required to seriously imagine s/he was about to “purchase” a
product with the assigned system. The demographic variety may be limited, such as the
low percentage of female participants, but the experimental results provided promising
design guidelines. We intend to further verify the scalability and generality of our
ﬁndings by recruiting more females, and also making the source of participants as
diverse as possible in terms of the age, cultural background, education and profession.
We also want to integrate our technologies into a real e-commerce platform on which
users could make genuine purchasing decisions.
8 Conclusion
In conclusion, in this paper, we studied how to design effective components for
critiquing-based recommender systems in order to assist users in providing feedback to
recommended items and guide them to efﬁciently target at their best choice. Through
a series of three user-trials, we have investigated two crucial control elements: critiquing coverage and critiquing aid, and investigated their respective inﬂuences on
users’ decision accuracy, decision effort, and trusting intentions.
The ﬁrst trial compared two typical existing applications: DynamicCritiquing that
suggests one item during each recommendation cycle and a list of system-suggested
Interaction design guidelines
compound critiques for users to select as improvement to the recommended item,
and ExampleCritiquing which returns multiple items at a time and provides a userinitiated critiquing facility to assist users in freely creating their own tradeoff criteria. Results show that ExampleCritiquing (EC) performed signiﬁcantly better than
DynamicCritiquing (DC) in improving users’ objective/subjective accuracy, reducing
their interaction effort and cognitive effort, and increasing their trust-inspired purchase
and return intentions.
In the second trial, both EC and DC were modiﬁed so that the only differing factor was their critiquing aids. Although there is no signiﬁcant measurement difference
between the two modiﬁed versions, participants’ written comments revealed their
respective strengths: system-suggested compound critiques made users feel of obtaining more knowledge of remaining recommendation opportunities and being easier
to make critiques; user-initiated critiquing aid allowed for detailed preference reﬁnement and higher user-control over composing users’ own searching criteria. Moreover,
the signiﬁcant effects of k-NIR (k recommendations in the ﬁrst round) and k-NCR
(k recommended items after each critiquing action) were identiﬁed (k = 7 in our
experiments). That is, k-NIR was signiﬁcantly contributive to improving users’ decision accuracy and trusting intentions, and k-NCR performed effectively in saving
users’ objective effort including task time and critiquing cycles. In addition, it implies
that this multi-item display strategy should be the key factor leading to EC’s success
in the ﬁrst trial.
The third trial evaluated user performance in a hybrid critiquing interface that
combines both system-suggested critiques and user-initiated critiquing facility on the
same screen. It was shown that users acted actively to both types of critiquing supports.
Furthermore, in comparison with user data in the system without system-suggested
compound critiques or the one without user-initiated compound critiquing support, the
hybrid system enabled users to reach signiﬁcantly higher levels of decision conﬁdence
and return intention.
Practicalimplicationswereﬁnallyderivedfromallofexperimentalresultsregarding
the breadth of recommendational choice and the locus of user-initiative. We suggest
that a critiquing-based recommender system should better return multiple recommended items at a time, especially during the ﬁrst recommendation cycle, for users
to determine their own interested critiquing object. Once users have been given such
multiple choices, it should offer them additionally a hybrid critiquing interface with
two types of critiquing aids: system-suggested critiques and user-initiated critiquing,
by which users can freely decide whether picking one of suggested critiques (if it
matches their desires) or specifying their own feedback criteria with the self-initiated
support if necessary.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Swiss National Science Foundation for sponsoring the reported
research work. We are grateful to all participants of our user studies for their patience and time.