Gavin Giovannoni, FRCP, PhD,5 Andrew J. Lees, FRCP,
MD,1,2 and John Hardy, PhD*1,2
1Reta Lila Weston Institute, UCL Institute of Neurology
2Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of
3Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of
4Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Queen Mary
University of London
5Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London
References
Sieber B-A, Landis S, Koroshetz W, et al. Prioritized research recommendations from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Parkinson’s Disease 2014 conference. Ann Neurol
2014;76:469-472.
Noyce AJ, Bestwick JP, Silveira-Moriyama L, et al. Meta-analysis
of early nonmotor features and risk factors for Parkinson disease.
Ann Neurol 2012;72:893-901.
Noyce AJ, Bestwick JP, Silveira-Moriyama L, et al. PREDICT-PD:
identifying risk of Parkinson’s disease in the community: methods
and baseline results. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014;85:31-37.
Winder-Rhodes SE, Evans JR, Ban M, et al. Glucocerebrosidase
mutations inﬂuence the natural history of Parkinson’s disease in a
community-based incident cohort. Brain 2013;136:392-399.
Duran R, Mencacci NE, Angeli AV, et al. The glucocerobrosidase
E326K variant predisposes to Parkinson’s disease, but does not
cause Gaucher’s disease. Mov Disord 2012;28:232-236.
Walker JM, Lwin A, Tayebi N, et al. Glucocerebrosidase mutation
T369M appears to be another polymorphism. Clin Genet 2003;63:
Healy DG, Falchi M, O’Sullivan SS, et al. Phenotype, genotype,
and worldwide genetic penetrance of LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s disease: a case-control study. Lancet Neurol 2008;7:583-590.
Supporting Data
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article.
Adaptive Deep Brain
Stimulation in a Freely
Moving Parkinsonian
The future of deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson’s
disease (PD) lies in new closed-loop systems that continuously
supply the implanted stimulator with new settings obtained
by analyzing a feedback signal related to the patient’s current
clinical condition.1 The most suitable feedback for PD is subthalamic local ﬁeld potential (LFP) activity recorded from the
stimulating electrode itself.2-4 This closed-loop technology
known as adaptive DBS (aDBS) recently proved superior to
conventional open-loop DBS (cDBS) in patients with PD.2
No studies have yet tested aDBS in freely moving humans
for a prolonged time. This information is an essential prerequisite for developing new implantable aDBS devices for
chronic PD treatment.
In this single-case study, we tested whether a portable
DBS device we developed is suitable to compare the clinical
beneﬁt in a freely moving PD patient induced by either
aDBS or cDBS. To do so, after a ﬁrst experimental session
for extracting patient settings to personalize the aDBS algorithm, we treated a blinded patient (51 y old, male, 8 y PD
history) with cDBS and aDBS in two separate experimental
sessions each lasting 120 min, 5 and 6 d, respectively, after
DBS electrode implant. To ensure reliable results, the patient
underwent repeated clinical assessments every 20 min (T1-
T5) by two independent blinded neurologists through Uni-
ﬁed Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) III subsections and Rush Dyskinesia Rating Scale (see Supplemental
Data for details).
The aDBS portable device we used was equipped with an ad
hoc algorithm that analyzed patient’s LFP beta band power
(13-17 Hz) and adapted voltage stimulation linearly each second (Fig. 1A).
The patient during aDBS experienced a more stable condition than during cDBS, with better control of symptoms
and dyskinesias over time (Fig. 1; video 1). In particular,
aDBS and cDBS improved patient’s axial symptoms to a
similar extent (Fig. 1B), but compared with cDBS, aDBS signiﬁcantly
bradykinesia
(Fig. 1C). aDBS did not elicit side effects and was well
tolerated.
Because we evaluated the patient a few days after surgery
when he probably manifested a stunning effect,5 the aDBSand cDBS-induced improvements were lower than those
reported by others in follow-up DBS studies.6 A major clinical achievement was that compared with cDBS, aDBS
greatly reduced the patient’s dyskinesias during gait and at
rest (Fig. 1B; Fig. 1D). Presumably it did so because we
designed the adaptive algorithm to avoid dyskinesias related
to hyperstimulation: when
L-dopa reduced beta-band LFP
diminished,
hyperstimulation.
------------------------------------------------------------
C 2014 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
*Correspondence to: Dr. Manuela Rosa, MS, Universita degli Studi di
Milano, Centro Clinico per la Neurostimolazione, le Neurotecnologie ed i
Disordini del Movimento Fondazione IRCCS, Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Francesco Sforza 35, Milano, 20122 Italy, e-mail:
 
Funding agencies: This study was supported by Fondazione IRCCS Ca’
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico and by Universita degli Studi di
Milano (Italy).
Relevant conﬂicts of interest/ﬁnancial disclosures: Filippo Cogiamanian, Sara Marceglia, Paolo M Rampini e Alberto Priori are shareholders
of Newronika s.r.l., a spin-off company of Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan and Universita degli Studi di Milano.
Full ﬁnancial disclosures and author roles may be found in the online version of this article.
Received: 6 October 2014; Revised: 20 February 2015; Accepted: 21
March 2015
Published online 21 May 2015 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.26241
L E T T E R S :
O B S E R V A T I O N S
Movement Disorders, Vol. 30, No. 7, 2015
Our results, besides corroborating ﬁndings reported by Little and colleagues2 showing that aDBS promises to be more
efﬁcient and effective than cDBS, expand them for two important reasons. First, we tested aDBS for a longer observation
time than Little et al., and in a more ecological condition
(freely moving patient). Second, the personalized algorithm
continuously adapts stimulation settings according to LFP
beta changes, instead of providing an on–off strategy.
The aDBS device we used here can assess large patient
series in real clinical settings, testing different LFP-based
adaptive strategies other than those controlled by the beta
activity to ﬁnd the frequency that is more suitable to reﬂect
patient clinical state.7
In conclusion, the approach and device we used proved
eligible for prolonged use in a freely moving parkinsonian
patient and disclosed new opportunities to study aDBS
during patients’
daily activities,
providing new
into how this novel DBS strategy should improve patients’
quality of life. Although we await future studies to con-
ﬁrm our ﬁndings and to test other aDBS LFP-based algorithms, our observation is a step toward developing a new
generation of implantable aDBS devices for chronic treatment of PD.
Video legend
Video: The video shows a section of patient clinical assessments performed 120 min after the experiment began (T5)
during standard DBS (cDBS) on the left and during adaptive
DBS (aDBS) on the right. Standard DBS was delivered at 2
V, 130 Hz, 60 ms; aDBS was delivered at a stimulation voltage that automatically changes according to the online LFP
beta recording analysis (voltage range, 0-2 V), 130 Hz, 60
ms. The video shows the patient during the execution of
items 29, 23, 24, and 31 of uniﬁed parkinson’s disease rating scale (UPDRS) III scale.
Manuela Rosa, MS,*1,2 Mattia Arlotti, MS,1,3 Gianluca Ardolino, MD,1 Filippo Cogiamanian, MD,1 Sara Marceglia, MS,
PhD,1 Alessio Di Fonzo, MD, PhD,1 Francesca Cortese, MD,1,2,4
Paolo M. Rampini, MD,1 and Alberto Priori, MD, PhD1,2
FIG. 1. (A) Sample of aDBS functioning lasting 10 min. Upper panel, the local field potential (LFP) beta band (13-17 Hz) power and below the stimulation voltage. The dotted line represents the time levodopa (L-dopa) took to achieve its clinical effect. The voltage delivered by aDBS followed the
beta-band changes: When L-dopa reduced beta-band LFP activity, the voltage linearly diminished. (B) Clinical results for axial symptoms and dyskinesias during gait. Mean Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) III subsection (items 28, 29, 30) and mean Rush Dyskinesias Rating
Scale (DRS) (during gait) percentage score changes from baseline evaluated at T5 (120 min after the experiment began) for cDBS and aDBS.
Assessment at T5 showed that the patient’s axial symptoms improved to a similar extent after aDBS and cDBS, but dyskinesias during gait reduced
more during aDBS than during cDBS. (C) Clinical results for bradykinesia. Mean changes from baseline in the UPDRS III subsection (items 23, 24,
31) percentage score changes from baseline for the upper limb contralateral to the stimulation side for cDBS and aDBS from T1 to T5. The UPDRS
III subscore improved significantly more during aDBS than during cDBS (Wilcoxon matched pairs test; *P < 0.05). (D) Clinical results for dyskinesias
at rest. Mean Rush DRS (at rest) percentage score changes from baseline for cDBS and aDBS from T1 to T5. Except at T3, aDBS induced a lower
mean Rush DRS increase than cDBS (Wilcoxon matched pairs test; P > 0.05) (see Supplemental Data for data analysis details).
L E T T E R S :
O B S E R V A T I O N S
Movement Disorders, Vol. 30, No. 7, 2015
1Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy
2Universita degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
3Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering ‘Guglielmo Marconi’, Universita di Bologna, Cesena, Italy
4Universita la Sapienza di Roma, Polo Pontino, Latina, Italy
Acknowledgments: We thank the neurosurgery staff for the precious
collaboration: Marco Locatelli, Giorgio Carrabba and Vincenzo Levi.