MIT Open Access Articles
Unpacking the Black Box of Causality: Learning about Causal
Mechanisms from Experimental and Observational Studies
The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please share
how this access benefits you. Your story matters.
Citation: IMAI, KOSUKE, LUKE KEELE, DUSTIN TINGLEY, and TEPPEI YAMAMOTO. “Unpacking
the Black Box of Causality: Learning about Causal Mechanisms from Experimental and
Observational Studies.” American Political Science Review 105, no. 04 :
765-789. Copyright © American Political Science Association 2011
As Published: 
Publisher: Cambridge University Press
Persistent URL: 
Version: Final published version: final published article, as it appeared in a journal, conference
proceedings, or other formally published context
Terms of Use: Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be
subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use.
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
November 2011
doi:10.1017/S0003055411000414
Unpacking the Black Box of Causality: Learning about
Causal Mechanisms from Experimental and Observational Studies
KOSUKE IMAI
Princeton University
LUKE KEELE
Pennsylvania State University
DUSTIN TINGLEY
Harvard University
TEPPEI YAMAMOTO
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
dentifying causal mechanisms is a fundamental goal of social science. Researchers seek to study not
only whether one variable affects another but also how such a causal relationship arises. Yet commonly used statistical methods for identifying causal mechanisms rely upon untestable assumptions
and are often inappropriate even under those assumptions. Randomizing treatment and intermediate
variables is also insufﬁcient. Despite these difﬁculties, the study of causal mechanisms is too important
to abandon. We make three contributions to improve research on causal mechanisms. First, we present a
minimum set of assumptions required under standard designs of experimental and observational studies
and develop a general algorithm for estimating causal mediation effects. Second, we provide a method
for assessing the sensitivity of conclusions to potential violations of a key assumption. Third, we offer
alternative research designs for identifying causal mechanisms under weaker assumptions. The proposed
approach is illustrated using media framing experiments and incumbency advantage studies.
ver the last couple of decades, social scientists
have given greater attention to methodological
issues related to causation. This trend has led
to a growing number of laboratory, ﬁeld, and survey
experiments, as well as an increasing use of natural
experiments, instrumental variables, and quasirandomized studies such as regression discontinuity designs.
However, many of these empirical studies focus on
merely establishing whether one variable affects an-
Kosuke Imai is Associate Professor, Department of Politics,
Princeton University, Corwin Hall 036, Princeton NJ 08544
( ).
Luke Keele is Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science, Pennsylvania State University, 211 Pond Lab, University Park,
PA 16802 ( ).
Dustin Tingley is Assistant Professor, Department of Government, Harvard University, 1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS Knafel
Building 208, Cambridge MA 02138 ( ).
Teppei Yamamoto is Assistant Professor, Department of Political
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 ( ).
The companion articles that present technical aspects of the
methods introduced here are available as Imai, Keele, and Tingley
 , and Imai, Keele, Tingley, and Yamamoto .
All of our proposed methods can be implemented via an R
package, mediation , which is freely available for download at the Comprehensive R Archive Network
( A Stata package
mediation by Raymond Hicks and Tingley is available at IDEAS
( The replication
archive for this article is available as Imai et al. . We thank
Ted Brader, Gary Jacobson, and Jonathan Katz for providing us
with their data. We also thank Christina Davis, Michael Donnelly,
Kevin Esterling, Marty Gilens, Don Green, Simon Jackman, Gary
King, Arthur Lupia, Rose McDermott, Tali Mendelberg, Marcus
Prior, Cesar Zucco, and participants at the West Coast Experiment
Conference, the NSF Conference on Politics Experiments, and the
Institute of Statistical Mathematics Summer Lecture Series, as well
as seminar participants at Northwestern University and the University of Chicago for helpful suggestions. Comments from an APSR
co-editor and three anonymous reviewers signiﬁcantly improved the
presentation of this article. Imai acknowledges ﬁnancial support from
the National Science Foundation (SES-0849715 and SES-0918968).
other and fail to explain how such a causal relationship
arises. This “black box” approach to causality has been
criticized across disciplines for being atheoretical and
even unscientiﬁc .1 For many
researchers, estimating causal effects is insufﬁcient and
underlying mechanisms must be examined in order to
test social science theories empirically.
We deﬁne a causal mechanism as a process in which
a causal variable of interest, i.e., a treatment variable,
inﬂuences an outcome. The identiﬁcation of a causal
mechanism requires the speciﬁcation of an intermediate variable or a mediator that lies on the causal
pathway between the treatment and outcome variables.
Although qualitative studies often employ the method
of process tracing, quantitative investigation of causal
mechanisms is based on the estimation of causal mediation effects. Indeed, the traditional approach to causal
mediation analysis has been to use structural equation
models , a practice which goes back decades
 .2
In this article, we show that these commonly used
statistical methods rely upon untestable assumptions
and are often inappropriate even under those assumptions. In particular, contrary to the commonly held belief, conventional exogeneity assumptions alone are insufﬁcient for identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms.3 For
1 Prominent experimentalists acknowledge “the impatience that social scientists often express with experimental studies that fail to
explain why an effect obtains” 
2 The use of linear structural equation models is still widespread,
and numerous applications can be found . Earlier applications include
Cnudde and McCrone and Miller and Stokes .
3 This fact is well known in the methodological literature on causal
inference . Others highlight
why the search for causal mechanisms is elusive but
stop short of developing methodological tools to confront the challenge .4
Although recognizing these difﬁculties, we believe
that the study of causal mechanisms is too important to
abandon, and new tools must be developed. In this article, we make three contributions toward this goal. First,
we present a minimum set of assumptions required
under standard designs of experimental and observational studies. Using the potential outcomes framework
of causal mediation analysis, we demonstrate why conventional exogeneity assumptions are insufﬁcient for
identifying causal mechanisms. This formal framework
allows us to develop a general algorithm for estimating
causal mediation effects, which is applicable to any
statistical model under these assumptions. The new
method corrects common mistakes made by empirical
researchers when quantifying causal mechanisms with
nonlinear statistical models.
Second, we develop a method of assessing the sensitivity of conclusions to potential violations of key
assumptions. Typically, researchers must rely upon
untestable assumptions for identiﬁcation of causal
mechanisms. This situation is similar to the one where
researchers must assume a treatment is exogenous
when estimating causal effects in observational studies.
Nonetheless, most research, whether experimental or
observational, depends on certain untestable assumptions . In such circumstances, sensitivity analysis plays an essential role by
formally quantifying the degree to which empirical
ﬁndings rely upon the key assumption . To facilitate the
use of sensitivity analysis, we provide software, mediation, which also implements our general estimation
algorithm for a wide range of commonly used statistical
models .
Third, we offer alternative research designs that enable identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms under less
stringent assumptions. Under standard research designs, sensitivity analysis will not entirely solve the
fundamental difﬁculty of causal mediation analysis, because no statistical method can recover information
that is not present in the observed data. Therefore,
alternative research design strategies must be devised
with the goal of replacing strong assumptions with
Robins 2003; Robins and Greenland 1992), but has not received
much attention among social scientists until recently .
4 Concrete methodological suggestions about how to study causal
mechanisms appear to be scarce in the qualitative methodology literature, too. For example, King, Keohane, and Verba 
have only a limited discussion.
weaker and more credible ones. Our approach to causal
mediation analysis allows us to develop several such
research design templates for both experimental and
observational studies. We describe the power and limitations of the proposed research design strategies in
order to guide their application in empirical research.
Although our proposed approach is general, we illustrate it by applying it to two empirical examples in
political science; media priming experiments and observational studies of incumbency advantage. In many
ways, research on these two topics has evolved along
similar paths also experienced by other literatures in
the discipline. Initially, researchers focused on the estimation of causal effects in studies that quantiﬁed the
effects of media cues on policy attitudes and the effects
of incumbency on electoral outcomes. Once a certain
level of consensus emerged about the magnitude of
causal effects, scholarly attention shifted to the question of causal mechanisms: how media cues inﬂuence
public opinion and why incumbents have electoral advantages. The two examples allow us to illustrate substantive aspects of the required identiﬁcation assumption, and we apply our estimation method and sensitivity analysis to the data from leading publications.
We also discuss how research on these issues could
be further improved by adopting alternative research
design strategies.
Finally, we invoke several other empirical examples to further demonstrate how our proposed approach differs from other commonly used methods
such as instrumental variables and interaction terms.
Although these techniques were originally developed
for purposes other than analyzing causal mechanisms,
we show that they can be used to identify mechanisms under certain assumptions. Here again, the formal framework of causal mediation analysis adopted in
this article clariﬁes these assumptions and helps applied
researchers choose appropriate statistical methods for
their substantive questions of interest.
EXAMPLES OF THE SEARCH FOR
CAUSAL MECHANISMS
Before we present the formal framework of studying causal mechanisms, we brieﬂy describe two empirical examples where researchers endeavor to identify causal mechanisms and go beyond simply estimating causal effects. They serve as illustrative examples
throughout the rest of this article.
The Role of Emotions in
Media Framing Effects
Political science has long considered whether the media inﬂuence public support for government policies
(e.g., opposition or support for speciﬁc policies) and
political candidates (e.g., evaluations of candidate leadership potential) .
A prominent focus in this literature has been on issue
framing . Because the media can frame issues in particular ways, we expect that
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
the news stories individuals read or hear will inﬂuence
public opinion . In
particular, the framing of a political issue involving references to speciﬁc groups of people has been found
to be particularly effective in some issue areas such as
immigration .
In a recent article, Brader, Valentino, and Suhay
 go beyond estimating the framing effects of
ethnicity-based media cues on immigration preferences and ask “why the race or ethnicity of immigrants,
above and beyond arguments about the consequences
of immigration, drives opinion and behavior” (960,
emphasis in the original). That is, instead of simply asking whether media cues inﬂuence opinion, they explore
the mechanisms through which this effect operates.
Consistent with earlier work suggesting the emotional
power of group-based politics , the authors ﬁnd that the inﬂuence of groupbased media cues arises through changing individual
levels of anxiety.
Brader, Valentino, and Suhay employ a standard experimental design where subjects receive a randomly assigned media cue that featured a story about a
Caucasian(in-group) or Latino(out-group) immigrant.
This is followed by measurement of anxiety and immigration attitudes. Their analysis indicates that threatening cues from out-group immigrants increase anxiety,
which then escalates opposition to immigration and
makes political action on the topic more likely. They
also examined the role of other mechanisms, such as
changes in beliefs about the economic costs of immigration . Following this important
study, the emphasis in this literature has moved from
simply estimating the effect of group-based appeals on
public attitudes to identifying various mechanisms that
transmit this effect .
The Decomposition of Incumbency Effects
One of the most studied topics in the electoral politics literature is the advantage of incumbency status. A
new approach to this topic began with the work of Gelman and King , who used the potential outcomes
framework of causal inference to demonstrate the bias
of previous measures. These and other authors found
that the incumbency advantage had been positive and
growing for the past several decades.
Cox and Katz take the incumbency advantage
literature in a new direction by considering possible
causal mechanisms that explain why incumbents have
an electoral advantage. They argue that an important
mechanism is the ability of incumbents to deter highquality challengers from entering the race. The authors
attempt to decompose the incumbency advantage into
a “scare-off/quality effect” and effects due to other
causal mechanisms such as name recognition and resource advantage. They ﬁnd that much of the growth
of incumbency advantage over time can be attributed
to the growth of the scare-off/quality effect; incumbents are facing increasingly low-quality challengers,
which gives them a greater electoral advantage. Following Cox and Katz , some have used different empirical strategies to test the existence of the
scare-off/quality effect .
Others have considered alternative causal mechanisms
such as the roles of campaign spending , personal vote , and television .
A FORMAL FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING
CAUSAL MECHANISMS
Using the potential outcomes framework of causal inference, we formally deﬁne a causal mechanism as a
process whereby one variable causally affects another
through an intermediate variable. We show that identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms can be formulated as
a decomposition of a total causal effect into direct
and indirect effects. The use of the potential outcomes
framework is essential because it provides a formal
language for understanding the counterfactual comparisons required to study causal mechanisms. As shown
later, the conventional approaches based on structural
equation models fail to recognize the key assumption
behind causal mediation analysis.
Potential Outcomes Framework
We ﬁrst introduce the concept of potential outcomes,
which has been used in the methodological literature
as the formal framework of causal inference . The main advantage of this framework is that issues of unobserved
causal heterogeneity are made much more explicit than
in regression models, where such heterogeneity is obscured as part of error terms. In fact, using this framework, we show later that, contrary to commonly held
belief,standardexogeneityassumptionsareinsufﬁcient
for identifying causal mechanisms.
Given a unit and a set of actions that we call treatment and control, we associate an outcome of interest
with each unit and action. These two outcomes remain
potential until one is ultimately realized. The other outcome cannot be observed and thus remains counterfactual. For example, usually we do not see how subjects in
the control group would have responded had they been
in the treatment group. Formally, let Ti be a treatment
indicator, which takes on the value of 1 when unit i is in
the treatment group and 0 otherwise. For simplicity, we
focus on binary treatment, but our proposed methods
can be extended easily to nonbinary treatment . We can use Yi(t) to
denote the potential outcomes that would result when
unit i was under the treatment status t.5 Although there
are two potential values for each subject, only the one
that corresponds to his or her actual treatment status
is observed. Thus, if we use Yi to denote the observed
5 This notation implicitly assumes no interference between units; the
potential outcomes for a given unit does not depend on the treatment
assignment of other units.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
outcome, we have Yi = Yi(Ti) for each unit. Throughout
the remainder of this article, we assume the absence of
missing data as well as perfect compliance with treatment assignment. The violation of these assumptions
typically leads to more complications in identiﬁcation
and estimation of causal mechanisms .
To illustrate the idea, consider a stylized version of
the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study where
subjects are exposed to either a negative immigration
story (Ti = 1) or a control news story unrelated to immigration (Ti = 0). The outcome here is simply the extent to which subjects want immigration to be increased
or decreased. Under the potential outcomes notation,
Yi(1) is subject i’s potential immigration opinion if he
or she receives the immigration news story, and Yi(0) is
the potential immigration opinion if he or she receives
the control story. Similarly, take a stylized version of
the Cox and Katz study where the treatment
is the incumbency status (Ti = 1 if candidate i is an
incumbent and Ti = 0 otherwise), and the observed
outcome variable Yi represents the actual vote share
candidate i received. Potential outcomes can also be
deﬁned, where Yi(1) (Yi(0)) is the potential vote share
candidate i receives if he/she is (not) an incumbent.
Given this setup, the causal effect of the treatment
can be deﬁned as the difference between two potential outcomes; one potential outcome that would be
realized under the treatment, and the other potential outcome that would be realized under the control
condition, i.e., Yi(1) −Yi(0). Because only one of the
potential outcomes is observable, the unit-level treatment effect is unobservable. Thus, researchers often
focus on the estimation of the average treatment effect
(ATE) over a population.6 If the treatment assignment
is randomized, as in the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay
 study, then the treatment is jointly independent
of the potential outcomes because the probability of
receiving the treatment is identical regardless of the
values of the potential outcomes. We can write this as
{Yi(1), Yi(0)} ⊥⊥Ti with the standard symbol of statistical independence.
In observational studies, treatments are not randomized. Thus, we often statistically adjust for the observed
differences in the pretreatment covariates Xi between
the treatment and control groups through regression,
matching, and other techniques .
This approach assumes that there is no omitted variable
affecting both the treatment and outcome variables. To
be precise, we assume that the treatment is assigned as
if randomized among those units that have identical
values of the observed pretreatment covariates, i.e.,
{Yi(1), Yi(0)} ⊥⊥Ti | Xi = x for any value x in the support of Xi. For example, Cox and Katz adjust
for the lagged vote shares of parties by including them
in the linear regression model, implying the assumption that the incumbency status of any two candidates
from the same party is essentially randomly determined
if their districts have similar vote shares in the past
6 The ATE is deﬁned as E(Yi(1) −Yi(0)).
Under this framework, the ATE can be identiﬁed
as the average difference in outcome means between
the treatment and control groups. For experiments, we
have the familiar result that the difference-in-means
estimator is unbiased for the ATE. For observational
studies, this amounts to estimating the ATE for a
unique set of pretreatment covariate values and then
averaging it over the distribution of the pretreatment
covariates.7 Thus, in the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay
 experiment, where the two types of news stories
are randomly assigned to subjects, the average causal
effect of the negative immigration story on the opinion toward immigration can be estimated without bias
by calculating the average difference of observed responses between the two groups. In observational studies, slightly more complex calculations may be needed,
although under certain assumptions a regression coef-
ﬁcient can be interpreted as an unbiased estimate of
Deﬁning Causal Mechanisms as
Indirect and Direct Effects
Next, we formally deﬁne causal mechanisms using
the framework introduced previously. We deﬁne a
causal mechanism as a process whereby one variable
T causally affects another Y through an intermediate
variable or a mediator M that operationalizes the hypothesized mechanism. In the Brader, Valentino, and
Suhay study, respondents’ anxiety (M) transmits the causal effect of the media framing (T) on
attitudes toward immigration (Y). In the Cox and Katz
 study, challenger quality represents a mediator
(M) through which the incumbency status (T) causally
affects the election outcome (Y). Of course, in both
studies, other causal mechanisms may exist; for example, media effects may operate through changes in
beliefs about the consequences of immigration, and
campaign spending and personal vote may explain the
incumbency advantage.
Thus, an inferential goal is to decompose the causal
effect of a treatment into the indirect effect, which represents the hypothesized causal mechanism, and the direct effect, which represents all the other mechanisms.
Figure 1a graphically illustrates this simple idea and the
assumed causal ordering. The indirect effect combines
two arrows going from the treatment T to the outcome
Y through the mediator M, whereas the direct effect is
represented by a single arrow from T to Y.
Formally, let Mi(t) denote the potential value of a
mediator of interest (anxiety level for media framing
and challenger quality for incumbency advantage) for
unit i under the treatment status Ti = t. Now, we use
Yi(t, m) to denote the potential outcome that would
result if the treatment and mediating variables equal
t and m, respectively. For example, in the incumbency
research, Yi(1, 1) represents the potential vote share
7 That is, E(Yi(1) −Yi(0)) = E{E(Yi | Ti = 1, Xi) −E(Yi | Ti = 0, Xi)}.
8 Speciﬁcally, the assumption is called the constant additive unit
treatment effect in the linear regression, which is implicitly made
in the Cox and Katz study.
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
Diagrams Representing Various
Causal Mechanisms
Note: (a) is a simple graphical representation of the decomposition where the treatment T causally affects the outcome Y
directly or indirectly through the mediator M. The other two
diagrams show causal mechanisms involving two measured
mediators. In (b), there is no causal relationship between the two
mediators and hence sequential ignorability (Assumption 1) is
satisﬁed. The other diagram (c) does not satisfy the assumption,
because N serves as a posttreatment confounder for M.
for candidate i if he/she is an incumbent facing a challenger who was previously an ofﬁce holder (a typical way of measuring candidate quality in the literature). As before, we only observe one of the potential
outcomes, and the observed outcome, Yi, now equals
Yi(Ti, Mi(Ti)), which depends upon both the treatment
status and the level of the mediator under the observed
treatment status. Thus, the (total) unit treatment effect
can be written as τi ≡Yi(1, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(0)).
We can now deﬁne indirect effects or causal mediation effects for each unit i, which correspond to a
hypothesized causal mechanism, as follows :
δi(t) ≡Yi(t, Mi(1)) −Yi(t, Mi(0)),
for each treatment status t = 0, 1. This causal quantity
represents the indirect effects of the treatment on the
outcome through the mediating variable. It equals the
change in the outcome corresponding to a change in
the mediator from the value that would be realized
under the control condition, i.e., Mi(0), to the value
that would be observed under the treatment condition,
i.e., Mi(1), holding the treatment status at t. By ﬁxing the treatment and changing only the mediator, we
eliminate all other causal mechanisms and isolate the
hypothesized mechanism. If the treatment has no effect
on the mediator, i.e., Mi(1) = Mi(0), then the causal
mediation effects are zero. What the potential outcomes framework clariﬁes is that whereas Yi(t, Mi(t))
is observable for units with Ti = t, the counterfactual
outcome Yi(t, Mi(1 −t)) can never be observed under
most common research designs. This underscores the
difﬁculty of identifying causal mechanisms.
In the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study, the
mediator is the subjects’ levels of anxiety. Thus, δi(1)
represents the difference between the two potential
immigration opinions for subject i, who actually receives the treatment of an immigration news story. For
this subject, Yi(1, Mi(1)) is the observed immigration
opinion if he/she views the immigration news story,
whereas Yi(1, Mi(0)) is his or her immigration opinion
under the counterfactual scenario where subject i still
viewed the immigration story but his or her anxiety
level is as if the subject viewed a control news story.
The difference between these two potential outcomes
represents the effect of the change in the mediator that
would be induced by the treatment, while the direct
impact of the treatment is suppressed holding its value
Similarly, in the Cox and Katz study, suppose
candidate i is an incumbent. Then an indirect effect,
δi(1), equals the difference between the observed vote
share Yi(1, Mi(1)) and the counterfactual vote share
Yi(1, Mi(0)). This represents the vote share the candidate would receive if he or she faced a challenger whose
quality was at the same level as the challenger he or she
would have faced if not an incumbent. Thus, this causal
quantity formalizes the scare-off/quality effect by isolating the portion of incumbency advantage that results
from deterrence of high-quality challengers, controlling for all other mechanisms.
To represent all other causal mechanisms, we deﬁne
the direct effects of the treatment as
ζi(t) ≡Yi(1, Mi(t)) −Yi(0, Mi(t))
for each unit i and each treatment status t = 0, 1. The
direct effect equals the causal effect of the treatment on
the outcome that is not transmitted by the hypothesized
mediator. In the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay 
study, ζi(1) represents the difference in immigration
opinions under treatment (the immigration news story)
and control (no immigration news story) holding the
level of anxiety constant at the level that would be realized under treatment. In the incumbency advantage
study, ζi(1) equals the difference in the vote share of
candidate i with and without incumbency status holding the challenger quality at the level that would be
realized if the candidate were an incumbent. Because
the direct effects and the indirect effects sum up to the
total causal effect, a causal mediation analysis represents a decomposition of the total effect into the direct
and indirect (mediation) effects.9
In this article, we focus on the average causal mediation effects (ACME) ¯δ(t) and the average direct
effects (ADE) ¯ζ(t), which represent the population
averages of the causal mediation and direct effects,
respectively.10 As before, the ATE ¯τ equals the sum of
the ACME and ADE.11 Our goal is to decompose the
ATE into the ACME and ADE and then assess the
relative importance of the hypothesized mechanism.
9 Formally, τi = δi(t) + ζi(1 −t) = 1
t=0{δi(t) + ζi(t)}, for t = 0, 1.
In addition, if no interaction between the treatment and the mediator
is assumed, i.e., δi = δi(1) = δi(0) and ζi = ζi(1) = ζi(0) (see Interaction Terms for details), then we have a simpler expression τi = δi + ζi.
See Imai, Keele, and Tingley for additional discussion of the
no-interaction assumption and how to relax it.
10 These quantities are formally deﬁned as ¯δ(t) ≡E(Yi(t, Mi(1)) −
Yi(t, Mi(0))) and ¯ζ(t) ≡E(Yi(1, Mi(t)) −Yi(0, Mi(t))).
¯τ ≡E(Yi(1, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(0))) =
t=0(¯δ(t) + ¯ζ(t)). Again, under the no-interaction assumption, we
have ¯τ = ¯δ + ¯ζ.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
Nonparametric Identiﬁcation under the
Standard Designs
With causal mechanisms formally deﬁned, we now consider the assumption necessary to identify the ACME
and ADE under the standard designs. By the standard designs, we mean that the treatment assignment
is either randomized (as in experimental studies) or
assumed to be random given the pretreatment covariates (as in observational studies). The key insight here
is that both the direct and indirect effects contain a
potential outcome that would never be realized under
these designs, and therefore neither quantity can be
identiﬁed even in randomized experiments, let alone
observational studies. In fact, under these designs, the
ATE is identiﬁed, but the ACME and ADE are not.
Identifying causal mechanisms, therefore, requires an
additional assumption. Researchers rarely acknowledge that this assumption is necessary to give the quantities they estimate a causal interpretation.
We formalize this additional identiﬁcation assumption as follows. Let Xi be a vector of the observed
pretreatment confounders for unit i, such as a respondent’s gender and race in the media framing study and
the past election results in the research on incumbency
advantage. Then the assumption can be written as follows.
Assumption 1 [Sequential Ignorability ].
{Yi(t′, m), Mi(t)} ⊥⊥Ti | Xi = x,
Yi(t′, m) ⊥⊥Mi(t) | Ti = t, Xi = x,
where 0 < Pr(Ti = t | Xi = x) and 0 < p(Mi = m | Ti =
t, Xi = x) for t = 0, 1, and all x and m in the support of
Xi and Mi, respectively.
How can Assumption 1 be interpreted? The assumption is called sequential ignorability because two ignorability assumptions are made sequentially. First, given
the observed pretreatment confounders, the treatment
assignment is assumed to be ignorable—statistically independent of potential outcomes and potential mediators. This part of the assumption is often called
no-omitted-variable bias, exogeneity, or unconfoundedness. In experiments, the assumption is expected
to hold because treatment is randomized. In observational studies, researchers typically use regression
and/or matching to make this assumption plausible .
The second part of Assumption 1 implies that the
observed mediator is ignorable given the actual treatment status and pretreatment confounders. Here, we
are assuming that once we have conditioned on a set
of covariates gathered before the treatment, the mediator status is ignorable. Note the apparent similarity
between this assumption and the standard assumption
made in observational studies that the treatment assignment is exogenous given the observed pretreatment covariates. In fact, even in randomized experiments, identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms requires an
additional assumption that is similar to the one often
made in observational studies. However, as further discussed in Sequential Ignorability and Conventional Exogeneity Assumptions a key difference between this assumption and the conventional exogeneity assumption
is that randomizing both the treatment and mediating
variables does not sufﬁce for this assumption to hold.
What does Assumption 1 imply about media framing
and incumbency advantage studies discussed in Examples of the Search for Causal Mechanism? First, consider the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study.
Because the news stories are randomly assigned to
subjects, the ﬁrst part of Assumption 1 will hold even
without conditioning on any pretreatment covariate
Xi. However, the second part of the assumption implies that there are no unmeasured pretreatment or
posttreatment covariates that confound the relationship between the levels of anxiety and the subjects’
immigration opinions. To satisfy this assumption, we
must measure the complete set of covariates that affect both anxiety and immigration opinions, and they
all must not be affected by the treatment.
This assumption is violated if, for example, both
one’s anxiety and immigration opinions are affected by
fear disposition ) or ideology
 . Among those in the treatment
group, individuals with high fear disposition or conservative ideology might exhibit higher levels of anxiety.
Furthermore, fear disposition and ideology have also
been directly linked to a variety of political attitudes,
including attitudes towards out-groups . Hence, these pretreatment covariates could in-
ﬂuence both the mediator and outcome in the Brader,
Valentino, and Suhay study (see Figure 7a in the
Appendix for a diagram depicting this situation). Thus,
we must assume that ignorability holds after adjustment for all pretreatment covariates that affect anxiety
and immigration attitudes.
Next, consider the incumbency advantage example.
In an observational study, the ﬁrst part of Assumption
1 must be made with great care because treatment assignment is not randomized. In the context of the Cox
and Katz study, we must ﬁrst assume that the
incumbency status is random once we adjust for differences in the previous election outcome and partisanship. This means that after we adjust for these pretreatment covariates, whether or not the Democratic party
will run an incumbent candidate in the current election
is essentially random. Assumption 1 also requires that
the quality of the challenger in the current election
is random once we take into account differences in
the incumbency status and the past election outcome
as well as partisanship. For both of these ignorability
assumptions, there may exist unobserved confounders.
As this discussion illustrates, the second stage of sequential ignorability is a strong assumption even in
standard randomized experiments. Furthermore, as already recognized by many researchers, the ﬁrst part
of Assumption 1 must be made with great care in
observational studies. Assumptions such as sequential
ignorability are often referred to as irrefutable because
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
The Fallacy of the Causal Chain Approach
Potential Mediators and
Treatment Effect
Mediator Effect
Causal Mediation
Population
on Mediator
on Outcome
Proportion
Mi(1) −Mi(0)
Yi(t, 1) −Yi(t, 0)
Yi(t, Mi(1)) −Yi(t, Mi(0))
Notes: The left ﬁve columns of the table show a hypothetical population proportion of “types” of units deﬁned by the values of
potential mediators and outcomes. Note that these values can never be jointly observed. The last row of the table shows the
population average value of each column. In this example, the average causal effect of the treatment on the mediator (the sixth
column) is positive and equal to 0.2. Moreover, the average causal effect of the mediator on the outcome (the seventh column) is
also positive and equals 0.2. And yet the average causal mediation effect (ACME; ﬁnal column) is negative and equals −0.2.
one cannot disprove them with observable information
 . It is impossible to entirely preclude the
possibility that there exist unobserved variables that
confound the relationships even after conditioning on
many observed covariates.
What does this strong assumption buy us then? Imai,
Keele, and Yamamoto prove that under Assumption1theACME andADE are nonparametrically
identiﬁed.12 This means that, without any additional
distributional or functional-form assumptions about
the mediator or outcome variables, these effects can
be consistently estimated. Therefore, Assumption 1 allows us to make inferences about the counterfactual
quantities we do not observe—the potential outcomes
under the value of the mediator that would be realized if subjects were in the treatment status opposite to
their actual treatment status—using the quantities we
do observe—observed outcomes and mediators. The
result also implies that we may estimate the ACME
and ADE more ﬂexibly by making no or weak assumptions about the functional form or distribution of the
observed data. Imai, Keele, and Tingley exploit
this fact to develop a general method for estimating
these quantities for outcome and mediating variables
of many types using either parametric or nonparametric regression models. As illustrated in Empirical
Illustrations, this new method corrects common mistakes made by researchers in estimating the ACME
and ADE with nonlinear statistical models.
Sequential Ignorability and
Conventional Exogeneity Assumptions
As we brieﬂy mentioned earlier, sequential ignorability (Assumption 1) differs critically from the conventional exogeneity assumptions that are commonly understood to identify indirect effects in structural equation models. First, one might incorrectly conjecture that
Assumption 1 is satisﬁed by the randomization of both
12 Formally, it can be shown that f (Yi(t, Mi(t′)) | Xi = x) =
Mi = m, Ti = t, Xi = x) dFMi(m | Ti = t′, Xi = x) for any x ∈X and
t, t′ = 0, 1.
treatment and mediator. For example, Spencer, Zanna,
and Fong propose a “causal chain” approach
where researchers implement two randomized experiments, one in which the treatment is randomized to
identify its effect on the mediator, and another in which
the mediator is randomized to identify its effect on the
outcome.13
Unfortunately, even though the treatment and mediator are each guaranteed to be exogenous in these two
experiments, simply combining the two is not sufﬁcient
to identify the ACME. A simple numerical example
makes this evident. Consider the hypothetical population given in Table 1, which describes the population
proportion of “types” of units by the values of potential
mediators and outcomes. Although the values in Table
1 can never be jointly observed, the two randomized
experiments will give sufﬁcient information to identify the average causal effect of the treatment on the
mediator as well as that of the mediator on the outcome. In this example, both of these effects are positive
and equal to 0.2, and thus based on these results one
might conclude that the ACME is positive. However,
the ACME is actually negative. Thus, contrary to the
commonly held belief, the conventional exogeneity assumptions do not necessarily identify the ACME.
In this example, causal heterogeneity exists in such a
way that the units with a positive effect of the treatment
on the mediator (the ﬁrst row of the table) exhibit a
negative effect of the mediator on the outcome. This
particular deviation from sequential ignorability makes
the causal mediation effects negative on the average
even though all other average effects are positive. The
key point, beyond this speciﬁc example, is the fundamental difference between the causal mediation effect
and the causal effect of the mediator itself. The latter refers to the average difference in the potential
outcomes that would be realized if the mediator were
manipulated to certain ﬁxed values, i.e., the average
13 An alternative and better experimental design is what Imai et al.
 call the parallel design where in the second experiment both
the treatment and mediating variables are randomized. See Alternative Research Design for Credible Inference for further discussion.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
value of Yi(t, 1) −Yi(t, 0), which can be consistently estimated when the conventional exogeneity assumption
holds about the mediator. However, this quantity crucially differs from the causal mediation effect in that the
mediator is artiﬁcially manipulated to take particular
values (1 or 0) as opposed to being hypothetically set
to the values that would naturally arise in response to
treatment (Mi(1) or Mi(0)). Because a causal mechanism represents how the effect of treatment on outcome
is transmitted through the mediator, identifying the
effect of the mediator itself is not sufﬁcient.
The second key difference between sequential ignorability and conventional exogeneity assumptions
is that the conditioning set of covariates in the second part of sequential ignorability must only include
pretreatment variables.14 In other words, one cannot
condition on premediator confounders if they are affected by the treatment. This subtle difference has
important substantive implications. Figures 1b and 1c
show two causal diagrams that involve two observed
mediators, M and N, where for the sake of simplicity
no pretreatment confounders are assumed to exist.15
The diagrams represent a common situation where two
possible causal mechanisms are hypothesized and two
corresponding mediators are measured to test them
against each other. For example, Brader, Valentino, and
Suhay measure two mediators. The ﬁrst mechanism suggests that the inﬂuence of the media cue on
immigration attitudes is through changes in a subject’s
anxiety levels. In contrast, their second mechanism examines changes in beliefs about the economic effects of
immigration and hence represents a hypothesis focused
on cognitive evaluations of costs and beneﬁts.
These two diagrams are different in terms of whether
there is a direct causal relationship between the two
mediators. In Figure 1b, the two mediators are causally
unrelated and thus conditionally independent of each
other once the treatment status is controlled for. This
implies that both the conventional exogeneity assumptions and sequential ignorability are satisﬁed. The
ACME for each of the mediators can therefore be
identiﬁed, as discussed in Nonparametric Identiﬁcation under the Standard Designs. In contrast, Figure 1c
represents a situation in which the causal relationship
between one mediator (M) and the outcome (Y) is confounded by the other mediator (N). Because the second
mediator is affected by the treatment, N represents a
posttreatment confounder. This implies that although
the exogeneity assumption is met once both N and
treatment (T) are adjusted for, sequential ignorability
is not satisﬁed. Here again is an example where the
exogeneity of mediator does not imply identiﬁability of
causal mechanisms. In the Appendix, we discuss further
issues related to the role of post-treatment variables
14 Robins considers a variant of sequential ignorability that
allows posttreatment premediator confounders as well as pretreatment confounders. He shows, however, that in general the ACME
cannot be identiﬁed without additional strong assumptions, such as
no interaction between the treatment and mediator.
15 The subsequent argument holds so long as all such confounders
are adjusted for.
and multiple mediators. Imai and Yamamoto 
further address these important issues by developing a
new sensitivity analysis.
In the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study,
for example, Figure 1b corresponds to the situation
where the effect of the media cue goes through both
emotion and cognitive mechanisms (such as beliefs) but
there is no direct causal connection between the two
mechanisms. An alternative causal model, depicted in
Figure 1c, allows for the possibility that beliefs about
immigration’s economic costs (N) also lead to changes
in anxiety levels (M). This might be due to individuals
realizing that a threat is present, inducing the greater
information acquisition and avoidance behavior associated with anxiety. Here, media cues might also produce
direct changes in anxiety because of ingroup/outgroup
triggers, and beliefs about the ﬁnancial impact of immigration can inﬂuence immigration preferences .
INFERENCE AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
UNDER THE STANDARD DESIGNS
In this section, we introduce our approach to estimating
the ACME and ADE based on the nonparametric identiﬁcation result given in Nonparametric Identiﬁcation
under the Standard Designs. In both the Cox and Katz
 and Brader, Valentino, and Suhay studies, analyses are conducted within the traditional linear
structural equation modeling (LSEM) framework. This
method was popularized by Baron and Kenny 
and is widespread in the social sciences . However, the
drawbacks of the LSEM framework are twofold . First, it obscures the identiﬁcation assumptions required to identify causal mechanisms (see
Sequential Ignorability and Conventional Exogeneity
Assumptions). Second, the LSEM framework does not
easily extend to nonlinear or nonparametric models.
Nevertheless, as we illustrate via the Brader, Valentino,
and Suhay study later in this article, many scholars incorrectly apply the LSEM-based method to nonlinear models such as logistic regression.16 Recognizing this problem, some authors, such as Cox and Katz
 who use ordered probit regression to model the
mediator, report the estimates for the ACMEs only
when linear models are used.
In contrast, our approach is not tied to any speciﬁc
statistical model. In fact, we can use parametric or nonparametric regressions to model the mediator and outcome variables, because the identiﬁcation assumption
is stated without reference to any speciﬁc model. We
also propose a sensitivity analysis to probe the sequential ignorability assumption by quantifying the degree
of possible violation. The proposed estimation method
and sensitivity analysis can be implemented easily using
our software mediation.
16 This and other similar mistakes are common in the discipline .
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
The Existing Method and Its Limitations
To highlight the ﬂexibility and transparency of our approach, we ﬁrst provide a brief review of the standard
approach to estimating mediation effects . This commonly
used method is based on the following set of linear
equations:
Yi = α1 + β1Ti + ξ⊤
1 Xi + ϵi1,
Mi = α2 + β2Ti + ξ⊤
2 Xi + ϵi2,
Yi = α3 + β3Ti + γMi + ξ⊤
3 Xi + ϵi3.
In the media framing experiment, for example, Ti represents a binary treatment indicator for the news story
stimuli, Mi represents the observed level of anxiety,
and Yi is the observed opinion about immigration levels. Similarly, in the incumbency advantage study, Ti
represents the incumbency status of a candidate, Mi
represents the quality of his or her opponent, and Yi
is his or her vote share. In both cases, Xi represents
a set of observed pre-treatment covariates, which are
included to make sequential ignorability plausible.
In this setup, the standard method is to estimate the
ACME using the product of coefﬁcients ˆβ2 ˆγ, where ˆβ2
and ˆγ are obtained by separately ﬁtting least squares
regressions based on equations (6) and (7). A second
method is to use the difference of coefﬁcients method,
which uses ˆβ1 −ˆβ3 as the estimate of the ACME, where
ˆβ1 comes from another separate least squares ﬁt of
equation (5). Both produce numerically identical estimates of the ACME. Finally, ˆβ1 and ˆβ3 are used as
the estimates of the ATE and ADE, respectively. Both
Brader, Valentino, and Suhay and Cox and Katz
 used the product of coefﬁcients method to estimate the ACME. Often, researchers conduct a hypothesis test based on the asymptotic variance of ˆβ2 ˆγ with
the null hypothesis of the ACME being zero prove that under sequential ignorability and the
additional no-interaction assumption, i.e., ¯δ(1) = ¯δ(0),
the product of coefﬁcients ˆβ2 ˆγ is a valid estimate (i.e.,
asymptotically consistent) so long as the linearity assumption holds. In fact, the sequential ignorability assumption can be easily translated into phraseology familiar to LSEM analysts. Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto
 show that under the LSEM, sequential ignorability implies zero correlation between ϵi2 and ϵi3.
Clearly, randomization of Ti will not guarantee this correlation to be zero, whereas it does enable consistent
estimation of the ATEs of the treatment on the outcome and on the mediator (Ti is uncorrelated with either ϵi1 or ϵi2). As shown in Sequential Ignorability and
Conventional Exogeneity Assumptions, however, the
converse is not always true: Zero correlation between
ϵi2 and ϵi3 does not necessarily imply sequential ignorability. For example, randomizing both treatment and
mediator does not justify using ˆβ2 ˆγ as an estimate of
the ACME. Indeed, the correlation between the error
terms may not be zero even when the conventional exogeneity assumptions are satisﬁed (see the Appendix).
These important facts are not readily apparent in the
LSEM framework but can be seen immediately in the
potential outcomes framework.
As we mentioned before, another important deﬁciency in the LSEM framework is that it cannot be
directly applied to nonlinear models. If the mediator
and/or the outcome are measured with discrete variables, one may wish to replace linear regression models
with discrete choice models such as probit regression.
However, nonlinearity in this and other models implies that the product of coefﬁcients and the difference
of coefﬁcient methods no longer provide a consistent
estimate of the ACME under sequential ignorability
 , contrary to some existing suggestions
 . Our approach offers a
general method for estimating the ACME and ADE by
directly using the nonparametric identiﬁcation result,
which is not dependent on any statistical model. In the
following, we provide an informal overview of this new
method, referring readers to Imai, Keele, and Tingley
 for details.
The Proposed Estimation Method
The nonparametric identiﬁcation result leads to a general algorithm for computing the ACME and the ADE,
which is applicable to any statistical model so long as
sequential ignorability holds. The algorithm consists
of two steps.17 First, we ﬁt regression models for the
mediator and outcome. The mediator is modeled as a
function of the treatment and any relevant pretreatment covariates. The outcome is modeled as a function
of the mediator, the treatment, and the pretreatment
covariates. The form of these models is immaterial. The
models can be nonlinear, such as logistic or probit models, or even be non-semiparametric, such as generalized
additive models. Based on the mediator model, we then
generate two sets of predictions for the mediator, one
under the treatment and the other under the control.
For example, in the media framing study, this would
correspond to predicted levels of anxiety after reading
a news story on immigration or a neutral news story.
For the next step, the outcome model is used to make
potential outcome predictions. Suppose that we are interested in estimating the ACME under the treatment,
i.e., ¯δ(1). First, the outcome is predicted under the treatment using the value of the mediator predicted in the
treatment condition. Second, the outcome is predicted
under the treatment condition but now uses the mediator prediction from the control condition. The ACME
is then computed as the average difference between the
outcome predictions using the two different values of
17 Imai et al. show a ﬂowchart summarizing this algorithm in
terms of the easy-to-use software mediation.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
the mediator. For example, in the media framing study,
this would correspond to the average difference in immigration attitudes from ﬁxing the treatment status but
changing the level of anxiety between the level predicted after reading an immigration story versus reading a neutral story. Finally, either bootstrap or Monte
Carlo approximation based on the asymptotic sampling
distribution can be
used to compute statistical uncertainty.
Thus, our new estimation method provides much
needed generality and ﬂexibility. Instead of researchers
attempting to shoehorn nonlinear models of various
types into the LSEM framework, they can estimate the
ACME and ADE using statistical models appropriate
to the data at hand.
Sensitivity Analysis
As we discussed, identifying causal mechanisms requires sequential ignorability, which cannot be tested
with the observed data. Given that the identiﬁcation of
causal mechanisms relies upon an untestable assumption, it is important to evaluate the robustness of empirical results to potential violation of this assumption.
Sensitivity analysis provides one way to do this. The
goal of a sensitivity analysis is to quantify the exact degree to which the key identiﬁcation assumption must be
violated for a researcher’s original conclusion to be reversed. If inference is sensitive, a slight violation of the
assumption may lead to substantively different conclusions. Although sensitivity analyses are not currently
a routine part of statistical practice in political science
 ,
we would argue that they should form an indispensable
part of empirical research .
Imai, Keele, and Tingley and Imai, Keele, and
Yamamoto propose a sensitivity analysis based
on the correlation between ϵi2, the error for the mediation model, and ϵi3, the error for the outcome model,
under a standard LSEM setting and several commonly
used nonlinear models. They use ρ to denote the correlation across the two error terms. If sequential ignorability holds, all relevant pretreatment confounders
have been conditioned on, and thus ρ equals zero. However, nonzero values of ρ imply departures from the sequential ignorability assumption and that some hidden
confounder is biasing the ACME estimate.18 For example, in the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study,
if subjects’ unmeasured fear disposition makes them
more likely to become anxious and also more opposed
to immigration, this confounding will be reﬂected in
the data-generating process as a positive correlation
between ϵi2 and ϵi3. Ignoring this and estimating the
two models separately will lead to a biased estimate of
the ACME. Thus, ρ can serve as a sensitivity parameter,
because more extreme values of ρ represent larger departures from the sequential ignorability assumption.
In particular, although the true value of ρ is unknown,
18 This omitted variable can also be thought of as any linear combination of multiple unobserved confounders, though having a speciﬁc
omitted variable in mind will help interpretation.
it is possible to calculate the values of ρ for which the
ACME is zero or its conﬁdence interval contains zero.
Researchers may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to interpret the
sensitivity parameter ρ. To ease interpretation, Imai,
Keele, and Yamamoto have developed an alternative formulation of the sensitivity analysis based
on how much the omitted variable would alter the coefﬁcients of determination (aka. R2) of the mediator
and outcome models. For example, if fear disposition is
important in determining anxiety levels or immigration
preferences, then the model excluding fear disposition
will have a much smaller value of R2 compared to
the full model including fear disposition. On the other
hand, if fear disposition is unimportant, R2 will not be
very different whether including or excluding the variable. Thus, this relative change in R2 can be used as a
sensitivity parameter. For example, the original results
would be considered weak if the sensitivity analysis
suggests that fear disposition would need to explain
only a small portion of the remaining variance in anxiety levels and immigration attitudes for the ACME to
lose statistical signiﬁcance.
Although sensitivity analysis can shed light on
whether the estimates obtained under sequential ignorability are robust to possible hidden pretreatment
confounders, it is important to note the limitations of
the proposed sensitivity analysis. First, the proposed
method is designed to probe for sensitivity to the presence of an unobserved pretreatment confounder. In
particular, it does not address the possible existence
of confounders that are affected by the treatment and
then confound the relationship between the mediator
and the outcome , for a
new sensitivity analysis with respect to posttreatment
confounders). If such a confounder exists, we will need
a different strategy for both identiﬁcation and sensitivity analysis. Second, unlike statistical hypothesis
testing, sensitivity analysis does not provide an objective criterion that allows researchers to determine
whether sequential ignorability is valid or not. This
is not surprising, given that sequential ignorability is
an irrefutable assumption. Therefore, as suggested by
Rosenbaum , a cross-study comparison is
helpful for assessing the robustness of one’s conclusion
relative to those of other similar studies.19
EMPIRICAL ILLUSTRATIONS
In this section, we illustrate the proposed methods
through a reanalysis of the experimental and observational studies of Brader, Valentino, and Suhay 
and Cox and Katz , respectively, which were
brieﬂy discussed in Examples of the Search for Causal
Mechanism. We show the general applicability of our
method by accommodating different types of data, such
19 In addition, the proposed framework rests on the more fundamental presumption that the causal ordering imposed by the analyst
is correct (e.g., emotional reactions occur before policy preference
is formed). This can only be veriﬁed by some appeal to scientiﬁc
evidence not present in the data.
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
Estimated Products of Coefﬁcients and Average
Causal Mediation Effects with Discrete Outcomes
Product of Coefﬁcients
Average Causal
Outcome variables
Mediation Effect (δ)
Decrease Immigration (Ordinal)
[0.146, 0.548]
[0.048, 0.170]
Support English-Only Laws (Ordinal)
[0.069, 0.339]
[0.027, 0.132]
Request Anti-Immigration Information (Binary)
[0.084, 0.469]
[0.007, 0.063]
Send Anti-Immigration Message (Binary)
[0.102, 0.450]
[0.035, 0.144]
Notes: The 95% conﬁdence intervals for the products of coefﬁcients are based on the asymptotic variance of
Sobel . The ACME conﬁdence intervals are based on nonparametric bootstrap with 1000 resamples. The
mediation equation was estimated with least squares and the outcome equation is either a binary or an ordered
probit model, depending on whether the outcome measure is binary or ordinal. For ordinal measures, the ACME
is presented only in terms of the probability of the ﬁnal category, which is the modal category. The results are
computed via the mediation software.
as binary outcomes and mediators. We also show how
to conduct a sensitivity analysis to probe the consequences of potential violations of the sequential ignorability assumption, i.e., Assumption 1.
Quantifying the Role of Anxiety
in the Media Framing Effects
Brader, Valentino, and Suhay set out to study
why and how media cues inﬂuence attitudes toward
immigration. The authors identify two key factors that
they hypothesize not only may alter opinions about
immigration but also may spur people to political action. First, media messages that emphasize the costs of
immigration on society should be expected to increase
opposition, whereas stories that emphasize the beneﬁts
should reduce opposition. Second, given that immigration often has a racial component, whites will be more
likely to oppose immigration when the immigrants being discussed in the media are nonwhite. Cues using
nonwhite immigrants and messages emphasizing costs
will have particularly negative effects on immigration
attitudes. As earlier work suggests that the effect of
group-based appeals works through emotional mechanisms , Brader, Valentino,
and Suhay hypothesize that the cues operate
through changes in anxiety levels. They also consider
an alternative mechanism where the cues inﬂuence immigration attitudes by changing beliefs about the costs
and beneﬁts of immigration.
To test these hypotheses, they constructed an experiment where respondents were given a news story
with two manipulations. First, the content of the news
story was manipulated to emphasize the beneﬁts or
the costs of immigration. Second, the researchers varied whether the particular immigrant described and
pictured was a white immigrant from Russia or a Hispanic immigrant from Mexico. Brader, Valentino, and
Suhay found that generally only one treatment
combination—a negative immigration news story with a
picture of a Hispanic immigrant—elevated anxiety and
eroded support for immigration. That is, when subjects
were exposed to a news story that highlighted the costs
of immigration and referenced a Hispanic immigrant,
they became less supportive of immigration. They also
were more likely to speak out against increased immigration to their member of Congress and more likely
to request anti-immigration information. The authors
conclude that subjects’ level of anxiety mediated the
effect of media cues.
Given the original results, we recode the fourcategory treatment condition indicator into a binary
variable where the treatment condition is the negative
news story combined with the picture of the Hispanic
immigrant and the control condition is composed of
subjects in the other three conditions. The anxiety mediator is measured as a roughly continuous scale constructed from three self-reported emotion indices in
the survey. The outcome variables, which all measure
various attitudes toward immigration, are all discrete.
The ﬁrst two outcome measures are ordinal scales and
the other two outcome measures are binary. Finally,
we use the same pretreatment covariates used in the
original analysis (education, age, income, and gender).
Estimation of the Average Causal Mediation Effects.
We report two types of results in Table 2. The ﬁrst
is based upon the product-of-coefﬁcients method that
Brader, Valentino, and Suhay use (left column).
This involves estimating equation (6) with a linear regression and then estimating equation (7) with a binary
or ordered probit model (depending on whether the
outcome measure is binary or ordinal), both including
the set of pretreatment covariates. Under this method,
ˆβ2 ˆγ is interpreted to be the estimate of the ACME
and the conﬁdence intervals are calculated using the
asymptotic variance formula . For each
type of immigration attitude or behavior, we obtain
a positive, statistically signiﬁcant estimate using the
product-of-coefﬁcients method. Brader, Valentino, and
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
Suhay took this as evidence that anxiety transmits the effect of receiving the Hispanic/cost cue on
immigration attitudes and behavior.
As discussed earlier, however, the use of the
product-of-coefﬁcients method is problematic unless
both the outcome and mediator are modeled as linear
functions. In the current case, because of the nonlinear
models (probits) for the outcome variables, ˆβ2 ˆγ does
not estimate the ACME consistently even under the sequential ignorability assumption and thus lacks a clear
substantive interpretation.
The second set of results employs the method described in The Proposed Estimation Method (right column). Using the mediation software, we estimate the
same set of regression models and then calculate the
ACME with conﬁdence intervals based on the nonparametric bootstrap with 1000 resamples. We report
the ACME for the treatment condition, ¯δ(1).20 When
the ordinal outcome is modeled with an ordered probit
model, there is an ACME point estimate for each category in the dependent variable, which represents the
change in the probability for each value of the outcome.
Here, we report the ACME for the ﬁnal category in
eachoutcomemeasure,whichinbothcases is themodal
category. The results show a striking contrast with the
product-of-coefﬁcients estimates, with the latter being
4 to 10 times as large. Under Assumption 1, our estimates are consistent for the ACME, which represents
the average change in the outcome that is due to the
change in the mediator induced by the difference in the
treatment condition.
For example, we ﬁnd that on average the treatment
increased the probability that a subject preferred less
immigration by 0.105 (with a 95% conﬁdence interval of [0.048, 0.170]) because of heightened anxiety.
Because the total causal effect of the Hispanic/cost
treatment was 0.195 ([0.067, 0.324]) and the direct effect was 0.090 ([−0.021, 0.209]), we can conclude that
about 54% of the total effect was mediated through
the anxiety mechanism. In contrast, the product-ofcoefﬁcients method overestimates the increase in the
probability of preferring less immigration due to the
anxiety pathway (0.347 as opposed to 0.105).21
Sensitivity Analysis.
The previous results indicate that
anxiety is indeed likely to be a mediator of the effect of
media cues on immigration opinions. However, these
ﬁndings are obtained under the sequential ignorability
assumption (Assumption 1). Thus, a natural question
is how sensitive these results are to the violation of that
assumption. In the current context, Assumption 1 implies that we have fully accounted for any confounders
that might have effects on both the mediator and the
outcome. More concretely, we must ask whether individuals who became more anxious have unobserved
20 Estimates of ¯δ(0) were similar. Although we can incorporate an
interaction term between the treatment and mediator, the estimates
of ¯δ(0) and ¯δ(1) will generally differ even without an interaction term
because of nonlinearity in the outcome model.
21 The biased estimate based on the product of coefﬁcients method
does not make much substantive sense, either, because it implies that
the direct effect is negative.
characteristics that differ from those of other individuals and that also inﬂuence immigration attitudes. If, for
example, the unmeasured fear disposition or ideology
of subjects makes them both more anxious and more
opposed to immigration (see Nonparametric Identiﬁcation under the Standard Designs), the proposed estimation procedure produces a biased estimate of the
ACME. Our sensitivity analysis measures the robustness of conclusions to such possibilities.
Here, we focus on the outcome where subjects stated
whether immigration should be decreased or increased.
The results are presented in Figure 2, which is generated using the mediation software. In the left panel, the
true ACME is plotted against values of the sensitivity
parameter ρ, which equals the correlation between the
error terms in the mediator and outcome models and
thus represents both the degree and direction of the
unobserved confounding factor between anxiety and
immigration preference. When ρ is zero, sequential ignorability holds and the true ACME coincides with the
estimate reported in Table 2. The shaded region in the
plot marks the 95% conﬁdence intervals for each value
The ﬁrst question we ask in the sensitivity analysis is how large ρ must be for the mediation effect to
be zero. We ﬁnd that for this outcome, the estimated
ACME equals zero when ρ equals 0.43. After taking
into account sampling uncertainty, we ﬁnd that the 95%
conﬁdence intervals for the ACME include zero when
ρ exceeds 0.34. Thus, to conclude that the true ACME
is not signiﬁcantly different from zero, we must assume
an unobserved confounder that affects both anxiety
and immigration preference in the same direction and
makes the correlation between the two error terms
greater than 0.34.
Although this procedure effectively quantiﬁes the
degree of sensitivity, analysts may have difﬁculty in
interpreting the result in substantive terms. There are
two ways to address this issue. As suggested in Sensitivity Analysis, the ﬁrst is a cross-study comparison.
For example, Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto ﬁnd
in their reanalysis of another prominent media framing
experiment that the
ACME is zero when ρ is equal to 0.48. Thus, the ﬁndings
reported here are slightly less robust to the existence
of unobserved confounding than in this previous study.
The second possibility is to express the degree of sensitivity in terms of the importance of an unobserved
confounder in explaining the observed variation in the
mediator and outcome variables.
In the right panel of Figure 2, the true ACME is
shown as contours with respect to the proportions of
the variance in the mediator (horizontal axis) and in the
outcome (vertical axis), each explained by the unobserved confounder in the true regression models. Here,
we explore the case where the unobserved confounder
affects the mediator and outcome in the same direction, which is what we would expect if the confounder
were fear disposition. These two sensitivity parameters
are each bounded above by one minus the R2 of the
observed models, which represents the proportion of
the variance that is not yet explained by the observed
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
Sensitivity Analysis with Continuous Mediator and Binary Outcome
Sensitivity Parameter: ρ
Average Mediation Effect: δ(1)
Proportion of Total Variance in M
Explained by Confounder
Proportion of Total Variance in Y
Explained by Confounder
Notes: The graphs show two alternative formulations of the proposed sensitivity analysis. The outcome for both analyses is whether
subjects opposed increased immigration. In the left panel, the true ACME is plotted against the sensitivity parameter ρ, which is the
correlation between the error terms in the mediator and outcome regression models. The dashed line represents the estimated ACME
when the sequential ignorability assumption is made. The shaded areas represent the 95% conﬁdence interval for the mediation effects
at each value of ρ. In the right panel, the contours represent the true ACME plotted as a function of the proportion of the total mediator
variance (horizontal axis) and the total outcome variance (vertical axis), that are each explained by the unobserved confounder included
in the corresponding regression models. Here the unobserved confounder is assumed to affect the mediator and outcome in the same
direction. Both graphs are generated by the mediation software.
predictors in each model. In this example, these upper
bounds are 0.78 for the mediator model and 0.50 for
the outcome model. Other things being equal, a low
value of this upper bound indicates a more robust estimate of the ACME because there is less room for an
unobserved confounder to bias the result.
We ﬁnd that the true ACME changes sign if the
product of these proportions is greater than 0.07 and
the confounder affects both anxiety and immigration
preference in the same direction. For example, if subjects’ fear disposition explains more than 35% of the
variance in anxiety and 20% of the variance of the immigration level preference in the latent scale, then the
true ACME is negative. Thus, the positive ACME reported in the original analysis is robust to confounding
because of unmeasured fear disposition when the latter
explains less than about 26% (≃
0.07) of the variance
in the mediator and outcome. If the confounder were to
affect the mediator and outcome in different directions,
then mediation effects would be even more positive.
In sum, our reanalysis of the Brader, Valentino, and
Suhay study yields appropriate estimates of the
ACME (given the use of nonlinear models), makes the
necessary assumptions for the identiﬁcation of mediation effects clear, and provides a sensitivity analysis.
Estimating the “Scare-off/Quality Effect”
of Incumbency
Cox and Katz study the causal mechanisms through
which incumbency generates an electoral advantage.
They suggest one such mechanism where incumbents
“scare off” quality challengers, yielding the electoral
advantage of the incumbent in terms of relative opponent quality. Their argument is that because incumbents are likely to have greater resources available to
them, higher-quality challengers will be deterred by
the higher cost of defeating an incumbent and their
own high opportunity costs.
In the original analysis, the treatment variable is a
trichotomous incumbency indicator equal to −1 if the
incumbent is Republican in district i, 0 if there is no
incumbent, and 1 if district i has a Democratic incumbent. The mediator is what they call the Democratic
quality advantage, which is operationalized as a trichotomous variable that equals −1 if the Republican
challenger had previously held elected ofﬁce but not
the Democrat, 0 if neither or both candidates previously held elected ofﬁce, and 1 if the Democrat had held
ofﬁce but not the Republican. The outcome variable is
Democratic vote share in district i.22
Measurement of Challenger Quality.
Our reanalysis
based on the potential outcomes framework reveals an
important conceptual limitation of the original study.
To estimate the scare-off/quality effect of incumbency,
Cox and Katz operationalize the quality advantage of Democratic candidates as the difference in the
two candidates’ quality (measured by their previous
experience in an elective ofﬁce) for each district. This
mediating variable, however, is problematic because it
is deﬁned in terms of not only challengers’ quality but
22 Despite the trichotomous nature of the mediating variable, the
original analysis used linear regression models so that the product of
coefﬁcients method can be applied. Our approach permits the use of
an ordered probit model.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
also incumbents’ own quality. In fact, because incumbency itself is regarded as previous ofﬁce experience,
the mediator cannot take its largest (smallest) possible
value whenever there is a Republican (Democratic)
incumbent in a district regardless of the challenger’s
quality, i.e., Mi(−1) ∈{−1, 0} and Mi(1) ∈{0, 1} for any
i. This creates an artiﬁcial positive correlation between
the observed values of the mediator and the treatment
because by deﬁnition Mi(−1) can never be greater than
Mi(1) for any i.
For example, consider the counterfactual scenario
where a Democratic incumbent had his or her incumbency status changed and thus is no longer an
incumbent. The scare-off effect is then the decrease
in the quality of the Republican challenger that would
result from this hypothetical change in incumbency.
However, under the original coding scheme, the value
of Democratic quality advantage would automatically
decrease—because of the counterfactual change in
incumbency status—even if the challenger’s quality
stayed the same. Thus, the change in incumbency negatively affects the mediator even if the true scare-off
effect is zero. Note that although our focus on counterfactuals makes these inconsistencies readily apparent,
the model-based approach tends to mask them by obscuring the relevant counterfactual comparisons.
Fortunately, our framework permits a clear way to
revisit their original question. The problem with the
original coding scheme was that changes in the incumbency status would automatically produce changes in
the quality variable; the mediator is deﬁned too closely
to the treatment variable. To avoid this problem, we
ﬁrst split apart the sample into two groups based on the
party of incumbents.23 For the analysis of Democratic
incumbency effects, the treatment variable is coded as
1 if there was a Democratic incumbent in the district
and 0 if the seat was open. To construct the mediating
variable, we used the original Jacobson data to
calculate the quality of the Republican candidate in
the district. We code this mediating variable as 1 if the
Republican had previously held public ofﬁce and 0 if
he or she had not. Note, importantly, that variation in
this variable is no longer tied to the treatment variable in any deterministic way, as in the original coding
scheme. Finally, the outcome variable is the Democratic candidate’s percentage of the two-party vote.
The variables for the Republican incumbents group are
coded analogously. The new coding scheme allows us to
deﬁne causal quantities of interest in a clearer and more
transparent manner. For example, the average total effect of incumbency, ¯τ = E(Yi(1, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(0))),
is equal to the expected change in the candidate’s percentage of the two party vote that would result if the
candidate were changed from an incumbent to a nonincumbent in an open seat, holding his or her party constant either to Democrat or Republican. The ACME
for the scare-off/quality mechanism under the control
condition, ¯δ(0) = E(Yi(0, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(0))), represents the expected change in the vote share caused
23 Open seats are counted twice and included in both groups, composing the control groups.
by the change in challenger quality that would result
if a candidate in an open seat (either Democratic or
Republican) hypothetically ran as an incumbent of the
same party. Thus, the original scare-off/quality hypothesis can be tested by estimating the size of ¯δ(0) and
comparing it to the total incumbency effect, ¯τ, for each
Estimation of the Average Causal Mediation Effects.
Cox and Katz found that the component of incumbency
effects that is due to the scare-off/quality mechanism
increased over time by estimating effects separately
by election. Figure 3 presents the ACME and total effect of changing the incumbency variable from 0 (open
seat) to 1 (incumbent) separately for Democratic incumbents (left) and Republican incumbents (right). As
found generally in the literature, the effect of incumbency has greatly increased over time. In the original
study, this growth was attributed to a similar increase
over time in the scare-off/quality effect. In contrast,
our analysis shows that the ACME was not signiﬁcantly
different from zero for either Democratic or Republican candidates in the earlier time periods. Moreover,
although the ACME has slightly increased over time as
in the original study, the effect beginning in the 1970s
was usually between 2 and 3% and barely statistically
signiﬁcant at the .05 level. Thus, our reanalysis suggests
that the increase in incumbency advantage may be attributable to different causal mechanisms rather than
to the scare-off/quality mechanism.
Sensitivity Analysis.
We now apply the proposed sensitivity analyses to the incumbency advantage example. As explained earlier, the estimates of the ACME
reported in Figure 3 will be biased if the sequential ignorability assumption (Assumption 1) does not hold. In
this study, there can be many unobserved confounders
that affect both the mediator and the outcome variable. For example, Assumption 1 will be violated if
national party organizations allocate campaign funds
across districts based on priorities for getting particular candidates (say those in powerful committee
positions) elected. The candidates might face lowerquality challengers and have higher election returns
because of these added resources. The proposed sensitivity analysis quantiﬁes the robustness of the ACME
estimates to the existence of such unobserved confounding. Whereas previous sensitivity analyses with
the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay study were
conducted with a dichotomous outcome and continuous mediating variable, the ﬂexibility of our approach
permits sensitivity analyses for more general settings.
Here, the mediating variable is dichotomous and the
outcome variable continuous.
For illustration, we focus on the Republican incumbency effects in 1976 and 1980, where the magnitude of
the estimated ACME was similar (1.25 and 1.27). The
results are shown in Figure 4, which again is generated
by mediation. Sensitivity estimates can be quite different even in this case, where the estimated ACME under
Assumption 1 is roughly equal. For example, in 1976 the
value of ρ for which the point estimate of the ACME
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
Estimated Average Causal Mediation Effect (ACME) and Total Effect of
Incumbency Status on Own Party Vote Share
Democratic Incumbents
Average Mediation Effect: δ(0)
Average Total Effect: τ
Effect of Incumbency on
Incumbent % of Two−Party Vote
Republican Incumbents
Notes: For each party (left panel Democratic; right panel Republican), the black dots represent the ACME of incumbency on own party
vote share mediated by the other candidate’s quality. The white dots represent the total effect of incumbency on vote share. The effects
are reported for each U.S. House election between 1946 and 1990. The vertical lines represent the 95% conﬁdence intervals. The effects
are estimated using the algorithm in Imai, Keele, and Tingley with probit for the mediator model and linear regression for the
outcome model. Estimates generally show smaller proportions of the total effects transmitted through the scare-off/quality mechanism
than reported by Cox and Katz .
changes sign is −0.39, whereas for 1980 it is −0.20,
implying that the 1976 estimate is much more robust to
unobserved confounding. The analysis with respect to
the explained variances similarly shows a striking contrast between these two years. For 1976, an unobserved
confounder must affect the mediator and outcome in
different directions and explain as much as 23.4% of
the total variance in both variables for the true ACME
to be negative.24 In contrast, this percentage for the
1980 estimate is only about 11.8%, and the true ACME
could be negative and quite large (−3 or even less)
when the degree of confounding was extremely high.
The two years also differ in terms of the upper bounds
of the sensitivity parameters. For 1976, the observed
variables in the models leave 85.1% and 42.1% of the
variance in the mediator and outcome, respectively, to
be potentially explained by an unobserved confounder.
For 1980, these proportions are much smaller for the
mediator (62.5%) but slightly larger for the outcome
(56.1%). In summary, even when the point estimates
under Assumption 1 are similar, the robustness of conclusions can be quite different.
We conclude this section by reminding readers of an
important limitation of observational studies. As explained in Sensitivity Analysis, the analysis maintains
the assumption that the treatment is ignorable after
conditioning on observed covariates. Although this as-
24 We use a pseudo-R2 for the probit model . If the unobserved confounder inﬂuences the mediator and outcome in the same direction the results would suggest a
stronger role of the proposed mechanism.
sumption is guaranteed to hold in randomized experiments, it can be violated in observational studies. For
example, the analysis would be invalid if there were unobserved confounders that affected both incumbency
status and challenger quality. As with any causal inference based on observational data, the assumption of
ignorable treatment also plays a crucial role.
ALTERNATIVE RESEARCH DESIGNS
FOR CREDIBLE INFERENCE
So far, we have discussed how to make inferences
about causal mechanisms using the standard designs
for experimental and observational studies. However,
as should be clear by now, the standard designs require
a strong identiﬁcation assumption that may be difﬁcult to justify in practice. A natural question to ask is
whether there exist alternative research designs that
rely on more credible assumptions. Imai, Tingley, and
Yamamoto (n.d.) propose new experimental designs
and analyze their power to identify causal mechanisms.
The key idea is to consider designs where the mediator
can be directly or indirectly manipulated. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss some of these alternative experimental designs in the context of the Brader, Valentino,
and Suhay study. We then show that the basic ideas of these experimental designs can serve as
a template for observational studies in the context of
incumbency advantage research. Our discussion should
help researchers to think systematically about how to
design observational studies.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
Sensitivity Analysis for the Scare-off/Quality Mechanism, 1976 and 1980 Elections with
Republican Incumbents
Average Causal Mediation Effect: δ
Sensitivity Parameter: ρ
Proportion of Total Variance in M Explained by Confounder
Proportion of Total Variance in Y
Explained by Confounder
Notes: The top row plots the ACME as a function of the sensitivity parameter ρ. The bottom row of plots provide the alternative formulation
based on the decomposition of variances. See Figure 2 for the graph interpretation. Despite the two years having a similar-sized ACME
estimate, the sensitivity analyses suggest that the 1980 results are more sensitive to an omitted variable that affects the Democratic
candidate quality (mediator) and Republican vote share (outcome) in opposite directions.
Designing Randomized Experiments
To study how media cues inﬂuence immigration attitudes, Brader, Valentino, and Suhay use the
standard single-experiment design, which consists of
the following three basic steps. First, a treatment is
randomly assigned to subjects. Second, a mediating
variable is measured after the treatment has been administered. Finally, an outcome variable is measured.
The single-experiment design is typical of the vast majority of experimental work in the social sciences that
attempt to identify causal mechanisms.
However, sequential ignorability must hold for the
ACME and ADE to be identiﬁable under this singleexperiment design. What happens if we relax this
assumption and only assume that the treatment is
randomized (as is the case under the single experiment design)? For the special case of binary mediator and outcome, Imai, Tingley, and Yamamoto
(n.d.) and Sj¨olander derive the nonparametric sharp bounds for the ACME and ADE, respectively. The bounds represent the exact range of possible
values that these quantities of interest can take without sequential ignorability. The results imply that the
single-experiment design can provide some information about these quantities compared to what is known
before the experiment (i.e., the bounds are narrower
than [−1, 1]). But the bounds unfortunately will always
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
include zero and hence will not provide information
about the sign of the ACME or ADE. Thus, relatively
little can be learned under the single-experiment design
without an additional untestable assumption.
The problem with the single-experiment design is
that we cannot be sure that the observed mediator is
ignorable conditional on the treatment and pretreatment covariates. A better alternative is to implement
experimental designs where the researcher randomly
assigns the values of the mediator. Imai, Tingley, and
Yamamoto (n.d.) propose several such designs and derive their identiﬁcation power under a minimal set of
assumptions. One important difference among these
new designs is whether the mediator can be perfectly
manipulated by the researcher. For the purpose of
studying topics like media cues, the most applicable
class of designs is what they call encouragement designs,
because it is unlikely that a researcher will be able to
perfectly assign levels of anxiety, because anxiety can
at best be encouraged to take certain values. Thus, in
this section, we focus on encouragement designs and
discuss how they can help improve our inferences about
In the parallel encouragement design, subjects are
ﬁrst split into two experiments, which are run in parallel. The ﬁrst experiment uses the standard singleexperiment design. In the second experiment, we ﬁrst
randomly assign subjects to the treatment and control conditions. Then, within each condition, a random
subset of subjects are encouraged to take on a high
or low value of the mediator. Finally, both the mediator and outcome variable are observed. For example,
a redesign of Brader, Valentino, and Suhay’s 
original study would be to assign individuals to either receive the treatment news story, which features
a Hispanic immigrant and emphasizes the costs to immigration, or the control story. Second, within each
condition, a random set of subjects are encouraged to
have lower or higher levels of anxiety through a writing
task or other mood
induction procedures .
If mediator manipulation in the second experiment
were perfect, then the parallel encouragement design
would reduce to the parallel design, where the mediator
is directly manipulated to take particular values for a
randomly selected subset of the sample. It is important
to note that even in the parallel design, the ACME and
ADE are not identiﬁed. This stems from the fact that
the causal mediation effect represents a change in the
mediator due to the difference in the treatment condition rather than the effect of directly manipulating the
mediator at a certain level (see Sequential Ignorability
and Conventional Exogeneity Assumptions). In practice, manipulation of mood will not be perfect, so some
subjects will have the same level of anxiety regardless
of whether they are encouraged. In these cases, the
encouragement design will provide less information
about the ACME for the entire population than the
parallel design.
However, the parallel encouragement design provides more information for those subjects that comply
with the encouragement. Figure 5 illustrates the fact
Diagram Illustrating the
Parallel Encouragement Design
Notes: The randomized encouragement Z induces an exogenous variation in the mediator M, which allows researchers to
make informative inference about the ACME and ADE even
in the presence of confounders, which are represented by the
dashed arc.
that the randomized encouragement Z can be regarded
as the instrument inducing an exogenous variation in
the mediator. Thus, following the identiﬁcation strategy used in instrumental variables approach for the
total causal effect ,
we can deﬁne the complier average mediation effect
(CACME). In Instrumental Variables, we further discuss this connection with instrumental variables. For
example, the CACME in the context of the immigration study is equal to the average effect of ethnic cues
on immigration attitudes that is mediated by anxiety
among those subjects whose anxiety levels are either
lowered or raised by the mood induction task. Although these compliers represent a particular subset
of the population and hence there is no guarantee that
the CACME is similar to the ACME for the entire
population of interest, the bounds on the former can
be as tight as or even tighter than those on the latter in
this encouragement design.
We refer readers to Imai, Tingley, and Yamamoto
(n.d.) for the details of various alternative design,
including the parallel encouragement design, as well
as the comparison between them and the singleexperiment design. A key point, however, is that these
new designs in many cases will generate more information about causal mechanisms. Thus, these designs
are useful alternatives for experimentalists who study
causal mechanisms but wish to avoid the sequential
ignorability assumption.
Designing Observational Studies
How should we design observational studies so that
we can make credible inferences about causal mechanisms in the absence of experimental controls? Our
suggestion is to use the experimental designs discussed
previously as templates. The growing use of natural
experiments in social sciences over the last couple of
decades arose as a result of systematic efforts by empirical researchers who use randomized experiments
as research templates. These researchers search for
situations where the treatment variable is determined
haphazardly so that the ignorability assumption is more
We argue that a similar strategy can be employed for
the identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms by designing
observational studies to imitate various experimental
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
designs. In fact, some have already employed similar
research design strategies in the incumbency advantage
literature. Here, we show how these existing studies can
be seen as observational study approximations to various experimental designs. This suggests that by using
these experimental designs as templates, researchers
can systematically think about ways to make observational studies more credible for identifying causal
mechanisms.
We ﬁrst consider an extension of the crossover design proposed in Imai, Tingley, and Yamamoto (n.d.) to
an observational study on incumbency advantage. The
crossover design for randomized experiments consists
of the following two steps. First, the treatment is randomized and then the values of the mediator and the
outcome variable are observed. Second, the treatment
status is changed to the one opposite to the treatment
status of the ﬁrst period and the mediator is manipulated so that its value is ﬁxed at the observed mediator
value from the ﬁrst period. Because the mediator value
is ﬁxed throughout the two periods, the comparison of
the outcomes of each unit between the ﬁrst and second
periods identiﬁes the direct effect for that unit. Subtracting the estimated ADE from the estimated ATE
then gives the estimate of the ACME.25
In the incumbency advantage literature, the research
design used by Levitt and Wolfram can be understood as an approximation to this crossover design.
In that article, the authors examine repeated contests
between the same candidates. The basic idea is the
following. Suppose that both candidates are nonincumbent during the ﬁrst election. One candidate wins the
election and then they face each other again in the next
election as an incumbent and a challenger. If we assume
that the candidate quality has not changed between
the two elections, then this is essentially a crossover
design. In the ﬁrst period, we have a nonincumbent
Ti = 0 and we observe the challenger quality without
incumbency Mi(0). In the second period, the mediator
is held at the same value as the ﬁrst period, but the
treatment status changes to Ti = 1 now that the candidate is an incumbent. If we further assume that the
ﬁrst election does not affect the second election (i.e.,
no carryover effect), then we can identify the ADE,
E{Yi(1, Mi(0)) −Yi(0, Mi(0))}, for a subset of districts
that have repeated contests between the same two candidates.
Ansolabehere,
Snyder, and Stewart use a similar research design to examine the importance of personal vote as an
alternative causal mechanism of incumbency advantage. In particular, the authors use decennial redistricting as a natural experiment and compare (right after
redistricting) the incumbent’s vote share in the new
part of the district with that in the old part of the district. They argue that this comparison allows the identiﬁcation of personal vote (due to incumbents’ services
25 Imai, Tingley, and Yamamoto (n.d.) discuss how this design can be
applied to the labor market discrimination experiment of Bertrand
and Mullainathan by modifying the original experimental
protocol in subtle but important ways.
to their districts) because in both parts of the districts
the incumbent faces the same challenger; hence the
challenger quality is held ﬁxed. Although the comparison is made within the same election cycle, this
design can also be considered as an approximation to
the crossover design. The authors assume that the incumbency status is different between the old and new
parts of the district because the candidate is not an
incumbent for new voters, even though the challenger
quality is the same for the entire district. If this assumption is reasonable, then their research design identiﬁes
the ADE, E{Yi(1, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(1))}, for a subset of
districts where redistricting produced both new and old
voters. Assuming there is no causal pathway between
incumbency and vote share other than challenger quality and personal vote, the ADE is then equal to the
incumbency effect due to personal vote.
Assuming that the no-carryover effect assumption
holds, there exist two main advantages of this crossover design over the standard design such as the one
used by Cox and Katz . First, because the challenger is held constant, researchers can assume challenger/quality is held constant without even measuring
it. Second, the randomization of treatment is unnecessary because under the appropriate assumptions all
necessary potential outcomes are observed for each
unit. This is an important advantage, given that the
ignorability of treatment assignment is difﬁcult to assume in observational studies. These examples illustrate that the identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms with
observational studies can be made more credible by
using randomized experiments as templates. In particular, researchers may use the key idea of the crossover
design and look for natural experiments where the
mediator is held constant either across time or
Of course, researchers should always be aware of
whether a natural experiment has external validity
limitations. In the incumbency advantage example
described earlier, Levitt and Wolfram attributed a
large fraction of incumbency advantage to the scareoff/quality effect, whereas Ansolabehere, Snyder, and
Stewart attributed it to the personal vote. Although these results are apparently contradictory, the
difference may have arisen simply because the two
designs identify different quantities. The ADE identiﬁed by Levitt and Wolfram holds the mediator constant at Mi(0), whereas the mediator is ﬁxed
to Mi(1) for the Ansolabehere, Snyder, and Stewart
 study. In addition, the two studies identify these
quantities for different subsets of districts. Thus, the
differences between the two sets of ﬁndings may simply
reﬂect the differences in the causal estimands.
The Importance of the
Consistency Assumption
Finally, we note that the research designs considered
so far all rest on an important assumption called consistency . In the current context, the assumption states that regardless of how the
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
values of the treatment and mediator come about, their
potential outcomes must take the same values as long
as the treatment and mediator values are the same.
In other words, experimental manipulations themselves must not affect the outcome except through the
changes they induce in the values of the treatment or
mediator.26
This notion of consistency represents a fundamental
assumption that is common to a vast majority of the existing results in the causal inference literature, though
it is often left implicit.27 In the analysis of causal mechanisms, however, the consistency assumption deserves
special attention. As emphasized throughout this article, the identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms, by deﬁnition, requires inference about natural changes in the
mediator as responses to treatment. Therefore, even in
experimental designs involving the manipulation (or
encouragement) of mediators, one must assume that
subjects would respond in the same way if those values of mediators were spontaneously chosen by the
subjects themselves.
The consistency assumption requires particularly
careful examination when the mechanism of interest
is a psychological one. For example, in the redesigned
version of the Brader, Valentino, and Suhay 
study we discussed in Designing Randomized Experiments, anxiety encouragement such as a writing task
may itself have an effect on subjects’ immigration attitudes other than through its direct effect on anxiety
if the task changes other emotions, which in tern affect immigration attitudes. The consistency assumption
would then be violated. In the incumbency advantage
study by Levitt and Wolfram, the consistency assumption requires that the vote shares in the two elections
be comparable, in the sense that they would on average take identical values if both incumbency status
and challenger qualities stayed the same. In sum, one
must carefully evaluate the plausibility of consistency
in using these alternative designs in light of the speciﬁc
context of one’s empirical application.
RELATED CONCEPTS AND
COMMON MISUNDERSTANDINGS
Finally, we discuss how the concepts and methods introduced here differ from those frequently used by
social scientists. Understanding these key differences
is crucial for determining the quantities of interest that
ﬁt the goal of one’s research, leading to the appropriate
choice of statistical methods and research designs.
Instrumental Variables
The instrumental variables method is widely used for
the identiﬁcation of causal effects across disciplines.
26 The exact deﬁnition of the consistency assumption varies depending on which speciﬁc design is employed in a given study. See Imai,
Tingley, and Yamamoto (n.d.) for its formal representations.
27 Consistency and the assumption of no interference between units
(see footnote 5) together compose the so-called stable unit treatment
value assumption (SUTVA).
Typically, an instrumental variable is used when one
is interested in the causal effect of an endogenous
treatment variable. Under this setting, the instrument
is assumed to have no direct effect on the outcome (i.e.,
exclusion restriction) and affects all units in one direction (i.e., monotonicity) . Together with the ignorability of the instrument
and the stable unit treatment value assumption, researchers can identify the ATE for compliers. Although
this standard use of the instrumental variables method
is helpful for identifying causal effects, it does not directly help identify causal mechanisms. In fact, it has
more often been associated with the “black box” approach to causal inference, where insufﬁcient attention
is paid to causal mechanisms. For example, Deaton
 criticizes the blind application of this
method to economic research precisely because of this
Given the value of the instrumental variables
method for studying causal effects, can it be incorporated into the study of causal mechanisms? The
answer is yes, though unfortunately the existing
methodological suggestions are of limited use for applied researchers because they a priori rule out the existence of causal mechanisms other than the hypothesized one by assuming the direct effect of the treatment
to be zero (i.e., an exclusion restriction) . A more appropriate way of applying the instrumental variable method appears in the
encouragement design discussed in Designing Randomized Experiments. Under that design, the randomized
encouragement can be seen as an instrument for the
mediator which in conjunction with the randomized
treatment helps identify causal mechanisms. If encouragement has no direct effect on the outcome (other
than through the mediator) and does not discourage
anyone, then the instrumental variables assumptions
are satisﬁed. This means that one can learn about the
ACME and the ADE for those who can be affected by
the encouragement without assuming sequential ignorability. Therefore, the instrumental variables method
can effectively address the endogeneity of the mediator. The key point here is that combining instrumental
variables and novel research designs helps to identify
causal mechanisms, whereas previous applications of
instrumental variables were unable to do more than
simply identify causal effects.
Furthermore, the idea of this encouragement design
can be extended to observational studies that seek to
understand the role of a causal mechanism. To do
this, researchers can use an instrument that induces
exogenous variation in the mediator of interest, while
also measuring and using the treatment variable of interest. For example, in the literature on how incumbency advantage inﬂuences election outcomes, Gerber
 explores campaign spending as an alternative
causal mechanism. Recognizing the possible endogeneity problem, the author uses candidate wealth levels
as an instrument. Here, the key identifying assumptions are that candidate wealth levels are essentially
random (ignorability of instrument); they inﬂuence
election outcomes only through campaign spending
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
(exclusion restriction); and higher candidate wealth
levels never lead to lower campaign spending (monotonicity). These assumptions are strong, but if they are
met, candidate wealth levels can be used as an instrument to study causal mechanisms without sequential
ignorability.
Under this setting, a standard instrumental variables estimator may be used to estimate the ACME
and ADE. For example, in the LSEM framework,
the two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimator can be
used, where the ﬁrst-stage model is given by the
Mi = α2 + β2Ti + λZi + ξ⊤
2 Xi + ϵi2,
where Zi is the instrumental variable, whereas the
second-stage regression is the same as before, i.e., equation (7). In the Appendix, we prove that under this
linear structural model the ACME and ADE are identiﬁed and equal to β2γ and β3, respectively. Thus, this
well-known 2SLS estimator can also be used for the
identiﬁcation of causal mechanisms. If an instrument is
available and a researcher has a strong reason to believe that ignorability of the mediator will not hold, this
strategy is a viable alternative. However, as in any use
of instrumental variables, the validity of the required
assumptions must be taken seriously.
Interaction Terms
Another common strategy researchers employ to identify causal mechanisms is to use interaction terms.
Broadly speaking, there are two usages; interaction
terms between the treatment and mediator measures
and those between the treatment and pre-treatment
covariates. Researchers typically include these interaction terms in regressions and use their statistical significance as evidence of the causal mechanisms that these
terms are assumed to represent. Now, we examine the
conditions that justify such strategies.
First, consider an interaction between treatment
and mediator. A recent such example is the work by
Blattman , who ﬁnds that in Uganda abduction
by rebel groups leads to substantial increases in voting through elevated levels of violence witnessed. In
a series of regressions, the author shows that level of
violence witnessed has a positive, statistically signiﬁcant association with political participation primarily
among those who were abducted. This ﬁnding is then
used as evidence for the claim that “violence, especially
violence witnessed, is the main mechanism by which
abduction impacts participation” (239).
Under what assumptions is this line of reasoning
valid? Such an inference can be justiﬁed under sequential ignorability. In the current example, the abduction by rebels must occur at random and levels of
violence witnessed also need to be random, conditioning on whether one was abducted and other pretreatment covariates such as income and education. Under sequential ignorability, the signiﬁcant interaction
term between treatment and mediator indicates that
the ACME differs depending on the treatment status,
i.e., ¯δ(1) ̸= ¯δ(0), and in particular ¯δ(1) > 0 but ¯δ(0) ≈0.
This means that the average level of political participation for abductees would have been lower if they had
witnessed the same level of violence as nonabductees.
However, for nonabductees, the levels of political participation would not have changed much even if they
had witnessed as high levels of violence as abductees
Thus, so long as sequential ignorability holds, the
statistically signiﬁcant interaction term between treatment and mediator provides evidence for the existence
of a hypothesized causal mechanism. However, simply testing the signiﬁcance of the interaction term is
not recommended because such a procedure can only
test whether either ¯δ(1) or ¯δ(0) is different from zero.
In contrast, the procedure in Inference and Sensitivity
Analysis under the Standard Designs can estimate the
size of these quantities along with conﬁdence intervals,
providing more substantive information on the basis
of the same assumption. In the situation where the
values of ¯δ(1) and ¯δ(0) are likely to differ, one can
include the interaction term TiMi in equation (7) to
allow the estimates to be different .
The second common strategy is to use the statistically signiﬁcant interaction between treatment and
pretreatment variables as evidence for the existence
of a hypothesized causal mechanism. In this approach,
researchers demonstrate that the ATE for a certain
subgroup of the population is different from that for
another subgroup. One such example appears in a recent survey experiment by Tomz and van Houweling
 , who investigate how the ambiguity of candidates’ position-taking inﬂuences voters’ evaluation of
these candidates. In one part of the study, the authors
randomize the attachment of party labels to candidates
as the treatment. A hypothesized mechanism is that the
lack of a party label increases the uncertainty about
candidates’ positions and in turn makes voters more
likely to prefer ambiguous candidates over unambiguous candidates if the voter is risk-seeking rather than
risk-averse. Note that in this study the risk preference
is considered to be a pretreatment characteristic of a
voter. The original analysis ﬁnds that the estimated
ATE of party labels is larger for risk-seeking voters
than for risk-averse voters. This ﬁnding is used to argue that party labels inﬂuence candidate preferences
by reducing uncertainty.
Such an interaction between treatment and pretreatment covariates indicates variation in the treatment effect. It is well known that such treatment effect heterogeneity itself does not necessarily imply the existence
of causal mechanisms, representing the distinction between moderation and mediation Baron and Kenny
 . However, treatment effect heterogeneity can
also be taken as evidence of a causal mechanism under
a certain assumption. Speciﬁcally, if the size of the ADE
does not depend on the pretreatment covariate (risk
preferences), a statistically signiﬁcant interaction term
implies that the ACME is larger for one group (riskseeking voters) than for another group (risk-averse
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
voters).28 This assumption allows researchers to interpret the variation in the ATE as the variation in the
Thus, an interaction term between the treatment and
a pretreatment covariate can be used as evidence for
the hypothesized causal mechanism at the cost of an
additional assumption. A marked advantage of this
approach is that one can analyze a causal mechanism
without even measuring the mediating variable. The
downside, however, is that it necessitates the strong
assumption that the ADE is constant regardless of the
value of the pretreatment covariate Xi. Moreover, this
strategy shows that the ACME varies as a function of
Xi but does not even identify the sign of the ACME
for a particular value of Xi. For example, in the Tomz
and van Houweling study, the ACME can be negative
for both risk groups. This indicates that the strategy
based on interaction between treatment and pretreatment covariates provides only indirect evidence about
a hypothesized causal mechanism.
CONCLUDING REMARKS ABOUT
EMPIRICAL TESTING OF
SOCIAL SCIENCE THEORIES
Much of social science research is about theorizing and
testing causal mechanisms. Yet statistical and experimental methods have been criticized because of the
prevailing view that they only yield estimates of causal
effects and fail to identify causal mechanisms. Recognizing the difﬁculty of studying causal mechanisms,
some researchers even recommend that the focus of
empirical research should be on the identiﬁcation of
causal effects and not causal mechanisms.
Although we acknowledge the challenge, we also
believe that progress can be made. Empirical social science research, whether experimental or observational,
often requires strong assumptions . Yet much can be learned from empirical
analysis within the constraints of those assumptions.
In this article, we show three ways to move forward
in research on causal mechanisms. First, the potential
outcomes model of causal inference used in this article
improves understanding of the identiﬁcation assumptions. Second, the sensitivity analysis we develop allows researchers to formally evaluate the robustness
of their conclusions to the potential violations of those
assumptions. Finally and perhaps most importantly, the
proposed new research designs for experimental and
observational studies can reduce the need to rely upon
untestable assumptions. Strong assumptions such as sequential ignorability simply deserve great care and call
for a combination of innovative statistical methods and
research designs.
28 This result is a consequence of a general algebraic equality. Let
the conditional ATE, the conditional ACME, and the conditional
¯τ(x) = E(Yi(1, Mi(1)) −Yi(0, Mi(0)) | Xi = x),
¯δ(t, x) =
E(Yi(t, Mi(1)) −Yi(t, Mi(0)) | Xi = x), and ¯ζ(t, x) = E(Yi(1, Mi(t)) −
Yi(0, Mi(t)) | Xi = x), respectively. Then, ¯τ(x) −¯τ(x′) = {¯δ(t, x) +
¯ζ(1 −t, x)} −{¯δ(t, x′) + ¯ζ(1 −t, x′)} = ¯δ(t, x) −¯δ(t, x′).
The set of new methods and research designs introduced here can be used to test social science theories that attempt to explain how and why one variable
causes changes in another. Of course, such tests are not
always possible, and in those situations researchers may
evaluate their theories by examining their auxiliary empirical implications. For example, this can be done by
identifying a set of competing theories and examining
which rival theories best predict the observed data (e.g.,
Imai and Tingley n.d.). Another possibility is to identify
particular components of a treatment that are capable
of affecting an outcome, rather than focusing on causal
processes .
Much methodological work remains to be done to
improve various ways to empirically test social science
theories. Scientiﬁc inquiry is an iterative process of theory construction and empirical theory testing. In this
article, we have shown that direct tests of causal mechanisms are sometimes possible with new methodological
tools, and if so, researchers can unpack the black box of
causality, going beyond the estimation of causal effects.
Multiple Mediators and
Posttreatment Confounders
In this article, we focus on a simple setting where the interest is in the identiﬁcation of a particular causal mechanism
represented by a mediator Mi (indirect effect) against all
other possible mechanisms (direct effect). Frequently, analysts have more speciﬁc ideas about what these other mechanisms may be. Suppose that there is a second mediator,
Ni, that is also assumed to lie on the causal path from the
treatment Ti to the outcome of interest Yi. This mediator
may be observed or unobserved. For example, in addition to
measuring anxiety, Brader, Valentino, and Suhay also
measured a second potential mediator, which was changes
in beliefs about the economic consequences of immigration.
They also tested whether other types of emotional responses
mediated the treatment, but did not measure other possible
mediators.
Under what conditions is the presence of a second mechanism problematic for the identiﬁcation of the main mechanism under the standard (single-experiment) design? In
this Appendix, we ﬁrst describe various situations where the
existence of other mechanisms is addressed by the method
proposed in Inference and Sensitivity Analysis under the Standard Designs. In these cases, either the ACME is identiﬁed
or the researcher can conduct sensitivity analyses to address
the possibility of confounding. We then describe situations
where multiple mediators present a serious problem under
standard designs, thereby requiring researchers to consider
alternative research designs such as those discussed in Alternative Research Designs for Credible Inference.
In general, the existence of other causal pathways does
not cause a problem for the identiﬁcation of a causal mechanism under standard designs so long as it does not violate the
sequential ignorability assumption. And even in many cases
where sequential ignorability is violated, the researcher can
conduct a sensitivity analysis. Hence, multiple mediators do
not in general pose an additional obstacle to inference about
mediation. Nor does the presence of multiple mediators require alternative identiﬁcation strategies such as instrumental variables .
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
Another Unobserved Mediator Causing No Problem
Notes: The diagrams represent various situations where the presence of an unobserved variable Ni mediating the effect of Ti on Yi
does not violate the sequential ignorability assumption for the identiﬁcation of the ACME with respect to the mediator of interest, Mi.
Solid lines represent causal relationships between observed variables whereas dashed lines represent causal relationships involving
an unobserved variable.
For example, the diagrams of Figure 6 represent various situations in which sequential ignorability still holds despite the
presence of a second unobserved mediator Ni. In each of
these cases, the ACME of the mediator of interest, Mi, can
still be identiﬁed under standard research designs with the
sequential ignorability assumption and researchers can apply
the methods described in Inference and Sensitivity Analysis
under the Standard Designs.
In Figure 6a, the second mediator is independent, and
therefore not even correlated with the main mediator after
conditioning on the treatment status. In this case, the treatment transmits its effect both through the observed mediator
of interest, Mi, and through a second unobserved mediator,
Ni, along with other unspeciﬁed mechanisms that are implicitly represented by the direct arrow from Ti to Yi. But because
there is no direct relationship between the two mediators,
the sequential ignorability assumption will still identify the
ACME for the mediator of interest Mi and the role of all
other unobserved mediators will be estimated as part of the
direct effect.
In contrast, the two mediators are correlated in the other
diagrams in Figure 6, even after conditioning on the treatment, though the nature of the correlation is quite different
in each of these cases. The second mediator represents an
unobserved variable that simply transmits the entire effect of
the mediator on the outcome in Figure 6b. Similarly, Figure 6c
represents the situation where the second mediator transmits
the entire effect of the treatment on the primary mediator. In
both of these cases the role of Mi will still be identiﬁed under
sequential ignorability even though Mi is part of a longer
chain of causal relationships. This is important because, for
example, the role played by anxiety in transmitting media
cue effects might also involve other more ﬁne-grained psychological processes that anxiety induces (Figure 6b) or that
generate anxiety (Figure 6c).
In Figure 6d, the second mediator partially transmits both
the direct and indirect effects of the treatment on the outcome. This seemingly problematic situation does not cause
a problem, because the sequential ignorability assumption is
still satisﬁed; that is, the mediator and potential outcomes
are independent after conditioning on the treatment status.
Thus, the ACME of the main mediator of interest Mi can be
Unobserved Mediator Causing
Problem Addressable by the Proposed
Sensitivity Analysis
Notes: The diagrams represent situations where the additional
(unobserved) mediator Ni causes the violation of sequential
ignorability because of the existence of the unobserved pretreatment covariate Ui. In these cases the ACME can be probed
by the proposed sensitivity analysis.
consistently estimated even when we disregard the presence
of the unobserved intermediate variable Ni.
Figures 6e and 6f are the situations where sequential ignorability holds only after conditioning on the pretreatment
covariate Xi, despite the presence of the unobserved second
mediator. Failure to control for Xi would violate sequential
ignorability because Xi affects both the mediator and the outcome variable. But if Xi is controlled for, then these situations
reduce, respectively, to Figures 6a and 6d.
Because none of these cases lead to violation of the sequential ignorability, the proposed estimation strategy can
be used to consistently estimate the ACME with respect to
the mediator of primary interest Mi despite the presence of
a secondary (unobserved) mediator Ni. What types of multiple mediators will cause problems for the identiﬁcation of
causal mechanisms? The two diagrams in Figure 7 represent
situations in which the sequential ignorability assumption is
violated because of an unobserved pretreatment confounder,
Ui. In both cases, the unobserved secondary mediator represents a posttreatment confounder between the mediator and
the outcome, but conditioning on both the treatment and
American Political Science Review
Vol. 105, No. 4
Second Mediator Causing
Serious Problem
Notes: The diagrams represent situations where the second
mediator Ni causes the violation of the sequential ignorability
assumption, which cannot be addressed by the proposed sensitivity analysis. This is a problem whether or not the second
mediator is unobserved (left panel) or observed (right panel).
the unobserved confounder, should it be possible, would be
sufﬁcient for the satisfaction of the sequential ignorability
assumption. Thus, the proposed sensitivity analysis can be
conducted to measure the degree of robustness with respect
to the presence of this unobserved mediator.
The third class of additional mediators, displayed in Figure 8, is the most problematic. In this situation, the second
mediator causally affects both the primary mediator and the
outcome and thus represents a typical posttreatment confounder that is not allowed under the sequential ignorability
assumption. The ACME with respect to the primary mediator
is then not identiﬁable on the basis of Assumption 1. This
is true not only when the second mediator is unobserved
(Figure 8a) but also even if it is observed . Nor can the sensitivity analysis described in
Sensitivity Analysis be applied, because the confounding between the mediator and outcome is due to a posttreatment
covariate. In such cases the proposed sensitivity analysis will
not be helpful, and instead the researcher should consider
alternative research designs (see Alternative Research Design for Credible Inference), or other identiﬁcation strategies
 . In addition, Imai and
Yamamoto have developed a new sensitivity analysis
that is applicable in the presence of multiple mediators and
posttreatment confounders.
This discussion reveals a crucial point: Whether the presence of multiple mechanisms causes a problem or not entirely
depends on the type of mechanisms in a speciﬁc application.
Thus, one should carefully think about the possible theoretical relationships that might be present in linking a particular treatment variable to an outcome variable. Situations
like those in Figures 6 and 7 can be dealt with using methods described in Inference and Sensitivity Analysis under the
Standard Designs, whereas situations like those in Figure 8
are best dealt with using alternative designs such as those
described in Alternative Research Design for Credible Inference. As a ﬁnal note, we point out that the discussion applies
equally to both observational and experimental studies, with
the caveat that observational studies must still satisfy the
conditional ignorability of the treatment.
Two Interpretations of Nonzero Correlation
between Errors
In this Appendix, we show that nonzero correlation between
errors in the structural equation models has at least two distinct interpretations. The ﬁrst interpretation is the existence
of unobserved pretreatment covariates, which violates the
assumption of sequential ignorability as well as conventional
exogeneity assumptions. This interpretation is given in Sensitivity Analysis. Another interpretation, to which a formal justiﬁcation is given next, is the existence of heterogenous causal
effects. In this case, conventional exogeneity assumptions
may be satisﬁed, but it is still difﬁcult to identify the ACME
(as discussed in Sequential Ignorability and Conventional Exogeneity Assumptions). The potential outcome framework of
causal mediation analysis clariﬁes the distinction between
these two interpretations, which is obscured under the traditional structural equation modeling framework.
Consider a system of linear regressions with heterogenous
effects considered by Glynn ,
Mi(Ti) = α2 + β2iTi + ϵ2i,
Yi(Ti, Mi) = α3 + β3iTi + γiMi + ϵ3i,
where β2i is the causal effect of the treatment on the mediator,
and β3i and γi represent the causal effects of the treatment
and the mediator on the outcome, respectively. All of these
effects are heterogenous in that they vary across individuals.
Now, reparameterize these effects as
β2i = β2 + ηi,
β3i = β3 + ξi,
γi = γ + ψi,
where β2, β3, and γ represent the average causal effects and
E(ηi) = E(ξi) = E(ψi) = 0. Using this reparameterization, we
can rewrite the system of linear regressions as
Mi(Ti) = α2 + β2Ti + ϵ∗
Yi(Ti, Mi) = α3 + β3Ti + γMi + ϵ∗
where the error terms are given by ϵ∗
2i = ηiTi + ϵ2i and ϵ∗
ξiTi + ψiMi + ϵ3i.
Under the exogeneity of Ti and Mi, we have E(ϵ∗
2i | Ti) =
3i | Ti, Mi) = 0, and thus β2, β3, and γ are all identiﬁed.
However, the two error terms are correlated. Speciﬁcally,
using the fact that Cov(Ti, Mi) = β2V(Ti), we have
3i) = V(Ti)Cov(ηi, ξi) + β2V(Ti)Cov(ηi, ψi),
which does not generally equal zero. One condition under
which the correlation between errors equals zero (and the
ACME is therefore identiﬁed) is that the two correlations
in heterogenous causal effects, i.e., correlation between ηi
and ξi as well as between ηi and ψi, are zero . It is also important to recognize
that if the heterogeneity can be explained by pretreatment
covariates alone and one can measure these variables, then
sequential ignorability assumption will hold conditional on
them. In that situation, all of our proposed methods will be
applicable so long as the functional form is correctly speciﬁed
when adjusting for these pretreatment variables.
Learning about Causal Mechanisms
November 2011
Two-stage Least Squares Estimation of the
Average Causal Mediation Effects
In this Appendix, we prove that under certain assumptions
the two-stage least squares method can be used to estimate
the ACME. Using the potential outcomes notation, where the
mediator is now a function of both treatment and instrument,
we can write the model as
Yi(Ti, Mi(Ti, Zi)) = α3 + β3Ti + γMi(Ti, Zi)
+ ϵi3(Ti, Mi(Ti, Zi)),
Mi(Ti, Zi) = α2 + β2Ti + λZi + ϵi2(Ti, Zi),
normalization,
E(ϵi3(t, m)) =
E(ϵi2(t, z)) = 0 for any t, m, z, is assumed. This speciﬁcation
restriction of the instrument. The model also implies
the following expression for the ACME and the average
E(Yi(t, Mi(1, z)) −Yi(t, Mi(0, z)) = β2γ
E(Yi(1, Mi(t, z)) −Yi(0, Mi(t, z))) = β3. In addition, assume
that both the treatment Ti and the instrument Zi are randomized. Formally, we write {Ti, Zi}⊥⊥{Yi(t, m), Mi(t′, z)} for any
t, m, t′, and z. Then we have the following exogeneity condition
E(ϵi3(Ti, Mi(Ti, Zi)) | Zi = z, Ti = t) = E(ϵi3(t, m)) = 0
for any t, z, where m = α2 + β2t + λz + ϵi2(t, z). Thus, the
model parameters can be estimated consistently from
observed data using Zi as an instrument, implying that the
ACME and the average direct effect are also consistently
estimated by ˆβ2 ˆγ and ˆβ3 with the two-stage least squares