SNP detection for massively parallel whole-genome
resequencing
Ruiqiang Li,1,2,3 Yingrui Li,1,3 Xiaodong Fang,1 Huanming Yang,1 Jian Wang,1
Karsten Kristiansen,1,2 and Jun Wang1,2,4
1Beijing Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518000, China; 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense M DK-5230, Denmark
Next-generation massively parallel sequencing technologies provide ultrahigh throughput at two orders of magnitude
lower unit cost than capillary Sanger sequencing technology. One of the key applications of next-generation sequencing is
studying genetic variation between individuals using whole-genome or target region resequencing. Here, we have developed a consensus-calling and SNP-detection method for sequencing-by-synthesis Illumina Genome Analyzer technology. We designed this method by carefully considering the data quality, alignment, and experimental errors common
to this technology. All of this information was integrated into a single quality score for each base under Bayesian theory
to measure the accuracy of consensus calling. We tested this methodology using a large-scale human resequencing data set
of 363 coverage and assembled a high-quality nonrepetitive consensus sequence for 92.25% of the diploid autosomes and
88.07% of the haploid X chromosome. Comparison of the consensus sequence with Illumina human 1M BeadChip genotyped alleles from the same DNA sample showed that 98.6% of the 37,933 genotyped alleles on the X chromosome and
98% of 999,981 genotyped alleles on autosomes were covered at 99.97% and 99.84% consistency, respectively. At a low
sequencing depth, we used prior probability of dbSNP alleles and were able to improve coverage of the dbSNP sites
significantly as compared to that obtained using a nonimputation model. Our analyses demonstrate that our method has
a very low false call rate at any sequencing depth and excellent genome coverage at a high sequencing depth.
[SOAPsnp is freely available from under GPL license. The raw sequence data used in this
report have been deposited in the EBI/NCBI Short Read Archive ( 
under accession no. ERA000005, and the SNP set has been deposited in dbSNP (release 130). These data are also available
at 
Genetic polymorphisms contribute to variations in phenotypes,
risk to certain diseases, and response to drugs and the environment. Genome-wide linkage analysis and positional cloning have
been tremendously successful for mapping human disease genes
that underlie monogenic Mendelian diseases . But most common diseases (such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer) and clinically important quantitative
traits have complex genetic architectures; a combination of multiple genes and interactions with environmental factors is believed
to determine these phenotypes. Linkage analysis has significant
limitations in its ability to identify common genetic variations
that have modest effects on disease . In contrast,
genome-wide association studies offer a promising approach for
mapping associated loci. The completion of the human genome
sequence enabled the
identification of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and the construction of a
high-density haplotype map . These
advances have set the stage for large-scale genome-wide SNP surveys for seeking genetic variations associated with or causative of
a wide variety of human diseases.
For more than two decades, Sanger sequencing and fluorescence-based electrophoresis technologies have dominated the
DNA sequencing field. And DNA sequencing is the method of
choice for novel SNP detection, using either a random shotgun
strategy or PCR amplification of regions of interest. Most of the
SNPs deposited in dbSNP were identified by these methods . A key advantage of the utility of traditional Sanger
sequencing is the availability of the universal standard of phred
scores for defining SNP
detection accuracy, in which the phred program assigns a score to
each base of the raw sequence to estimate an error probability.
With high-throughput clone sequencing of shotgun libraries,
a standard method for SNP detection is to align the reads onto a reference genome and filter
low-quality mismatches according to their phred score, known as
the ‘‘neighborhood quality standard’’ (NQS) .
With direct sequencing of PCR-amplified sequences from diploid
samples, software, including SNPdetector ,
novoSNP , PolyPhred ,
and PolyScan , has been developed to examine
chromatogram files to detect heterozygous polymorphisms.
New DNA sequencing technologies, which have recently
been developed and implemented, such as the Illumina Genome
Analyzer (GA), Roche/454 FLX system, and AB SOLiD system,
have significantly improved throughput and dramatically reduced
the cost as compared to capillary-based electrophoresis systems
 . In a single experiment using one Illumina
GA, the sequence of approximately 100 million reads of up to 50
3These authors contributed equally to this work.
4Corresponding author.
E-mail ; fax 86-755-2527-4247.
Article published online before print. Article and publication date are at
 
Genome Research
www.genome.org
19:1124–1132  2009 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/09; www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
bases in length can be determined. This ultrahigh throughput
makes next-generation sequencing technologies particularly suitable for carrying out genetic variation studies by using large-scale
resequencing of sizeable cohorts of individuals with a known
reference . Currently, using these technologies,
three human individuals have been sequenced: James Watson’s
genome by 454 Life Sciences (Roche) FLX sequencing technology
 , an Asian genome , and an
African genome sequenced by Illumina GA
technology. Additionally, given such sequencing advances, an
international research consortium has formed to sequence the
genomes of at least 1000 individuals from around the world to
create the most detailed human genetic variation map to date.
As noted, SNP detection methods for standard sequencing
technologies are well developed; however, given distinct differences in the sequence data output from and analyses of nextgeneration sequencing, novel methods for accurate SNP detection
are essential. To meet these needs, we have developed a method of
consensus calling and SNP detection for the massively parallel
Illumina GA technology. The Illumina platform uses a phred-like
quality score system to measure the accuracy of each sequenced
base pair. Using this, we calculated the likelihood of each genotype
at each site based on the alignment of short reads to a reference
genome together with the corresponding sequencing quality
scores. We then inferred the genotype with highest posterior
probability at each site using a Bayesian statistical method. The
Bayesian method has been used for SNP calling for traditional
Sanger sequencing technology and has also
been introduced for the analysis of next-generation sequencing
data . In the method presented here, we have taken
into account the intrinsic bias or errors that are common in Illumina GA sequencing data and recalibrated the quality values for
use in inferring consensus sequence.
We evaluated this SNP detection method using the Asian
genome sequence, which has 363 high-quality data . The evaluation demonstrated that our method has a very
low false call rate at any sequencing depth, and excellent genome
coverage in high-depth data, making it very useful for SNP detection in Illumina GA resequencing data at any sequencing
depth. This methodology and the developed software described in
this report have been integrated into the Short Oligonucleotide
Alignment Program (SOAP) package and named
‘‘SOAPsnp’’ to indicate its functionality for SNP detection using
SOAP short read alignment results as input.
System design for genotype calling
We used Bayes’s theorem to infer the genotype given the observed
allele types and quality scores at each chromosomal site. The steps
for this method are depicted in Figure 1. For input data, the method
used sequencing reads generated by the Illumina GA technology.
These reads were then mapped onto a known reference genome (in
this case, the genome sequence data from an Asian individual onto
the build NCBI build 36.1 reference) using SOAP ,
and the alignment of uniquely mapped reads was used to build the
consensus sequence for the sequenced genome. A sequencing
quality score, which is an estimation of the sequencing error rate of
each base, was recalibrated according to the observed mismatch rate
of the read alignment onto the reference genome. Next, we calculated the likelihood of each observed genotype at each position on
the genome. We then calculated the posterior probabilities of the
genotypes using a Baysian formula that used the likelihood of observed genotypes and the estimated SNP rate between the sequenced sample and the reference genome as prior probability. The
genotype assigned to each genomic location was the one with the
highest probability, and that probability was transformed to a phredlike quality score to indicate the accuracy of the called genotype.
Finally, a sum rank test was used to further eliminate any artificial
heterozygous sites.
Prior probability of each genotype
Given an available reference genome, the mutation rate of the
newly sequenced individual and the reference genome can be estimated from known large SNP discovery studies. The estimated
SNP rate between two human haploid chromosomes is about
0.001 . If we therefore assume that the
human reference genome sequence has an error rate of 1 3 105
 , each inferred haploid chromosome of a sequenced sample should have about one in a thousand bases different from the reference. Using these numbers, for diploid
chromosomes, we set the homozygous SNP rate at 0.0005 and the
heterozygous rate at 0.001.
According to a previous study on NCBI dbSNPs , transitions are four times more frequent than
transversions among the substitution mutations, but there is
little bias among each type of transition or transversion combination. Given this, these ratios were used in our SNP detection model.
For example, assuming that the reference allele is G at a location, the
prior probability of haploid genotypes is as follows: A and T are each
1.67 3 104; C is 6.67 3 104; and G is 0.999. The prior probability
of the diploid genotypes GG is 0.9985; AA is 3.33 3 104; CC and TT
are 8.33 3 105; AC and AT are 1.11 3 107; GC and GT are 1.67 3
104; AG is 6.67 3 104; and CT is 2.78 3 108 (Table 1).
Likelihood calculation using quality scores
The candidate allele types D at each location can be observed from
the alignment of mapped reads on the reference genome. The likelihood of each assumed genotype Ti is P(D|Ti). All four attributes
Algorithmic overview of consensus calling for massively parallel resequencing. The program takes raw sequencing reads as input,
maps them onto the reference genome, and calculates the likelihood of
each possible genotype. It outputs the inferred genotype with highest
posterior probability and its corresponding quality score.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
SNP detection for short read resequencing
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
of each observed allele, including (1) allele type, (2) quality score,
(3) coordinates on the read, and (4) t-th occurrence were integrated into our model of likelihood calculation to maximize
information usage. (See Methods for details.)
Differences in bases between the reference and the new
sequence can also be caused by errors during sequencing and
by misalignment of short reads. Since the read length of nextgeneration sequencing is quite short, there is a higher possibility
of reads from highly diverged genomic regions to be incorrectly
mapped, thus creating an incorrect SNP call. We filtered most
of these incorrect alleles by setting a frequency cutoff that we
determined best to filter out these errors (discussed in the next
With regard to sequencing, errors are often not random; this
is especially true for low quality bases and those near the 39-end of
reads. A 4 C and G 4 T substitution errors are significantly (P <
0.0001) overrepresented. Given these aspects, we used a multiple
dimensional matrix to recalibrate the
quality scores by taking into account read
coordinates, the sequencing quality score,
and substitution error bias. We then used
these recalibrated quality scores to calculate the likelihood of the genotypes. Additionally, to avoid dependent errors, we
reduced the sum quality of genotypes
that may be due to the presence of duplicate clones of PCR amplification. Investigation of these problems and the
means we devised to remedy them are
discussed in the following sections.
Uniqueness and accuracy of read
To evaluate the uniqueness and accuracy
of read mapping, we generated simulated
short reads of different lengths from
chromosome 12 of the NCBI human genome. The simulated reads contained
a SNP rate of 0.001 against the reference,
and mismatch sequencing errors were
generated using a sampling of the quality
scores from the Asian genome sequencing data. The simulated reads were realigned back to the whole human reference
genome. We called a ‘‘best hit’’ for each
simulated read or read-pair that mapped
to a position on a chromosome with the
lowest number of nucleotide differences
between the read and the reference genome. A read having only a single best hit was considered
uniquely aligned. Reads that had more than one ‘‘best hit’’
(meaning that they could be aligned to multiple positions with
the same number of mismatches) were considered repeatedly
From these data, we calculated the percentage of reads that
could be uniquely aligned. For single-end reads, the percent
uniqueness increased sharply (10 times) for read lengths from 15
to 25 bp, but beyond this length, there was only a small change in
percent uniqueness (Fig. 2A). For reads that were identical to the
sequence at their mapped position, 78.6% of the 25-bp reads and
91.5% of the 50-bp reads were uniquely mapped. At a 35-bp
length, which is the typical read length generated by Illumina
GA technology, 85.4%, 86.3%, and 85.9% of the 0-, 1-, and 2mismatch hits, respectively, are unique. The percent uniqueness
in the simulation data was similar to that found from mapping the
sequence reads generated from the Asian genome sequence. From
our analysis, we also found that paired-end sequencing greatly
improved the amount of uniquely mapped reads. We next fixed
read length at 35 bp and simulated insert sizes from 100 bp to
10 kb with 610% deviation and found that the percent uniqueness only slightly improved with increased insert size (Fig. 2B). At
an insert size of 200 bp, 95.4% of the read pairs have unique
placement.
When mapping using very short reads, it is likely that some
reads containing true SNPs or reads containing sequencing errors
could map to incorrect locations. In simulated reads, since the
original locations were known, we evaluated the rate of misplacement. In 25-bp single-end reads, 2.3% and 3.5% of the 1- and
Prior probability of genotypes of a diploid genome
3.33 3 104
1.11 3 107
6.67 3 104
1.11 3 107
8.33 3 105
1.67 3 104
2.78 3 108
1.67 3 104
8.33 3 105
Assuming that the reference allele is G, the homozygous SNP rate is
0.0005, the heterozygous SNP rate is 0.001, and the ratio of transitions
versus transversions is 4.
Uniqueness and accuracy of read placement. We produced a copy of human chromosome
12 with a 0.001 SNP rate to the NCBI reference, then simulated 363 reads for each given read length or
paired-end insert size. The simulated error rate over all reads is ;1%, and the standard deviation on
paired-end insert size is 10%. (See Methods section for details.) All the read sequences were then
aligned back to the reference genome, and then the uniqueness and accuracy of reads placement was
evaluated: (A) unique placement of single-end reads; (B) unique placement of paired-end reads (read
length: 35 bp); (C) wrong placement of single-end reads; (D) wrong placement of paired-end reads
(read length, 35 bp).
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
2-mismatch hits, respectively, were mapped incorrectly (Fig. 2C).
This rate was reduced to 0.6% and 0.8% when using reads that
were 50 bp in length. A similar survey using simulated 1-mismatch
paired-end reads with insert sizes of 100 bp and 10 kb had an incorrect placement of 0.4% and 0.06%, respectively; and 2-mismatch
reads of these two insert sizes had a misplacement rate of 0.3% and
0.06%, respectively (Fig. 2D).
We calculated the frequency of incorrect alleles in the simulated data to detect misidentified SNPs from real ones. More than
95% of the erroneous alleles appear only once in both single-end
(35-bp read length) and paired-end (200-bp insert size) reads.
Given these findings, we set a filtering threshold that removed all
low-frequency alleles that had fewer than four reads as support.
We used this strategy to call SNPs in the Asian genome, and only
about 0.036% of all the incorrect alleles remained. In a simulation
of random DNA fragmentation, using 363 sequencing, only
;0.008% of real heterozygous alleles were removed by this frequency filter. Next, to distinguish high-frequency errors from
heterozygous SNPs, we used binomial distribution (P = 0.0001) to
detect a frequency discrepancy of these two alleles at any site
and found that 87.3% of the remaining incorrect alleles were also
removed. In all, 99.93% of the erroneous alleles caused by
misplaced reads were filtered out using these frequency thresholds.
An additional error source in our SNP identification process
is the presence of incorrectly aligned reads that contain indels.
This error source is related to our read alignment method. Because
there are nearly five to 10 times more SNPs than small insertions or
deletions , we first carried out an ungapped
alignment. For those reads that could not be mapped by this
method, we then allowed up to a 3-bp insertion or deletion to
assign a best hit. Because of this ‘‘ungapped prior to gapped
alignment’’ strategy, some reads that truly contain an indel may
have been erroneously aligned during the ungapped mapping
stage. To evaluate the potential impact of this on our SNP detection, we simulated 10,000 small indels and found that 0.6% of
the indel-containing reads did have a best hit during the ungapped mapping stage. By using the same frequency filter as we
used above (requiring at least four reads for support), only three
(0.03%) of the incorrect SNP alleles generated by read misplacement remain.
Recalibration of Illumina GA quality scores
Errors accumulate during the sequencing process, and the later
cycles near the 39-end of reads have a much higher error rate
than do earlier cycles. The raw quality scores of Illumina GA sequencing are calculated from the signal intensities. These quality
scores do not accurately represent the true error rate. To correct for
this, we evaluated the deviation in the Asian genome sequencing
data and designed a method to recalibrate the standard quality
scores using the observed mismatch rate from the alignment of
mapped reads on the reference genome. To avoid as many true
SNPs as possible in our recalibration, we excluded all the mismatches between the sequenced reads and the reference genome
that are currently present in dbSNP, and thus are known SNP sites.
The Illumina GA pipeline can recalibrate the quality scores by
separating sequencing cycles into several bins. The calibrated
quality scores still had an obvious deviation from the real mismatch rate at each sequencing cycle, and the deviation fluctuated
over the cycles (Fig. 3A). Here, we recalibrated the scores cycleby-cycle again by loading the alignment together with either the
raw sequencing scores or the recalibrated scores such as by the
Illumina GA pipeline.
In addition to increased sequencing errors in later cycles
having an impact on the calculated quality scores, the method of
nucleotide detection can also affect the quality score. Illumina
GA technology uses two lasers to excite the dye attached to each of
the four nucleotides. The four intensity signals are not independent because the frequency emission of these four dyes
overlaps. A and C use the same laser, while G and T use another
laser, so the sequencing errors of A 4 C or G 4 T substitution are
more frequent than the other types of substitutions. We found
that the quality scores of A 4 C and G 4 T substitution were
;58%–72% overestimated than the observed substitution rate
from alignment, while the quality scores of C 4 G substitution
were ;36% underestimated (Fig. 3B). For example, among the
bases with quality 10 (or equal to error rate 0.1), the observed
substitution rates between the reads and the reference sequence of
A ! C, C ! A, G ! T, and T ! G are 4.62%, 5.27%, 5.29%, and
4.62%, respectively, while the rate of the other types of substitutions is ;1.62% to 2.48%. Thus, we also calibrated the quality
score by separating each type of substitution.
Penalty for duplicate reads
PCR was used to add adapter and amplify the library for sequencing. There can be an increase in the number of duplicate
Inaccuracy of sequencing quality score and biased substitution errors. (A) Estimated quality of Illumina GA pipeline recalibrated
quality values 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 along sequencing cycles. We
extracted bases with each quality value from raw reads of the Asian genome sequencing, then estimated the real quality by the mismatch rate in
the alignment as [10log10(mismatch rate)]. (B) Deviation of quality
score to estimated mismatch rate of each substitution combination. The
percentage of deviation was calculated by [(Error rate by alignment
mismatch rate)  (Error rate according to quality value)]/(Error rate
according to quality value). The substitution of A on read to C on reference was represented as AC in the figure.
SNP detection for short read resequencing
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
clones in a library if the starting amount of DNA is small, as is the
case when obtaining DNA from a gel slice to get uniform
fragment length or if there are too many PCR cycles. The presence
of duplicate clones will significantly influence the randomness of
the sequencing process. Some of the genomic region will have an
unexpectedly high depth. This can also result in large frequency
differences between the two alleles of a heterozygous site. In particular, DNA damage or amplification errors from early PCR cycles
could then be present in multiple reads; such repeated identical
errors would be hard to distinguish from real SNPs. Thus, we set
a penalty to the reads that have an identical mapping location on
the reference genome. If the library and sequencing process is
random, then the location distribution on the reference is
expected to exhibit a Poisson distribution.
In the 363 Asian genome sequencing using read lengths
up to 35 bp, 0.39% of the chromosomal positions were covered by
six or more read mapping start points; however, in theory, the
percentage should be ;0.07%. We therefore used an empirical
exponential adjustment to reduce the contribution of reads
with an identical genomic start point. Using the Illumina 1M
BeadChip on the same DNA sample, we examined the homozygous alleles that showed different allele types in the reads alignment and found that the frequency of these incorrect alleles fit the
Poisson distribution after this adjustment (Fig. 4).
Evaluation in human genome deep resequencing
We tested our SNP detection method, which incorporated all of
the above corrections, in the Asian genome data with 363 deep
sequencing of a male individual. According to the sequencing
quality scores, the estimated error rate of the detected SNPs is
lower than 1%. PCR amplification and validation of a few dozens
of randomly selected SNPs cannot reflect the accuracy rate precisely. So, we did the validation by comparing the inferred consensus sequence to the genotyping result using the same DNA
sample on an Illumina 1M BeadChip. We assumed that all the
genotyped alleles were correct and separated all the conflicting
sites into false-negative (FN) and false-positive (FP) categories. FN
is considered a call of a heterozygous site where one allele is
missing in the GA sequencing consensus calling, and FP is considered a call of an incorrect allele. Although the FN and FP rates
are defined over the genotyping sites, they are effective overall
indicators of SNP calling accuracy for the whole genome.
Figure 5 shows the percent of the reference genome that is
covered by the assembled nonrepetitive consensus sequence, the
percent of the Illumina 1M BeadChip genotyped alleles covered
by the consensus sequence, and the error rate of the consensus
sequence under different quality filtering assuming that all genotyping results were correct. Without using a quality filter, the
coverage of the whole genome is lower than the coverage of the
genotyping sites. This is because the genotyping sites are biased to
a unique portion of the genome. By increasing the quality cutoff
from Q0 to Q40, the coverage of the genotyping sites decreased
only slightly: from 98.98% to 97.02%; but the coverage decreased
very rapidly when a higher cutoff was used. This can be explained
by the use of a low prior probability setting of the SNP sites, which
resulted in relatively lower quality scores than at other sites. The
rate of FP and FN showed a continuous decrease with an increase
in the quality filtering threshold (from 0.067% by Q0 to 0.059%
by Q20 for FP, from 0.115% by Q0 to 0.083% by Q20 for FN).
Based on these data, we set a quality cutoff at Q20 to obtain
the best trade-off between coverage and rate of undercall and
Five additional filter steps were used to remove unreliable
portions of the consensus sequence: (1) We required at least two
reads for haploid chromosome X/Y and four reads for diploid
autosomes. (2) The overall depth, including randomly placed repetitive hits, had to be less than 100. (3) The approximate copy
number of flanking sequences had to be less than two. (This was
done in order to avoid misreading SNPs as heterozygotes caused
by the alignment of similar reads from repeat units or by copy
number variations [CNVs].) (4) There had to be at least one pairedend read. (5) The SNPs had to be at least 5 bp away from each
For haploid chromosome X
We sequenced a male genome, which has only one X chromosome, so consensus calling for the X chromosome is the same as
for a haploid genome. There are four different genotypes and only
one allele at each site. Among the 37,933 Illumina 1M BeadChip
loci on the X chromosome, 98.61% were well covered in the assembled consensus sequence with a 99.97% agreement (Table 2).
The consensus sequence covered 88.07% of the X chromosome
of the reference genome. The remaining unassembled chromosomal regions are highly repetitive and thus had very few unique
read mappings. The Y chromosome is mainly composed of repeat
sequences and was therefore poorly assembled; thus, these results
are not included.
Effective allele frequency of incorrect alleles before and after
adjusting reads with identical mapping location. We calculated the frequency of the alleles in the Asian genome sequencing reads that are
different from the genotyping results. The frequency contributed by the
n-th reads with the same mapping location was multiplied by un, where
0 # u # 1. The original, adjusted frequency and Poisson distribution are
Coverage of whole genome, coverage of the genotyped sites,
and error rate as a function of quality filter. The consensus sequence of the
Asian genome was calculated from the 363 sequencing reads. The error
rate was estimated by assuming the genotyping result on the same
sample was right. A false-positive (FP) is to call an incorrect allele, while
a false-negative (FN) is the heterozygous site with one allele missing.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
For diploid autosomes
To evaluate the accuracy of consensus calling and SNP detection
in a diploid genome, we compared the assembled consensus
sequence of all autosomes of the Asian genome to the genotyping
results and to the NCBI reference. The inferred consensus sequence covered 92.25% of the whole autosomal reference and
97.97% of the Illumina 1M BeadChip loci. In a comparison of the
array-based genotyped alleles and GA sequencing-called alleles,
;99.84% of the overlapping loci were in agreement (Table 2). Of
the genotyped homozygous loci that were identical to the reference, 0.044% were called as heterozygote by our GA sequencing
consensus; while in the genotyped homozygous loci that are
different from the reference, 0.104% were called as heterozygote,
and 0.090% were called as homozygote but of the incorrect allele
type. Among the 250,667 genotyped heterozygous loci, there was
a 0.017% FP rate and 0.374% FN rate in the GA sequencing consensus. Overall, the 999,981 genotyped sites, the FP and FN rates
were 0.069% and 0.091%, respectively. As has been shown in the
analysis of the Asian genome data, a subset of the possible falsely
called SNPs, which are inconsistent with the array-based genotyping, was PCR-amplified and sequenced again using traditional
Sanger sequencing technology to assess the accuracy of the GA
sequencing versus genotyping methods for SNP identification
 . Among the 57 examined loci, 49 (86.0% loci)
showed consistent allele types with GA
sequencing consensus rather than the
array genotyping.
In all, the consensus and SNP calling
by this method showed good consistency
with the array-based genotyping results;
and for the possible falsely called loci, the
GA sequencing consensus appeared more
often to be correct.
MAQ is another tool developed for
short reads mapping and consensus assembly . We ran MAQ on
the same read data set and also compared
the inferred consensus sequence to the
genotyping results. On the haploid X
chromosome, SOAPsnp has an obviously
higher coverage of the Illumina 1M
BeadChip loci than MAQ (98.61% vs.
(0.04%) is also lower than MAQ (0.18%).
On the diploid autosomes, SOAPsnp
had a slightly higher coverage (97.97%
vs. 97.92%), but both a lower FP rate
(0.07% vs. 0.15%) and FN rate (0.09% vs.
0.17%) than MAQ.
Using dbSNP prior probability
for low-depth sequencing
At a low sequencing depth, the real heterozygous alleles will be difficult to distinguish from sequencing errors. In our
method, we used the estimated SNP rate
based on its prior probability, so the FP
rate was very low. But using this in the
called consensus of low-depth sequencing will mean that some of the heterozygous alleles are likely to fail to pass the
quality filter or will pass, but with the alternative allele missing.
We therefore used a Q10 quality filter instead of Q20, which was
used for high-depth sequencing regions, and found that the percentage of genotyping sites covered by the unfiltered consensus
sequence was improved from 32.4% by Q20 to 72.1% for 43
single-end reads (Table 3). At the same time, the FN rate of heterozygous alleles increased significantly from 1.19% using Q20 to
7.96%, meaning that 13.49% of the heterozygous sites in the
consensus sequence with a quality filter between Q10 and Q20
were incorrectly called as homozygous. Our results indicate that
the quality filter used in regions of low-depth sequencing can have
a large impact; therefore, it is important to make a decision based
on a trade-off between coverage and FN rate of heterozygotes.
According to a comparison of the identified SNPs in the
Asian genome with those present in dbSNP, ;90% of the SNPs in
a newly sequenced human individual genome are already in
dbSNP, thus using dbSNP information for determining prior
probability is useful for capturing more SNPs. We therefore set
a prior SNP rate of 0.1 for the dbSNP known heterozygous genotypes and 0.05 for homozygous SNPs to improve our SNP calling
in regions of low-depth sequencing. Assuming that a genotype is
G/T at a dbSNP site, then the prior probability of GG and TT is
estimated to be 0.454; GT is 0.0909; AT, CT, AG, CG is 9.1 3 105;
AA, CC is 4.55 3 107; and AC is 9.11 3 108. Consensus calling
Coverage and accuracy of the Illumina 1M BeadChip genotyped sites of the called
consensus sequence
Illumina 1M
Covered in
HOM reference
HOM mutant
HOM reference
HOM mutant
The called consensus sequence was compared with the genotyping on the same DNA sample. We
sequenced a male, so chromosome X is haploid. The genotyped sites were classified into: (1) HOM
reference, homozygotes where both alleles are identical to the reference; (2) HOM mutant, homozygotes where both alleles differ from the reference; and (3) HET, heterozygotes.
FP, false-positive; FN, false-negative.
Coverage and accuracy of SNP calling without and with dbSNP information in prior
probability
Without dbSNP prior
With dbSNP prior
Sequencing depth
Coverage (%)
Coverage (%)
Single-end sequencing
Paired-end sequencing
The coverage and accuracy were measured by Illumina 1M Beadchip genotyped sites. We set a prior
SNP rate of 0.1 for the dbSNP known heterozygous genotypes and 0.05 for homozygous SNP sites. A
Q10 filter was applied.
FN, false-negative; FP, false-positive.
SNP detection for short read resequencing
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
using these new prior probabilities showed that the coverage of
the genotyping sites was improved from 88.37% to 94.41% with
single-end and 90.53% to 95.78% with paired-end sequencing of
83 reads (Table 3). Correspondingly, the FN rate of heterozygotes
was reduced from 4.17% to 1.83% and 3.34% to 1.44% with
single-end and paired-end sequencing, respectively. Thus, using
dbSNP sites in prior probability for low-depth sequencing provides a solid improvement in the coverage of SNP sites and
improves the accuracy of heterozygous site detection.
Computational complexity
The software is implemented in standard C++ language. SOAP
alignment results of raw short reads onto the corresponding reference genome were loaded into SOAPsnp, and it output the
inferred consensus sequence. To facilitate SNP calling for a multisample population data set, there is also an option to have allele
likelihoods for each genomic locus output in a flat tabular format.
Analysis time is proportional to the total amount of sequencing data: For example, our analysis of the 363 Asian genome sequencing data consumed ;200 CPU hours with a RAM usage of
<2 GB. The computing process can also be parallelized by splitting
the input data into chromosomes or genomic fragments.
Discussion
Ultrahigh throughput and the characteristics of short read length
make next-generation sequencing technologies particularly suitable for large-scale resequencing, such as for use in human personal genome sequencing or in the sequencing of a cohort of
individuals to capture rare mutations and to build a detailed genetic variation map of a population. These sequencing technologies could also be used for genome-wide association studies.
Although the cost of sequencing is still not low enough to perform
whole-genome sequencing on thousands of individuals in one
study, the target region capture method does provide a current
way to focus on specific regions of interest, such as coding, regulatory, or non-repeat regions . SNP detection is a key step in
all such studies.
In this study, we described a method for consensus calling
and SNP detection of massively parallel sequencing-by-synthesis
Illumina GA technology. This method took into account the error
patterns inherent in this sequencing technology and integrated all
this information into a single quality score to measure the accuracy of each nucleotide position in the consensus sequence. The
quality of this method has been evaluated using the Asian genome
sequencing data and shows a higher accuracy than that in previous studies using traditional Sanger sequencing technology.
The typical error pattern seen in Illumina GA sequencing
differs from that of other sequencing-by-synthesis methods and
thus requires the availability of a SNP detection method that
properly takes this into account. For example, the typical sequencing errors in reads that are generated by the Roche 454
Genome Sequencer 20 are a miscalculation of homopolymer
runs, which display as insertions or deletions rather than substitutions. So the quality score of 454 reads represents the probability that the base should be called according to the observed
signal intensity, and a method taking this aspect into account for
calibrating quality scores and SNPs for Roche 454 sequencing
technology has been developed , while for
Illumina GA sequencing technology, common errors are substitutions resulting from cross-talk between signals.
SNP detection accuracy is related to the sequencing error
rate and read length. In the Asian genome sequence, the error rate
over all the mappable reads was ;1.4%, and read length averaged
35 bp. We have recently been able to reduce this error rate to
0.5%;0.8% in reads of 35 bp and to 0.5%;1.5% for 50;75-bp
read length in a typical run, and thus expect to be able obtain very
accurate SNP calling from low-depth (such as 4;103) paired-end
sequencing in the near future with continuous improvement in
data quality.
The method described in this study was developed primarily
to handle the consensus assembly and SNP detection of one
haploid or diploid genome with a known reference sequence. This
program, however, also provides the option to output the likelihood of each allele type at each genomic location in a Genome
Likelihood Format (GLF), which was proposed as the standard
format for use in the 1000 Genomes Project ( 
1000genomes.org). Thus, for multi-individual data sets, the likelihood information of each individual can be integrated and used
to build a statistic frame to infer the genotype for each allele.
We also showed that using dbSNP genotypes for prior probability calculation substantially helps in distinguishing real heterozygotes from errors in regions of low-depth sequencing. The
use of additional information for prior probability under the
general Bayesian probability framework could likely aid in further
improving accuracy of posterior probability calculation. For example, we could use different polymorphism rates for different
portions of the genome, such as a lower polymorphism rate for
gene regions; we could also use HapMap allele frequencies or
haplotype block information for SNP calling of an individual belonging to a specific population. Furthermore, we could use joint
probability for genotype calculation of multiple individuals from
Mendelian segregation.
For assessment of our SNP detection method, we also estimated the impact of potential errors by ungapped alignment of
reads containing small indels, but we have not yet built a model to
call the indels, and thus calling for indels is not yet part of our
SOAP package. With paired-end sequencing and increasing read
lengths, it is feasible to accurately identify small indels from GA
sequencing. We have also found that with very deep paired-end
sequencing, we can detect structural variations including insertions, deletions, inversions, and rearrangements. Ultimately, de
novo assembly of each sequenced genome would facilitate creating a complete picture of all kinds of genetic variations between
any two individuals.
Sequence data
NCBI build 36.1 was used as the reference of the human genome
in this study. The chromosome sequences were downloaded from
the UCSC database ( We used version
128 of dbSNP ( data in the
model of applying known SNPs in prior probability. The Asian
genome data were sampled from an anonymous male Han Chinese and sequenced by the Illumina Genome Analyzer. These data
are available in the EBI/NCBI Short Read Archive (accession no.
ERA000005), and in the YH database ( 
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
The Asian genome genotype validation
An array-based technology, the Illumina 1M BeadChip, was used
to genotype the Asian DNA sample for validation of SNP calling.
Two technical duplicates were performed, and 1,038,923 sites
that were identified in both experiments with consistent genotypes were used for the comparison against the alleles called by the
Illumina GA sequencing.
PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing were performed to
further validate a subset of the SNPs that showed inconsistent
genotypes between the called consensus and genotyping. In total,
successfully
AB 3730xl. The genotypes were called manually from the trace
Simulated data
Both single-end reads with different lengths and paired-end reads
with different span sizes were simulated from chromosome 12 of
the human genome randomly. We carried out the following process to create simulated reads that were similar to that which
would be generated by GA sequencing:
1. Use chromosome 12 of the NCBI human genome as a reference, and produce an identical copy of the chromosome sequence.
2. Generate SNPs in this copy sequence with an estimated rate of
0.001. Both the sites and mutated allele types were chosen at
3. Reads were generated from random locations for both forward
and reverse strains of the copy. For single-end reads, read
lengths of 15, 20, 25, 30, 25, 40, 45, and 50 bp were chosen. For
paired-end reads, the read length was fixed at 35 bp, which is
the typical read length of current Illumina GA sequencing, and
span sizes of 100, 200, 500, 1000, and 10,000 bp were chosen.
The span size was not fixed, but it obeyed a normal distribution
with 10% standard deviation in each data set. Thirty-six-fold
coverage reads were generated for each of the data sets
4. Quality from the real Asian genome sequencing reads was selected at random and assigned to each of the simulated reads.
Then an error rate for each base on each read was calculated
from the assigned quality score by 10Q/10, and this error was
introduced according to its rate.
The simulation of small indels with sizes of 1 to 3 bp used a similar process, but produced 1000 insertions or deletions in step 2
rather than SNPs.
Consensus calling and SNP detection
Read alignment
The short reads were aligned onto the reference using the SOAP
program. To obtain reliable alignment hits, at most two mismatches were allowed between the read and the reference. The
alignments with the least number of differences were defined as
‘‘best hits.’’ If there was only one single best hit for a read, then the
read was taken as uniquely placed; a read with multiple equal best
hits was taken as repeatedly placed. For paired-end reads, two reads
belonging to a pair were aligned together with both in the correct
orientation and with a proper span size on the reference. In this
study, we only used those reads with unique ungapped alignment
for consensus calling and SNP detection.
Basic statistic model
Under a Bayesian model, the probability of genotype Ti by observing data D from an individual at a locus can be expressed as
PðTiÞPðDjTiÞ
PðTxÞPðDjTxÞ
S is the total number of genotypes. If we define haploid genotype
as Hm, then for a haploid genome, there are four kinds of genotypes: Ti = Hm 2 {A, C, G, T}, S = 4; while for a diploid genome, Ti =
HmHn 2 {AA, CC, GG, TT, AC, AG, AT, CG, CT, GT}, S = 10. At each
genomic location, prior probability P(Ti) of each genotype Ti was
set according to the reference genotype and the estimated SNP
rate between the sequenced individual and the reference genome.
An example has been given in the Results section. The likelihood
P(D|Ti) for the assumed genotype Ti was calculated from the observed allele types in the sequencing reads. We defined the likelihood of observing allele dk in a read for a possible haploid
genotype H as P(dk|H). Supposing the two sets of chromosomes of
a genome are independent, the likelihood P(dk|T) at a locus of
a diploid genome can be calculated as
PðdkjTÞ = PðdkjHmÞ + PðdkjHnÞ
So, for a set of n total observed alleles at a locus, D = {d1, d2, . . ., dn},
Thus the posterior probability can be derived from a Bayesian
formula. The genotype Ti with the highest posterior probability
P(Ti|D) was chosen as the consensus, and the phred-like quality
score was calculated as 10 log10[1  P(Ti|D)].
Quality calibration matrix and likelihood calculation
For each observed allele dk from a read mapped on a genomic location, there are four attributes: (1) ok, observed allele type; (2) qk,
quality score; (3) ck, sequencing cycle (coordinate on read); and (4)
tk, the tk-th observation of the same allele from reads with the
same mapping location. All four attributes are useful for the calculation of likelihood: We first suppose sequencing errors are independent and fit attributes 1, 2, and 3 into the model. Then in
the next section, we will discuss the method used to deal with
potential dependent errors by considering attribute d. So the
likelihood P(dk|H) now is
PðdkjHÞ = Pððok; qk; ckÞjHÞ = Pððok; ckÞjðH; qkÞÞ 3 PðqkjHÞ
We built a four-dimensional matrix to store the likelihood of
observing an allele dk with type ok, quality score qk, and at the ck-th
cycle on the read for each assumed genotype H. By using the
unique alignments, we counted the number of substitutions and
estimated the mismatch rate for each combination of quality score
qk, read coordinate ck, and substitution type. So P[(ok, ck)|(H, qk)]
becomes a known value, which could be looked up in the
matrix. Each raw sequencing quality score was in effect rescaled
by each sequencing cycle and for each substitution combination.
P(qk|H) is the probability of an allele H to have an observation with quality score qk. The quality distribution of each
assumed allele is unknown. Here, we assumed that the distributions from A, C, G, and T are the same; then P(qk|H) is the
function of qk only, which can be written as f(qk) and be reduced
in Bayesian formula.
SNP detection for short read resequencing
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
Dealing with dependent errors
The same alleles from reads with the same mapping locations were
ordered by the sequencing quality scores from low to high. An
empirical treatment was used to reduce the quality of the tk-th
observation:
q9k = utkqk
Here, u is called a dependency coefficient. The adjusted
quality score q9k, instead of the original qk, was used in the likelihood matrix. u is set between 0 and 1. Specifically, u = 0 means the
completely dependent model, and u = 1 is the completely independent model.
Sum rank test for HET
Since the quality scores of erroneous bases are lower than that for
correct bases, we used the sum rank test to check the heterozygous
sites of the called consensus. All observed appearances of the two
alleles in the reads were ordered according to the quality score,
then the sum rank of the less frequent allele was tested. The calculated P-value was integrated into the consensus quality score by
subtracting 10log10(p).
Acknowledgments
This project is supported by the Chinese Academy of Science
(GJHZ0701-6;
KSCX2-YWN-023);
Science Foundation of China (30725008; 90403130; 90608010;
30221004; 90612019; 30392130); the Chinese 973 program
(2007CB815701; 2007CB815703; 2007CB815705); the Chinese
863 program (2006AA02Z334; 2006AA10A121; 2006AA02Z177);
the Chinese Municipal Science and Technology Commission
(D07030200740000); the Danish Platform for Integrative Biology;
the Ole Rømer grant from the Danish Natural Science Research
Council; a pig bioinformatics grant from the Danish Research
Council and the Solexa project (272-07-0196); and the Lundbeck
Foundation Centre of Applied Medical Genomics for Personalized
Disease Prediction, Prevention and Care (LUCAMP). Laurie Goodman edited the manuscript.
References
Albert, T.J., Molla, M.N., Muzny, D.M., Nazareth, L., Wheeler, D., Song, X.,
Richmond, T.A., Middle, C.M., Rodesch, M.J., Packard, C.J., et al. 2007.
Direct selection of human genomic loci by microarray hybridization.
Nat. Methods 4: 903–905.
Altshuler, D., Pollara, V.J., Cowles, C.R., Van Etten, W.J., Baldwin, J., Linton,
L., and Lander, E.S. 2000. An SNP map of the human genome generated
by reduced representation shotgun sequencing. Nature 407: 513–
Bentley, D.R. 2006. Whole-genome re-sequencing. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.
16: 545–552.
Bentley, D., Balasubramanian, S., Swerdlow, H., Smith, G., Milton, J.,
Brown, C.G., Hall, K.P., Evers, D.J., Barnes, C.L., Bignell, H.R., et al.
2008. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using reversible
terminator chemistry. Nature 456: 53–59.
Brockman, W., Alvarez, P., Young, S., Garber, M., Giannoukos, G., Lee, W.L.,
Russ, C., Lander, E.S., Nusbaum, C., and Jaffe, D.B. 2008. Quality scores
and SNP detection in sequencing-by-synthesis systems. Genome Res. 18:
Chen, K., McLellan, M.D., Ding, L., Wendl, M.C., Kasai, Y., Wilson, R.K.,
and Mardis, E.R. 2007. PolyScan: An automatic indel and SNP detection
approach to the analysis of human resequencing data. Genome Res. 17:
Collins, F., Lander, E., Rogers, J., and Waterston, R. 2004. Finishing the
euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature 431: 931–945.
Dawson, E., Chen, Y., Hunt, S., Smink, L.J., Hunt, A., Rice, K., Livingston, S.,
Bumpstead, S., Bruskiewich, R., Sham, P., et al. 2001. A SNP resource for
human chromosome 22: Extracting dense clusters of SNPs from the
genomic sequence. Genome Res. 11: 170–178.
Ewing, B. and Green, P. 1998. Base-calling of automated sequencer traces
using phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res. 8: 186–194.
Ewing, B., Hillier, L., Wendl, M.C., and Green, P. 1998. Base-calling of
automated sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome
Res. 8: 175–185.
Hodges, E., Xuan, Z., Balija, V., Kramer, M., Molla, M.N., Smith, S.W.,
Middle, C.M., Rodesch, M.J., Albert, T.J., Hannon, G.J., et al. 2007.
Genome-wide in situ exon capture for selective resequencing. Nat.
Genet. 39: 1522–1527.
The International HapMap Consortium. 2005. A haplotype map of the
human genome. Nature 437: 1299–1320.
The International HapMap Consortium. 2007. A second generation human
haplotype map of over 3.1 million SNPs. Nature 449: 851–861.
The International SNP Map Working Group. 2001. A map of human
genome sequence variation containing 1.42 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms. Nature 409: 928–933.
Jimenez-Sanchez, G., Childs, B., and Valle, D. 2001. Human disease genes.
Nature 409: 853–855.
Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody, M.C., Baldwin, J.,
Devon, K., Dewar, K., Doyle, M., FitzHugh, W., et al. 2001. Initial
sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409: 860–921.
Li, H., Ruan, J., and Durbin, R. 2008a. Mapping short DNA sequencing reads
and calling variants using mapping quality scores. Genome Res. 18:
1851–1858.
Li, R., Li, Y., Kristiansen, K., and Wang, J. 2008b. SOAP: Short
oligonucleotide alignment program. Bioinformatics 24: 713–714.
Marth, G.T., Korf, I., Yandell, M.D., Yeh, R.T., Gu, Z., Zakeri, H., Stitziel,
N.O., Hillier, L., Kwok, P.Y., and Gish, W.R. 1999. A general approach
to single-nucleotide polymorphism discovery. Nat. Genet. 23: 452–
Ning, Z., Cox, A.J., and Mullikin, J.C. 2001. SSAHA: A fast search method for
large DNA databases. Genome Res. 11: 1725–1729.
Okou, D.T., Steinberg, K.M., Middle, C., Cutler, D.J., Albert, T.J., and Zwick,
M.E. 2007. Microarray-based genomic selection for high-throughput
resequencing. Nat. Methods 4: 907–909.
Porreca, G.J., Zhang, K., Li, J.B., Xie, B., Austin, D., Vassallo, S.L., LeProust,
E.M., Peck, B.J., Emig, C.J., Dahl, F., et al. 2007. Multiplex amplification
of large sets of human exons. Nat. Methods 4: 931–936.
Shendure, J., Mitra, R.D., Varma, C., and Church, G.M. 2004. Advanced
sequencing technologies: Methods and goals. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5: 335–
Sherry, S.T., Ward, M.H., Kholodov, M., Baker, J., Phan, L., Smigielski, E.M.,
and Sirotkin, K. 2001. dbSNP: The NCBI database of genetic variation.
Nucleic Acids Res. 29: 308–311.
Stephens, M., Sloan, J.S., Robertson, P.D., Scheet, P., and Nickerson, D.A.
2006. Automating sequence-based detection and genotyping of SNPs
from diploid samples. Nat. Genet. 38: 375–381.
Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J., Sutton, G.G.,
Smith, H.O., Yandell, M., Evans, C.A., Holt, R.A., et al. 2001. The
sequence of the human genome. Science 291: 1304–1351.
Wang, W.Y., Barratt, B.J., Clayton, D.G., and Todd, J.A. 2005. Genome-wide
association studies: Theoretical and practical concerns. Nat. Rev. Genet.
6: 109–118.
Wang, J., Wang, W., Li, R., Li, Y., Tian, G., Goodman, L., Fan, W., Zhang, J.,
Li, J., Zhang, J., et al. 2008. The diploid genome sequence of an Asian
individual. Nature 456: 60–65.
Weckx, S., Del-Favero, J., Rademakers, R., Claes, L., Cruts, M., De Jonghe, P.,
Van Broeckhoven, C., and De Rijk, P. 2005. novoSNP, a novel
computational tool for sequence variation discovery. Genome Res. 15:
Wheeler, D.A., Srinivasan, M., Egholm, M., Shen, Y., Chen, L., McGuire, A.,
He, W., Chen, Y.J., Makhijani, V., Roth, G.T., et al. 2008. The complete
genome of an individual by massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nature
452: 872–876.
Zhang, J., Wheeler, D.A., Yakub, I., Wei, S., Sood, R., Rowe, W., Liu, P.P.,
Gibbs, R.A., and Buetow, K.H. 2005. SNPdetector: A software tool for
sensitive and accurate SNP detection. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1: e53. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010053.
Zhao, Z. and Boerwinkle, E. 2002. Neighboring-nucleotide effects on single
nucleotide polymorphisms: A study of 2.6 million polymorphisms
across the human genome. Genome Res. 12: 1679–1686.
Received October 15, 2008; accepted in revised form March 11, 2009.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
10.1101/gr.088013.108
Access the most recent version at doi:
2009 19: 1124-1132 originally published online May 6, 2009
Genome Res.
Ruiqiang Li, Yingrui Li, Xiaodong Fang, et al.
SNP detection for massively parallel whole-genome resequencing