Fast Direct Super-Resolution by Simple Functions
Chih-Yuan Yang and Ming-Hsuan Yang
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Merced
{cyang35,mhyang}@ucmerced.edu
The goal of single-image super-resolution is to generate a high-quality high-resolution image based on a given
low-resolution input. It is an ill-posed problem which requires exemplars or priors to better reconstruct the missing
high-resolution image details. In this paper, we propose to
split the feature space into numerous subspaces and collect exemplars to learn priors for each subspace, thereby
creating effective mapping functions. The use of split input space facilitates both feasibility of using simple functions for super-resolution, and efﬁciency of generating highresolution results. High-quality high-resolution images are
reconstructed based on the effective learned priors. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs efﬁciently and effectively over state-of-the-art methods.
1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) aims to generate a
visually pleasing high-resolution (HR) image from a given
low-resolution (LR) input. It is a challenging and ill-posed
problem because numerous pixel intensities need to be predicted from limited input data. To alleviate this ill-posed
problem, it is imperative for most SISR algorithms to exploit additional information such as exemplar images or statistical priors. Exemplar images contain abundant visual
information which can be exploited to enrich the superresolution (SR) image details .
However, numerous challenging factors make it difﬁcult to
generate SR images efﬁciently and robustly. First, there exist fundamental ambiguities between the LR and HR data as
signiﬁcantly different HR image patches may generate very
similar LR patches as a result of downsampling process.
That is, the mapping between HR and LR data is many to
one and the reverse process from one single LR image patch
alone is inherently ambiguous. Second, the success of this
approach hinges on the assumption that a high-ﬁdelity HR
patch can be found from the LR one (aside from ambiguity
which can be alleviated with statistical priors), thereby requiring a large and adequate dataset at our disposal. Third,
the ensuing problem with a large dataset is how to determine
similar patches efﬁciently.
In contrast, statistical SISR approaches have the marked advantage of performance stability and
low computational cost. Since the priors are learned from
numerous examples, they are statistically effective to represent the majority of the training data. The computational
load of these algorithms is relatively low, as it is not necessary to search exemplars. Although the process of learning
statistical priors is time consuming, it can be computed of-
ﬂine and only once for SR applications. However, statistical SISR algorithms are limited by speciﬁc image structures
modeled by their priors (e.g., edges) and ineffective to reconstruct other details (e.g., textures). In addition, it is not
clear what statistical models or features best suit this learning task from a large number of training examples.
In this paper, we propose a divide-and-conquer approach to learn statistical priors directly from exemplar patches using a large number of simple functions.
We show that while sufﬁcient amount of data is collected,
the ambiguity problem of the source HR patches is alleviated. While LR feature space is properly divided, simple
linear functions are sufﬁcient to map LR patches to HR effectively. The use of simple functions also facilitates the
process to generate high-quality HR images efﬁciently.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. First, we demonstrate a direct single-image superresolution algorithm can be simple and fast when effective
exemplars are available in the training phase. Second, we
effectively split the input domain of low-resolution patches
based on exemplar images, thereby facilitating learning
simple functions for effective mapping. Third, the proposed
algorithm generates favorable results with low computational load against existing methods. We demonstrate the
merits of the proposed algorithm in terms of image quality
and computational load by numerous qualitative and quantitative comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work and Problem Context
The SISR problem has been intensively studied in computer vision, image processing, and computer graphics.
Classic methods render HR images from LR ones through
2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
1550-5499/13 $31.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICCV.2013.75
certain mathematical formulations such as bicubic
interpolation and back-projection .
While these algorithms can be executed efﬁciently, they are less effective to
reconstruct high-frequency details, which are not modeled
in the mathematical formulations.
Recent methods exploit rich visual information contained in a set of exemplar images. However, there are many
challenges to exploit exemplar images properly, and many
methods have been proposed to address them. To reduce the
ambiguity between LR and HR patches, spacial correlation
is exploited to minimize the difference of overlapping HR
patches . For improving the effectiveness of exemplar images, user guidance is required to prepare precise
ones . In order to increase the efﬁciency of reconstructed HR edges, small scaling factors and a compact exemplar patch set are proposed by generating from the input
frame . For increasing the chance to retrieve effective
patches, segments are introduced for multiple-level patch
searching .
Statistical SISR algorithms learn priors from numerous
feature vectors to generate a function mapping features
from LR to HR. A signiﬁcant advantage of this approach
is the low computational complexity as the load of searching exemplars is alleviated. Global distributions of gradients are used to regularize a deconvolution process for
generating HR images. Edge-speciﬁc priors focus on reconstructing sharp edges because they are important visual
cues for image quality . In addition, priors of patch
mapping from LR to HR are developed based on dictionaries via sparse representation , support vector regression , or kernel ridge regression .
Notwithstanding much demonstrated success of the algorithms in the literature, existing methods require computationally expensive processes in either searching exemplars or extracting complex features .
In contrast, we present a fast algorithm based on simple features. Instead of using one or a few mapping functions, we
learn a large number of them. We show this divide-andconquer algorithm is effective and efﬁcient for SISR when
the right components are properly integrated.
3. Proposed Algorithm
One motivation of this work is to generate SR images
efﬁciently but also to handle the ambiguity problem. To
achieve efﬁciency, we adopt the approach of statistical SISR
methods, e.g., we do not search for a large exemplar set at
the test phase. Compared with existing statistical methods
using complicated features , we propose simple
features to reduce computational load. To handle the ambiguity problem using simple features, we spend intensive
computational load during the training phase. We collect a
large set of LR patches and their corresponding HR source
patches. We divide the input space into a large set of subspaces from which simple functions are capable to map LR
Figure 1. Training LR and HR pairs (four corner pixels are discarded). A set of functions is learned to map a LR patch to a set
of pixels at the central (shaded) region of the corresponding HR
patch (instead of the entire HR patch).
features to HR effectively. Although the proposed algorithm
entails processing a large set of training images, it is only
carried out ofﬂine in batch mode.
We generate a LR image Il from a HR one Ih by
Il = (Ih ⊗G) ↓s,
where ⊗is a convolution operator, G is a Gaussian kernel,
↓is a downsampling operator and s is the scaling factor.
From each Ih and the corresponding Il image, a large set of
corresponding HR and LR patch pairs can be cropped. Let
Ph and Pl be two paired patches. We compute the patch
mean of Pl as μ, and extract the features of Ph and Pl as the
intensities minus μ to present the high-frequency signals.
For HR patch Ph, we only extract features for pixels at the
central region (e.g., the shaded region in Figure 1) and discard boundary pixels. We do not learn mapping functions
to predict the HR boundary pixels as the LR patch Pl does
not carry sufﬁcient information to predict those pixels.
We collect a large set of LR patches from natural images
to learn K cluster centers of their extracted features. Figure 2 shows 4096 cluster centers learned from 2.2 million
natural patches. Similar to the heavy-tailed gradient distribution in natural images , more populous cluster centers
correspond to smoother patches as shown in Figure 3. These
K cluster centers can be viewed as anchor points to represent the feature space of natural image patches.
For some regions in the feature space where natural
patches appear fairly rarely, it is unnecessary to learn mapping functions to predict patches of HR from LR. Since each
cluster represents a subspace, we collect a certain number of
exemplar patches in the segmented space to training a mapping function. Since natural images are abundant and easily
acquired, we can assume that there are sufﬁcient exemplar
patches available for each cluster center.
Suppose there are l LR exemplar patches belonging to
the same cluster. Let vi and wi (i = 1, . . . , l) be vectorized features of the LR and HR patches respectively, in dimensions m and n. We propose to learn a set of n linear
regression functions to individually predict the n feature
values in HR. Let V ∈Rm×l and W ∈Rn×l be the matrices of vi and wi. We compute the regression coefﬁcients
Figure 2. A set of 4096 cluster centers learned from 2.2 million natural patches. As the features for clustering are the intensities subtracting
patch means, we show the intensities by adding their mean values for visualization purpose. The order of cluster centers is sorted by the
amounts of clustered patches, as shown in Figure 3. Patches with more high-frequency details appear less frequently in natural images.
Figure 3. Histogram of clustered patches from a set of 2.2 million
natural patches with cluster centers shown in Figure 2. While the
most populous cluster consists of 18489 patches, the 40 least populous clusters only have one patch. A cluster has 537 patches on
C∗∈Rn×(m+1) by
C∗= argmin
where 1 is a 1 × l vector with all values as 1. This linear
least-squares problem is easily solved.
Given a LR test image, we crop each LR patch to compute the LR features and search for the closest cluster center. According to the cluster center, we apply the learned
coefﬁcients to compute the HR features by
The predicted HR patch intensity is then reconstructed by
adding the LR patch mean to the HR features.
The proposed method generates effective HR patches because each test LR patch and its exemplar LR patches are
highly similar as they belong to the same compact feature
subspace. The computational load for generating a HR image is low as each HR patch can be generated by a LR patch
through a few additions and multiplications. The algorithm
can easily be executed in parallel because all LR patches are
upsampled individually. In addition, the proposed method
is suitable for hardware implementations as only few lines
of code are required.
4. Experimental Results
Implementation: For color images, we apply the proposed
algorithm on brightness channel (Y) and upsample color
channels (UV) by bicubic interpolation as human vision is
more sensitive to brightness change. For a scaling factor 4,
we set the Gaussian kernel width in Eq. 1 to 1.6 as commonly used in the literature . The LR patch size is set
as 7 × 7 pixels, and the LR feature dimension is 45 since
four corner pixels are discarded. The central region of a HR
patch is set as 12 × 12 pixels (as illustrated in Figure 1).
Since the central region in LR is 3 × 3 pixels, a pixel in HR
is covered by 9 LR patches and the output intensity is generated by averaging 9 predicted values, as commonly used
in the literature . We prepare a training set containing 6152 HR natural images collected from the Berkeley segmentation and LabelMe datasets to generate
a LR training image set containing 679 million patches.
Number of clusters: Due to the memory limitation on a
machine (24 GB), we randomly select 2.2 million patches
to learn a set of 4096 cluster centers, and use the learned
cluster centers to label all LR patches in training image set.
As the proposed function regresses features from 45 dimensions to one dimension only (each row of C∗in Eq. 2 is
assumed to be independent) and most training features are
highly similar, a huge set of training instances is unnecessary. We empirically choose a large value, e.g., 1000, as
the size of training instances for each cluster center and col-
Figure 4. Numbers of patches used to train regression coefﬁcients
in our experiments. Since some patches are rarely observed in
natural images, there are fewer than 1000 patches in some clusters.
(a) 512 clusters
(b) 4096 clusters (c) Difference map
Figure 5. Super resolution results using different cluster numbers.
Images best viewed on a high-resolution display where each image
is shown with at least 512 × 512 pixels (full resolution).
lect training instances randomly from the labeled patches.
Figure 4 shows the actual numbers of training patches.
Since some patches are rarely observed in natural images,
there are fewer than 1000 patches in a few clusters. For
such cases we still compute the regression coefﬁcients if
there is no rank deﬁciency in Eq. 2, i.e., at least 46 linear independent training vectors are available. Otherwise, we use
bilinear interpolation to map LR patches for such clusters.
The number of clusters is a trade-off between image
quality and computational load.
Figure 5 shows the results generated by 512 and 4096 clusters with all other
same setup. While the low-frequency regions are almost
the same, the high-frequency regions of the image generated by more clusters are better in terms of less jaggy artifacts along the face contours. With more clusters, the input
feature space can be divided into more compact subspaces
from which the linear mapping functions can be learned
more effectively.
In addition to linear regressors, we also evaluate image
quality generated by support vector regressor (SVR) with
a Radial Basis Function kernel or a linear kernel.
the same setup, the images generated by SVRs and linear regressors are similar visually (See the supplementary
material for examples). However, the computational load
of SVRs is much higher due to the cost of computing the
similarity between each support vector and the test vector.
While linear regressors take 14 seconds to generate an image, SVRs take 1.5 hours.
Evaluation and analysis: We implement the proposed algorithm in MATLAB, which takes 14 seconds to upsample
an image of 128 × 128 pixels with a scaling factor 4 on
a 2.7 GHz Quad Core machine. The execution time can
be further reduced by other implementations and GPU. We
Table 1. Average evaluated values of 200 images from the Berkeley segmentation dataset . While the generated SR images by
the proposed method are comparable to those by the self-exemplar
SR algorithm , the required computational load is much lower
(14 seconds vs. 10 minutes).
Bicubic Interpolation
Back Projection 
Freedman 
Glasner 
use the released code from the authors to generate HR images, and implement other state-of-the-art algorithms as the source code is not available.
Our code and dataset are available at the project web page
 
Figure 6-11 show SR results of the proposed algorithm
and the state-of-the-art methods. More results are available
in the supplementary material. We evaluate the method numerically in terms of PSNR and SSIM index when the
ground truth images are available. Table 1 shows averaged
results for a set of 200 natural images. The evaluations are
presented from the four perspectives with comparisons to
SR methods using statistical priors , fast SR algorithms , self-exemplar SR algorithms , and SR
approaches with dictionary learning .
SR methods based on statistical priors: As shown in Figure 6(b)(c), Figure 8(a), Figure 10(c), and Figure 11(b)(c),
the proposed algorithm generates textures with better contrast than existing methods using statistical priors .
While a kernel ridge regression function is learned in 
and a gradient proﬁle prior is trained in to restore the
edge sharpness based on an intermediate bicubic interpolated image, the high-frequency texture details are not generated due to the use of the bicubic interpolated intermediate image. Furthermore, a post-processing ﬁlter is used
in to suppress median gradients in order to reduce noise
generated by the regression function along edges. However,
mid-frequency details at textures may be wrongly reduced
and the ﬁltered textures appear unrealistic. There are several differences between the proposed method and the existing methods based on statistical priors. First, the proposed
method upsamples the LR patches directly rather than using an intermediate image generated by bicubic interpolation, and thus there is no loss of texture details. Second, the
proposed regressed features can be applied to any type of
patches, while existing methods focus only on edges. Third,
no post-processing ﬁlter is required in the proposed method
(a) Bicubic Interpolation
(b) Kim 
(c) Sun 
(d) Proposed
PSNR / SSIM: 29.8 / 0.9043
31.3 / 0.9321
30.4 / 0.9142
31.6 / 0.9422
(e) Back Projection 
(f) Shan 
(g) Yang 
(h) Wang 
PSNR / SSIM: 31.1 / 0.9391
27.8 / 0.8554
30.1 / 0.9152
29.5 / 0.8859
Figure 6. Child. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least
512 × 512 pixels (full resolution).
to reﬁne the generated HR images. Fourth, existing methods
learn a single regressor for the whole feature space, but the
proposed method learns numerous regressors (one for each
subspace), thereby making the prediction more effective.
Fast SR methods: Compared with existing fast SR methods and bicubic interpolation, Figure 6(a)(e)(f), Figure 7, and Figure 11(a)(b) show that the proposed method
generates better edges and textures. Although bicubic interpolation is the fastest method, the generated edges and textures are always over-smoothed. While back-projection 
boosts contrast in SR images, displeasing jaggy artifacts are
also generated. Those problems are caused by the ﬁxed
back-projection kernel, which is assumed isotropic. However, the image structures along sharp edges are highly
anisotropic, and thus an isotropic kernel wrongly compensates the intensities. A global gradient distribution is exploited as constraints in to achieve fast SR. However,
although the global gradient distribution is reconstructed
by in Figure 6(f) and Figure 7(c), the local gradients are
not constrained. Thus, over-smoothed textures and jaggy
edges are generated by this method. The proposed method
generates better edges and textures as each LR patch is upsampled by a speciﬁc prior learned from a compact subspace of similar patches. Thus, the contrast and local structures are better preserved with less artifacts.
SR methods based on self exemplars: Figure 8(b)(d), Figure 9(a)(d), Figure 10(b)(d), and Figure 11(c)(d) show the
results generated by self-exemplar SR methods and the proposed algorithm. Self-exemplar SR algorithms iteratively upsample images with a small scaling factor (e.g.,
1.25). Such an approach has an advantage of generating
sharp and clear edges because it is easy to ﬁnd similar edge
(a) Bicubic Interpolation
(b) Back Projection 
(c) Shan 
(d) Proposed
Figure 7. IC. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least 974 × 800
pixels (full resolution). Because the ground truth image does not exist, the PSNR and SSIM indexes can not be computed.
(a) Sun 
(b) Glasner 
(c) Wang 
(d) Proposed
PSNR / SSIM: 28.7 / 0.8827
29.1 / 0.9002
28.5 / 0.8642
29.6 / 0.9071
Figure 8. Lena. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least
512 × 512 pixels (full resolution).
patches in the slightly downsampled input images. However, the exemplar patches generated by the input image are
few. To reduce the errors caused by using a small exemplar patch set, the back-projection technique is facilitated
as a post-processing in to reﬁne the generated image in
each upsampling iteration. However, the post-processing
may over-compensate SR images and generate artifacts, as
shown in Figure 8(b) and Figure 11(c), the edges and textures are over-sharpened and unnatural. In addition, since
all exemplar patches are generated from the input image, it
entails a computationally expensive on-line process to ﬁnd
similar patches and makes the method less suitable for realtime applications. An simpliﬁed algorithm reduces the
computational load by searching local patches only, but the
restriction also reduces the image quality. As shown in Figure 9(a), the structure of windows and the texture of bushes
are distorted. The details of nose structure are almost lost in
Figure 10(b) with unrealistic stripes near the hand and rock
region. In contrast, the proposed method overcomes the dif-
ﬁculty of ﬁnding rare patches by using a huge exemplar set,
which improves the probability to ﬁnd similar edge patches.
The proposed method exploits the well labeled edge patches
in training phase to generated effective SR edges in test
phase. As shown in Figure 6(d), Figure 7(d), Figure 8(d),
Figure 10(d), and Figure 11(d), the proposed method generates SR images with sharp edges effectively.
SR methods based on dictionary learning:
Figure 6(g)(h), Figure 8(c), and Figure 10(a) show images generated by SR algorithms based on sparse dictionary learning . The proposed algorithm is different from these
algorithms in several aspects. The proposed algorithm splits
the feature space and learns numerous mapping functions
individually, but the existing algorithms learn one
mapping function (through the paired dictionaries) for all
patches. Therefore, the learned dictionaries may not capture
(a) Freedman 
(b) Kim 
(c) Sun 
(d) Proposed
PSNR / SSIM: 18.7 / 0.3876
20.4 / 0.4699
20.1 / 0.4395
20.5 / 0.4921
Figure 9. Mansion. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least
480 × 320 pixels (full resolution).
(a) Wang 
(b) Freedman 
(c) Sun 
(d) Proposed
PSNR / SSIM: 25.9 / 0.6746
23.2 / 0.6374
25.8 / 0.6606
26.5 / 0.7133
Figure 10. Mermaid. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least
320 × 480 pixels (full resolution).
the details from some infrequent patches. Since patches of
sharp edges are less frequent than smooth patches in natural images, blocky edges can be observed in Figure 6(g).
To improve the accuracy of patch mapping through a pair
of dictionaries, an additional transform matrix is proposed
in to map LR sparse coefﬁcients to HR ones. As shown
in Figure 6(h), Figure 8(c) and Figure 10(a), the edges are
sharp without blocky artifacts.
However, the additional
transform matrix blurs textures because the mapping of
sparse coefﬁcients becomes many-to-many rather than oneto-one, which results in effects of averaging. In contrast, the
proposed method exploits the advantage of the divide-andconquer approach to ensure each linear function effectively
works in a compact feature subspace. Using simple feature
and linear functions, the proposed method generates sharper
edges than and richer textures than , as shown in
Figure 6(d)(g)(h), Figure 8(c)(d), and Figure 10(a)(d).
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose a fast algorithm which learns
mapping functions to generate SR images. By splitting the
feature space into numerous subspaces and collecting suf-
ﬁcient training exemplars to learn simple regression functions, the proposed method generates high-quality SR images with sharp edges and rich textures. Numerous experi-
(a) Bicubic Interpolation
(b) Shan 
(c) Glasner 
(d) Proposed
PSNR / SSIM: 23.1 / 0.5241
22.4 / 4908
23.7 / 0.5839
23.8 / 0.5835
Figure 11. Shore. Results best viewed on a high-resolution display with adequate zoom level where each image is shown with at least
320 × 480 pixels (full resolution).
ments with qualitative and quantitative comparisons against
several state-of-the-art SISR methods demonstrate the effectiveness and stability of the proposed algorithm.
6. Acknowledge
This work is supported in part by the NSF CAREER
Grant #1149783 and NSF IIS Grant #1152576.