Background/Objectives: Learning is getting transformed into digital and digital coursework is evidently seen to have
increased adoption. Major consumer base for e-commerce companies is India wherein learners and instructors form a
major part. So, many e-commerce companies are well positioned to service this need having an eye on education market. The
rapidly growing internet and smartphone penetration in the country is expected to further fuel this growth. India’s leading
e-commerce companies are in a competitive environment offering e-learning material for formal education, certificate
courses, E-books, coaching materials for competitive exams, online tests etc. Some e-commerce companies also offer hobby
courses. The study investigated the Information Control Technology (ICT) related factors that decide the adoption of various
online offerings from e-commerce companies for the purpose of education. Method/Statistical Analytics: Simple random
sampling has been applied for the research to collect the required sample. A structured questionnaire was distributed to
collect the data from about 100 consumers including learners and instructors. A conceptual framework was developed to
analyze the ICT factors impacting adoption of e-commerce offerings for education. Application/Improvements: This study
provides valuable guidance to policy makers and providers of e-commerce in education in understanding the ICT factors
influencing consumer adoption. Findings: ICT infrastructure has a significant impact on the perceived satisfaction of the
stakeholders (Learners and Instructors) followed by ICT skills and then the ICT Support. Also consumers view insufficient
ICT skills to take advantage of new technology as a significant challenge. Thereby they see a need for continuous technical
training. Other major concerns from respondents on the ICT infrastructure is about the unavailability of up-to-date ­antivirus protection in their systems, unavailability high-speed internet connection and multi-media incompatibility issues.
ICT Factors Influencing Consumer Adoption of
E-Commerce Offerings for Education
Meenakshi Thanji* and S. Vasantha
School of Management Studies, Vels University, Chennai - 600117, Tamil Nadu, India; ,
­ , 
Keywords: Consumers, E-commerce, Instructors, Infrastructure, Information Control Technology (ICT), Learners, Skills,
1.  Introduction
Internet coupled with developments in Information
Control Technology (ICT) has become a significant
business platform. This drastic growth has leveraged
E-commerce to altogether a new level. India has got 65%
of its population below 35 years of age. The demand-sup­
ply mismatch for quality education has reached massive
proportions and eventually the use of ICT has become
inevitable to address the demand for quality education.
Thereby in recent times, online courses and other study
materials offered online tend to be the attraction of learner
and instructor community.
The primary objective of this research paper is to
review the use of E-commerce offerings for Education
and training purposes. Being aware that learners and
instructors as consumers play a major role in the growth
of e-commerce business, the second goal is to analyze
the impact of Information Control Technology (ICT)
on adoption of the E-commerce offerings by Learner
and instructor community. Consumer’s opinion about
e-commerce offerings were elicited from the perspective
of learners and ­instructors. To develop a suitable model,
*Author for correspondence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, Vol 9(32), DOI: 10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i32/98650, August 2016
ISSN (Print) : 0974-6846
ISSN (Online) : 0974-5645
ICT Factors Influencing Consumer Adoption of E-Commerce Offerings for Education
Indian Journal of Science and Technology
Vol 9 (32) | August 2016 | www.indjst.org
a. Pursue a degree, taking internet-based courses
b. Take a complete web-based course for certifica­
tion purposes
c. Purchase textbooks (e-books, Smart books)
from on campus bookstore and from various
E-commerce providers
d. Online research databases
e. Conducting assessments and assignments
through online mode
f. Online Surveys to understand the enrollment
demographics
g. E-recruitment
h. Online directory of university services
i. Student services like Fee payment
j. Academic performance maintained online
2. E-commerce providers in market generate student
prospects online in terms of various online offerings
like e-learning modules, e-books and deliver several
education web sites to pursue a degree.
1.4  Consumers of Online Education
Non-traditional students2 can prove successful in their
higher education leveraging the online education capa­
bilities and offerings by various institutions. As per the
definition by National Center for Education Statistics,
learners meeting one of the below criteria fall under
­category of nontraditional student
Older students seeking a second degree or those
delayed college
Positioned abroad without any access to higher
­education.
Serving in varied time zones that don’t align with
­traditional course timings.
Lifestyle is highly disposed to unexpected transfers to
different states/countries.
Living on a geography where there are no institutions
of preference
1.5  E-commerce Offerings for Education
Various online offerings by leading e-commerce
­companies of Indi.3
Professional certificate courses
Training courses without any certification
Test preparation tools
Conducting assessments for certification
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) technique was
applied for analyzing the data. All the measures used in
structural equation modeling fit the recommended values
thereby indicating a good fit for the data collected.
1.1  Research Objectives
The objectives of this study are as listed below:
To identify the ICT factors influencing the consumer
adoption of e-commerce offerings
To examine the fit of the estimated model using SEM
model fit.
1.2  Consumer Oriented E-Commerce
Applications
Based on their services, e-commerce applications can be
broadly classified 1into:-
Entertainment
e-commerce
­applications in market today which stream movies on
demand, host video games either free or at cost.
Financial services
: E-commerce applications to pay
household bills like electricity bills, telephone bills etc.
Banking services for fund transfer, cash deposit also
come under this category.
Essential services
: Several key e-commerce players
in market today who are into e-retailing either in the
form of generalized stores or specialized stores for
essential services like grocery, apparels, food orders,
medicine etc.
Educational and training
: Digital education offered
in terms of e-learning, e-books, video assignments,
online enrollment modules etc.
1.3  E-Commerce in Education
Prior reviews have discussed the role of e-commerce in
Educational sector in various views discussed in detail as
1. E-commerce is in itself is a very well established
industry now with several e-commerce websites
prevalent on the cyberspace. This has necessitated the
need among learners and instructors that they need be
equipped with knowledge on ICT. The global educa­
tion sector is no longer restricted to just classrooms.
The online learning space in Indian educational sector
is also growing dramatically. Some of the e-commerce
applications offered by Educational institutions for
their student body:
Meenakshi Thanji and S. Vasantha
Indian Journal of Science and Technology
Vol 9 (32) | August 2016 | www.indjst.org
Friedman test was used to test for differences between
groups. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was used
for analyzing the association between factors used in the
2.3  Research Methodology
2.3.1  Sample
The sample comprises of online users which includes
full-time, part-time, distance education learners and
instructors. The research design is descriptive in nature
for the study. The sampling technique that is used for the
study is simple random sampling. A group of respondents
were selected through simple random to avoid any sort of
bias in the research and then the questionnaire was circu­
lated to them in the form of electronic survey for which
response was collected. Survey method of primary data
collection using questionnaire adopted for collection of
primary data.
2.3.2  Data Analysis and Interpretation
SEM was used to analyze the collected data and evalu­
ate the suitability of the model. Cronbach’s alpha scores
were calculated to test the reliability and consistency of
each ICT factor. The findings show that the overall reli­
ability score is 0.9867 as shown in table1 which is above
the minimum acceptable level of 0.8.
3.  Results and Discussion
3.1  Structural equation modeling (SEM):
Model fit assessment
Structural equation modeling (Figure 1) was used to ana­
lyze the model fit based upon the primary data that was
collected. This model is held as the most useful for assess­
ment of causal relationship between variables and for
verifying the suitability of the estimated model. For evalu­
ating the model fitness, emphasis was given to chi-square
value, Probability value, Goodness of Fit Index (GFI),
Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI), Comparative Fit
index (CFI), RMR and Root mean square error of approx­
imation (RMSEA) (Table 2).
Obtain student feedback through e-surveys to improve
the courses offered online
Coaching materials
1.6  ICT Factors impacting adoption of
Online Education
ICT facilitates anytime, anywhere learning provid­
ing access to remote learning resources and thus helps
expand access to education. Research likewise suggests
that use of ICT increases learner motivation and engage­
ment in the learning process provided with adequate ICT
support and training on ICT skills. ICT infrastructure
cost is discussed in detail as fixed cost and Variable cost.
Retrofitting of physical facilities, hardware and software
upgrades and replacement are some of the fixed cost
involved. Internet connectivity and other maintenance
support cost are some of the recurrent or Variable cost
involved. ICT infrastructure cost, changes to instructional
design owing to ICT developments, ICT skills, equity of
access to ICT are some of the challenges discussed in this
article. As outlined in this article, technological literacy
covers the below listed aspects4:
Fundamental technical skills and concepts
Usage of the electronic devices and accessories
Usage of productivity tools like word processing,
spreadsheets etc.
Usage of collaboration tools like emails, blogs etc.
Elementary knowledge in accessing web applications
2.  Methods
2.1  Data Collection and Sample
In this study, consumer (learners and instructors) per­
ceptions were gathered using a structured questionnaire
circulated in the form of electronic survey. Five-point
scale was used to increase the sensitivity of the measure.
Data on learners’ and instructors’ perception about the
three ICT factors – ICT skills, ICT Infrastructure and ICT
support were collected.
2.2  Data Analysis
Data collected from 100 consumers which includes 16
full-time learners, 56 Part-time learners and 28 instruc­
tors were analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social
Sciences (SPSS). Statistical techniques like reliability anal­
ysis, was used to evaluate the quality of the questionnaire.
Table 1.  Reliability Statistics
Cronbach`s alpha
No of items
ICT Factors Influencing Consumer Adoption of E-Commerce Offerings for Education
Indian Journal of Science and Technology
Vol 9 (32) | August 2016 | www.indjst.org
variables for every metric unit change in the independent
variable. The coefficient of perceived satisfaction is 0.775
represents the partial effect of perceived satisfaction on
adoption, holding the other variables as constant. Table3
reports the unstandardized estimate, its standard error
(S.E.), and the critical ratio (C.R.).
3.3  Level of Significance for Regression
As per table 4, the probability of getting a critical ratio
as large as 19.473 in absolute value is less than 0.001. In
other words, the regression weight for perceived satisfac­
tion in the prediction of adoption is significantly different
from zero at the 0.001 level (two-tailed).
3.4  Correlation Analysis on factors of ICT
on Adoption
The correlation coefficient between skills and infrastruc­
ture is 0.711. This indicates 71.1 percentage positive
relationships between skills and infrastructure on infra­
structure at 1% level. The correlation coefficient between
skills and support is 0.565. This indicates 56.5 percentage
positive relationships between skills and support and is
significant at 1% level. The correlation coefficient between
skills and support is 0.686. This indicates 68.6 percentage
positive relationships between skills and support and is
significant at 1% level and similarly the other factors are
positively correlated with each other (Table 5).
3.5  Finding and Suggestions
Among the three factors of ICT i.e. support, skills and
infrastructure, the factor most significantly ­impacting
As per the result shown in table 3, Chi square statistics
with p value of 0.358 which is greater than 0.05 shows
good fit of the model. The GFI and AGFI of this study was
0.984 which is more than the recommended value of 0.90
representing a good fit. The CFI value of 0.999 also means
a good fit. And the RMR = 0.069 and RMSEA=0.031 indi­
cate an absolute fit of the model. Goodness of fit indices
support the estimated model fit and these emphasized
indices indicate the acceptability of this structural model.
The variables used in the structural equation model are
I.  Observed, endogenous variables
1. Information Control Technology (ICT)
II.  Observed, exogenous variables
2. Infrastructure
3. Support
4. Perceived Satisfaction
5. Adoption
III. Unobserved, exogenous variables
e1, e2, e3, e4 and e5: Error terms for Skills,
Infrastructure, Support, Perceived satisfaction and
adoption respectively.
3.2  Significance Tests of Individual
Parameters
Table 4 reports the unstandardized regression coefficients
and connected test statistics. The unstandardized regres­
sion coefficient is the amount of change in the dependent
Table 2.  Number of variables in the SEM
Total variables in this model
Total observed variables
Total unobserved variables
Total exogenous variables
Total endogenous variables
Figure 1.  Structural model -confirmatory factor analysis.
Table 3.  Model fit summary of Structural Equation
Fit Indices
Suggested values5-9
Chi-square value
Probability value
Goodness of Fit Index (GFI)
Adjusted Goodness of Fit
Index (AGFI)
Comparative Fit index (CFI)
Root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA)
Meenakshi Thanji and S. Vasantha
Indian Journal of Science and Technology
Vol 9 (32) | August 2016 | www.indjst.org
the perceived satisfaction of consumers is the ICT
­infrastructure followed by ICT skills and then the ICT
Support (Table9). ICT Support is provided by part-time
staffs but the consumers do not seem to have concerns on
the support timings (Table 6). As far as ICT Skills are con­
cerned, consumers strongly feel that insufficient skills to
take advantage of new technology is significant challenge.
The research findings show that estimated model has an
Table 4.  Variables in the Structural Equation Model Analysis
Unstandardized
Standardized
Infrastructure
Perceived Satisfaction
Perceived Satisfaction
Table 5.  Correlation coefficients between ICT and Adoption
Infrastructure
Satisfaction
Infrastructure
Perceived Satisfaction
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Table 6.  Friedman test summary for Support
How the IT support staff is organized to
provide technical support?
Support is provided by part time staffs
Support is provided by dedicated staffs
Separate departments support online learning
and other online services
IT support available 24*7 (All days in a week
and round the clock support)
IT support available from 9 to 5; Weekdays
IT support available 9 to 5; All days in a week
IT support available round the clock support;
But weekdays only
Table 7.  Friedman test summary for Skills
How significant a challenge is it for IT to
support learners in the following areas?
Lack of knowledge about technology
Rapidly changing technology
Need for continuous technical training
Insufficient skills to take advantage of
new technologies
Utilizing online course applications/tools
Not user friendly
Security of equipment
acceptable fit. Lack of knowledge about technology stands
out as the next significant challenge. Thereby there is a
demand from end users on need for continuous techni­
cal training (Table 7). Major concern from respondents
on the ICT infrastructure is about the anti-virus protec­
tion in their systems. High-speed internet connection
and multi-media incompatibility issues rank the next top
challenges (Table 8).
ICT Factors Influencing Consumer Adoption of E-Commerce Offerings for Education
Indian Journal of Science and Technology
Vol 9 (32) | August 2016 | www.indjst.org
the perceived satisfaction of the learners and instructors
thereby significantly impacting the adoption levels of the
e-commerce offerings. The article explained about all the
e-commerce offerings for the purpose of academics. At
the same time the article handled how the ICT develop­
ments impact the adoption of the various offerings by
consumers.
5. Acknowledgement
I wish to thank my respondents to have participated in
this survey. My sincere thanks to Dr. S Vasantha, for guid­
ing me in this research. Heartfelt thanks to my family
and I thank all many people who have helped me in my
research. I would also like to thank the publisher.
6.  References
1. E-commerce. Available from: www.ignou.ac.in/upload/
B2U1cit-002.pdf. Date accessed 04/04/2016
2. Using Technology to Engage the Nontraditional Student.
 
using-technology-to-engage-the-nontraditional-student.
Date accessed 07/03/2016. Date accessed 04/04/2016
3. The retailing of online education courses in  India.
Available from: 
industry/jobs/the-retailing-of-online-education-coursesin-india/211512/,Data accessed:? 15–2016.
4. Tinio VL. ICT in Education. Available from: 
un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/unpan/
unpan037270.pdf. Date accessed 04/04/2016
5. Daire H, Joseph C, Michael RM. Structural Equation
Modeling: Guidelines for Determining Model Fit Electron.
J Bus Res Methods. 2008; 6(1):53–60.
6. Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL. Multivariate Data
Analysis, Prentice- Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
In: Pont M, McQuilken L editors. Testing the Fit of the
BANKSERV Model to BANKPERF Data. ANZMAG
Conference Proceedings. 2012. p. 1–865.
7. Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tantham RL. Multivariate Data
Analysis.10th edn., Prentice Hall: New Jersey. In: AL-
Majali M, Nik Mat NK editors. Modeling the antecedents
of internet banking service adoption (IBSA) in Jordan: A
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) approach. Journal of
Internet Banking and Commerce. 2011; 16(1):8–13.
8. Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC, Babin BJ.
Multivariate Data Analysis, 6th edn., Pearson Education,
New Delhi. 2006; 734–5.
9. Hu LT, Bentler PM. Cutoff Criteria for Fit Indexes in
Covariance Structure Analysis: Conventional Criteria ver­
sus New Alternatives. Struct Equ Model. 1999; 6(1):1–55.
Table 8.  Friedman test summary for Infrastructure
Rate the following key challenges that you
face towards use of technology
High-Speed bandwidth /Connection
available within campus
I am connected to the Internet with a
reasonably fast, reliable connection
I have headphones/ speakers and a
microphone to make a remote connect if a
class has a videoconference
My computer runs reliably on the operating
system and my browser is compatible with
several common multimedia formats
I have virus protection software running on
my computer
My institution offers orientation module
before the learners are exposed to first
online course
My institution encourages teachers/trainers
to develop their own online teaching content
My institution encourages instructors to
incorporate technology into instruction
My institution offers easy-to-use tools to
decrease IT support requirements
My institution constants upgrades the
infrastructure to enable latest technology use
Table 9.  Friedman test
summary for ICT factors
Infrastructure
4.  Conclusion
Conclusively, the article points out that ICT support, skills
and infrastructure majorly impact the perceived satisfac­
tion of consumer’s i.e. learners, instructors. As the current
state of ICT stands, as far as the in-campus support is con­
cerned, seems to be provided by staff who are involved
in part-time support for ICT. From the study, we get to
understand that there is a huge demand from the con­
sumers on a continuous need for training on the rapidly
changing technologies. Security aspect is known to cause
serious concern among consumers which prevents them
from adopting the e-commerce offerings. Overall, lack
of ICT skills, stands out as the major barrier impacting