Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
Technical Report TR-2009-07, April 2009
Joint-sparse recovery from multiple measurements∗
Ewout van den Berg
Michael P. Friedlander
The joint-sparse recovery problem aims to recover, from sets of compressed measurements,
unknown sparse matrices with nonzero entries restricted to a subset of rows. This is an
extension of the single-measurement-vector (SMV) problem widely studied in compressed
sensing. We analyze the recovery properties for two types of recovery algorithms. First, we
show that recovery using sum-of-norm minimization cannot exceed the uniform recovery rate
of sequential SMV using ℓ1 minimization, and that there are problems that can be solved with
one approach but not with the other. Second, we analyze the performance of the ReMBo
algorithm [M. Mishali and Y. Eldar, IEEE Trans. Sig. Proc., 56 ] in combination with
ℓ1 minimization, and show how recovery improves as more measurements are taken. From
this analysis it follows that having more measurements than number of nonzero rows does not
improve the potential theoretical recovery rate.
Introduction
A problem of central importance in compressed sensing is the following: given an m × n
matrix A, and a measurement vector b = Ax0, recover x0. When m < n, this problem is ill-posed,
and it is not generally possible to uniquely recover x0 without some prior information. In many
important cases, x0 is known to be sparse, and it may be appropriate to solve
subject to
to ﬁnd the sparsest possible solution. (The ℓ0-norm ∥· ∥0 of a vector counts the number of nonzero
entries.) If x0 has fewer than s/2 nonzero entries, where s is the number of nonzeros in the sparsest
null-vector of A, then x0 is the unique solution of this optimization problem . The main
obstacle of this approach is that it is combinatorial , and therefore impractical for all but the
smallest problems. To overcome this, Chen et al. introduced basis pursuit:
subject to
This convex relaxation, based on the ℓ1-norm ∥x∥1, can be solved much more eﬃciently; moreover,
under certain conditions , it yields the same solution as the ℓ0 problem (1.1).
A natural extension of the single-measurement-vector (SMV) problem just described is the
multiple-measurement-vector (MMV) problem. Instead of a single measurement b, we are given a
set of r measurements
b(k) = Ax(k)
k = 1, . . . , r,
in which the vectors x(k)
are jointly sparse—i.e., have nonzero entries at the same locations. Such
problems arise in source localization , neuromagnetic imaging , and equalization of sparsecommunication channels . Succinctly, the aim of the MMV problem is to recover X0 from
observations B = AX0, where B = [b(1), b(2), . . . , b(r)] is an m × r matrix, and the n × r matrix
∗Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver V6T 1Z4, BC, Canada
({ewout78,mpf}@cs.ubc.ca).
Research partially supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.
 
X0 is row sparse—i.e., it has nonzero entries in only a small number of rows. The most widely
studied approach to the MMV problem is based on solving the convex optimization problem
subject to
where the mixed ℓp,q norm of X is deﬁned as
and Xj→is the (column) vector whose entries form the jth row of X. In particular, Cotter et al. 
consider p = 2, q ≤1; Tropp analyzes p = 1, q = ∞; Malioutov et al. and Eldar and
Mishali use p = 1, q = 2; and Chen and Huo study p = 1, q ≥1. A diﬀerent approach is
given by Mishali and Eldar , who propose the ReMBo algorithm, which reduces MMV to a
series of SMV problems.
In this paper we study the sum-of-norms problem and the conditions for uniform recovery of
all X0 with a ﬁxed row support, and compare this against recovery using ℓ1,1. We then construct
matrices X0 that cannot be recovered using ℓ1,1 but for which ℓ1,2 does succeed, and vice versa.
We then illustrate the individual recovery properties of ℓ1,1 and ℓ1,2 with empirical results. We
further show how recovery via ℓ1,1 changes as the number of measurements increases, and propose
a boosted-ℓ1 approach to improve on the ℓ1,1 approach. This analysis provides the starting point
for our study of the recovery properties of ReMBo, based on a geometrical interpretation of this
algorithm.
We begin in Section 2 by summarizing existing ℓ0-ℓ1 equivalence results, which give conditions
under which the solution of the ℓ1 relaxation (1.2) coincides with the solution of the ℓ0 problem (1.1).
In Section 3 we consider the ℓ1,2 mixed-norm and sum-of-norms formulations and compare their
performance against ℓ1,1. In Sections 4 and 5 we examine two approaches that are based on
sequential application of (1.2).
We assume throughout that A is a full-rank matrix in Rm×n, and that X0 is an s
row-sparse matrix in Rn×r. We follow the convention that all vectors are column vectors. For
an arbitrary matrix M, its jth column is denoted by the column vector M ↓j; its ith row is the
transpose of the column vector M i→. The ith entry of a vector v is denoted by vi. We make
exceptions for ei = I↓i and for x0 (resp., X0), which represents the sparse vector (resp., matrix)
we want to recover. When there is no ambiguity we sometimes write mi to denote M ↓i. When
concatenating vectors into matrices, [a, b, c] denotes horizontal concatenation and [a; b; c] denotes
vertical concatenation. When indexing with I, we deﬁne the vector vI := [vi]i∈I, and the m × |I|
matrix AI := [A↓j]j∈I. Row or column selection takes precedence over all other operators.
Existing results for ℓ1 recovery
The conditions under which (1.2) gives the sparsest possible solution have been studied by applying
a number of diﬀerent techniques. By far the most popular analytical approach is based on the
restricted isometry property, introduced by Cand`es and Tao , which gives suﬃcient conditions
for equivalence. Donoho obtains necessary and suﬃcient (NS) conditions by analyzing the
underlying geometry of (1.2). Several authors characterize the NS-conditions in terms of
properties of the kernel of A:
Ker(A) = {x | Ax = 0}.
Fuchs and Tropp express suﬃcient conditions in terms of the solution of the dual of (1.2):
subject to
In this paper we are mainly concerned with the geometric and kernel conditions. We use the
geometrical interpretation of the problems to get a better understanding, and resort to the null-space
properties of A to analyze recovery. To make the discussion more self-contained, we brieﬂy recall
some of the relevant results in the next three sections.
The geometry of ℓ1 recovery
The set of all points of the unit ℓ1-ball, {x ∈Rn | ∥x∥1 ≤1}, can be formed by taking convex
combinations of ±ej, the signed columns of the identity matrix. Geometrically this is equivalent
to taking the convex hull of these vectors, giving the cross-polytope C = conv{±e1, ±e2, . . . , ±en}.
Likewise, we can look at the linear mapping x 7→Ax for all points x ∈C, giving the polytope
P = {Ax | x ∈C} = AC. The faces of C can be expressed as the convex hull of subsets of
vertices, not including pairs that are reﬂections with respect to the origin (such pairs are sometimes
erroneously referred to as antipodal, which is a slightly more general concept ). Under linear
transformations, each face from the cross-polytope C either maps to a face on P or vanishes into
the interior of P.
The solution found by (1.2) can be interpreted as follows. Starting with a radius of zero, we
slowly “inﬂate” P until it ﬁrst touches b. The radius at which this happens corresponds to the
ℓ1-norm of the solution x∗. The vertices whose convex hull is the face touching b determine the
location and sign of the non-zero entries of x∗, while the position where b touches the face determines
their relative weights. Donoho shows that x0 can be recovered from b = Ax0 using (1.2) if
and only if the face of the (scaled) cross-polytope containing x0 maps to a face on P. Two direct
consequences are that recovery depends only on the sign pattern of x0, and that the probability of
recovering a random s-sparse vector is equal to the ratio of the number of (s −1)-faces in P to the
number of (s −1)-faces in C. That is, letting Fd(P) denote the collection of all d-faces in P,
the probability of recovering x0 using ℓ1 is given by
Pℓ1(A, s) = |Fs−1(AC)|
|Fs−1(C)| .
When we need to ﬁnd the recoverability of vectors restricted to a support I, this probability
Pℓ1(A, I) = |FI(AC)|
where FI(C) = 2|I| denotes the number of faces in C formed by the convex hull of {±ej}i∈I, and
FI(AC) is the number of faces on AC generated by {±A↓j}j∈I.
Null-space properties and ℓ1 recovery
Equivalence results in terms of null-space properties generally characterize equivalence for the set
of all vectors x with a ﬁxed support, which is deﬁned as
Supp(x) = {j | xj ̸= 0}.
We say that x can be uniformly recovered on I ⊆{1, . . . , n} if all x with Supp(x) ⊆I can be
recovered. The following theorem illustrates conditions for uniform recovery via ℓ1 on an index set;
more general results are given by Gribonval and Nielsen .
Theorem 2.1 (Donoho and Elad , Gribonval and Nielsen ). Let A be an m × n matrix and
I ⊆{1, . . . , n} be a ﬁxed index set. Then all x0 ∈Rn with Supp(x0) ⊆I can be uniquely recovered
from b = Ax0 using basis pursuit (1.2) if and only if for all z ∈Ker(A) \ {0},
That is, the ℓ1-norm of z on I is strictly less than the ℓ1-norm of z on the complement Ic.
Optimality conditions for ℓ1 recovery
Suﬃcient conditions for recovery can be derived from the ﬁrst-order optimality conditions necessary
for x∗and y∗to be solutions of (1.2) and (2.1) respectively. The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
conditions are also suﬃcient in this case because the problems are convex. The Lagrangian function
for (1.2) is given by
L(x, y) = ∥x∥1 −yT(Ax −b);
the KKT conditions require that
0 ∈∂xL(x, y),
where ∂xL denotes the subdiﬀerential of L with respect to x. The second condition reduces to
0 ∈sgn(x) −ATy,
where the signum function
if γ ̸= 0,
otherwise,
is applied to each individual component of x. It follows that x∗is a solution of (1.2) if and only if
Ax∗= b and there exists an m-vector y such that |aT
jy| ≤1 for j ̸∈Supp(x), and aT
jy = sign(x∗
all j ∈Supp(x). Fuchs shows that x∗is the unique solution of (1.2) when [aj]j∈Supp(x) is full
rank and, in addition, |aT
jy| < 1 for all j ̸∈Supp(x). When the columns of A are in general position
(i.e., no k + 1 columns of A span the same k −1 dimensional hyperplane for k ≤n) we can weaken
this condition by noting that for such A, the solution of (1.2) is always unique, thus making the
existence of a y that satisﬁes (2.4) for x0 a necessary and suﬃcient condition for ℓ1 to recover x0.
Recovery using sums-of-row norms
Our analysis of sparse recovery for the MMV problem of recovering X0 from B = AX0 begins with
an extension of Theorem 2.1 to recovery using the convex relaxation
subject to
note that the norm within the summation is arbitrary. Deﬁne the row support of a matrix as
Supprow(X) = {j | ∥Xj→∦= 0}.
With these deﬁnitions we have the following result. (A related result is given by Stojnic et al. .)
Theorem 3.1. Let A be an m × n matrix, k be a positive integer, I ⊆{1, . . . , n} be a ﬁxed index
set, and let ∥·∥denote any vector norm. Then all X0 ∈Rn×r with Supprow(X0) ⊆I can be uniquely
recovered from B = AX0 using (3.1) if and only if for all Z with columns Z↓k ∈Ker(A) \ {0},
Proof. For the “only if” part, suppose that there is a Z with columns Z↓k ∈Ker(A) \ {0} such
that (3.2) does not hold. Now, choose Xj→= Zj→for all j ∈I and with all remaining rows
zero. Set B = AX. Next, deﬁne V = X −Z, and note that AV = AX −AZ = AX = B. The
construction of V implies that P
j ∥V j→∥, and consequently X cannot be the unique
solution of (3.1).
Conversely, let X be an arbitrary matrix with Supprow(X) ⊆I, and let B = AX. To show that
X is the unique solution of (3.1) it suﬃces to show that for any Z with columns Z↓k ∈Ker(A)\{0},
∥(X + Z)j→∥>
This is equivalent to
∥(X + Z)j→∥−
Applying the reverse triangle inequality, ∥a + b∥−∥b∥≥−∥a∥, to the summation over j ∈I and
reordering exactly gives condition (3.2).
In the special case of the sum of ℓ1-norms, i.e., ℓ1,1, summing the norms of the columns is
equivalent to summing the norms of the rows. As a result, (3.1) can be written as
subject to
AX↓k = B↓k,
k = 1, . . . , r.
Because this objective is separable, the problem can be decoupled and solved as a series of
independent basis pursuit problems, giving one X↓k for each column B↓k of B. The following result
relates recovery using the sum-of-norms formulation (3.1) to ℓ1,1 recovery.
Theorem 3.2. Let A be an m × n matrix, r be a positive integer, I ⊆{1, . . . , n} be a ﬁxed index
set, and ∥·∥denote any vector norm. Then uniform recovery of all X ∈Rn×r with Supprow(X) ⊆I
using sums of norms (3.1) implies uniform recovery on I using ℓ1,1.
Proof. For uniform recovery on support I to hold it follows from Theorem 3.1 that for any matrix
Z with columns Z↓k ∈Ker(A) \ {0}, property (3.2) holds. In particular it holds for Z with Z↓k = ¯z
for all k, with ¯z ∈Ker(A)\{0}. Note that for these matrices there exist a norm-dependent constant
γ such that
|¯zj| = γ∥Zj→∥.
Since the choice of ¯z was arbitrary, it follows from (3.2) that the NS-condition (2.3) for independent
recovery of vectors B↓k using ℓ1 in Theorem 2.1 is satisﬁed. Moreover, because ℓ1,1 is equivalent to
independent recovery, we also have uniform recovery on I using ℓ1,1.
An implication of Theorem 3.2 is that the use of restricted isometry conditions—or any technique,
for that matter—to analyze uniform recovery conditions for the sum-of-norms approach necessarily
lead to results that are no stronger than uniform ℓ1 recovery. (Recall that the ℓ1,1 and ℓ1 norms
are equivalent).
Recovery using ℓ1,2
In this section we take a closer look at the ℓ1,2 problem
subject to
which is a special case of the sum-of-norms problem. Although Theorem 3.2 establishes that uniform
recovery via ℓ1,2 is no better than uniform recovery via ℓ1,1, there are many situations in which
it recovers signals that ℓ1,1 cannot. Indeed, it is evident from Figure 1 that the probability of
recovering individual signals with random signs and support is much higher for ℓ1,2. The reason for
the degrading performance or ℓ1,1 with increasing k is explained in Section 4.
In this section we construct examples for which ℓ1,2 works and ℓ1,1 fails, and vice versa. This
helps uncover some of the structure of ℓ1,2, but at the same time implies that certain techniques
used to study ℓ1 can no longer be used directly. Because the examples are based on extensions of
the results from Section 2.3, we ﬁrst develop equivalent conditions here.
Recovery rate (%)
Figure 1: Recovery rates for ﬁxed, randomly drawn 20 × 60 matrices A, averaged over 1,000 trials
at each row-sparsity level s. The nonzero entries in the 60 × r matrix X0 are sampled i.i.d. from
the normal distribution. The solid and dashed lines represent ℓ1,2 and ℓ1,1 recovery, respectively.
Suﬃcient conditions for recovery via ℓ1,2
The optimality conditions of the ℓ1,2 problem (3.3) play a vital role in deriving a set of suﬃcient
conditions for joint-sparse recovery. In this section we derive the dual of (3.3) and the corresponding
necessary and suﬃcient optimality conditions. These allow us to derive suﬃcient conditions for
recovery via ℓ1,2.
The Lagrangian for (3.3) is deﬁned as
L(X, Y ) = ∥X∥1,2 −⟨Y, AX −B⟩,
where ⟨V, W⟩:= trace(V TW) is an inner-product deﬁned over real matrices. The dual is then given
by maximizing
X L(X, Y ) = inf
X {∥X∥1,2 −⟨Y, AX −B⟩} = ⟨B, Y ⟩−sup
over Y . (Because the primal problem has only linear constraints, there necessarily exists a dual
solution Y ∗that maximizes this expression [25, Theorem 28.2].) To simplify the supremum term,
we note that for any convex, positively homogeneous function f deﬁned over an inner-product
{⟨w, v⟩−f(v)} =
if w ∈∂f(0),
otherwise.
To derive these conditions, note that positive homogeneity of f implies that f(0) = 0, and thus
w ∈∂f(0) implies that ⟨w, v⟩≤f(v) for all v. Hence, the supremum is achieved with v = 0. If on
the other hand w ̸∈∂f(0), then there exists some v such that ⟨w, v⟩> f(v), and by the positive
homogeneity of f, ⟨w, αv⟩−f(αv) →∞as α →∞. Applying this expression for the supremum
to (3.5), we arrive at the necessary condition
ATY ∈∂∥0∥1,2,
which is required for dual feasibility.
We now derive an expression for the subdiﬀerential ∂∥X∥1,2. For rows j where ∥Xj→∥2 > 0,
the gradient is given by ∇∥Xj→∥2 = Xj→/∥Xj→∥2. For the remaining rows, the gradient is not
deﬁned, but ∂∥Xj→∥2 coincides with the set of unit ℓ2-norm vectors Br
ℓ2 = {v ∈Rr | ∥v∥2 ≤1}.
Thus, for each j = 1, . . . , n,
∂Xj→∥X∥1,2 ∈
Xj→/∥Xj→∥2
if ∥Xj→∥2 > 0,
otherwise.
Combining this expression with (3.6), we arrive at the dual of (3.3):
trace(BTY )
subject to
∥ATY ∥∞,2 ≤1.
The following conditions are therefore necessary and suﬃcient for a primal-dual pair (X∗, Y ∗) to
be optimal for (3.3) and its dual (3.8):
(primal feasibility);
∥ATY ∗∥∞,2 ≤1
(dual feasibility);
∥X∗∥1,2 = trace(BTY ∗)
(zero duality gap).
The existence of a matrix Y ∗that satisﬁes (3.9) provides a certiﬁcate that the feasible matrix
X∗is an optimal solution of (3.3). However, it does not guarantee that X∗is also the unique
solution. The following theorem gives suﬃcient conditions, similar to those in Section 2.3, that also
guarantee uniqueness of the solution.
Theorem 3.3. Let A be an m × n matrix, and B be an m × r matrix. Then a set of suﬃcient
conditions for X to be the unique minimizer of (3.3) with Lagrange multiplier Y ∈Rm×r and row
support I = Supprow(X), is that
(ATY )↓j = (X∗)j→/∥(X∗)j→∥2,
∥(ATY )↓j∥2 < 1,
rank(AI) = |I|.
Proof. The ﬁrst three conditions clearly imply that (X, Y ) primal and dual feasible, and thus
satisfy (3.9a) and (3.9b). Conditions (3.10b) and (3.10c) together imply that
trace(BTY ) ≡
[(ATY )↓j]T Xj→=
Xj→≡∥X∥1,2.
The ﬁrst and last identities above follow directly from the deﬁnitions of the matrix trace and of the
norm ∥· ∥1,2, respectively; the middle equality follows from the standard Cauchy inequality. Thus,
the zero-gap requirement (3.9c) is satisﬁed. The conditions (3.10a)–(3.10c) are therefore suﬃcient
for (X, Y ) to be an optimal primal-dual solution of (3.3). Because Y determines the support and
is a Lagrange multiplier for every solution X, this support must be unique. It then follows from
condition (3.10d) that X must be unique.
Counter examples
Using the suﬃcient and necessary conditions developed in the previous section we now construct
examples of problems for which ℓ1,2 succeeds while ℓ1,1 fails, and vice versa. Because of its simplicity,
we begin with the latter.
Recovery using ℓ1,1 where ℓ1,2 fails.
Let A be an m × n matrix with m < n and unit-norm
columns that are not scalar multiples of each other. Take any vector x ∈Rn with at least m + 1
nonzero entries. Then X0 = diag(x), possibly with all identically zero columns removed, can be
recovered from B = AX0 using ℓ1,1, but not with ℓ1,2. To see why, note that each column in X0
has only a single nonzero entry, and that, under the assumptions on A, each one-sparse vector can
be recovered individually using ℓ1 (the points ±A↓j ∈Rm are all 0-faces of P) and therefore that
X0 can be recovered using ℓ1,1.
On the other hand, for recovery using ℓ1,2 there would need to exist a matrix Y satisfying the
ﬁrst condition of (3.9) for all j ∈I = {1, . . . , n}. For this given X0 this reduces to AT Y = M, where
M is the identity matrix, with the same columns removed as X. But this equality is impossible
to satisfy because rank(A) ≤m < m + 1 ≤rank(M). Thus, X0 cannot be the solution of the ℓ1,2
problem (3.3).
Recovery using ℓ1,2 where ℓ1,1 fails.
For the construction of a problem where ℓ1,2 succeeds
and ℓ1,1 fails, we consider two vectors, f and s, with the same support I, in such a way that
individual ℓ1 recovery fails for f, while it succeeds for s. In addition we assume that there exists a
vector y that satisﬁes
yTA↓j = sign(sj)
for all j ∈I,
|yTA↓j| < 1
for all j ̸∈I;
i.e., y satisﬁes conditions (3.10b) and (3.10c). Using the vectors f and s, we construct the 2-column
matrix X0 = [(1 −γ)s, γf], and claim that for suﬃciently small γ > 0, this gives the desired
reconstruction problem. Clearly, for any γ ̸= 0, ℓ1,1 recovery fails because the second column can
never be recovered, and we only need to show that ℓ1,2 does succeed.
For γ = 0, the matrix Y = [y, 0] satisﬁes conditions (3.10b) and (3.10c) and, assuming (3.10d)
is also satisﬁed, X0 is the unique solution of ℓ1,2 with B = AX0. For suﬃciently small γ > 0, the
conditions that Y need to satisfy change slightly due to the division by ∥Xj→
0 ∥2 for those rows in
Supprow(X). By adding corrections to the columns of Y those new conditions can be satisﬁed. In
particular, these corrections can be done by adding weighted combinations of the columns in ¯Y ,
which are constructed in such a way that it satisﬁes AT
I ¯Y = I, and minimizes ∥AT
Ic ¯Y ∥∞,∞on the
complement Ic of I.
Note that on the above argument can also be used to show that ℓ1,2 fails for γ suﬃciently close
to one. Because the support and signs of X remain the same for all 0 < γ < 1, we can conclude the
following:
Corollary 3.4. Recovery using ℓ1,2 is generally not only characterized by the row-support and the
sign pattern of the nonzero entries in X0, but also by the magnitude of the nonzero entries.
A consequence of this conclusion is that the notion of faces used in the geometrical interpretation
of ℓ1 is not applicable to the ℓ1,2 problem.
Experiments
To get an idea of just how much more ℓ1,2 can recover in the above case where ℓ1,1 fails, we
generated a 20 × 60 matrix A with entries i.i.d. normally distributed, and determined a set of
vectors si and fi with identical support for which ℓ1 recovery succeeds and fails, respectively.
Using triples of vectors si and fj we constructed row-sparse matrices such as X0 = [s1, f1, f2] or
X0 = [s1, s2, f2], and attempted to recover from B = AX0W, where W = diag(ω1, ω2, ω3) is a
diagonal weighting matrix with nonnegative entries and unit trace, by solving (3.3). For problems
of this size, interior-point methods are very eﬃcient and we use SDPT3 through the CVX
interface . We consider X0 to be recovered when the maximum absolute diﬀerence between
X0 and the ℓ1,2 solution X∗is less than 10−5. The results of the experiment are shown in Figure 2.
In addition to the expected regions of recovery around individual columns si and failure around fi,
we see that certain combinations of vectors si still fail, while other combinations of vectors fi may
be recoverable. By contrast, when using ℓ1,1 to solve the problem, any combination of si vectors
can be recovered while no combination including an fi can be recovered.
Figure 2: Generation of problems where ℓ1,2 succeeds, while ℓ1,1 fails. For a 20 × 60 matrix A
and ﬁxed support of size |I| = 5, 7, 10, we create vectors fi that cannot be recovered using ℓ1, and
vectors si than can be recovered. Each triangle represents an X0 constructed from the vectors
denoted in the corners. The location in the triangle determines the weight on each vector, ranging
from zero to one, and summing up to one. The dark areas indicates the weights for which ℓ1,2
successfully recovered X0.
Boosted ℓ1
As described in Section 3, recovery using ℓ1,1 is equivalent to individual ℓ1 recovery of each column
based on bk := B↓k, for k = 1, . . . , r:
subject to
Assuming that the signs of nonzero entries in the support of each xk are drawn i.i.d. from {1, −1},
we can express the probability of recovering a matrix X0 with row support I using ℓ1,1 in terms of
the probability of recovering vectors on that support using ℓ1. To see how, note that ℓ1,1 recovers
the original X0 if and only if each individual problem in (4.1) successfully recovers each xk. For
the above class of matrices X0 this therefore gives a recovery rate of
Pℓ1,1(A, I, k) = [Pℓ1(A, I)]r .
Using ℓ1,1 to recover X0 is clearly not a good idea. Note also that uniform recovery of X0 on a
support I remains unchanged, regardless of the number of observations, r, that are given. As a
consequence of Theorem 3.2, this also means that the uniform-recovery properties for any sumof-norms approach cannot increase with r. This clearly defeats the purpose of gathering multiple
observations.
In many instances where ℓ1,1 fails, it may still recover a subset of columns xk from the
corresponding observations bk. It seems wasteful to discard this information because if we could
recognize a single correctly recovered xk, we would immediately know the row support I =
Supprow(X0) = Supp(xk) of X0. Given the correct support we can recover the nonzero part ¯X of
X0 by solving
∥AI ¯X −B∥F .
In practice we obviously do not know the correct support, but when a given solution x∗
k of (4.1)
that is suﬃciently sparse, we can try to solve (4.2) for that support and verify if the residual at
the solution is zero. If so, we construct the ﬁnal X∗using the non-zero part and declare success.
given A, B
for k = 1, . . . , r do
solve (1.2) with bk = B↓k to get x
I ←Supp(x)
if |I| < m/2 then
solve (4.2) to get X
if AIX = B then
(X∗)j→←Xj→for j ∈I
return solution X∗
return failure
Recovery rate (%)
Figure 3: The boosted ℓ1 algorithm
Figure 4: Theoretical (dashed) and experimental
(solid) performance of boosted ℓ1 for three problem
instances with diﬀerent row support s.
Otherwise we simply increment k and repeat this process until there are no more observations
and recovery was unsuccessful. We refer to this algorithm, which is reminiscent of the ReMBo
approach , as boosted ℓ1; its sole aim is to provide a bridge to the analysis of ReMBo. The
complete boosted ℓ1 algorithm is outlined in Figure 3.
The recovery properties of the boosted ℓ1 approach are opposite from those of ℓ1,1: it fails only
if all individual columns fail to be recovered using ℓ1. Hence, given an unknown n × r matrix X
supported on I with its sign pattern uniformly random, the boosted ℓ1 algorithm gives an expected
recovery rate of
1 (A, I, r) = 1 −[1 −Pℓ1(A, I)]r .
To experimentally verify this recovery rate, we generated a 20 × 80 matrix A with entries
independently sampled from the normal distribution and ﬁxed a randomly chosen support set Is
for three levels of sparsity, s = 8, 9, 10. On each of these three supports we generated vectors with
all possible sign patterns and solved (1.2) to see if they could be recovered or not (see Section 3.3).
This gives exactly the face counts required to compute the ℓ1 recovery probability in (2.2), and the
expected boosted ℓ1 recovery rate in (4.3)
For the empirical success rate we take the average over 1,000 trials with random coeﬃcient
matrices X supported on Is, and its nonzero entries independently drawn from the normal
distribution. To reduce the computational time we avoid solving ℓ1 and instead compare the sign
pattern of the current solution xk against the information computed to determine the face counts
(both A and Is remain ﬁxed). The theoretical and empirical recovery rates using boosted ℓ1 are
plotted in Figure 4.
Recovery using ReMBo
The boosted ℓ1 approach can be seen as a special case of the ReMBo algorithm. ReMBo
proceeds by taking a random vector w ∈Rr and combining the individual observations in B into a
single weighted observation b := Bw. It then solves a single measurement vector problem Ax = b
for this b (we shall use ℓ1 throughout) and checks if the computed solution x∗is suﬃciently sparse.
If not, the above steps are repeated with a diﬀerent weight vector w; the algorithm stops when a
maximum number of trials is reached. If the support I of x∗is small, we form AI = [A↓j]j∈I, and
check if (4.2) has a solution ¯X with zero residual. If this is the case we have the nonzero rows of
the solution X∗in ¯X and are done. Otherwise, we simply proceed with the next w. The ReMBo
algorithm reduces to boosted ℓ1 by limiting the number of iterations to r and choosing w = ei
given A, B. Set Iteration ←0
while Iteration < MaxIteration do
w ←Random(n, 1)
solve (1.2) with b = Bw to get x
I ←Supp(x)
if |I| < m/2 then
solve (4.2) to get X
if AIX = B then
(X∗)j→←Xj→for j ∈I
return solution X∗
Iteration ←Iteration + 1
return failure
Recovery rate (%)
Figure 5: The ReMBo-ℓ1 algorithm
Figure 6: Theoretical performance model for ReMBo
on three problem instances with diﬀerent sparsity
in the ith iteration. We summarize the ReMBo-ℓ1 algorithm in Figure 5. The formulation given
in requires a user-deﬁned threshold on the cardinality of the support I instead of the ﬁxed
threshold m/2. Ideally this threshold should be half of the spark of A, where
Spark(A) :=
z∈Ker(A)\{0} ∥z∥0
which is the number of nonzeros of the sparsest vector in the kernel of A; any vector x0 with fewer
than Spark(A)/2 nonzeros is the unique sparsest solution of Ax = Ax0 = b . Unfortunately, the
spark is prohibitively expensive to compute, but under the assumption that A is in general position,
Spark(A) = m + 1. Note that choosing a higher value can help to recover signals with row sparsity
exceeding m/2. However, in this case it can no longer be guaranteed to be the sparsest solution.
To derive the performance analysis of ReMBo, we ﬁx a support I of cardinality s, and consider
only signals with nonzero entries on this support. Each time we multiply B by a weight vector
w, we in fact create a new problem with an s-sparse solution x0 = X0w corresponding with a
right-hand side b = Bw = AX0w = Ax0. As reﬂected in (2.2), recovery of x0 using ℓ1 depends
only on its support and sign pattern. Clearly, the more sign patterns in x0 that we can generate,
the higher the probability of recovery. Moreover, due to the elimination of previously tried sign
patterns, the probability of recovery goes up with each new sign pattern (excluding negation of
previous sign patterns). The maximum number of sign patterns we can check with boosted ℓ1 is
the number of observations r. The question thus becomes, how many diﬀerent sign patterns we can
generate by taking linear combinations of the columns in X0? (We disregard the situation where
elimination occurs and |Supp(X0w)| < s.) Equivalently, we can ask how many orthants in Rs (each
one corresponding to a diﬀerent sign pattern) can be properly intersected by the hyperplane given
by the range of the s × r matrix ¯X consisting of the nonzero rows of X0 (with proper we mean
intersection of the interior). In Section 5.1 we derive an exact expression for the maximum number
of proper orthant intersections in Rn by a hyperplane generated by d vectors, denoted by C(n, d).
Based on the above reasoning, a good model for the recovery rate of n × r matrices X0 with
Supprow(X0) = I < m/2 using ReMBo is given by
PR(A, I, r) = 1 −
C(|I|,r)/2
FI(C) −2(i −1)
The term within brackets denotes the probability of failure and the fraction represents the success
rate, which is given by the ratio of the number of faces FI(AC) that survived the mapping to the
total number of faces to consider. The total number reduces by two at each trial because we can
exclude the face f we just tried, as well as −f. The factor of two in C(|I|, r)/2 is also due to this
symmetry1.
This model would be a bound for the average performance of ReMBo if the sign patterns
generated would be randomly sampled from the space of all sign patterns on the given support.
However, because it is generated from the orthant intersections with a hyperplane, the actual
pattern is highly structured. Indeed, it is possible to imagine a situation where the (s −1)-faces in
C that perish in the mapping to AC have sign patterns that are all contained in the set generated
by a single hyperplane. Any other set of sign patterns would then necessarily include some faces
that survive the mapping and by trying all patterns in that set we would recover X0. In this case,
the average recovery over all X0 on that support could be much higher than that given by (5.1).
We do not yet fully understand how the surviving faces of C are distributed. Due to the simplicial
structure of the facets of C, we can expect the faces that perish to be partially clustered (if a
(d −2)-face perishes, then so will the two (d −1)-faces whose intersection gives this face), and
partially unclustered (the faces that perish while all their sub-faces survive). Note that, regardless
of these patterns, recovery is guaranteed in the limit whenever the number of unique sign patterns
tried exceeds half the number of faces lost, (|FI(C)| −|FI(AC)|)/2.
Figure 6 illustrates the theoretical performance model based on C(n, d), for which we derive the
exact expression in Section 5.1. In Section 5.2 we discuss practical limitations, and in Section 5.3 we
empirically look at how the number of sign patterns generated grows with the number of normally
distributed vectors w, and how this aﬀects the recovery rates. To allow comparison between ReMBo
and boosted ℓ1, we used the same matrix A and support Is used to generate Figure 4.
Maximum number of orthant intersections with subspace
Theorem 5.1. Let C(n, d) denote the maximum attainable number of orthant interiors intersected
by a hyperplane in Rn generated by d vectors. Then C(n, 1) = 2, C(n, d) = 2n for d ≥n. In
general, C(n, d) is given by
C(n, d) = C(n −1, d −1) + C(n −1, d) = 2
Proof. The number of intersected orthants is exactly equal to the number of proper sign patterns
(excluding zero values) that can be generated by linear combinations of those d vectors. When
d = 1, there can only be two such sign patterns corresponding to positive and negative multiples
of that vector, thus giving C(n, 1) = 2. Whenever d ≥n, we can choose a basis for Rn and add
additional vectors as needed, and we can reach all points, and therefore all 2n = C(n, d) sign
For the general case (5.2), let v1, . . . , vd be vectors in Rn such that the aﬃne hull with the origin,
S = aﬀ{0, v1, . . . , vd}, gives a hyperplane in Rn that properly intersects the maximum number of
orthants, C(n, d). Without loss of generality assume that vectors vi, i = 1, . . . , d −1 all have their
nth component equal to zero. Now, let T = aﬀ{0, v1, . . . , vd−1} ⊆Rn−1 be the intersection of S
with the (n −1)-dimensional subspace of all points X = {x ∈Rn | xn = 0}, and let CT denote
the number of (n −1)-orthants intersected by T. Note that T itself, as embedded in Rn, does not
properly intersect any orthant. However, by adding or subtracting an arbitrarily small amount
of vd, we intersect 2CT orthants; taking vd to be the nth column of the identity matrix would
suﬃce for that matter. Any other orthants that are added have either xn > 0 or xn < 0, and their
number does not depend on the magnitude of the nth entry of vd, provided it remains nonzero.
Because only the ﬁrst n −1 entries of vd determine the maximum number of additional orthants,
the problem reduces to Rn−1. In fact, we ask how many new orthants can be added to CT taking
the aﬃne hull of T with v, the orthogonal projection vd onto X. Since the maximum orthants for
this d-dimensional subspace in Rn−1 is given by C(n −1, d), this number is clearly bounded by
1Henceforth we use the convention that the uniqueness of a sign pattern is invariant under negation.
C(n −1, d) −CT . Adding this to 2CT , we have
C(n, d) ≤2CT + [C(n −1, d) −CT ] = CT + C(n −1, d)
≤C(n −1, d −1) + C(n −1, d)
The ﬁnal expression follows by expanding the recurrence relations, which generates (a part of)
Pascal’s triangle, and combining this with C(1, j) = 2 for j ≥1. In the above, whenever there
are free orthants in Rn−1, that is, when d < n, we can always choose the corresponding part of vd
in that orthant. As a consequence we have that no hyperplane supported by a set of vectors can
intersect the maximum number of orthants when the range of those vectors includes some ei.
We now show that this expression holds with equality. Let U denote an (n −d)-hyperplane in
Rn that intersects the maximum C(n, n −d) orthants. We now claim that in the interior of each
orthant not intersected by U there exists a vector that is orthogonal to U. If this were not the
case then T must be aligned with some ei and can therefore not be optimal. The span of these
orthogonal vectors generates a d-hyperplane V that intersects CV = 2n −C(n, n −d) orthants, and
it follows that
C(n, d) ≥CV = 2n −C(n, n −d)
where the last inequality follows from (5.3). Consequently, all inequalities hold with equality.
Corollary 5.2. Given d ≤n, then C(n, d) = 2n −C(n, n −d), and C(2d, d) = 22d−1.
Corollary 5.3. A hyperplane H in Rn, deﬁned as the range of V = [v1, v2, . . . , vd], intersects
the maximum number of orthants C(n, d) whenever rank(V ) = n, or when ei ̸∈range(V ) for
i = 1, . . . , n.
Practical considerations
In practice it is generally not feasible to generate all of the C(|I|, r)/2 unique sign patterns. This
means that we would have to replace this term in (5.1) by the number of unique patterns actually
tried. For a given X0 the actual probability of recovery is determined by a number of factors. First
of all, the linear combinations of the columns of the nonzero part of ¯X prescribe a hyperplane
and therefore a set of possible sign patterns. With each sign pattern is associated a face in C that
may or may not map to a face in AC. In addition, depending on the probability distribution from
which the weight vectors w are drawn, there is a certain probability for reaching each sign pattern.
Summing the probability of reaching those patterns that can be recovered gives the probability
P(A, I, X0) of recovering with an individual random sample w. The probability of recovery after t
trials is then of the form
1 −[1 −P(A, I, X0)]t.
To attain a certain sign pattern ¯e, we need to ﬁnd an r-vector w such that sign( ¯Xw) = ¯e. For a
positive sign on the jth position of the support we can take any vector w in the open halfspace
{w | ¯Xj→w > 0}, and likewise for negative signs. The region of vectors w in Rr that generates a
desired sign pattern thus corresponds to the intersection of |I| open halfspaces. The measure of
this intersection as a fraction of Rr determines the probability of sampling such a w. To formalize,
deﬁne K as the cone generated by the rows of −diag(¯e) ¯X, and the unit Euclidean (k −1)-sphere
Sk−1 = {x ∈Rr | ∥x∥2 = 1}. The intersection of halfspaces then corresponds to the interior of the
polar cone of K: K◦= {x ∈Rr | xTy ≤0, ∀y ∈K}. The fraction of Rr taken up by K◦is given
by the (k −1)-content of Sk−1 ∩K◦to the (k −1)-content of Sk−1 . This quantity coincides
precisely with the deﬁnition of the external angle of K at the origin.
Experiments
In this section we illustrate the theoretical results from Section 5 and examine some practical
considerations that aﬀect the performance of ReMBo. For all experiments that require the matrix
A, we use the same 20 × 80 matrix that was used in Section 4, and likewise for the supports Is. To
solve (1.2), we again use CVX in conjunction with SDPT3. We consider x0 to be recovered from
b = Ax0 = AX0w if ∥x∗−x0∥∞≤10−5, where x∗is the computed solution.
The experiments that are concerned with the number of unique sign patterns generated depend
only on the s × r matrix ¯X representing the nonzero entries of X0. Because an initial reordering of
the rows does not aﬀect the number of patterns, those experiments depend only on ¯X, s = |I|, and
the number of observations r; the exact indices in the support set I are irrelevant for those tests.
Generation of unique sign patterns
The practical performance of ReMBo depends on its ability to generate as many diﬀerent sign
patterns using the columns in X0 as possible. A natural question to ask then is how the number
of such patterns grows with the number of randomly drawn samples w. Although this ultimately
depends on the distribution used for generating the entries in w, we shall, for sake of simplicity,
consider only samples drawn from the normal distribution. As an experiment we take a 10 × 5
matrix ¯X with normally-distributed entries, and over 108 trials record how often each sign-pattern
(or negation) was reached, and in which trial they were ﬁrst encountered. The results of this
experiment are summarized in Figure 7. From the distribution in Figure 7(b) it is clear that the
occurrence levels of diﬀerent orthants exhibits a strong bias. The most frequently visited orthant
pairs were reached up to 7.3 × 106 times, while others, those hard to reach using weights from the
normal distribution, were observed only four times over all trials. The eﬃciency of ReMBo depends
on the rate of encountering new sign patterns. Figure 7(c) shows how the average rate changes over
the number of trials. The curves in Figure 7(d) illustrate the theoretical probability of recovery
in (5.1), with C(n, d)/2 replaced by the number of orthant pairs at a given iteration, and with
face counts determined as in Section 4, for three instances with support cardinality s = 10, and
observations r = 5.
Role of ¯X.
Although the number of orthants that a hyperplane can intersect does not depend on the basis
with which it was generated, this choice does greatly inﬂuence the ability to sample those orthants.
Figure 8 shows two ways in which this can happen. In part (a) we sampled the number of unique
sign patterns for two diﬀerent 9 × 5 matrices ¯X, each with columns scaled to unit ℓ2-norm. The
entries of the ﬁrst matrix were independently drawn from the normal distribution, while those in
the second were generated by repeating a single column drawn likewise and adding small random
perturbations to each entry. This caused the average angle between any pair of columns to decrease
from 65 degrees in the random matrix to a mere 8 in the perturbed matrix, and greatly reduces
the probability of reaching certain orthants. The same idea applies to the case where d ≥n,
as shown in part (b) of the same ﬁgure. Although choosing d greater than n does not increase
the number of orthants that can be reached, it does make reaching them easier, thus allowing
ReMBo to work more eﬃciently. Hence, we can expect ReMBo to have higher recovery on average
when the number of columns in X0 increases and when they have a lower mutual coherence
µ(X) = mini̸=j |xT
i xj|/(∥xi∥2 · ∥xj∥2).
Iterations
Unique sign pattern pairs
Instances (% of trials)
Sign pattern index
Iterations
Unique sign pattern pairs per iteration
Iterations
Recovery rate (%)
Figure 7: Sampling the sign patterns for a 10×5 matrix ¯X, with (a) number of unique sign patterns
versus number of trials, (b) relative frequency with which each orthant is sampled, (c) average
number of new sign patterns per iteration as a function of iterations, and (d) theoretical probability
of recovery using ReMBo for three instances of X0 with row sparsity s = 10, and r = 5 observations.
Iterations
Unique sign patterns
Iterations
Unique sign patterns
Figure 8: Number of unique sign patterns for (a) two 9 × 5 matrices ¯X with columns scaled to
unit ℓ2-norm; one with entries drawn independently from the normal distribution, and one with a
single random column repeated and random perturbations added, and (b) 10 × r matrices with
r = 10, 12, 15.
Unique orthant pairs
Trials = 1,000
Trials = 10,000
Trials = Inf
Recovery rate (%)
Recovery rate (%)
Figure 9: Eﬀect of limiting the number of weight vectors w on (a) the distribution of unique orthant
counts for 10 × k random matrices ¯X, solid lines give the median number and the dashed lines
indicate the minimum and maximum values, the top solid line is the theoretical maximum; (b–c)
the average performance of the ReMBo-ℓ1 algorithm (solid) for ﬁxed 20 × 80 matrix A and three
diﬀerent support sizes r = 8, 9, 10, along with the average predicted performance (dashed). The
support patterns used are the same as those used for Figure 4.
Limiting the number of iterations
The number of iterations used in the previous experiments greatly exceeds that what is practically
feasible: we cannot aﬀord to run ReMBo until all possible sign patterns have been tried, even if
there was a way detect that the limit had been reached. Realistically, we should set the number
of iterations to a ﬁxed maximum that depends on the computational resources available, and the
problem setting.
In Figure 7 we show the unique orthant count as a function of iterations and the predicted
recovery rate. When using only a limited number of iterations it is interesting to know what the
distribution of unique orthant counts looks like. To ﬁnd out, we drew 1,000 random ¯X matrices
for each size s × r, with s = 10 nonzero rows ﬁxed, and the number of columns ranging from
r = 1, . . . , 20. For each ¯X we counted the number of unique sign patterns attained after respectively
1,000 and 10,000 iterations. The resulting minimum, maximum, and median values are plotted
in Figure 9(a) along with the theoretical maximum. More interestingly of course is the average
recovery rate of ReMBo with those number of iterations. For this test we again used the 20 × 80
matrix A with predetermined support I, and with success or failure of each sign pattern on that
support precomputed. For each value of r = 1, . . . , 20 we generated random matrices X on I
and ran ReMBo with the maximum number of iterations set to 1,000 and 10,000. To save on
computing time, we compared the on-support sign pattern of each combined coeﬃcient vector Xw
to the known results instead of solving ℓ1. The average recovery rate thus obtained is plotted in
Figures 9(b)–(c), along with the average of the predicted performance using (5.1) with C(n, d)/2
replaced by orthant counts found in the previous experiment.
Conclusions
The MMV problem is often solved by minimizing the sum-of-row norms of the unknown coeﬃcients
X. We show that the (local) uniform recovery properties, i.e., recovery of all X0 with a ﬁxed row
support I = Supprow(X0), cannot exceed that of ℓ1,1, the sum of ℓ1 norms. This is despite the fact
that ℓ1,1 reduces to solving the basis pursuit problem (1.2) for each column separately, which does
not take advantage of the fact that all vectors in X0 are assumed to have the same support. A
consequence of this observation is that the use of restricted isometry techniques to analyze (local)
uniform recovery using sum-of-norm minimization can at best give improved bounds on ℓ1 recovery.
Empirically, minimization with ℓ1,2, the sum of ℓ2 norms, clearly outperforms ℓ1,1 on individual
problem instances: for supports where uniform recovery fails, ℓ1,2 recovers more cases than ℓ1,1.
We construct cases where ℓ1,2 succeeds while ℓ1,1 fails, and vice versa. From the construction where
only ℓ1,2 succeeds it also follows that the relative magnitudes of the coeﬃcients in X0 matter for
recovery. This is unlike ℓ1,1 recovery, where only the support and the sign patterns matter. This
implies that the notion of faces, so useful in the analysis of ℓ1, disappears.
We show that the performance of ℓ1,1 outside the uniform-recovery regime degrades rapidly
as the number of observations increases. We can turn this situation around, and increase the
performance with the number of observations by using a boosted-ℓ1 approach. This technique
aims to uncover the correct support based on basis pursuit solutions for individual observations.
Boosted-ℓ1 is a special case of the ReMBo algorithm which repeatedly takes random combinations
of the observations, allowing it to sample many more sign patterns in the coeﬃcient space. As a
result, the potential recovery rates of ReMBo (at least in combination with an ℓ1 solver) are a
much higher than boosted-ℓ1. ReMBo can be used in combination with any solver for the single
measurement problem Ax = b, including greedy approaches and reweighted ℓ1 . The recovery
rate of greedy approaches may be lower than ℓ1 but the algorithms are generally much faster, thus
giving ReMBo the chance to sample more random combinations. Another advantage of ReMBo,
even more so than boosted-ℓ1, is that it can be easily parallelized.
Based on the geometrical interpretation of ReMBo-ℓ1 (cf. Figure 5), we conclude that, theoretically, its performance does not increase with the number of observations after this number
reaches the number of nonzero rows. In addition we develop a simpliﬁed model for the performance
of ReMBo-ℓ1. To improve the model we would need to know the distribution of faces in the
cross-polytope C that map to faces on AC, and the distribution of external angles for the cones
generated by the signed rows of the nonzero part of X0.
It would be very interesting to compare the recovery performance between ℓ1,2 and ReMBo-ℓ1.
However, we consider this beyond the scope of this paper.
All of the numerical experiments in this paper are reproducible. The scripts used to run the
experiments and generate the ﬁgures can be downloaded from
 
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to give their sincere thanks to ¨Ozg¨ur Yılmaz and Rayan Saab for their
thoughtful comments and suggestions during numerous discussions.