Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) in deep learning-based
medical image analysis
Bas H.M. van der Velden, Hugo J. Kuijf, Kenneth G.A. Gilhuijs, Max A. Viergever
Image Sciences Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Corresponding author:
Bas van der Velden
Phone: +31 88 75 57772
Email address: 
Postal address: Image Sciences Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Q.02.4.45,
P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands
Key words:
Explainable artificial intelligence, medical image analysis, deep learning, survey
With an increase in deep learning-based methods, the call for explainability of such methods grows,
especially in high-stakes decision making areas such as medical image analysis. This survey presents an
overview of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) used in deep learning-based medical image analysis. A
framework of XAI criteria is introduced to classify deep learning-based medical image analysis methods.
Papers on XAI techniques in medical image analysis are then surveyed and categorized according to the
framework and according to anatomical location. The paper concludes with an outlook of future
opportunities for XAI in medical image analysis.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has invoked tremendous progress in automated image analysis. Before that, image analysis
was commonly performed using systems fully designed by human domain experts. For example, such
image analysis system could consist of a statistical classifier that used handcrafted properties of an image
(i.e., features) to perform a certain task. Features included low-level image properties such as edges or
corners, but also higher-level image properties such as the spiculated border of a cancer. In deep learning,
these features are learned by a neural network (in contrast to being handcrafted) to optimally give a result
(or output) given an input. An example of a deep learning system could be the output ‘cancer’ given the
input of an image showing a cancer.
Neural networks typically consist of many layers connected via many nonlinear intertwined relations. Even
if one is to inspect all these layers and describe their relations, it is unfeasibly to fully comprehend how
the neural network came to its decision. Therefore, deep learning is often considered a ‘black box’.
Concern is mounting in various fields of application that these black boxes may be biased in some way,
and that such bias goes unnoticed. Especially in medical applications, this can have far-reaching
consequences.
There has been a call for approaches to better understand the black box. Such approaches are commonly
referred to as interpretable deep learning or eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) ; Murdoch et al. ). These terms are commonly interchanged; we will use the term XAI. Some
notable XAI initiatives include those from the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), and the conferences on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency by the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM FAccT).
The stakes of medical decision making are often high. Not surprisingly, medical experts have voiced their
concern about the black box nature of deep learning ), which is the current state of the
art in medical image analysis ; Meijering ; Shen et al. ). Furthermore,
regulations such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, Article 15) require
the right of patients to receive meaningful information about how a decision was rendered.
Researchers in medical imaging are increasingly using XAI to obtain insight into their algorithms. In this
survey, we aim to give a comprehensive overview of papers using XAI in medical image analysis. We chose
to focus solely on papers that used deep learning-based XAI in medical image analysis. The search strategy
for inclusion of papers is detailed in Appendix 1. In short, it followed a systemic review procedure,
discussion with colleagues, and a snowballing approach – investigating papers referenced by the included
papers and papers that refer to the included papers, to come to the final list of surveyed articles.
The survey is structured as follows: We will first introduce the taxonomy of XAI and describe a framework
to classify XAI techniques in Section 2. In Section 3, the discussed papers are characterized according to
this XAI framework. We will discuss applications of XAI techniques in medical image analysis. In case of
multiple papers using the same technique, we will discuss some early adopters and summarize the rest of
the papers in the tables. Since XAI techniques often originate from computer vision, we will elaborate on
papers that adapted XAI techniques from computer vision by adding domain knowledge from the medical
imaging field. The papers are grouped in the tables according to explanation method and according to
anatomical location. This survey adds to the review of Reyes et al. ; since they mainly discussed
techniques in computer vision, without extensively evaluating the adaptation of such techniques
throughout medical image analysis. Furthermore, we describe if and how techniques from computer
vision have been adapted specifically for medical image analysis. This survey adds to the review of Huff et
al. , since they mostly focused on examples of visual explanation, while our survey aims for a more
holistic approach including non-visual explanation, critiques on XAI, and methods for evaluating XAI.
Additionally, we systematically survey papers, reflecting the current status of the field of XAI in medical
imaging. The survey is concluded in Section 4 by discussing the state of the art of XAI in medical image
analysis and an outlook of the opportunities of XAI.
2. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) framework
In this section, we will give a brief overview of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques found in
deep learning for medical image analysis. For exhaustive surveys focused solely on XAI, please refer to
Adadi and Berrada and Murdoch et al. .
We will distinguish XAI techniques based on three criteria: model-based versus post hoc, model-specific
versus model-agnostic, and global versus local (i.e., the scope of the explanation). The framework of these
three criteria is adapted from the surveys of Adadi and Berrada and Murdoch et al. and is
depicted in Figure 1. The following paragraphs will describe these criteria.
Figure 1: The eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) framework proposed in this paper. A rough
overview of XAI techniques (discussed in Section 3) is classified according to this framework. The orange
number refers to the section number in the manuscript where the XAI technique is described.
Model-based versus post hoc explanation
The first distinction we make is model-based explanation versus post hoc explanation (Figure 1). In deep
learning, the model generally refers to the neural network, and we will use the terms model and neural
network interchangeable throughout this survey.
2.1.1. Model-based explanation
Model-based explanation refers to models, e.g. a linear regression model or a support vector machine,
that are simple enough to be understood, but sophisticated enough to fit a relationship between input
and output well ). These are often the traditional machine learning models.
Examples of model-based explanation enforce the use of a limited amount of features (i.e., sparsity), or
enforce a human to be able to internally reason about the model’s entire decision-making process (i.e.,
simulatability) ). For example, models that enforce sparsity such as the least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator ), force many coefficients to zero.
Hence, a select subset of features leads to an output, making the inner construct of this model explainable.
Since the focus of our survey is on XAI methods for deep learning, model-based explanation by enforcing
sparsity or simulatability is infeasible. The model in deep learning is a deep neural network, typically with
thousands to millions of weights, which is neither sparse, nor suited for a human to internally simulate
and reason about the models entire decision making. However, one of the methods mentioned by
Murdoch et al. was model-based feature engineering, i.e., automated approaches for constructing
explainable features.
2.1.2. Post hoc explanation
Analyzing a trained model (i.e., a neural network in deep learning) to achieve insight into learned
relationships is referred to as post hoc explanation. An important distinction between post hoc
explanation and model-based explanation is that the former trains a neural network and subsequently
attempts to explain the behavior of the ensuing black box network, whereas the latter forces the model
to be explainable.
Methods that provide post hoc explanation include inspection of learned features, feature importance,
and interaction of features ; Olden et al. ; Tsang et al. ); as well as
visual explanation by saliency maps ; Simonyan et al. ; Springenberg et al.
 ; Zeiler and Fergus ; Zhou et al. ).
Model-specific versus model-agnostic explanation
The distinction between model-specific and model-agnostic explanation is related to that between modelbased and post hoc explanation ), but there are some nuanced differences.
2.2.1. Model-specific explanation
Model-specific explanation methods are limited to particular classes of models. For example, such a
method may use attributes that are specific to a type of neural network. A drawback is that by aiming at
model-specific explanation, we limit our choice of model, thereby potentially excluding a model that could
better fit the output to the input data.
Model-based explanation is by definition model-specific ), but model-specific
explanation is not necessary model-based. Some post hoc saliency mapping techniques are examples of
techniques that are specific to a certain class of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), but are not modelbased explanation methods ).
2.2.2. Model-agnostic explanation
Model-agnostic explanation is independent of the model choice, operating solely on the input and the
output of the model. By perturbing the input of a model, the user can inspect what the change is in the
output of the model. This can therefore explain which regions are driving the output of the model. Modelagnostic explanation is naturally post hoc.
Scope of explanation
The scope of an explanation distinguishes between explanation for an entire model (global) versus
explanation for a single output (local).
2.3.1. Global explanation
Global explanation, also called dataset-level explanation, provides general relationships learned by the
model. For example, global explanation could provide feature importance scores at the dataset level, i.e.,
how much do features contribute to the output across the entire dataset ). As an
illustration, one might observe from a model that – or even how much – high blood pressure increases
the risk of a cardiac event. Another example of global explanation could be visualization of learned filters,
i.e., which features are extracted by the neural network and to what extent are they meaningful to the
task at hand ; Zeiler and Fergus ).
2.3.2. Local explanation
Local explanation provides explanation of a single input. In the example of cardiac risk, an input would be
a single person. Local explanation would therefore explain why blood pressure is important to the risk of
cardiac event for that single person, whereas global explanation would describe the relation of blood
pressure with risk of cardiac events across the entire dataset. Another example of a local explanation
could be a saliency map pinpointing to a brain tumor on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to explain
which part of the MRI mainly contributed to the classifier output ‘tumor’. Since this explains which part
of the image drives the classifier to its output ‘tumor’ for that single person, this is a local explanation.
3. XAI in medical image analysis
In this section, we will present which XAI techniques are used in medical image analysis, and we will
discuss adaptations of the methods typically seen in computer vision. We categorize the explanation
methods into three types: visual, textual, and example-based; and we will classify each method according
to the framework of model-based versus post hoc, model-specific versus model-agnostic, and global
versus local explanation (Figure 1). Table 1 provides an overview of the most frequently used techniques,
classified according to the definitions of Section 2.
Table 1: Overview of eXplainable AI (XAI) techniques used in medical image analysis, classified by the
framework from Section 2.
Modelspecific
Modelagnostic
Visual explanation
Backpropagation-based approaches
Backpropagation
Simonyan et al. 
Deconvolution
Zeiler and Fergus 
Guided backpropagation
Springenberg et al. 
Class activation mapping (CAM)
Zhou et al. 
Gradient-weighted class activation
mapping (Grad-CAM)
Selvaraju et al. 
Layer-wise relevance propagation
Bach et al. 
Deep SHapley Additive exPlanations
(Deep SHAP)
Lundberg and Lee 
Trainable attention
Jetley et al. 
Perturbation-based approaches
Occlusion sensitivity
Zeiler and Fergus 
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations (LIME)
Ribeiro et al. 
Meaningful Perturbation
Fong and Vedaldi 
Prediction difference analysis
Zintgraf et al. 
Textual explanation
Image captioning
Vinyals et al. 
Image captioning with visual
explanation
Zhang et al. 
Testing with Concept Activation
Vectors (TCAV)
Kim et al. 
Example-based explanation
Triplet networks
Hoffer and Ailon 
Influence functions
Wei Koh and Liang 
Prototypes
C. Chen et al. 
* Deep Shapley Additive exPlanations are post hoc and model-specific because of the optimization
method, but Shapley Additive exPlanations can also be global and model-agnostic.
Figure 2: Number of papers published per year in medical image analysis, for the three types of XAI
techniques. Most papers use a visual explanation. The y-axis shows the number of papers included in
this survey, the x-axis shows the year these papers were published in. The dashed line for 2020 is an
extrapolation given the situation on October 31, 2020.
Visual explanation
Visual explanation, also called saliency mapping, is the most common form of XAI in medical image
analysis. Saliency maps show the important parts of an image for a decision. Most saliency mapping
techniques use backpropagation-based approaches, but some use perturbation-based or multiple
instance learning-based approaches. These approaches will be discussed below. An overview of papers
using saliency maps in medical imaging is shown in Table 2.
3.1.1. Backpropagation-based approaches
(Guided) backpropagation and deconvolution
Some of the earliest techniques to create saliency maps highlighted pixels that had the highest impact on
the analysis output. Examples included visualization of partial derivatives of the output on pixel level
 ), deconvolution ), and guided backpropagation
 ). These techniques provided local, model-specific (only for CNNs), post hoc
explanation. These techniques have been used in medical image analysis. For example, de Vos et al. 
estimated the amount of coronary artery calcium per cardiac or chest computed tomography (CT) image
slice, and used deconvolution to visualize from where in the slice the decision was based on.
Class Activation Mapping (CAM)
Zhou et al. introduced Class Activation Mapping (CAM). They replaced the fully connected layers
at the end of a CNN by global average pooling on the last convolutional feature maps. The class activation
map was a weighted linear sum of presence of visual patterns (captured by the filters) at different spatial
locations. This technique provided local, model-specific, post hoc explanation. Several researchers used
this technique in medical imaging (Table 2).
CAMs have also been used in medical image analysis in ensembles of CNNs. For example, Jiang et al. 
constructed an ensemble of Inception-V3, ResNet-152, and Inception-ResNet-V2 to distinguish fundus
images of healthy subjects or patients with mild diabetic retinopathy from those with moderate or severe
diabetic retinopathy; and provided a weighted combination of the resulting CAMs for localization of
diabetic retinopathy. Lee et al. constructed CAMs of the output of an ensemble of four CNNs:
VGG-16, ResNet-50, Inception-V3, and Inception-ResNet-V2, for the detection of acute intracranial
hemorrhage.
Since medical images often contain information at multiple scales, multi-scale CAMs have also been
proposed. Liao et al. concatenated feature maps at three scales which were subsequently provided
as input for the global average pooling. The provided activation maps showed higher resolution than
single-scale maps, and were better at identifying small structures on fundus images of the retina. Shinde
et al. concatenated the feature maps of each layer before max-pooling and also gave those as
input to a global average pooling layer. Their ‘High Resolution’ CAMs provided accurate localizations of
brain tumors on MRI. García-Peraza-Herrera et al. proposed extracting CAMs at multiple
resolutions. They showed that the CAMs at high resolution were accurate in highlighting interpapillary
capillary loop patterns in endoscopy images, which were relatively small compared to the entire image.
Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM)
Selvaraju et al. introduced Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM), which is a
generalization of CAM. Grad-CAM can work with any type of CNN to produce post hoc local explanation,
whereas CAM specifically needs global average pooling. The authors also introduced guided Grad-CAM,
an element-wise multiplication between guided backpropagation and Grad-CAM. Grad-CAM and Guided
Grad-CAM have been used in medical image analysis. For example, Ji used Grad-CAM to show on
which areas of histology lymph node sections a classifier based its decision of metastatic tissue; Kowsari
et al. used it to pinpoint small bowel enteropathies on histology; and Windisch et al. used
Grad-Cam to show which areas of brain MRI made the classifier decide on the presence of a tumor.
Layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP)
Bach et al. introduced layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP). LRP uses the output of the neural
network, e.g. a classification score between 0 and 1, and iteratively backpropagates this throughout the
network. In each iteration (i.e., each layer), LRP assigns a relevance score to each of the input neurons
from the previous layers. These distributed relevance scores must equal the total relevance score of its
source neuron, according to the conservation law.
LRP has been used in medical image analysis. For example, Böhle et al. used LRP for identifying
regions responsible for Alzheimer’s disease from brain MR images. They compared the saliency maps
provided by LRP with those provided by guided backpropagation, and found that LRP was more specific
in identifying regions known for Alzheimer’s disease.
Deep SHapley Additive exPlanations (Deep SHAP)
Lundberg and Lee proposed a unified approach for explaining model predictions by using SHapley
Additive exPlanations (SHAP). This model-agnostic approach used Shapley values ), a
concept from game theory. Shapley values determine the marginal contribution of every feature to the
model’s output individually. A downside of Shapley values is that they are resource-intensive to compute,
since they require assessment of many permutations.
By combining DeepLIFT with Shapley values, Lundberg and Lee proposed a fast method to
approximate Shapley values for CNNs called Deep SHAP. Deep SHAP has been used in medical image
analysis. For example, van der Velden et al. used a regression CNN to estimate the volumetric
breast density from breast MRI. Deep SHAP was used to explain which parts of the image had a positive
contribution and a which parts a negative contribution to the density estimation.
Trainable attention
While many of the previously mentioned techniques highlighted what regions of the image the network
focuses on, i.e. to where the attention was directed, Jetley et al. proposed a trainable attention
mechanism. This trainable attention method highlighted where and in what proportion the network
payed attention to input images for classification, and used this attention to further amplify relevant areas
and suppress irrelevant areas.
In medical imaging, Schlemper et al. used trainable attention and introduced grid attention. The
rationale behind this was that most objects of interest in medical images are highly localized. By using grid
attention, the trainable attention captured the anatomical information in medical images. They
demonstrated high performance for both segmentation and localization, by adding the attention gates to
a UNET ) and a variant of VGG ). The attention
coefficients were used to explain on which areas of the image the network focused.
3.1.2. Perturbation-based approaches
Occlusion sensitivity
Perturbation-based techniques perturb the input image to assess the importance of certain areas of that
image for the task under consideration. Zeiler and Fergus used an occlusion sensitivity analysis to
visualize which parts of the image were most important for classification. For example, they showed that
an image of a dog holding a tennis ball was correctly classified by the dog’s breed, except if the face of the
dog was occluded, which yielded the incorrect classification ‘tennis ball’.
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME)
Ribeiro et al. introduced Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME). LIME provides
local explanation by replacing a complex model locally with simpler models, for example by approximating
a CNN by a linear model. By perturbing the input data, the output of the complex model changes. LIME
uses the simpler model to learn the mapping between the perturbed input data and the change in output.
The similarity of the perturbed input to the original input is used as a weight, to ensure that explanations
provided by the simple models with highly perturbed inputs have less effect on the final explanation. In
images, Ribeiro et al. implemented the perturbations using superpixels ),
rather than individual pixels, to show which regions were important for explaining a classification.
LIME has been used by several researchers in medical image analysis. For example, Malhi et al. 
used LIME to explain which areas in gastral endoscopy images contained bloody regions.
Meaningful perturbation
Fong and Vedaldi introduced meaningful perturbation, where they perturbed the input image to
detect changes in the predictions of a trained model. Rather than using perturbations such as occlusion
sensitivity that block out parts of the image, they suggested simulating naturalistic or plausible effects,
leading to more meaningful perturbations, and consequently to more meaningful explanations. They
opted for three types of local perturbations, namely a constant value, noise, or blurring.
Uzunova et al. stated that the perturbations proposed by Fong and Vedaldi were not suited
for medical images. Replacing areas of a medical image with a constant value is implausible, and medical
images naturally tend to be noisy and blurry. They proposed to replace pathological regions with a healthy
tissue equivalent using a variational autoencoder (VAE). They showed that the perturbations by the VAE
pinpoint pathological regions in diverse imaging studies as optical coherence tomography images of the
eye (pathology consisted of intraretinal fluid, subretinal fluid, and pigment epithelium detachments), and
MRI of the brain (pathology consisted of stroke lesions). Furthermore, they showed that using a VAE
yielded better localization of pathology compared with using simple blurring or constant-value
perturbations.
Lenis et al. used similar reasoning as Uzunova et al. , and used inpainting to replace
pathological regions with healthy tissue equivalents. They showed that the perturbations created by
inpainting outperformed backpropagation and Grad-CAM in pinpointing masses in breast mammography
and tuberculosis on chest X-rays, based on the Hausdorff distance between thresholded heatmaps
derived from the saliency maps and the ground truth labels at pixel level.
Prediction difference analysis
Zintgraf et al. adapted prediction difference analysis ) for
generating saliency maps. If each pixel in an image is considered a feature, prediction difference analysis
assigns a relevance value to each pixel, by measuring how the prediction changes if the pixel is considered
unknown. Zintgraf et al. expanded this by adding conditional sampling, which means that they only
analyzed pixels that are hard to predict by simply investigating neighboring pixels, and by adding
multivariable analysis, which means that they analyzed patches of connected pixels instead of single
pixels. They included an analysis of brain MRI of patients with HIV versus healthy controls, yielding
explanation of the classifier’s decision.
Seo et al. used prediction difference analysis in combination with superpixels (or supervoxels for
3D) on multiple scales. These multiscale supervoxel-based saliency maps provided explanations that the
authors described as visually pleasing since they follow image edges. The saliency maps explained which
regions were informative for a classifier to distinguish between Alzheimer’s disease patients and normal
3.1.3. Multiple instance learning-based approaches
Multiple instance learning can be used for visualizing explanations. In multiple instance learning, training
sets consist of bags of instances ). These bags are labeled, but the instances are
not. In medical image analysis, multiple instance learning can for example be done using a patch-based
approach: An image represents the bag, and patches from that image represent the instances ).
Several researchers have used this approach to pinpoint which instances in the bag are responsible for
the classification. For example, Schwab et al. localized critical findings in chest X-ray using such a
patch-based approach. Each image patch received a prediction, and the predictions were overlaid on the
image to visualize on which areas the classifier based its decision. Araújo et al. used multiple
instance learning to explain which areas of a fundus photograph were important for diabetic retinopathy.
They assessed the severity of the disease using an ordinal scale with grades from 0 to 5. Using a patchbased approach, they provided visual explanation maps for each diabetic retinopathy grade.
Table 2: Papers that used saliency maps to provide explanation. For readability, the papers are sorted on
anatomical location and only the first paper dealing with that anatomical location shows the location
name. The column ‘Main XAI technique used/based on’ describes which visual explanation technique from
Section 3.1 was used, or which technique the method in the corresponding paper is based on. When
multiple visual explanation techniques have been applied, the most recent technique based on Table 1
has been noted. CAM = class activation mapping, CT = computed tomography, LIME = local interpretable
model-agnostic explanations, LRP = Layer-wise relevance propagation, MRI = magnetic resonance
imaging, OCT = optical coherence tomography, PET = positron emission tomography, SHAP = Shapley
additive explanations.
Anatomical location
Authors (year)
Main XAI technique used/based on
Woerl et al. 
A. Ahmad et al. 
Baumgartner et al. 
Böhle et al. 
Ceschin et al. 
Chakraborty et al. 
Choi et al. 
Dang and Chaudhury 
Dubost et al. 
Guided backpropagation
Dubost et al. 
Occlusion sensitivity
Dubost et al. 
Trainable attention
Eitel et al. 
Fuchigami et al. 
Backpropagation
Y. Gao et al. 
Deconvolution
K. Gao et al. 
Grigorescu et al. 
Hilbert et al. 
Kim and Ye 
Kubach et al. 
Guided Grad-CAM
Lee et al. 
Q. Li et al. 
Lian et al. 
Trainable attention
Liao et al. 
Lin et al. 
Ultrasound
Natekar et al. 
Ng et al. 
Pereira et al. 
Pominova et al. 
Rezaei et al. 
Backpropagation
Saab et al. 
Multiple instance learning
Seo et al. 
Prediction difference analysis
Shahamat and Saniee Abadeh 
Occlusion sensitivity
Shinde et al. 
Shinde et al. 
Z. Tang et al. 
X Wang et al. 
Guided backpropagation
Wei et al. 
Backpropagation
Windisch et al. 
B. Xie et al. 
Ultrasound
H. Xu et al. 
Trainable attention
H. Xu et al. 
Ye et al. 
Zintgraf et al. 
Prediction difference analysis
Akselrod-Ballin et al. 
Meaningful perturbation
El Adoui et al. 
Gecer et al. 
Occlusion sensitivity
Huang et al. 
C. Kim et al. 
Ultrasound
Lee and Nishikawa 
Luo et al. 
Maicas et al. 
Multiple instance learning
Obikane and Aoki 
Papanastasopoulos et al. 
Integrated gradient
Qi et al. 
Ultrasound
van der Velden et al. 
H. Wang et al. 
Trainable attention
Xi et al. 
Yang et al. 
Trainable attention
Yi et al. 
L.-Q. Zhou et al. 
Ultrasound
Cardiovascular
Candemir et al. 
Cong et al. 
Gessert et al. 
Guided backpropagation
Huo et al. 
Patra and Noble 
Ultrasound
de Vos et al. 
Deconvolution
Ausawalaithong et al. 
Brunese et al. 
B. Chen et al. 
Dunnmon et al. 
Guo et al. 
He et al. 
Hosny et al. 
Huang and Fu 
Humphries et al. 
Khakzar et al. 
Ko et al. 
Kumar et al. 
Lei et al. 
Z. Li et al. 
Multiple instance learning
H. Liu et al. 
Mahmud et al. 
R. Paul et al. 
Pesce et al. 
Trainable attention
Philbrick et al. 
Qin et al. 
Rajaraman et al. 
Rajpurkar et al. 
Schwab et al. 
Multiple instance learning
Sedai et al. 
Singla et al. 
Trainable attention
R. Tang et al. 
Tang et al. 
Teramoto et al. 
van Sloun and Demi 
Ultrasound
K. Wang et al. 
R. Xu et al. 
H. Y. Paul et al. 
Zhu and Ogino 
Vila-Blanco et al. 
M. Ahmad et al. 
Fundus photography
Araújo et al. 
Fundus photography
Multiple instance learning
Costa et al. 
Fundus photography
Multiple instance learning
Jang et al. 
Fundus photography
Guided Grad-CAM
Jiang et al. 
Fundus photography
M. Kim et al. 
Fundus photography
Kumar et al. 
Fundus photography
L. Li et al. 
Fundus photography
Trainable attention
Liao et al. 
Fundus photography
C. Liu et al. 
Fundus photography
Martins et al. 
Fundus photography
Meng et al. 
Fundus photography
Narayanan et al. 
Fundus photography
Perdomo et al. 
Quellec et al. 
Fundus photography
Backpropagation
Shen et al. 
Fundus photography
Thakoor et al. 
Tu et al. 
Fundus photography
Wang et al. 
Xi Wang et al. 
X. Wang et al. 
Fundus photography
Zhang et al. 
Fundus photography
K. Zhou et al. 
Female reproductive system
M. Gupta et al. 
GV and Reddy 
Sun et al. 
Gastrointestinal
X. Chen et al. 
Everson et al. 
García-Peraza-Herrera et al. 
Heinemann et al. 
Itoh et al. 
Kiani et al. 
Korbar et al. 
Kowsari et al. 
Jeong Hyun Lee et al. 
Ultrasound
Backpropagation
Malhi et al. 
Rajpurkar et al. 
Shapira et al. 
Multiple instance learning
Wang et al. 
S. Wang et al. 
Wickstrøm et al. 
Guided backpropagation
Yan et al. 
Zhu et al. 
Trainable attention
Lymph nodes
Musculoskeletal
Bien et al. 
Chang et al. 
Cheng et al. 
V. Gupta et al. 
Jamaludin et al. 
Guided backpropagation
Y. Kim et al. 
Backpropagation
Paul et al. 
Zhang et al. 
Zhao et al. 
von Schacky et al. 
Silva-Rodríguez et al. 
Yang et al. 
Barata et al. 
Dermatoscopy
Trainable attention
Bian et al. 
Photography
Backpropagation
W. Li et al. 
Dermatoscopy
X. Li et al. 
Photography
Prediction difference analysis
Y. Xie et al. 
Photography
Y. Yan et al. 
Dermatoscopy
Trainable attention
Young et al. 
Dermatoscopy
Zunair and Hamza 
Photography
Y. Kim et al. 
Jeong Hoon Lee et al. 
J. Wang et al. 
Ultrasound
Wang et al. 
Ultrasound
Chan et al. 
Huang and Chung 
Hägele et al. 
Kermany et al. 
Occlusion sensitivity
I. Kim et al. 
Langner et al. 
Meng et al. 
Ultrasound
Trainable attention
Schlemper et al. 
Trainable attention
Tang 
Upadhyay and Banerjee 
Textual explanation
Textual explanation is a form of XAI that adds textual descriptions to the model. Such descriptions include
relatively simple characteristics (e.g. ‘spiculated mass’), up to entire medical reports. We will describe
three types of textual explanation: image captioning, image captioning with visual explanation, and testing
with concept attribution.
An overview of papers using textual explanation in medical imaging is shown in Table 3.
3.2.1. Image captioning
Vinyals et al. provided textual explanation for images using an end-to-end image captioning
framework. They coupled a convolutional neural network for encoding of the image, with a recurrent
neural network – specifically a long-short term memory net (LSTM) )
– for textual encoding. They used human-generated sentences as ground truth for training, and used the
bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU) metric for evaluation. The BLEU-metric describes the precision of
word N-grams, i.e. a sequence of N words, between generated and reference sentences used an image captioning framework to provide textual explanation for chest X-rays.
They used word-embedding databases Global Vectors (GloVe) ) and the radiology
variant RadGloVe ) to train the LSTM, and used the aforementioned BLEU metric as
well as variants METEOR, CIDER, and ROUGE ; Lin ; Vedantam et al.
 ). As expected, higher performance was reached in the generated radiology report when both
RadGloVe and GloVe were used instead of just GloVe.
3.2.2. Image captioning with visual explanation
Several researchers combined image captioning with visual explanation. Zhang et al. introduced
a framework that used dual attention, both for text and for imaging. They used a similar approach as with
image captioning, i.e. an encoder for the image and an LSTM for the text, but added dual attention. This
facilitated high-level interactions between image and text predictions, and yielded visual attention maps
corresponding with textual explanation in Histology images.
X. Wang et al. used a similar approach, and showed in their chest X-ray example that different parts
of the textual explanation led to different areas of saliency mapping in the image. They showed a saliency
map of the chest with multiple regions corresponding to different radiological findings.
Lee et al. showed image captioning with visual explanation for breast mammograms. They added
a visual word constraint loss to the text-generating LSTM, to ensure that the provided explanations follow
the correct jargon of breast mammography reports. They showed that adding this loss aids in generating
better textual explanation. Furthermore, they linked the radiology reports to visual saliency maps.
3.2.3. Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV)
Concept attributions provide explanation corresponding to high-level concepts that humans find easy to
understand ). Using Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV), Kim et al. 
presented human-friendly linear explanations of the internal state of neural networks, yielding global
explanation of the networks in terms of human-understandable concepts. These concepts can be provided
after training of the model as a post hoc analysis. The TCAV algorithm uses user-defined sets of examples
of a concept and of random non-concept examples. Such a concept might be ‘stripes’ to assess whether
an image contained a zebra, or ‘spiculated mass’ to assess whether an image contained a cancer. TCAV
quantified the sensitivity of a trained model to such concepts using concept activation vectors (CAVs). The
response of test cases to these CAVs was then used to measure the sensitivity to that concept. The authors
showed feasibility of TCAV on a medical image processing example, by relating physician annotations such
as ‘microaneurysm’ to diabetic retinopathy in fundus imaging.
Clough et al. identified cardiac disease in cine-MRI by classifying the latent space of a VAE. They
used TCAV to show which clinically known biomarkers were related to cardiac disease in their model.
Furthermore, they reconstructed images with low peak ejection rate – a characteristic that might be
related to cardiac disease – by adding the CAV to the latent space.
Graziani et al. expanded on TCAV by introducing regression concept vectors. The main addition
was that, while TCAV models are binary by indicating the presence or absence of a concept, regression
concept vectors model continuous-valued measures of a concept. This can be useful when investigating a
continuous concept such as tumor size. Graziani et al. showed that by using regression concept
vectors, they could for example explain why the network classified one area of a breast histopathology
image as cancer and another as healthy: Both areas of the image scored high on the concept ‘contrast’,
but the concept ‘nuclei area’, referring to a clinically used system for evaluating cell size, was different
between healthy and cancerous regions.
3.2.4. Other textual explanation techniques
Shen et al. used what they called a hierarchical semantic CNN to predict malignancy of lung nodules
on CT. They classified five textual descriptions of image characteristics representative of lung nodule
malignancy that are typically assessed by a radiologist. The task of finding textual descriptions was
combined with the main task of classifying lung nodule malignancy. Although their hierarchical semantic
CNN did not significantly outperform a normal CNN in predicting nodule malignancy, the method did
provide human-interpretable characteristics of the nodules.
Table 3: Papers that provide textual explanation. For readability, the papers are sorted on anatomical
location and only the first paper dealing with that anatomical location shows the location name. The
column ‘Main XAI technique used/based on’ describes which textual explanation technique from Section
3.2 was used, or which technique the method in the corresponding paper is based on. CT = computed
tomography, TCAV = testing with concept activation vectors
Anatomical location
Authors (year)
Main XAI technique used/based on
Zhang et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
S. T. Kim et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Lee et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Sun et al. 
Image captioning
Cardiovascular
Clough et al. 
Gasimova 
Image captioning
Kashyap et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
C. Y. Li et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Nunes et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Rodin et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Shen et al. 
Other textual explanation
Singh et al. 
Image captioning
Spinks and Moens
Image captioning
Tian et al. 
Image captioning
X Wang et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Wu et al. 
K. Yan et al. 
Other textual explanation
S. Yang et al. 
Image captioning
Yin et al. 
Image captioning
Yuan et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Kim et al. 
Fundus photography
Female reproductive system
Ma et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Gastrointestinal
Tian et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Maksoud et al. 
Image captioning
Musculoskeletal
Koitka et al. 
Image captioning
Allaouzi et al. 
Image captioning
Graziani et al. 
Jing et al. 
Image captioning with visual explanation
Pelka et al. 
Image captioning
Zeng et al. 
Image captioning
Example-based explanation
Example-based explanation is an XAI technique that provides examples relating to the data point that is
currently being analyzed. This can be useful when trying to explain why a model came to a decision, and
is related to how humans reason. For example, when a pathologist examines a biopsy of a patient that
shows similarity with an earlier patient examined by the pathologist, the clinical decision may be
enhanced by knowing the assessment of that earlier biopsy.
Example-based explanation often optimizes the hidden layers deep in the neural network (i.e., the latent
space) in such a way that similar points are close to each other in this latent space, while dissimilar points
are further away in the latent space.
An overview of papers using example-based explanation in medical imaging is shown in Table 4.
3.3.1. Triplet network
Several papers provided example-based explanation using a triplet network ). A
triplet network consists of three identical networks with shared parameters. By feeding these networks
three input samples, the network calculates two values consisting of the L2 distances between the
representations in the latent space (i.e., embedded representations) of these input samples. This allows
learning of useful representations by unsupervised comparison of samples. When analyzing a data point,
inspection of neighbors in this embedded representation will provide examples of data points that are
similar to the data point that is being analyzed, which can provide explanation why the network came to
its output.
Peng et al. used example-based explanation in colorectal cancer histology. They first trained a CNN
using a triplet loss, hashing, and k hard-negatives to learn an embedding that preserves similarity. In
testing, a coarse-to-fine search yielded the 10 nearest examples from a testing database related to the
input image. This provided explanation on which images similar to the image that was being analyzed the
network based a decision.
Yan et al. utilized a radiological picture archiving and communication systems (PACS) to extract
32000 clinically relevant lesions from the entire body. To learn relevant lesion embeddings, they trained
a triplet network with three supervision cues: lesion size, lesion anatomical location (e.g. lung, liver, or
kidney), and relative coordinate of the lesion in the body. These embeddings showed good separation
based on anatomical location (e.g., liver lesions were separated from lung lesions), and could accurately
retrieve example-based explanation from a test set.
Codella et al. also used a triplet loss but combined it with global average pooling, the technique
used in CAM. Consequently, they could not only extract example-based explanation, but they also
provided query activation maps and search result activation maps. In other words, a visual explanation
showed which region of the input image the network used to generate the example-based explanation.
They demonstrated this technique in dermatology images of melanoma.
3.3.2. Influence functions
Wei Koh and Liang proposed to use influence functions to explain on which inputs from a training
set the model based its decision. They did so by investigating what would happen in case an input from
the training set would not be available or would be changed. Since it is expensive to assess this by
perturbation, they provided an efficient approximation using influence functions used influence functions to explain which classifications of liver lesions on
multiphase MRI were associated with which radiological characteristics. This global explanation provided
insight into the neural network’s behavior. For example, the class ‘benign cyst’ was most often associated
with the radiological finding ‘thin-walled mass’. Since the network did not only output the class label but
also the corresponding radiological characteristics, this explanation could enhance user trust in the output
of the network.
3.3.3. Prototypes
C. Chen et al. proposed to use typical examples as explanation (i.e., prototypes), which they
described as ‘this-looks-like-that’. The method reflected case-based reasoning that humans perform. For
example, when a person explains why a picture contains a car, they can internally reason that this is a car
because it looks like a car they have seen before. A prototype layer was added to the neural network,
which grouped training inputs according to their classes in the latent space. A prototype was picked for
each class, consisting of a typical example of that class. During testing, the method utilized parts of the
test image that resembled these trained prototypes. The output was a weighted combination of the
similarities to these prototypes. Hence, the explanation was an actual computation of the model, not a
post hoc approximation.
Uehara et al. used prototypes to explain why a neural network classified patches of histology
images as cancer or as not-cancer. The network was able to identify on which parts of the image it based
its decision, and to what extent these parts of the image were similar to prototypical examples learned
from the training set.
3.3.4. Examples from the latent space
Sarhan et al. proposed learning disentangled representations of the latent space using a residual
adversarial VAE with a total correlation constraint. This adversarial VAE enhanced the fidelity of the
reconstruction and provided more detailed descriptions of underlying generative characteristics of the
data. When analyzing reconstructions by traversing through the latent space, they showed that their
method yielded reconstructions that were more true to human-interpretable concepts such as lesion size,
lesion eccentricity, and skin color compared with a regular VAE.
Biffi et al. provided a framework for explainable anatomical shape analysis using a ladder VAE
 ). They coupled this ladder VAE with a multi-layered perceptron, enabling the
network to train end-to-end for classification tasks. By doing this, the highest level of the latent space was
enforced to be low-dimensional (2D or 3D), which meant that these learned latent spaces could be directly
visualized without the need of further dimensionality reduction after training. They provided dataset-level
explanation using these low-dimensional latent spaces to visualize differences in shape for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy versus healthy controls on cardiac MRI, and for Alzheimer’s disease versus healthy
controls on brain MRI by visualizing the shape of the hippocampus.
Silva et al. proposed example-based explanation that showed similar and dissimilar cases
foraesthetic results of breast surgery on photos, and for skin images on dermoscopy. They identified these
examples using a nearest neighbor search in latent space: The nearest neighbor of the same class was
considered the most similar case, and the nearest neighbor of the other class was considered the most
dissimilar case. Their explanation also included rule extraction from meta-features (e.g. the color of a skin
lesion or the visibility of scars). They proposed three criteria to measure the validity of the rule-extracted
explanation, namely: 1) completeness, i.e. the explanation should be general enough to be applied to
more than one observation; 2) correctness, i.e. if the explanation itself was considered a model, it should
correctly identify which class it belongs to; and 3) compactness, i.e. the explanation should be succinct.
In later work, Silva et al. combined example-based explanation with saliency mapping. First, they
trained a baseline CNN to classify chest X-rays into pleural effusion versus non-pleural effusion. After that,
the CNN was fine-tuned on saliency maps. In testing, a nearest neighbor search between the latent space
of the test image and a curated ‘catalogue’ set of images was performed. Adding the saliency map yielded
more consistent examples than extracting examples without the saliency map (i.e., the baseline CNN).
Sabour et al. showed that by replacing the scalar feature maps from convolution neural networks
by vectorized representations (i.e., capsules), they were able to encode high-level features of images.
Capsules were basically subcollections of neurons in a layer. These were linked to subcollections of
neurons in subsequent layers, forming a capsule network. This capsule network was optimized using
dynamic routing. In short, higher level capsules were activated if their corresponding lower-level capsules
are active. This correspondence was described by routing coefficients, which summed to one for each
capsule. The coefficients were iteratively (i.e., dynamically) updated when the capsule network received
new input data. For the MNIST digits dataset, Sabour et al. found that these capsules learn humaninterpretable features such as scale, thickness, and skew.
LaLonde et al. used capsules for lung cancer diagnosis, while also predicting visual attributes such
as sphericity, lobulation, and texture. Since these visual attributes were not necessarily mutually exclusive,
as was the case in MNIST (a digit cannot be a two and a nine at the same time), they adapted the dynamic
routing algorithm accordingly. Specifically, the routing coefficients did not have to sum to one in their
implementation. LaLonde et al. showed that their implementation was indeed able to predict these
visual attributes as well as lung nodule malignancy.
Table 4: Papers that provide example-based explanation. For readability, the papers are sorted on
anatomical location and only the first paper dealing with that anatomical location shows the location
name. The column ‘Main XAI technique used/based on’ describes which example-based explanation
technique from Section 3.3 was used, or which technique the method in the corresponding paper is based
on. CT = computed tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
Anatomical location
Authors (year)
XAI technique used/based upon
Y. Li et al. 
Examples from the latent space
Uehara et al. 
Prototypes
LaLonde et al. 
Examples from the latent space
Silva et al. 
Examples from the latent space
Gastrointestinal
Peng et al. 
Triplet network
C. J. Wang et al. 
Influence functions
Codella et al. 
Dermatoscopy
Triplet network
Sarhan et al. 
Dermatoscopy
Examples from the latent space
Chen et al. 
Examples from the latent space
M. Li et al. 
Ultrasound
Prototypes
Biffi et al. 
Examples from the latent space
Choudhary et al. 
Triplet network
Silva et al. 
Examples from the latent space
Yan et al. 
Triplet network
P. Yang et al. 
Examples from the latent space with visual explanation
4. Discussion
We have discussed 223 papers on eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) for deep learning in medical
image analysis. We categorized the papers based on the XAI-frameworks proposed by Adadi and Berrada
 and Murdoch et al. . Some trends were noticeable in the surveyed papers. The majority of
the papers used post hoc explanation as contrasted with model-based explanation, i.e., the explanation
was provided on a model that had already been trained, instead of being incorporated in model training.
Both model-specific (e.g., specifically designed for CNNs) and model-agnostic explanation methods were
used. Furthermore, most of the papers investigated provided local explanation rather than global
explanation, i.e., the explanation was provided per case (e.g. per patient), rather than on a dataset-level
(e.g. for all patients). Since we focus on deep learning in medical image analysis, these trends were to be
expected. Most readily available XAI methods suitable for CNNs are saliency mapping techniques, which
often provide post hoc, model-specific, and local explanation. Furthermore, post hoc XAI methods can be
used after a neural network has been trained, making them more accessible than model-based XAI.
We categorized the papers based on anatomical location and modality of medical imaging. We found that
most papers focus on chest or brain and on X-ray or MRI (Figure 3). This is comparable to what Litjens et
al. found for deep learning methods in medical imaging in general.
Figure 3: Papers included in this survey, categorized by modality (left) and anatomical location (right). Papers
discussing multiple modalities or anatomical locations were grouped as ‘multiple’. Modalities or anatomical
locations that were used in fewer than five papers were grouped as ‘other’.
Evaluation of XAI
We have described several XAI techniques and their applications in medical image analysis, but how does
one evaluate whether an XAI technique provides good explanation? Unlike measures of performance
commonly used in medical image analysis, such as accuracy, Dice coefficient, or an ROC analysis; success
criteria of explanation are more difficult to define. Doshi-Velez and Kim proposed a framework for
the evaluation of explainability, consisting of three evaluation methods: application-grounded evaluation,
human-grounded evaluation, and functionally-grounded evaluation.
4.2.1. Application-grounded evaluation
Application-grounded evaluation uses human experiments within a real application. In other words, let
domain experts test the explanation. In medical image analysis this might involve a radiologist inspecting
whether example-based explanations are actually good examples based on the many images the
radiologist has seen in their many years of experience. The advantage of application-grounded evaluation
is that it directly tests the objective that the system was built for. The disadvantage is that it is a costly
evaluation.
4.2.2. Human-grounded evaluation
Human-grounded evaluation uses simpler human experiments that maintain the essence of the target
application. In other words, let laypersons test the explanation or a proxy of the explanation. For example,
when explaining the location and size of a cancer, this might involve a crowdsourcing project where
laypersons judge the quality of saliency maps. Since it uses laypersons instead of highly trained domain
experts, the advantage of human-grounded evaluation is that it is less costly, while still receiving general
notions of the quality of an explanation. The disadvantage is that the assessment of the quality of an
explanation is a proxy of the actual quality.
4.2.3. Functionally-grounded evaluation
Functionally-grounded evaluation does not use human experiments, but uses other proxies to assess the
quality of the explanation. These proxies may include measurements that have already been validated
using human users. In our example of explaining the location and size of a cancer, this might involve
comparing the explanation with manually drawn tumor delineations of a radiologist. The advantages of
functionally-grounded evaluation stated by Doshi-Velez and Kim include that they are relatively
cheap to acquire. This is, however, not necessarily the case in medical image analysis, since acquiring for
example manual annotations is a very resource intensive process. When these manual annotations do
already exist, e.g. when using curated data from a challenge, evaluation of explanations are easily
extracted, and can be automatically extracted multiple times. This can be useful, for example in the
development phase of explanation methods.
Critique on XAI
Rudin advised caution when using black box models with explanation for high-stakes decision
making. Rudin raised several issues with explaining black box models. For example, XAI may provide an
explanation that is not completely faithful to what the original model computes: If the explanation
explains 90% true to the model, that means that 10% is untrue ). Furthermore, an
explanation may not make sense or provide enough detail to understand what the black box is doing. For
example, a saliency map of the class with the highest probability may look similar to a saliency map of a
class with a lower probability. Rudin therefore advices to use interpretable model-based XAI instead, such
as the prototype network discussed in section 3.3.3.
Adebayo et al. investigated the robustness of several saliency mapping techniques using two tests:
parameter randomization and data randomization.
The parameter randomization test compared saliency maps from a trained CNN with saliency maps from
a randomly initialized untrained CNN of the same architecture. If the saliency map depended on the
learned parameters of the CNN (the desired situation), the two saliency maps should have differed
substantially. If the two saliency maps were similar, the saliency mapping technique was insensitive to the
properties of the CNN.
The data randomization test compared saliency maps from a trained CNN with saliency maps from a CNN
trained on the same dataset but with randomly imputed labels. If the saliency map depended on the data
labels (the desired situation), the two saliency maps should have differed substantially. If the two saliency
maps were similar, the saliency mapping technique did not depend on the relationship between images
and labels.
Adebayo et al. performed these two tests for many visual explanation methods including
backpropagation, guided backpropagation, and guided Grad-CAM. They showed that guided
backpropagation and guided Grad-CAM showed similar saliency maps in both tests, and might be
emphasizing edges. Hence, caution is advised when using such methods for visualization.
Eitel and Ritter evaluated the robustness of saliency mapping techniques in medical images over
multiple training runs, specifically for the classification of Alzheimer’s disease on brain MRI. They found
that layer-wise relevance propagation and guided backpropagation produced the most coherent
attribution maps. This was not fully in line with the results of Adebayo et al. . Hence, more research
on this topic in medical image analysis is desired.
Since high stakes decision-making is intertwined with medicine, we are convinced that XAI will be
increasingly important. We have investigated the trends, and noticed that an increasing amount of papers
contain a holistic approach, combining multiple forms of explanation. Examples of such more holistic
approaches include combinations of textual explanation and visual explanation ), or combinations of example based explanation and visual explanation predicted the molecular subtype of lower-grade gliomas on multimodal brain imaging, and Zhu et
al. predicted the molecular subtype luminal A of breast cancer on MRI. These analyses used a
biological target to train the neural network. However, performing such analysis the other way around,
for example by performing a pathway analysis on imaging phenotypes , not
deep learning), could provide interesting biological explanation.
Other directions of XAI in medical image analysis may include the link between causality and XAI. Typical
medical image analysis consists of correlation rather than causation. Causality describes the relation
between cause and effect, and can be mathematically described ). Current XAI techniques
that aim to be free of bias such as prototypes are potentially still sensitive to differences in training
population, which might hamper generalizability. Castro et al. describe how causal reasoning may
be useful to assess such as biases in the data. van Amsterdam et al. show an example of eliminating
bias using causality, yielding unbiased prediction of prognosis for patients with lung cancer. It would be
of interest to incorporate such analyses in explanation of medical images, as Chattopadhyay et al. 
have done for visual explanation of MNIST data.
There is no consensus on a priori estimations for required sample size for XAI and deep learning in medical
imaging in general ). Given the costly nature of acquiring medical imaging datasets in
terms of money, time, and patient burden, it is desired to have guidelines describing what minimum
sample sizes would be required for which XAI techniques.
Limitations
We derived our XAI framework from the frameworks of Adadi and Berrada and Murdoch et al.
 . Other frameworks also exist, such as the framework by Kim et al. that divides XAI in pre-, during-,
and post-model explanation. During- and post-model explanation are captured by our XAI framework with
model-based and post hoc explanation. Pre-model explanation mainly focuses on the structure of a
dataset, such as inspecting outliers. One could state that an example-based explanation that utilizes the
latent distributions of a dataset could be perceived as a pre-model explanation. We have, however, not
made this distinction, since in deep learning, these latent distributions are discovered by training a neural
We tried to be as comprehensive as possible with the inclusion of papers in our survey. However, XAI
often is a technique used to support methods, and keywords are often not mentioned in the title or body
of papers ). Therefore, we cannot guarantee that we covered all the work in the field.
Nevertheless, we provided the search strategy in the appendix to be as transparent as possible about the
selection of papers.
5. Conclusion
This paper surveyed 223 papers using explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) in deep-learning based
medical image analysis, classified according to an XAI framework, and categorized according to anatomical
location and imaging technique. The paper discussed how to evaluate XAI, current critiques on XAI, and
future perspectives for XAI in medical image analysis.
6. Additional information
This work was partially funded by the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF) grant number: 10755. We have no
conflicts of interest.
7. Appendix
We used the search query “(explainable deep learning OR interpretable deep learning OR XAI OR
interpretable machine learning OR explainable machine learning) AND (medical imaging OR medical image
analysis)” in SCOPUS. We analyzed the query results using the Active learning for Systematic Reviews
toolbox. This toolbox uses active learning to sort papers from most relevant to least relevant, while being
updated by user input. Furthermore, we had discussions with colleagues, and used a snowballing
approach – investigating papers referenced by the included papers and papers that refer to the included
papers. We read the title and the abstract of each of these papers, and browsed paper content if we were
not sure whether to include the paper. In case of multiple publications by the same authors on the same
subject, we chose the journal publication or the most recent publication in case of multiple conference
publications. We included peer reviewed journal papers and conference proceedings. Papers up to
October 2020 are included in the survey.
8. References
Abbasi-Asl, R., Yu, B., 2017. Structural Compression of Convolutional Neural Networks Based on Greedy
Filter Pruning.
Achanta, R., Shaji, A., Smith, K., Lucchi, A., Fua, P., Süsstrunk, S., 2012. SLIC superpixels compared to stateof-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34, 2274–2281.
 
Adadi, A., Berrada, M., 2018. Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI). IEEE Access 6, 52138–52160. 
Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Muelly, M., Goodfellow, I., Hardt, M., Kim, B., Brain, G., 2018. Sanity Checks for
Saliency Maps.
Ahmad, A., Sarkar, S., Shah, A., Gore, S., Santosh, V., Saini, J., Ingalhalikar, M., 2019. Predictive and
discriminative localization of IDH genotype in high grade gliomas using deep convolutional neural
nets, in: 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging . pp. 372–375.
Ahmad, M., Kasukurthi, N., Pande, H., 2019. Deep learning for weak supervision of diabetic retinopathy
abnormalities, in: 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging . pp.
Akselrod-Ballin, A., Chorev, M., Shoshan, Y., Spiro, A., Hazan, A., Melamed, R., Barkan, E., Herzel, E., Naor,
S., Karavani, E., Koren, G., Goldschmidt, Y., Shalev, V., Rosen-Zvi, M., Guindy, M., 2019. Predicting
breast cancer by applying deep learning to linked health records and mammograms. Radiology 292,
331–342. 
Allaouzi, I., Ben Ahmed, M., Benamrou, B., Ouardouz, M., 2018. Automatic caption generation for medical
images, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Smart City Applications. pp. 1–6.
Araújo, T., Aresta, G., Mendonça, L., Penas, S., Maia, C., Carneiro, Â., Mendonça, A.M., Campilho, A., 2020.
DR|GRADUATE: Uncertainty-aware deep learning-based diabetic retinopathy grading in eye fundus
images. Med. Image Anal. 63. 
Ausawalaithong, W., Thirach, A., Marukatat, S., Wilaiprasitporn, T., 2018. Automatic lung cancer
prediction from chest X-ray images using the deep learning approach, in: 2018 11th Biomedical
Engineering International Conference (BMEICON). pp. 1–5.
Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R., Samek, W., 2015. On Pixel-Wise
Explanations for Non-Linear Classifier Decisions by Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation. PLoS One 10,
1–46. 
Balki, I., Amirabadi, A., Levman, J., Martel, A.L., Emersic, Z., Meden, B., Garcia-Pedrero, A., Ramirez, S.C.,
Kong, D., Moody, A.R., Tyrrell, P.N., 2019. Sample-Size Determination Methodologies for Machine
Learning in Medical Imaging Research: A Systematic Review. Can. Assoc. Radiol. J.
 
Banerjee, S., Lavie, A., 2005. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation
with human judgments, in: Proceedings of the Acl Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation
Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization. pp. 65–72.
Barata, C., Celebi, M.E., Marques, J.S., 2020. Explainable skin lesion diagnosis using taxonomies. Pattern
Recognit. 
Baumgartner, C.F., Koch, L.M., Tezcan, K.C., Ang, J.X., Konukoglu, E., 2018. Visual Feature Attribution Using
Wasserstein GANs, in: 31st Meeting of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2018. IEEE Computer Society, Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, pp.
8309–8319. 
Bian, Z., Xia, S., Xia, C., Shao, M., 2019. Weakly supervised vitiligo segmentation in skin image through
saliency propagation, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
(BIBM). pp. 931–934.
Bien, N., Rajpurkar, P., Ball, R.L., Irvin, J., Park, A., Jones, E., Bereket, M., Patel, B.N., Yeom, K.W.,
Shpanskaya, K., others, 2018. Deep-learning-assisted diagnosis for knee magnetic resonance
imaging: development and retrospective validation of MRNet. PLoS Med. 15, e1002699.
Biffi, C., Doumou, G., Duan, J., Prasad, S.K., Cook, S.A., O Regan, D.P., Rueckert, D., Cerrolaza, J.J., Tarroni,
G., Bai, W., De Marvao, A., Oktay, O., Ledig, C., Le Folgoc, L., Kamnitsas, K., 2020. Explainable
Anatomical Shape Analysis through Deep Hierarchical Generative Models. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging
1–1. 
Bismeijer, T., van der Velden, B.H.M., Canisius, S., Lips, E.H., Loo, C.E., Viergever, M.A., Wesseling, J.,
Gilhuijs, K.G.A., Wessels, L.F.A., 2020. Radiogenomic Analysis of Breast Cancer by Linking MRI
Phenotypes
Expression.
 
Böhle, M., Eitel, F., Weygandt, M., Ritter, K., Initiative, on behalf of the A.D.N., 2019. Layer-wise relevance
propagation for explaining deep neural network decisions in MRI-based Alzheimer’s disease
classification. Front. Aging Neurosci. 10. 
Brunese, L., Mercaldo, F., Reginelli, A., Santone, A., 2020. Explainable Deep Learning for Pulmonary
Disease and Coronavirus COVID-19 Detection from X-rays. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 196.
 
Candemir, S., White, R.D., Demirer, M., Gupta, V., Bigelow, M.T., Prevedello, L.M., Erdal, B.S., 2020.
Automated coronary artery atherosclerosis detection and weakly supervised localization on
coronary CT angiography with a deep 3-dimensional convolutional neural network. Comput. Med.
Imaging Graph. 83. 
Castro, D.C., Walker, I., Glocker, B., 2020. Causality matters in medical imaging. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–10.
 
Ceschin, R., Zahner, A., Reynolds, W., Gaesser, J., Zuccoli, G., Lo, C.W., Gopalakrishnan, V., Panigrahy, A.,
2018. A computational framework for the detection of subcortical brain dysmaturation in neonatal
MRI using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks. Neuroimage 178, 183–197.
Chakraborty, S., Aich, S., Kim, H.-C., 2020. Detection of Parkinson’s disease from 3T t1 weighted MRI scans
using 3D convolutional neural network. Diagnostics 10, 402.
Chan, L., Hosseini, M.S., Rowsell, C., Plataniotis, K.N., Damaskinos, S., 2019. Histosegnet: Semantic
segmentation of histological tissue type in whole slide images, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 10662–10671.
Chang, G.H., Felson, D.T., Qiu, S., Guermazi, A., Capellini, T.D., Kolachalama, V.B., 2020. Assessment of
knee pain from MR imaging using a convolutional Siamese network. Eur. Radiol. 1–11.
Chattopadhyay, A., Manupriya, P., Sarkar, A., Balasubramanian, V.N., 2019. Neural Network Attributions:
A Causal Perspective.
Chen, B., Li, J., Lu, G., Zhang, D., 2019. Lesion location attention guided network for multi-label thoracic
disease classification in chest X-rays. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal. informatics 24, 2016–2027.
Chen, C., Li, O., Tao, D., Barnett, A., Rudin, C., Su, J.K., 2019. This Looks Like That: Deep Learning for
Interpretable Image Recognition, in: Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d\textquotesingle
Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32.
Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 8930–8941.
Chen, P., Shi, X., Liang, Y., Li, Y., Yang, L., Gader, P.D., 2020. Interactive thyroid whole slide image diagnostic
representation.
 
Chen, X., Lin, L., Liang, D., Hu, H., Zhang, Q., Iwamoto, Y., Han, X.-H., Chen, Y.-W., Tong, R., Wu, J., 2019. A
dual-attention dilated residual network for liver lesion classification and localization on CT images,
in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). pp. 235–239.
Cheng, C.-T., Ho, T.-Y., Lee, T.-Y., Chang, C.-C., Chou, C.-C., Chen, C.-C., Chung, I.-F., Liao, C.-H., 2019.
Application of a deep learning algorithm for detection and visualization of hip fractures on plain
pelvic radiographs. Eur. Radiol. 29, 5469–5477.
Cheplygina, V., de Bruijne, M., Pluim, J.P.W., 2019. Not-so-supervised: A survey of semi-supervised, multiinstance, and transfer learning in medical image analysis. Med. Image Anal. 54, 280–296.
 
Choi, H., Kim, Y.K., Yoon, E.J., Lee, J.-Y., Lee, D.S., 2020. Cognitive signature of brain FDG PET based on
deep learning: domain transfer from Alzheimer’s disease to Parkinson’s disease. Eur. J. Nucl. Med.
Mol. Imaging 47, 403–412.
Choudhary, A., Wu, H., Tong, L., Wang, M.D., 2019. Learning to evaluate color similarity for histopathology
images using triplet networks, in: Proceedings of the 10th ACM International Conference on
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics. pp. 466–474.
Clough, J.R., Oksuz, I., Puyol-Antón, E., Ruijsink, B., King, A.P., Schnabel, J.A., 2019. Global and local
interpretability for cardiac MRI classification. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv.
MICCAI 2019. 
Codella, N.C.F., Lin, C.-C., Halpern, A., Hind, M., Feris, R., Smith, J.R., 2018. Collaborative human-AI (CHAI):
Evidence-based interpretable melanoma classification in dermoscopic images. 1st Int. Work. Mach.
Learn. Clin. Neuroimaging, MLCN 2018, 1st Int. Work. Deep Learn. Fail. DLF 2018, 1st Int. Work.
Interpret. Mach. Intell. Med. Image Comput. iMIMIC . 
Cong, C., Kato, Y., Vasconcellos, H.D., Lima, J., Venkatesh, B., 2019. Automated Stenosis Detection and
Classification in X-ray Angiography Using Deep Neural Network, in: 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 1301–1308.
Cook, R.D., Weisberg, S., 1980. Characterizations of an Empirical Influence Function for Detecting
Influential Cases in Regression. Technometrics 22, 495. 
Costa, P., Araujo, T., Aresta, G., Galdran, A., Mendonca, A.M., Smailagic, A., Campilho, A., 2019. EyeWeS:
Weakly supervised pre-trained convolutional neural networks for diabetic retinopathy detection, in:
16th International Conference on Machine Vision Applications, MVA 2019. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., INESC TEC, Portugal. 
Dang, S., Chaudhury, S., 2019. Novel relative relevance score for estimating brain connectivity from fMRI
explainable
 
de Vos, B.D., Wolterink, J.M., Leiner, T., de Jong, P.A., Lessmann, N., Isgum, I., 2019. Direct Automatic
Coronary Calcium Scoring in Cardiac and Chest CT. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 38, 2127–2138.
 
Dietterich, T.G., Lathrop, R.H., Lozano-Pérez, T., 1997. Solving the multiple instance problem with axisparallel rectangles. Artif. Intell. 89, 31–71. 
Doshi-Velez, F., Kim, B., 2017. Towards A Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning.
Dubost, F., Adams, H., Bortsova, G., Ikram, M.A., Niessen, W., Vernooij, M., de Bruijne, M., 2019a. 3D
regression neural network for the quantification of enlarged perivascular spaces in brain MRI. Med.
Image Anal. 51, 89–100.
Dubost, F., Adams, H., Yilmaz, P., Bortsova, G., van Tulder, G., Ikram, M.A., Niessen, W., Vernooij, M.W.,
de Bruijne, M., 2020. Weakly supervised object detection with 2D and 3D regression neural
networks. Med. Image Anal. 65, 101767.
Dubost, F., Yilmaz, P., Adams, H., Bortsova, G., Ikram, M.A., Niessen, W., Vernooij, M., De Bruijne, M.,
2019b. Enlarged perivascular spaces in brain MRI: Automated quantification in four regions.
Neuroimage 185, 534–544.
Dunnmon, J.A., Yi, D., Langlotz, C.P., Ré, C., Rubin, D.L., Lungren, M.P., 2019. Assessment of convolutional
neural networks for automated classification of chest radiographs. Radiology 290, 537–544.
Eitel, F., Ritter, K., 2019. Testing the robustness of attribution methods for convolutional neural networks
in MRI-based Alzheimer’s disease classification, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Springer, pp.
3–11. 
Eitel, F., Soehler, E., Bellmann-Strobl, J., Brandt, A.U., Ruprecht, K., Giess, R.M., Kuchling, J., Asseyer, S.,
Weygandt, M., Haynes, J.-D., Scheel, M., Paul, F., Ritter, K., 2019. Uncovering convolutional neural
network decisions for diagnosing multiple sclerosis on conventional MRI using layer-wise relevance
propagation. NeuroImage Clin. 24. 
El Adoui, M., Drisis, S., Benjelloun, M., 2020. Multi-input deep learning architecture for predicting breast
tumor response to chemotherapy using quantitative MR images. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg.
15, 1491–1500.
Everson, M., Herrera, L.C.G.P., Li, W., Luengo, I.M., Ahmad, O., Banks, M., Magee, C., Alzoubaidi, D., Hsu,
H.M., Graham, D., Vercauteren, T., Lovat, L., Ourselin, S., Kashin, S., Wang, H.-P., Wang, W.-L., Haidry,
R.J., 2019. Artificial intelligence for the real-time classification of intrapapillary capillary loop patterns
in the endoscopic diagnosis of early oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma: A proof-of-concept
study. United Eur. Gastroenterol. J. 7, 297–306. 
Fong, R.C., Vedaldi, A., 2017. Interpretable Explanations of Black Boxes by Meaningful Perturbation, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Fuchigami, T., Akahori, S., Okatani, T., Li, Y., 2020. A hyperacute stroke segmentation method using 3D U-
Net integrated with physicians’ knowledge for NCCT, in: Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided
Diagnosis. p. 113140G.
Gao, K., Shen, H., Liu, Y., Zeng, L., Hu, D., 2019. Dense-CAM: Visualize the Gender of Brains with MRI
Images, in: 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). pp. 1–7.
Gao, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Guo, X., Zhang, J., 2019. Decoding Behavior Tasks from Brain Activity Using
43222–43232.
 
García-Peraza-Herrera, L.C., Everson, M., Lovat, L., Wang, H.-P., Wang, W.L., Haidry, R., Stoyanov, D.,
Ourselin, S., Vercauteren, T., 2020. Intrapapillary capillary loop classification in magnification
endoscopy: open dataset and baseline methodology. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 15, 651–
659. 
Gasimova, A., 2019. Automated enriched medical concept generation for chest X-ray images. 2nd Int.
Work. Interpret. Mach. Intell. Med. Image Comput. iMIMIC 2019, 9th Int. Work. Multimodal Learn.
conjunction
 
Gecer, B., Aksoy, S., Mercan, E., Shapiro, L.G., Weaver, D.L., Elmore, J.G., 2018. Detection and classification
of cancer in whole slide breast histopathology images using deep convolutional networks. Pattern
Recognit. 84, 345–356.
Gessert, N., Latus, S., Abdelwahed, Y.S., Leistner, D.M., Lutz, M., Schlaefer, A., 2019. Bioresorbable scaffold
visualization in IVOCT images using CNNs and weakly supervised localization, in: Medical Imaging
2019: Image Processing. p. 109492C.
Graziani, M., Andrearczyk, V., S., M.-M., Müller, H., 2020. Concept attribution: Explaining CNN decisions
to physicians. Comput. Biol. Med. 123. 
Grigorescu, I., Cordero-Grande, L., David Edwards, A., Hajnal, J. V, Modat, M., Deprez, M., 2019.
Investigating image registration impact on preterm birth classification: An interpretable deep
learning approach. 1st Int. Work. Smart Ultrasound Imaging, SUSI 2019, 4th Int. Work. Preterm,
Perinat. Paediatr. Image Anal. PIPPI 2019, held conjunction with 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Imaging
Comput. 
Guo, H., Kruger, M., Wang, G., Kalra, M.K., Yan, P., 2020. Multi-task learning for mortality prediction in
LDCT images, in: Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided Diagnosis. p. 113142C.
Gupta, M., Das, C., Roy, A., Gupta, P., Pillai, G.R., Patole, K., 2020. Region of interest identification for
cervical cancer images, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI).
pp. 1293–1296.
Gupta, V., Demirer, M., Bigelow, M., Sarah, M.Y., Joseph, S.Y., Prevedello, L.M., White, R.D., Erdal, B.S.,
2020. Using transfer learning and class activation maps supporting detection and localization of
femoral fractures on anteroposterior radiographs, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1526–1529.
GV, K.K., Reddy, G.M., 2019. Automatic Classification of Whole Slide Pap Smear Images Using CNN With
PCA Based Feature Interpretation., in: CVPR Workshops. pp. 1074–1079.
Hägele, M., Seegerer, P., Lapuschkin, S., Bockmayr, M., Samek, W., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R., Binder, A.,
2020. Resolving challenges in deep learning-based analyses of histopathological images using
explanation methods. Sci. Rep. 10. 
He, J., Shang, L., Ji, H., Zhang, X., 2017. Deep learning features for lung adenocarcinoma classification with
tissue pathology images, in: International Conference on Neural Information Processing. pp. 742–
Heinemann, F., Birk, G., Stierstorfer, B., 2019. Deep learning enables pathologist-like scoring of NASH
models. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–10.
Hilbert, A., Ramos, L.A., van Os, H.J.A., Olabarriaga, S.D., Tolhuisen, M.L., Wermer, M.J.H., Barros, R.S., van
der Schaaf, I., Dippel, D., Roos, Y., others, 2019. Data-efficient deep learning of radiological image
data for outcome prediction after endovascular treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Comput. Biol. Med. 115, 103516.
Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 9, 1735–1780.
Hoffer, E., Ailon, N., 2015. Deep metric learning using triplet network, in: International Workshop on
Similarity-Based Pattern Recognition. pp. 84–92.
Hosny, A., Parmar, C., Coroller, T.P., Grossmann, P., Zeleznik, R., Kumar, A., Bussink, J., Gillies, R.J., Mak,
R.H., Aerts, H.J.W.L., 2018. Deep learning for lung cancer prognostication: a retrospective multicohort radiomics study. PLoS Med. 15, e1002711.
Huang, Y., Chung, A.C.S., 2019. Evidence localization for pathology images using weakly supervised
learning, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. pp. 613–621.
Huang, Z., Fu, D., 2019. Diagnose chest pathology in X-ray images by learning multi-attention
convolutional neural network, in: 2019 IEEE 8th Joint International Information Technology and
Artificial Intelligence Conference (ITAIC). pp. 294–299.
Huang, Z., Zhu, X., Ding, M., Zhang, X., 2020. Medical image classification using a light-weighted hybrid
neural network based on PCANet and DenseNet. IEEE Access 8, 24697–24712.
Huff, D.T., Weisman, A.J., Jeraj, R., 2021. Interpretation and visualization techniques for deep learning
models in medical imaging. Phys. Med. Biol. 66, 04TR01.
Humphries, S.M., Notary, A.M., Centeno, J.P., Strand, M.J., Crapo, J.D., Silverman, E.K., Lynch, D.A., of
COPD (COPDGene) Investigators, G.E., 2020. Deep learning enables automatic classification of
emphysema pattern at CT. Radiology 294, 434–444.
Huo, Y., Terry, J.G., Wang, J., Nath, V., Bermudez, C., Bao, S., Parvathaneni, P., Carr, J.J., Landman, B.A.,
2019. Coronary calcium detection using 3D attention identical dual deep network based on weakly
supervised learning, in: Medical Imaging 2019: Image Processing. p. 1094917.
Itoh, H., Lu, Z., Mori, Y., Misawa, M., Oda, M., Kudo, S.-E., Mori, K., 2020. Visualising decision-reasoning
regions in computer-aided pathological pattern diagnosis of endoscytoscopic images based on CNN
weights analysis, in: H.K., H., M.A., M. (Eds.), Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided Diagnosis. SPIE,
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 464-8601,
Japan. 
Jamaludin, A., Kadir, T., Zisserman, A., 2017. SpineNet: automated classification and evidence visualization
in spinal MRIs. Med. Image Anal. 41, 63–73.
Jang, Y., Son, J., Park, K.H., Park, S.J., Jung, K.-H., 2018. Laterality Classification of Fundus Images Using
Interpretable Deep Neural Network. J. Digit. Imaging 31, 923–928. 
018-0099-2
Jetley, S., Lord, N.A., Lee, N., Torr, P., 2018. Learn to Pay Attention, in: International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Ji, J., 2019. Gradient-based Interpretation on Convolutional Neural Network for Classification of
Pathological Images, in: 2019 International Conference on Information Technology and Computer
Application, ITCA 2019. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., No.2 High School of East
University,
 
Jia, X., Ren, L., Cai, J., 2020. Clinical implementation of AI technologies will require interpretable AI models.
Med. Phys. 47, 1–4. 
Jiang, H., Yang, K., Gao, M., Zhang, D., Ma, H., Qian, W., 2019. An Interpretable Ensemble Deep Learning
Model for Diabetic Retinopathy Disease Classification, in: 41st Annual International Conference of
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC 2019. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., Beijing Zhizhen Internet Technology Co., Ltd, China, pp. 2045–2048.
 
Jing, B., Xie, P., Xing, E., 2018. On the Automatic Generation of Medical Imaging Reports, in: Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). pp. 2577–2586.
Kashyap, S., Karargyris, A., Wu, J., Gur, Y., Sharma, A., Wong, K.C.L., Moradi, M., Syeda-Mahmood, T.,
2020. Looking in the Right Place for Anomalies: Explainable Ai Through Automatic Location Learning,
in: 17th IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, ISBI 2020. IEEE Computer Society, IBM
Research Almaden, pp. 1125–1129. 
Kermany, D.S., Goldbaum, M., Cai, W., Valentim, C.C.S., Liang, H., Baxter, S.L., McKeown, A., Yang, G., Wu,
X., Yan, F., Dong, J., Prasadha, M.K., Pei, J., Ting, M., Zhu, J., Li, C., Hewett, S., Dong, J., Ziyar, I., Shi,
A., Zhang, R., Zheng, L., Hou, R., Shi, W., Fu, X., Duan, Y., Huu, V.A.N., Wen, C., Zhang, E.D., Zhang,
C.L., Li, O., Wang, X., Singer, M.A., Sun, X., Xu, J., Tafreshi, A., Lewis, M.A., Xia, H., Zhang, K., 2018.
Identifying Medical Diagnoses and Treatable Diseases by Image-Based Deep Learning. Cell 172, 1122-
1131.e9. 
Khakzar, A., Albarqouni, S., Navab, N., 2019. Learning Interpretable Features via Adversarially Robust
Optimization. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv. MICCAI 2019.
 
Kiani, A., Uyumazturk, B., Rajpurkar, P., Wang, A., Gao, R., Jones, E., Yu, Y., Langlotz, C.P., Ball, R.L.,
Montine, T.J., others, 2020. Impact of a deep learning assistant on the histopathologic classification
of liver cancer. NPJ Digit. Med. 3, 1–8.
Kim, B.-H., Ye, J.C., 2020. Understanding graph isomorphism network for rs-fMRI functional connectivity
analysis. Front. Neurosci. 14, 630.
Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J., Viegas, F., Sayres, R., 2018. Interpretability beyond
feature attribution: Quantitative Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV), in: J., D., A., K.
(Eds.), 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018. International Machine
Learning Society (IMLS), pp. 4186–4195.
Kim, C., Kim, W.H., Kim, H.J., Kim, J., 2020. Weakly-supervised US breast tumor characterization and
localization with a box convolution network, in: Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided Diagnosis.
p. 1131419.
Kim, I., Rajaraman, S., Antani, S., 2019. Visual interpretation of convolutional neural network predictions
in classifying medical image modalities. Diagnostics 9, 38.
Kim, M., Han, J.C., Hyun, S.H., Janssens, O., Van Hoecke, S., Kee, C., De Neve, W., 2019. Medinoid:
computer-aided diagnosis and localization of glaucoma using deep learning. Appl. Sci. 9, 3064.
Kim, S.T., Lee, J.-H., Ro, Y.M., 2019. Visual evidence for interpreting diagnostic decision of deep neural
network in computer-aided diagnosis, in: K., M., H.K., H. (Eds.), Medical Imaging 2019: Computer-
Aided Diagnosis. SPIE, School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea.
 
Kim, Y., Choi, D., Lee, K.J., Kang, Y., Ahn, J.M., Lee, E., Lee, J.W., Kang, H.S., 2020. Ruling out rotator cuff
tear in shoulder radiograph series using deep learning: redefining the role of conventional
radiograph. Eur. Radiol. 30, 2843–2852.
Kim, Y., Lee, K.J., Sunwoo, L., Choi, D., Nam, C.-M., Cho, J., Kim, J., Bae, Y.J., Yoo, R.-E., Choi, B.S., others,
2019. Deep learning in diagnosis of maxillary sinusitis using conventional radiography. Invest. Radiol.
Ko, H., Chung, H., Kang, W.S., Kim, K.W., Shin, Y., Kang, S.J., Lee, J.H., Kim, Y.J., Kim, N.Y., Jung, H., others,
2020. COVID-19 pneumonia diagnosis using a simple 2D deep learning framework with a single chest
CT image: model development and validation. J. Med. Internet Res. 22, e19569.
Koitka, S., Kim, M.S., Qu, M., Fischer, A., Friedrich, C.M., Nensa, F., 2020. Mimicking the radiologists’
workflow: Estimating pediatric hand bone age with stacked deep neural networks. Med. Image Anal.
64. 
Korbar, B., Olofson, A.M., Miraflor, A.P., Nicka, C.M., Suriawinata, M.A., Torresani, L., Suriawinata, A.A.,
Hassanpour, S., 2017. Looking under the hood: Deep neural network visualization to interpret wholeslide image analysis outcomes for colorectal polyps, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. pp. 69–75.
Kowsari, K., Sali, R., Ehsan, L., Adorno, W., Ali, A., Moore, S., Amadi, B., Kelly, P., Syed, S., Brown, D., 2020.
HMIC: Hierarchical medical image classification, a deep learning approach. Inf. 11.
 
Kubach, J., Muhlebner-Fahrngruber, A., Soylemezoglu, F., Miyata, H., Niehusmann, P., Honavar, M.,
Rogerio, F., Kim, S.-H., Aronica, E., Garbelli, R., Vilz, S., Popp, A., Walcher, S., Neuner, C., Scholz, M.,
Kuerten, S., Schropp, V., Roeder, S., Eichhorn, P., Eckstein, M., Brehmer, A., Kobow, K., Coras, R.,
Blumcke, I., Jabari, S., 2020. Same same but different: A Web-based deep learning application
revealed classifying features for the histopathologic distinction of cortical malformations. Epilepsia
61, 421–432. 
Kumar, D., Sankar, V., Clausi, D., Taylor, G.W., Wong, A., 2019a. SISC: End-to-End Interpretable Discovery
Radiomics-Driven Lung Cancer Prediction via Stacked Interpretable Sequencing Cells. IEEE Access 7,
145444–145454. 
Kumar, D., Taylor, G.W., Wong, A., 2019b. Discovery Radiomics with CLEAR-DR: Interpretable Computer
Retinopathy.
25891–25896.
 
LaLonde, R., Torigian, D., Bagci, U., 2020. Encoding Visual Attributes in Capsules for Explainable Medical
Diagnoses, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. pp. 294–304.
Langner, T., Wikström, J., Bjerner, T., Ahlström, H., Kullberg, J., 2019. Identifying morphological indicators
of aging with neural networks on large-scale whole-body MRI. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 39, 1430–
Lee, H., Kim, S.T., Ro, Y.M., 2019a. Generation of multimodal justification using visual word constraint
model for explainable computer-aided diagnosis. 2nd Int. Work. Interpret. Mach. Intell. Med. Image
Comput. iMIMIC 2019, 9th Int. Work. Multimodal Learn. Clin. Decis. Support. ML-CDS 2019, held
conjunction with 22nd Interna. 
Lee, H., Yune, S., Mansouri, M., Kim, M., Tajmir, S.H., Guerrier, C.E., Ebert, S.A., Pomerantz, S.R., Romero,
J.M., Kamalian, S., Gonzalez, R.G., Lev, M.H., Do, S., 2019b. An explainable deep-learning algorithm
for the detection of acute intracranial haemorrhage from small datasets. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 173–
182. 
Lee, J., Nishikawa, R.M., 2019. Detecting mammographically occult cancer in women with dense breasts
using deep convolutional neural network and Radon Cumulative Distribution Transform. J. Med.
Imaging 6, 44502.
Lee, Jeong Hoon, Ha, E.J., Kim, D., Jung, Y.J., Heo, S., Jang, Y.-H., An, S.H., Lee, K., 2020. Application of deep
learning to the diagnosis of cervical lymph node metastasis from thyroid cancer with CT: external
validation and clinical utility for resident training. Eur Radiol 3066–3072.
Lee, Jeong Hyun, Joo, I., Kang, T.W., Paik, Y.H., Sinn, D.H., Ha, S.Y., Kim, K., Choi, C., Lee, G., Yi, J., others,
2020. Deep learning with ultrasonography: automated classification of liver fibrosis using a deep
convolutional neural network. Eur. Radiol. 30, 1264–1273.
Lei, Y., Tian, Y., Shan, H., Zhang, J., Wang, G., Kalra, M.K., 2020. Shape and margin-aware lung nodule
classification in low-dose CT images via soft activation mapping. Med. Image Anal. 60, 101628.
Lenis, D., Major, D., Wimmer, M., Berg, A., Sluiter, G., Bühler, K., 2020. Domain aware medical image
classifier interpretation by counterfactual impact analysis, in: International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 315–325.
Li, C.Y., Liang, X., Hu, Z., Xing, E.P., 2019. Knowledge-driven encode, retrieve, paraphrase for medical
image report generation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pp. 6666–
Li, L., Xu, M., Liu, H., Li, Y., Wang, X., Jiang, L., Wang, Z., Fan, X., Wang, N., 2019. A large-scale database
and a CNN model for attention-based glaucoma detection. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 39, 413–424.
Li, M., Kuang, K., Zhu, Q., Chen, X., Guo, Q., Wu, F., 2020. IB-M: A Flexible Framework to Align an
Interpretable Model and a Black-box Model, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 643–649.
Li, Q., Xing, X., Sun, Y., Xiao, B., Wei, H., Huo, Q., Zhang, M., Zhou, X.S., Zhan, Y., Xue, Z., others, 2019.
Novel iterative attention focusing strategy for joint pathology localization and prediction of MCI
progression, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. pp. 307–315.
Li, W., Zhuang, J., Wang, R., Zhang, J., Zheng, W.-S., 2020. Fusing metadata and dermoscopy images for
skin disease diagnosis, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp.
1996–2000.
Li, X., Wu, J., Chen, E.Z., Jiang, H., 2019. From deep learning towards finding skin lesion biomarkers, in:
2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC). pp. 2797–2800.
Li, Y., Shafipour, R., Mateos, G., Zhang, Z., 2019. Mapping brain structural connectivities to functional
networks via graph encoder-decoder with interpretable latent embeddings, in: 7th IEEE Global
Conference on Signal and Information Processing, GlobalSIP 2019. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., University of Rochester, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rochester, United States. 
Li, Z., Wang, C., Han, M., Xue, Y., Wei, W., Li, L.-J., Fei-Fei, L., 2019. Thoracic Disease Identification and
Localization
Supervision.
 
Lian, C., Liu, M., Wang, L., Shen, D., 2019. End-to-end dementia status prediction from brain mri using
multi-task weakly-supervised attention network, in: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 158–167.
Liao, L., Zhang, X., Zhao, F., Lou, J., Wang, L., Xu, X., Zhang, H., Li, G., 2020. Multi-branch deformable
convolutional neural network with label distribution learning for fetal brain age prediction, in: 2020
IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 424–427.
Liao, W., Zou, B., Zhao, R., Chen, Y., He, Z., Zhou, M., 2019. Clinical Interpretable Deep Learning Model for
Diagnosis.
Informatics
 
Lin, C.-Y., 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries, in: Text Summarization
Branches Out. pp. 74–81.
Lin, Z., Li, S., Ni, D., Liao, Y., Wen, H., Du, J., Chen, S., Wang, T., Lei, B., 2019. Multi-task learning for quality
assessment of fetal head ultrasound images. Med. Image Anal. 58, 101548.
Litjens, G., Kooi, T., Bejnordi, B.E., Setio, A.A.A., Ciompi, F., Ghafoorian, M., van der Laak, J.A.W.M., van
Ginneken, B., Sánchez, C.I., 2017. A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Med. Image
Anal. 
Liu, C., Han, X., Li, Z., Ha, J., Peng, G., Meng, W., He, M., 2019. A self-adaptive deep learning method for
automated eye laterality detection based on color fundus photography. PLoS One 14.
 
Liu, H., Wang, L., Nan, Y., Jin, F., Wang, Q., Pu, J., 2019. SDFN: Segmentation-based deep fusion network
for thoracic disease classification in chest X-ray images. Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 75, 66–73.
Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I., 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Luo, L., Chen, H., Wang, X., Dou, Q., Lin, H., Zhou, J., Li, G., Heng, P.-A., 2019. Deep angular embedding
and feature correlation attention for breast MRI cancer analysis, in: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 504–512.
Ma, K., Wu, K., Cheng, H., Gu, C., Xu, R., Guan, X., 2018. A pathology image diagnosis network with visual
interpretability and structured diagnostic report. 25th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. ICONIP 2018.
 
Mahmud, T., Rahman, M.A., Fattah, S.A., 2020. CovXNet: A multi-dilation convolutional neural network
for automatic COVID-19 and other pneumonia detection from chest X-ray images with transferable
multi-receptive feature optimization. Comput. Biol. Med. 122, 103869.
Maicas, G., Bradley, A.P., Nascimento, J.C., Reid, I., Carneiro, G., 2019. Pre and post-hoc diagnosis and
interpretation of malignancy from breast DCE-MRI. Med. Image Anal. 58, 101562.
Maksoud, S., Wiliem, A., Zhao, K., Zhang, T., Wu, L., Lovell, B., 2019. CORAL8: Concurrent object regression
for area localization in medical image panels. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv.
MICCAI 2019. 
Malhi, A., Kampik, T., Pannu, H., Madhikermi, M., Framling, K., 2019. Explaining Machine Learning-Based
Classifications of In-Vivo Gastral Images, in: 2019 International Conference on Digital Image
Computing: Techniques and Applications, DICTA 2019. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., Department of Computer Science, Aalto University Finland, Finland.
 
Martins, J., Cardoso, J.S., Soares, F., 2020. Offline computer-aided diagnosis for Glaucoma detection using
fundus images targeted at mobile devices. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 192.
 
Matsui, Y., Maruyama, T., Nitta, M., Saito, T., Tsuzuki, S., Tamura, M., Kusuda, K., Fukuya, Y., Asano, H.,
Kawamata, T., Masamune, K., Muragaki, Y., 2020. Prediction of lower-grade glioma molecular
subtypes using deep learning. J. Neurooncol. 146, 321–327. 
Meijering, E., 2020. A bird’s-eye view of deep learning in bioimage analysis. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J.
 
Meng, Q., Hashimoto, Y., Satoh, S., 2020. How to extract more information with less burden: Fundus image
classification and retinal disease localization with ophthalmologist intervention. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal.
Informatics 24, 3351–3361.
Meng, Q., Sinclair, M., Zimmer, V., Hou, B., Rajchl, M., Toussaint, N., Oktay, O., Schlemper, J., Gomez, A.,
Housden, J., others, 2019. Weakly supervised estimation of shadow confidence maps in fetal
ultrasound imaging. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 38, 2755–2767.
Murdoch, W.J., Singh, C., Kumbier, K., Abbasi-Asl, R., Yu, B., 2019. Definitions, methods, and applications
in interpretable machine learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116, 22071–22080.
 
Narayanan, B.N., Hardie, R.C., De Silva, M.S., Kueterman, N.K., 2020. Hybrid machine learning architecture
for automated detection and grading of retinal images for diabetic retinopathy. J. Med. Imaging 7,
Natekar, P., Kori, A., Krishnamurthi, G., 2020. Demystifying Brain Tumor Segmentation Networks:
Interpretability
Uncertainty
 
Ng, H.G., Kerzel, M., Mehnert, J., May, A., Wermter, S., 2018. Classification of MRI Migraine Medical Data
Using 3D Convolutional Neural Network, in: International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks.
pp. 300–309.
Nunes, N., Martins, B., André da Silva, N., Leite, F., J. Silva, M., 2019. A multi-modal deep learning method
classifying
 
Obikane, S., Aoki, Y., 2020. Weakly Supervised Domain Adaptation with Point Supervision in
Histopathological Image Segmentation, in: 5th Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition, ACPR 2019.
pp. 127–140.
Olah, C., Mordvintsev, A., Schubert, L., 2017. Feature visualization. Distill 2, e7.
Olden, J.D., Joy, M.K., Death, R.G., 2004. An accurate comparison of methods for quantifying variable
importance in artificial neural networks using simulated data. Ecol. Modell. 178, 389–397.
 
Papanastasopoulos, Z., Samala, R.K., Chan, H.-P., Hadjiiski, L., Paramagul, C., Helvie, M.A., Neal, C.H., 2020.
Explainable AI for medical imaging: Deep-learning CNN ensemble for classification of estrogen
receptor status from breast MRI, in: H.K., H., M.A., M. (Eds.), Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided
Diagnosis. SPIE, University of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5842,
United States. 
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.-J., 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. pp. 311–318.
Patra, A., Noble, J.A., 2020. Incremental Learning of Fetal Heart Anatomies Using Interpretable Saliency
Maps. 23rd Conf. Med. Image Underst. Anal. MIUA 2019. 
Paul, H.Y., Kim, T.K., Alice, C.Y., Bennett, B., Eng, J., Lin, C.T., 2020. Can AI outperform a junior resident?
Comparison of deep neural network to first-year radiology residents for identification of
pneumothorax. Emerg. Radiol. 27, 367–375.
Paul, H.Y., Kim, T.K., Wei, J., Shin, J., Hui, F.K., Sair, H.I., Hager, G.D., Fritz, J., 2019. Automated semantic
labeling of pediatric musculoskeletal radiographs using deep learning. Pediatr. Radiol. 49, 1066–
Paul, R., Schabath, M., Gillies, R., Hall, L., Goldgof, D., 2020. Convolutional Neural Network ensembles for
accurate lung nodule malignancy prediction 2 years in the future. Comput. Biol. Med. 122, 103882.
Pearl, J., 2009. Causality. Cambridge university press.
Pelka, O., Nensa, F., Friedrich, C.M., 2019. Variations on branding with text occurrence for optimized body
parts classification, in: 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). pp. 890–894.
Peng, T., Boxberg, M., Weichert, W., Navab, N., Marr, C., 2019. Multi-task learning of a deep K-nearest
neighbour network for histopathological image classification and retrieval. 22nd Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Interv. MICCAI 2019. 
Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.D., 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representation, in:
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
pp. 1532–1543.
Perdomo, O., Rios, H., Rodríguez, F.J., Otálora, S., Meriaudeau, F., Müller, H., González, F.A., 2019.
Classification of diabetes-related retinal diseases using a deep learning approach in optical
tomography.
 
Pereira, S., Meier, R., Alves, V., Reyes, M., Silva, C.A., 2018. Automatic brain tumor grading from MRI data
using convolutional neural networks and quality assessment, in: Understanding and Interpreting
Machine Learning in Medical Image Computing Applications. Springer, pp. 106–114.
Pesce, E., Joseph Withey, S., Ypsilantis, P.-P., Bakewell, R., Goh, V., Montana, G., 2019. Learning to detect
chest radiographs containing pulmonary lesions using visual attention networks. Med. Image Anal.
53, 26–38. 
Philbrick, K.A., Yoshida, K., Inoue, D., Akkus, Z., Kline, T.L., Weston, A.D., Korfiatis, P., Takahashi, N.,
Erickson, B.J., 2018. What Does Deep Learning See? Insights From a Classifier Trained to Predict
Contrast Enhancement Phase From CT Images. Am. J. Roentgenol. 211, 1184–1193.
 
Pominova, M., Artemov, A., Sharaev, M., Kondrateva, E., Bernstein, A., Burnaev, E., 2018. Voxelwise 3d
convolutional and recurrent neural networks for epilepsy and depression diagnostics from structural
and functional mri data, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops
(ICDMW). pp. 299–307.
Qi, X., Zhang, L., Chen, Yao, Pi, Y., Chen, Yi, Lv, Q., Yi, Z., 2019. Automated diagnosis of breast
ultrasonography images using deep neural networks. Med. Image Anal. 52, 185–198.
Qin, R., Wang, Z., Jiang, L., Qiao, K., Hai, J., Chen, J., Xu, J., Shi, D., Yan, B., 2020. Fine-grained lung cancer
classification from PET and CT images based on multidimensional attention mechanism. Complexity
Quellec, G., Lamard, M., Conze, P.-H., Massin, P., Cochener, B., 2020. Automatic detection of rare
pathologies in fundus photographs using few-shot learning. Med. Image Anal. 61, 101660.
Rajaraman, S., Candemir, S., Thoma, G., Antani, S., 2019. Visualizing and explaining deep learning
predictions for pneumonia detection in pediatric chest radiographs, in: Medical Imaging 2019:
Computer-Aided Diagnosis. p. 109500S.
Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Ball, R.L., Zhu, K., Yang, B., Mehta, H., Duan, T., Ding, D., Bagul, A., Langlotz, C.P.,
others, 2018. Deep learning for chest radiograph diagnosis: A retrospective comparison of the
CheXNeXt algorithm to practicing radiologists. PLoS Med. 15, e1002686.
Rajpurkar, P., Park, A., Irvin, J., Chute, C., Bereket, M., Mastrodicasa, D., Langlotz, C.P., Lungren, M.P., Ng,
A.Y., Patel, B.N., 2020. AppendiXNet: deep learning for diagnosis of appendicitis from a small dataset
of CT exams using video pretraining. Sci. Rep. 10, 1–7.
Reyes, M., Meier, R., Pereira, S., Silva, C.A., Dahlweid, F.-M., Tengg-Kobligk, H. von, Summers, R.M., Wiest,
R., 2020. On the Interpretability of Artificial Intelligence in Radiology: Challenges and Opportunities.
Radiol. Artif. Intell. 2, e190043.
Rezaei, M., Uemura, T., Näppi, J., Yoshida, H., Lippert, C., Meinel, C., 2020. Generative synthetic
adversarial network for internal bias correction and handling class imbalance problem in medical
image diagnosis, in: Medical Imaging 2020: Computer-Aided Diagnosis. p. 113140E.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C., 2016. “Why should i trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any
classifier, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, New York, USA, pp. 1135–1144.
 
Robnik-Šikonja, M., Kononenko, I., 2008. Explaining classifications for individual instances. IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng. 20, 589–600. 
Rodin, I., Fedulova, I., Shelmanov, A., Dylov, D. V, 2019. Multitask and Multimodal Neural Network Model
for Interpretable Analysis of X-ray Images, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 1601–1604.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence
Bioinformatics).
 
Rudin, C., 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
interpretable models instead. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 206–215. 
Saab, K., Dunnmon, J., Goldman, R., Ratner, A., Sagreiya, H., Ré, C., Rubin, D., 2019. Doubly Weak
Supervision of Deep Learning Models for Head CT. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.
Interv. MICCAI 2019. 
Sabour, S., Frosst, N., Hinton, G.E., 2017. Dynamic routing between capsules. arXiv Prepr.
arXiv1710.09829.
Sarhan, M.H., Eslami, A., Navab, N., Albarqouni, S., 2019. Learning interpretable disentangled
representations using adversarial VAEs. 1st MICCAI Work. Domain Adapt. Represent. Transf. DART
2019, 1st Int. Work. Med. Image Learn. with Less Labels Imperfect Data, MIL3ID 2019, held
conjunction with 22nd Int. Conf. Med. 
Schlemper, J., Oktay, O., Schaap, M., Heinrich, M., Kainz, B., Glocker, B., Rueckert, D., 2019. Attention
gated networks: Learning to leverage salient regions in medical images. Med. Image Anal. 53, 197–
207. 
Schwab, E., Goossen, A., Deshpande, H., Saalbach, A., 2020. Localization of Critical Findings in Chest X-Ray
Without Local Annotations Using Multi-Instance Learning, in: 17th IEEE International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging, ISBI 2020. IEEE Computer Society, Clinical Informatics, Solutions Services, Philips
Cambridge,
1879–1882.
 
Sedai, S., Mahapatra, D., Ge, Z., Chakravorty, R., Garnavi, R., 2018. Deep multiscale convolutional feature
learning for weakly supervised localization of chest pathologies in x-ray images, in: International
Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging. pp. 267–275.
Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D., 2017. Grad-CAM: Visual
Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Localization.
Seo, D., Oh, K., Oh, I.-S., 2020. Regional multi-scale approach for visually pleasing explanations of deep
neural networks. IEEE Access 8, 8572–8582. 
Shahamat, H., Saniee Abadeh, M., 2020. Brain MRI analysis using a deep learning based evolutionary
approach. Neural Networks 126, 218–234. 
Shapira, N., Fokuhl, J., Schultheiß, M., Beck, S., Kopp, F.K., Pfeiffer, D., Dangelmaier, J., Pahn, G., Sauter,
A.P., Renger, B., others, 2020. Liver lesion localisation and classification with convolutional neural
networks: a comparison between conventional and spectral computed tomography. Biomed. Phys.
Eng. Express 6, 15038.
Shapley, L.S., 2016. 17. A Value for n-Person Games, in: Contributions to the Theory of Games (AM-28),
Volume II. Princeton University Press, pp. 307–318. 
Shen, D., Wu, G., Suk, H.-I., 2017. Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 19,
221–248. 
Shen, S., Han, S.X., Aberle, D.R., Bui, A.A., Hsu, W., 2019. An interpretable deep hierarchical semantic
convolutional neural network for lung nodule malignancy classification. Expert Syst. Appl. 128, 84–
95. 
Shen, Y., Sheng, B., Fang, R., Li, H., Dai, L., Stolte, S., Qin, J., Jia, W., Shen, D., 2020. Domain-invariant
interpretable
assessment.
 
Shinde, S., Chougule, T., Saini, J., Ingalhalikar, M., 2019a. HR-CAM: Precise localization of pathology using
multi-level learning in CNNS. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv. MICCAI 2019.
 
Shinde, S., Prasad, S., Saboo, Y., Kaushick, R., Saini, J., Pal, P.K., Ingalhalikar, M., 2019b. Predictive markers
for Parkinson’s disease using deep neural nets on neuromelanin sensitive MRI. NeuroImage Clin. 22,
Silva-Rodríguez, J., Colomer, A., Sales, M.A., Molina, R., Naranjo, V., 2020. Going deeper through the
Gleason scoring scale: An automatic end-to-end system for histology prostate grading and cribriform
pattern detection. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 195, 105637.
Silva, W., Fernandes, K., Cardoso, M.J., Cardoso, J.S., 2018. Towards complementary explanations using
deep neural networks, in: Understanding and Interpreting Machine Learning in Medical Image
Computing Applications. Springer, pp. 133–140.
Silva, W., Poellinger, A., Cardoso, J.S., Reyes, M., 2020. Interpretability-guided content-based medical
image retrieval, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. pp. 305–314.
Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., 2013. Deep Inside Convolutional Networks: Visualising Image
Classification Models and Saliency Maps. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. ICLR 2014 - Work. Track
Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., 2014. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition.
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. 1–14.
Singh, S., Karimi, S., Ho-Shon, K., Hamey, L., 2019. From Chest X-Rays to Radiology Reports: A Multimodal
Machine Learning Approach, in: 2019 International Conference on Digital Image Computing:
Techniques and Applications, DICTA 2019. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
Department
Computing,
University,
Australia.
 
Singla, S., Gong, M., Ravanbakhsh, S., Sciurba, F., Poczos, B., Batmanghelich, K.N., 2018. Subject2Vec:
Generative-discriminative approach from a set of image patches to a vector. 21st Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv. MICCAI 2018. 
Sønderby, C.K., Raiko, T., Maaløe, L., Sønderby, S.K., Winther, O., 2016. Ladder Variational Autoencoders,
in: Lee, D.D., Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V, Guyon, I., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 29. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 3738–3746.
Spinks, G., Moens, M.-F., 2019. Justifying diagnosis decisions by deep neural networks. J. Biomed. Inform.
96. 
Springenberg, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., Riedmiller, M., 2014. Striving for Simplicity: The All
Convolutional Net. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. ICLR 2015 - Work. Track Proc.
Sun, H., Zeng, X., Xu, T., Peng, G., Ma, Y., 2020. Computer-Aided Diagnosis in Histopathological Images of
the Endometrium Using a Convolutional Neural Network and Attention Mechanisms. IEEE J. Biomed.
Heal. Informatics 24, 1664–1676. 
Sun, L., Wang, W., Li, J., Lin, J., 2019. Study on medical image report generation based on improved
encoding-decoding method, in: International Conference on Intelligent Computing. pp. 686–696.
Tang, C., 2020. Discovering Unknown Diseases with Explainable Automated Medical Imaging, in: Annual
Conference on Medical Image Understanding and Analysis. pp. 346–358.
Tang, R., Tushar, F.I., Han, S., Hou, R., Rubin, G.D., Lo, J.Y., 2019. Classification of chest CT using case-level
weak supervision, in: Medical Imaging 2019: Computer-Aided Diagnosis. p. 1095017.
Tang, Y.-X., Tang, Y.-B., Peng, Y., Yan, K., Bagheri, M., Redd, B.A., Brandon, C.J., Lu, Z., Han, M., Xiao, J.,
others, 2020. Automated abnormality classification of chest radiographs using deep convolutional
neural networks. NPJ Digit. Med. 3, 1–8.
Tang, Z., Chuang, K. V, DeCarli, C., Jin, L.-W., Beckett, L., Keiser, M.J., Dugger, B.N., 2019. Interpretable
classification of Alzheimer’s disease pathologies with a convolutional neural network pipeline. Nat.
Commun. 10. 
Teramoto, A., Yamada, A., Kiriyama, Y., Tsukamoto, T., Yan, K., Zhang, L., Imaizumi, K., Saito, K., Fujita, H.,
2019. Automated classification of benign and malignant cells from lung cytological images using
deep convolutional neural network. Informatics Med. Unlocked 16, 100205.
Thakoor, K.A., Li, X., Tsamis, E., Sajda, P., Hood, D.C., 2019. Enhancing the accuracy of glaucoma detection
from OCT probability maps using convolutional neural networks, in: 2019 41st Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). pp. 2036–2040.
Tian, J., Li, C., Shi, Z., Xu, F., 2018. A diagnostic report generator from CT volumes on liver tumor with semisupervised attention mechanism. 21st Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv. MICCAI
2018. 
Tian, J., Zhong, C., Shi, Z., Xu, F., 2019. Towards automatic diagnosis from multi-modal medical data, in:
Interpretability of Machine Intelligence in Medical Image Computing and Multimodal Learning for
Clinical Decision Support. Springer, pp. 67–74.
Tibshirani, R., 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. 58, 267–288.
Tsang, M., Cheng, D., Liu, Y., 2018. Detecting Statistical Interactions from Neural Network Weights, in:
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Tu, Z., Gao, S., Zhou, K., Chen, X., Fu, H., Gu, Z., Cheng, J., Yu, Z., Liu, J., 2020. SUNet: A lesion regularized
model for simultaneous diabetic retinopathy and diabetic macular edema grading, in: 2020 IEEE 17th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1378–1382.
Uehara, K., Murakawa, M., Nosato, H., Sakanashi, H., 2019. Prototype-based interpretation of pathological
image analysis by convolutional neural networks, in: Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition. pp.
Upadhyay, U., Banerjee, B., 2020. Compact Representation Learning Using Class Specific Convolution
Coders-Application to Medical Image Classification, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1266–1270.
Uzunova, H., Ehrhardt, J., Kepp, T., Handels, H., 2019. Interpretable explanations of black box classifiers
applied on medical images by meaningful perturbations using variational autoencoders, in: Medical
Imaging 2019: Image Processing. p. 1094911.
van Amsterdam, W.A.C., Verhoeff, J.J.C., de Jong, P.A., Leiner, T., Eijkemans, M.J.C., 2019. Eliminating
biasing signals in lung cancer images for prognosis predictions with deep learning. npj Digit. Med. 2,
1–6. 
van der Velden, B.H.M., Janse, M.H.A., Ragusi, M.A.A., Loo, C.E., Gilhuijs, K.G.A., 2020. Volumetric breast
density estimation on MRI using explainable deep learning regression. Sci. Rep. 10.
 
van Sloun, R.J.G., Demi, L., 2019. Localizing B-lines in lung ultrasonography by weakly supervised deep
learning, in-vivo results. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal. informatics 24, 957–964.
Vedantam, R., Lawrence Zitnick, C., Parikh, D., 2015. Cider: Consensus-based image description
evaluation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
4566–4575.
Vila-Blanco, N., Carreira, M.J., Varas-Quintana, P., Balsa-Castro, C., Tomas, I., 2020. Deep neural networks
for chronological age estimation from OPG images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 39, 2374–2384.
Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., Erhan, D., 2015. Show and tell: A neural image caption generator, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3156–3164.
von Schacky, C.E., Sohn, J.H., Liu, F., Ozhinsky, E., Jungmann, P.M., Nardo, L., Posadzy, M., Foreman, S.C.,
Nevitt, M.C., Link, T.M., others, 2020. Development and validation of a multitask deep learning
model for severity grading of hip osteoarthritis features on radiographs. Radiology 295, 136–145.
Wang, C.J., Hamm, C.A., Savic, L.J., Ferrante, M., Schobert, I., Schlachter, T., Lin, M.D., Weinreb, J.C.,
Duncan, J.S., Chapiro, J., Letzen, B., 2019. Deep learning for liver tumor diagnosis part II:
convolutional neural network interpretation using radiologic imaging features. Eur. Radiol. 29, 3348–
3357. 
Wang, H., Feng, J., Zhang, Z., Su, H., Cui, L., He, H., Liu, L., 2018. Breast mass classification via deeply
integrating the contextual information from multi-view data. Pattern Recognit. 80, 42–52.
 
Wang, J., Cui, Y., Shi, G., Zhao, J., Yang, X., Qiang, Y., Du, Q., Ma, Y., Kazihise, N.G.-F., 2020. Multi-branch
cross attention model for prediction of KRAS mutation in rectal cancer with t2-weighted MRI. Appl.
Intell. 50, 2352–2369.
Wang, J., Zhang, R., Wei, X., Li, X., Yu, M., Zhu, J., Gao, J., Liu, Z., Yu, R., 2019. An attention-based semisupervised neural network for thyroid nodules segmentation, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 871–876.
Wang, K., Zhang, X., Huang, S., 2019. KGZNet: Knowledge-guided deep zoom neural networks for thoracic
disease classification, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
(BIBM). pp. 1396–1401.
Wang, L., Zhang, L., Zhu, M., Qi, X., Yi, Z., 2020. Automatic diagnosis for thyroid nodules in ultrasound
images by deep neural networks. Med. Image Anal. 61, 101665.
Wang, R., Fan, D., Lv, B., Wang, M., Zhou, Q., Lv, C., Xie, G., Wang, L., 2020. OCT image quality evaluation
based on deep and shallow features fusion network, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1561–1564.
Wang, S., Xing, Y., Zhang, L., Gao, H., Zhang, H., 2019. Deep convolutional neural network for ulcer
recognition in wireless capsule endoscopy: experimental feasibility and optimization. Comput. Math.
Methods Med. 2019.
Wang, Xi, Chen, H., Ran, A.-R., Luo, L., Chan, P.P., Tham, C.C., Chang, R.T., Mannil, S.S., Cheung, C.Y., Heng,
P.-A., 2020. Towards multi-center glaucoma OCT image screening with semi-supervised joint
structure and function multi-task learning. Med. Image Anal. 63, 101695.
Wang, X, Liang, X., Jiang, Z., Nguchu, B.A., Zhou, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, H., Li, Y., Zhu, Y., Wu, F., Gao, J.-H.,
Qiu, B., 2020. Decoding and mapping task states of the human brain via deep learning. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 41, 1505–1519. 
Wang, X., Peng, Y., Lu, L., Lu, Z., Summers, R.M., 2018. TieNet: Text-Image Embedding Network for
Common Thorax Disease Classification and Reporting in Chest X-Rays, in: 31st Meeting of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018. IEEE Computer
Society, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center, United States, pp. 9049–
9058. 
Wang, X., Xu, M., Li, L., Wang, Z., Guan, Z., 2019. Pathology-aware deep network visualization and its
application in glaucoma image synthesis, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 423–431.
Wang, X, Zhang, Y., Guo, Z., Li, J., 2019. A Computational Framework Towards Medical Image Explanation.
7th Jt. Work. Knowl. Represent. Heal. Care Process. Inf. Syst. Heal. Care, KR4HC/ProHealth 2019 1st
Transparent,
conjuncti.
 
Wei Koh, P., Liang, P., 2017. Understanding Black-box Predictions via Influence Functions.
Wei, W., Poirion, E., Bodini, B., Durrleman, S., Ayache, N., Stankoff, B., Colliot, O., 2019. Predicting PETderived demyelination from multimodal MRI using sketcher-refiner adversarial training for multiple
sclerosis. Med. Image Anal. 58, 101546.
Wickstrøm, K., Kampffmeyer, M., Jenssen, R., 2020. Uncertainty and interpretability in convolutional
neural networks for semantic segmentation of colorectal polyps. Med. Image Anal. 60, 101619.
Windisch, P., Weber, P., Fürweger, C., Ehret, F., Kufeld, M., Zwahlen, D., Muacevic, A., 2020.
Implementation of model explainability for a basic brain tumor detection using convolutional neural
networks on MRI slices. Neuroradiology. 
Woerl, A.-C., Eckstein, M., Geiger, J., Wagner, D.C., Daher, T., Stenzel, P., Fernandez, A., Hartmann, A.,
Wand, M., Roth, W., others, 2020. Deep learning predicts molecular subtype of muscle-invasive
bladder cancer from conventional histopathological slides. Eur. Urol. 78, 256–264.
Wu, B., Zhou, Z., Wang, J., Wang, Y., 2018. Joint learning for pulmonary nodule segmentation, attributes
and malignancy prediction, in: 15th IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, ISBI 2018.
IEEE Computer Society, Nat’l Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology Cooperative Medianet
Innovation Center, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MoE) Sch’l of EECS, Peking University,
Beijing, 100871, China, pp. 1109–1113. 
Xi, P., Guan, H., Shu, C., Borgeat, L., Goubran, R., 2019. An integrated approach for medical abnormality
detection using deep patch convolutional neural networks. Vis. Comput. 1–14.
Xie, B., Lei, T., Wang, N., Cai, H., Xian, J., He, M., Zhang, L., Xie, H., 2020. Computer-aided diagnosis for
fetal brain ultrasound images using deep convolutional neural networks. Int. J. Comput. Assist.
Radiol. Surg. 15, 1303–1312.
Xie, Y., Zhang, J., Xia, Y., Shen, C., 2020. A mutual bootstrapping model for automated skin lesion
segmentation and classification. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 39, 2482–2493.
Xu, H., Dong, M., Lee, M.-H., O’Hara, N., Asano, E., Jeong, J.-W., 2019. Objective Detection of Eloquent
Axonal Pathways to Minimize Postoperative Deficits in Pediatric Epilepsy Surgery Using Diffusion
Tractography and Convolutional Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 38, 1910–1922.
 
Xu, R., Cong, Z., Ye, X., Hirano, Y., Kido, S., Gyobu, T., Kawata, Y., Honda, O., Tomiyama, N., 2019.
Pulmonary textures Classification via a multi-scale attention network. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal.
informatics 24, 2041–2052.
Yan, C., Xu, J., Xie, J., Cai, C., Lu, H., 2020. Prior-Aware CNN with Multi-Task Learning for Colon Images
Analysis, in: 17th IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, ISBI 2020. IEEE Computer
Society, Nanjing University of Information Science Technology, Nanjing, China, pp. 254–257.
 
Yan, K., Peng, Y., Sandfort, V., Bagheri, M., Lu, Z., Summers, R.M., 2019. Holistic and comprehensive
annotation of clinically significant findings on diverse CT images: Learning from radiology reports and
label ontology, in: 32nd IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
2019. IEEE Computer Society, Imaging Biomarkers and Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory,
Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States, pp. 8515–8524.
 
Yan, K., Wang, X., Lu, L., Zhang, L., Harrison, A.P., Bagheri, M., Summers, R.M., 2018. Deep Lesion Graphs
in the Wild: Relationship Learning and Organization of Significant Radiology Image Findings in a
Diverse Large-Scale Lesion Database, in: 31st Meeting of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018. IEEE Computer Society, Imaging Biomarkers and
Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, 10 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, United States, pp. 9261–9270. 
Yan, Y., Kawahara, J., Hamarneh, G., 2019. Melanoma Recognition via Visual Attention. 26th Int. Conf. Inf.
Process. Med. Imaging, IPMI 2019. 
Yang, H., Kim, J.-Y., Kim, H., Adhikari, S.P., 2019. Guided soft attention network for classification of breast
cancer histopathology images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 39, 1306–1315.
Yang, P., Zhai, Y., Li, L., Lv, H., Wang, J., Zhu, C., Jiang, R., 2020. A deep metric learning approach for
histopathological image retrieval. Methods 179, 14–25.
Yang, S., Niu, J., Wu, J., Liu, X., 2020. Automatic Medical Image Report Generation with Multi-view and
Multi-modal Attention Mechanism, in: International Conference on Algorithms and Architectures for
Parallel Processing. pp. 687–699.
Yang, X., Wang, Z., Liu, C., Le, H.M., Chen, J., Cheng, K.-T.T., Wang, L., 2017. Joint detection and diagnosis
of prostate cancer in multi-parametric MRI based on multimodal convolutional neural networks, in:
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp.
Ye, H., Gao, F., Yin, Y., Guo, D., Zhao, P., Lu, Y., Wang, X., Bai, J., Cao, K., Song, Q., others, 2019. Precise
diagnosis of intracranial hemorrhage and subtypes using a three-dimensional joint convolutional and
recurrent neural network. Eur. Radiol. 29, 6191–6201.
Yi, P.H., Lin, A., Wei, J., Yu, A.C., Sair, H.I., Hui, F.K., Hager, G.D., Harvey, S.C., 2019. Deep-Learning-Based
Semantic Labeling for 2D Mammography and Comparison of Complexity for Machine Learning Tasks.
J. Digit. Imaging 32, 565–570. 
Yin, C., Qian, B., Wei, J., Li, X., Zhang, X., Li, Y., Zheng, Q., 2019. Automatic generation of medical imaging
diagnostic report with hierarchical recurrent neural network, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining (ICDM). pp. 728–737.
Young, K., Booth, G., Simpson, B., Dutton, R., Shrapnel, S., 2019. Deep neural network or dermatologist?
2nd Int. Work. Interpret. Mach. Intell. Med. Image Comput. iMIMIC 2019, 9th Int. Work. Multimodal
conjunction
 
Yuan, J., Liao, H., Luo, R., Luo, J., 2019. Automatic radiology report generation based on multi-view image
fusion and medical concept enrichment, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 721–729.
Zeiler, M.D., Fergus, R., 2014. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks, in: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics). Springer Verlag, pp. 818–833. 
Zeng, X., Wen, L., Xu, Y., Ji, C., 2020. Generating diagnostic report for medical image by high-middle-level
visual information incorporation on double deep learning models. Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed. 197, 105700.
Zhang, B., Tan, J., Cho, K., Chang, G., Deniz, C.M., 2020. Attention-based cnn for kl grade classification:
Data from the osteoarthritis initiative, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging (ISBI). pp. 731–735.
Zhang, R., Tan, S., Wang, R., Manivannan, S., Chen, J., Lin, H., Zheng, W.-S., 2019. Biomarker localization
by combining CNN classifier and generative adversarial network. 22nd Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput. Interv. MICCAI 2019. 
Zhang, Y., Ding, D.Y., Qian, T., Manning, C.D., Langlotz, C.P., 2018. Learning to Summarize Radiology
Findings, in: Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and
Information Analysis. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 204–213.
 
Zhang, Z., Chen, P., Sapkota, M., Yang, L., 2017a. TandemNet: Distilling knowledge from medical images
using diagnostic reports as optional semantic references. 20th Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
Comput. Interv. MICCAI 2017. 
Zhang, Z., Xie, Y., Xing, F., McGough, M., Yang, L., 2017b. MDNet: A semantically and visually interpretable
medical image diagnosis network, in: 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2017. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., University of Florida,
United States, pp. 3549–3557. 
Zhao, C., Han, J., Jia, Y., Fan, L., Gou, F., 2018. Versatile framework for medical image processing and
analysis with application to automatic bone age assessment. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. 2018.
Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A., Torralba, A., 2016. Learning Deep Features for Discriminative
Localization.
Zhou, K., Gao, S., Cheng, J., Gu, Z., Fu, H., Tu, Z., Yang, J., Zhao, Y., Liu, J., 2020. Sparse-gan: Sparsityconstrained generative adversarial network for anomaly detection in retinal oct image, in: 2020 IEEE
17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1227–1231.
Zhou, L.-Q., Wu, X.-L., Huang, S.-Y., Wu, G.-G., Ye, H.-R., Wei, Q., Bao, L.-Y., Deng, Y.-B., Li, X.-R., Cui, X.-
W., others, 2020. Lymph node metastasis prediction from primary breast cancer US images using
deep learning. Radiology 294, 19–28.
Zhu, P., Ogino, M., 2019. Guideline-based additive explanation for computer-aided diagnosis of lung
nodules. 2nd Int. Work. Interpret. Mach. Intell. Med. Image Comput. iMIMIC 2019, 9th Int. Work.
Multimodal Learn. Clin. Decis. Support. ML-CDS 2019, held conjunction with 22nd Interna.
 
Zhu, Z., Albadawy, E., Saha, A., Zhang, J., Harowicz, M.R., Mazurowski, M.A., 2019. Deep learning for
identifying radiogenomic associations in breast cancer. Comput. Biol. Med. 109, 85–90.
 
Zhu, Z., Ding, X., Zhang, D., Wang, L., 2020. Weakly-Supervised Balanced Attention Network for Gastric
Pathology Image Localization and Classification, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1–4.
Zintgraf, L.M., Cohen, T.S., Adel, T., Welling, M., 2017. Visualizing deep neural network decisions:
Prediction difference analysis, in: 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2017. International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Zunair, H., Hamza, A. Ben, 2020. Melanoma detection using adversarial training and deep transfer
learning. Phys. Med. Biol. 65, 135005.