Journal of the
VOLUME 61, NUMBER
JANUARY 1971
Lightness and Retinex Theory
EDWIN H. LAND* AND JOHN J. MCCANN
Polaroid Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
 
Sensations of color show a strong correlation with reflectance, even though the amount of visible light
reaching the eye depends on the product of reflectance and illumination. The visual system must achieve this
remarkable result by a scheme that does not measure flux. Such a scheme is described as the basis of retinex
theory. This theory assumes that there are three independent cone systems, each starting with a set of receptors peaking, respectively, in the long-, middle-, and short-wavelength regions of the visible spectrum.
Each system forms a separate image of the world in terms of lightness that shows a strong correlation with
reflectance within its particular band of wavelengths. These images are not mixed, but rather are compared to generate color sensations. The problem then becomes how the lightness of areas in these separate
images can be independen t of flux. This article describes the mathematics of a lightness scheme that generates
lightness numbers, the biologic correlate of reflectance, independent of the flux from objects
INDEX HEADINGS: Vision; Color.
Most of us assume that, subject to a variety of compensatory factors, we see in terms of the amount of the
light coming from objects to our eye; we think that in
a particular scene there is more light coming from
white objects than from black objects; we think there
is more long-wave light (so-called red light) coming
from red objects than from blue objects.
Yet, when we measure the amounts of light in the
world around us, or when we create artificial worlds in
the laboratory, we find that there is no predictable
relationship between flux at various wavelengths and
the color sensations associated with objects. Accordingly, we believe that the eye must have evolved a
system which, though using light as the communication
medium with the world, has become as nearly independent of energy as is biophysically possible. In short,
color sensations must be dependent
on some as yet
undefined characteristic
of the field of view, a characteristic that can be communicated to us by the light
with which we see, even though the amount and composition of the light are everywhere variable and unpredictable; the eye must have evolved around such a
permanent characteristic of the field of view. This
paper describes our search for that characteristic.
A major visual phenomenon is that objects with low
reflectance look dark, objects with high reflectance
look light, objects with reflectance higher in the longwave portion of the spectrum than in the short-wave
look reddish, objects with reflectance higher in the
short-wave portion than in the long-wave look bluish,
and so on. It is with reflectance that sensation of color
is strongly correlated when we view the world around
us.'-8 Yet ascertaining reflectance in any of the familiar
ways requires an operational step which the eye cannot
take. For example, the eye cannot insert a comparison
standard next to the object which it is regarding.
Furthermore, what reaches the eye from each point
is clearly the product of the reflectance and the illumination. The illumination from the sun is modulated by
clouds, atmosphere, water, mountains, trees, houses,
etc. As every photographer knows, the sun and sky
produce every conceivable combination of sunlight and
skylight. Even less uniform illumination is provided by
artificial light because the distance from the light
source drastically affects the illumination falling on
any point.
We are then left with the circular logical problem
that, because the light coming to our eye is the product
of the reflectance and illuminance, our eye could not
determine reflectance unless the illuminance is uniform
and the eye could not determine illuminance unless
the reflectance is uniform. In general, across the field
Copyright ©D 1971 by the Optical Society of America.
E. H. LAND AND J. J. McCANN
FILTER TRANSMISSION BANDS
WAVELENGTH IN MILLIMICRONS
FIG. 1. Spectral transmittances
of bandpass interference filters.
of view, neither reflectance nor illuminance is known;
and neither is uniform.
INDEPENDENCE OF COLOR SENSATION FROM
FLUX-WAVELENGTH DISTRIBUTIONS
To demonstrate the extent to which color sensation
is independent of flux-wavelength
distribution,
describe a simple quantitative laboratory experiment.
An extended array of rectangular, colored papers is
arranged to look like the paintings of the artist
Mondrian.,"'0 To reduce the role of specular reflectance,
the papers are not only matte, but are also selected to
have a minimum reflectance as high as or higher than
10% for any part of the visual spectrum. The Mondrianlike pattern is illuminated by three illuminating projectors with sharp-cut bandpass filters," one passing
long waves, one middle-length
waves, and one short
waves (Fig. 1). The flux from each of the three projectors is changed by a separate variable transformer.
The filters are selected on two bases: first, to minimize
the diversity of color sensations from the array of
colored papers when only one projector is turned on;
second, while satisfying the first condition, to transmit
as wide a band of wavelengths, and as much light as
With all three illuminating projectors turned on,
the variable transformers are set so that the whole
array of variegated papers is deeply colored, and so
that, at the same time, the whites are good whites.
This is not a critical setting. Then, using one projector
at a time, and hence only one waveband at a time, we
measure with a telescopic photometer the luminance at
the eye from any particular area, say a white rectangle.
Thus, we obtain from a white rectangle three numbers
that are proportional to the three luminances at the
particular location of the eye. (The subsequent procedures constitute a null experiment. The radiance-vsluminance function, the particular units of measure,
the wavelength sensitivity, and the linearity of the
meter are not significant in the experiment.)
In one example, the readings from a white area were
6 long-wave units, 35 middle-wave units, and 60 shortwave units. We turned the photometer to another area,
such as a dark brown. We then separately adjusted the
transformers to settings such that the three luminances
at the eye were 6, 35, 60. Thus the luminances from
the new area were identical to the three luminances
previously reaching the eye from the first rectangle.
The color sensation from the new area remained essentially unchanged (dark brown) despite the fact that
the wavelength-luminance composition for that area
had changed from whatever it might have been to 6,
35, 60. We then pointed the photometer towards a
series of different areas: bright yellow, blue, gray, lime
green, and red. The illumination of each area was
readjusted, in turn, so that the three luminances
coming to the observer's eye were 6, 35, 60. After each
of the new illuminations was adjusted so that the
photometer read 6, 35, 60 for the long, middle, and
short wavelengths, each area appeared essentially unchanged. Thus, the observers reported that the color
sensations from the series were yellow, blue, gray,
green, and red. When the variable transformers were
changed in this way to produce the standard set of
three luminances for any square, then all the other
areas nevertheless continued to generate their original
color sensation (although in a few areas there were
some slight changes). Dramatically, the retention of
the color sensations was related to the reflectances of
the papers-not
to the product of reflectance times
illumination, although this product appears to be the
only information reaching the eye.
Therefore, the color sensations in the display have
a completely arbitrary relation to the composition of
light in terms of wavelength and luminance of any
one point. The luminance-vs-wavelength distribution
of each object in the world around us cannot tell us
whether an object is white, gray, or black; the ratio of
fluxes at various wavelengths cannot determine whether
a point on an object is reddish, greenish, bluish, or
grayish. The mystery then is how we can all agree
with such precision about blacks, whites, grays, reds,
greens, browns, yellows, when there
is no obvious
physical quantity with which to describe how we know
at all the color of the objects we are seeing.
It might occur to the reader that such a large change
of relative luminance, a change such as we produce by
altering the output of the long-wave projector relative
to other projectors, is countered by a compensatory
adaptation in the eye. If, in the previous experiments,
changes of adaptation compensated for the changes of
flux coming to the eye, then deliberately causing changes
of adaptation should have a significant effect on the
color appearance of objects. To produce an extremely
large difference between the state of adaptation to
long waves and the state of adaptation to middle and
short waves, we asked observers to wear deep-red,
dark-adaptation goggles, described by Hecht," for 2 h,
AND RETINEX
to allow maximum regeneration of middle- and shortwave visual pigments. In order to insure an ample
domain for adaptation,
the level of illumination of the
display was maintained at a sufficiently high level. (The
white areas had luminances for the middle- and shortwave bands between 100 and 1000 times higher than
the threshold
for cone response after 30 min in the
dark.) When the observers removed the goggles, they
reported at the first instant, as well as later, that the
colors of the paper squares in the Mondrian
were essentially unchanged. The experiment was repeated with
the deep-red, dark-adaptation
filter over only one eye.
At the end of the adaptation period, the observers,
using the binocular-comparison technique, reported
slight shifts of the color sensations but none so large
as to change the color names. (Indeed, in our theory
a change of photochemical adaptation
is unimportant,
for the same reasons that a change of the flux of one
of the illuminants is unimportant. Similarly, reasonable
variations of the native concentrations of visual pigments are not important from time to time, or from
individual to individual.)
In another set of adaptation-related experiments the
6, 35, 60 Mondrian
experiments
were repeated
the observers seeing the Mondrian for less than 1/100 s.
The experimental procedure was exactly the same as
in the first 6, 35, 60 Mondrian experiments, with the
exception that the observers looked at the Mondrian
through a photographic shutter. The projectors were
set so that the long-, middle-, and short-wave
luminances from a white area were 6, 35, 60 and the observers reported that the area appeared white. The
projectors were then set so that other areas had luminances of 6, 35, 60 and the observers reported that
these areas, as before, produced
sensations of brown,
yellow, blue, gray, green, and red.
These experiments are significant because they show
the visual system uses a processing mechanism
that is not merely independent, but instantaneously
independent
of the wavelength-luminance
composition
of the light coming to the eye. These mechanisms are
not controlled by processes that are time dependent,
such as the changes of the visual pigments that are due
to differences of duration
or intensities
of adapting
illumination.
If a particular rectangle is moved to various positions
in the Mondrian, where it is surrounded
by new sets
of colored rectangles,
the color sensation
change significantly. The color sensation depends only
on the long-, middle-, and short-wave reflectances of
the rectangle and not on the properties of the neighboring rectangles. This independence of the neighboring
rectangles holds for all flux settings of the illuminating
projectors.
Because all these experiments, which show that any
given wavelength-luminance combination, within limits
as wide as the reflectance variations
of these papers,
BOUNDARY BETWEEN
40% & 80% PAPERS
DISTANCE ACROSS DISPLAY
FIG. 2. Luminance vs position for two-squaresand-a-happening experiment.
can produce any color sensation, and because of many
other kinds of laboratory experiments,'3-1 7 we came to
the conclusion that a color sensation involves the interaction of at least three (or four) retinal-cortical systems.
Each retinal system starts with a set of receptors peaking, respectively, within the long-, middle-, or shortwave portion of the visible spectrum. Each system
forms a separate image of the world; the images are
not mixed but are compared. Each system must discover independently, in spite of the variation and unknowability of the illumination, the reflectances for
the band of wavelengths to which that system responds.
We invented
a name, retinex,
for each of these
systems. A retinex employs as much of the structure
and function of the retina and cortex as is necessary for
producing an image in terms of a correlate of reflectance
for a band of wavelengths, an image as nearly independent of flux as is biologically possible.
It is convenient to refer to the differences in this
image as steps of lightness,' 8 -20 the whites being called
light, and the blacks being called dark. Unfortunately,
as Evans2 ' points out, dark is also used to describe the
quite different family of experiences associated with
change of illumination. Nevertheless, following him,
we shall call the steps in the scale from black to white,
steps of lightness. In our theory, it is an image in terms
of lightness, which is produced by each retinex for the
portion of the spectrum to which its pigment responds.
The color sensation for any area is determined by
the three lightnesses that are arrived at independently
by the three retinexes. Because the lightnesses of an
area are here defined as the biologic correlates of three
reflectances, it follows within this conceptual framework that the color sensation is not dependent on illumination or flux, but on reflectance. Our original
problem is converted into a new one: How does each
retinex generate for each area the appropriate light-
E. H. LAND AND J. J.
FIG. 3. Picture of two-squares-and-a-happening
experiment. Place
a pencil over the boundary between the two gray areas.
ness, the biologic correlate of reflectance that is independent of illuminance?
The scheme that we are about to describe for answering this question is one of a number of approaches that
we have been investigating.
All these schemes are
designed to solve the same problem, namely: For one
retinex, given the flux from each point in an entire
scene, and assuming that nothing is known about the
pattern of illumination and nothing is known about the
reflectances,
how can the biologic system generate
set of values that we experience as lightness? The
particular
scheme we will describe is the first that we
have found to satisfy our criteria.
The experiment that we call two squares and a
provides striking evidence of edges as the
source of lightness information. A piece of paper that
reflects 80% of the light that falls on it is placed to the
right of a piece of paper that reflects 46% of the light.
A fluorescent tube is mounted in front and to the left
of the papers. The tube is carefully positioned so that
twice as much light falls on the center of the 40% paper
as falls on the center of the 80% paper. The light,
being a line source, produces an approximately
gradient across the papers, and the reflected luminances
at each corresponding point of the two papers are
equal. The graph of luminance vs position on the
display is shown in Fig. 2. The 40% paper on the left
looks darker than the 86% paper on the right. Figure 3
is a photograph
of the experiment.
What increases our interest is that when a long
narrow object, a happening, obstructs the boundary
between the left and right areas, the two areas are then
perceived as having the same lightness. Long narrow
strips of colored papers in parallel, or three-dimensional
objects such as a pencil or a piece of yarn, make the
two areas change from looking uniform and different
to looking uniform and indistinguishable; yet, the only
alteration of the display is the obscuration of the edge.
We can see this by placing a pencil on the boundary
between the areas in Fig. 3.
The experiment was important in the development
of our ideas of how the visual system could generate
lightnesses. The fact that obscuring the edge information could change the appearance of these areas meant
that the edges are a very important source of information. It suggested that the change of luminance at the
junction between areas both constituted an edge and
also led to the visual difference between the whole
two areas. The word edge suggests a sharp, in-focus
boundary. Experiments, however, show that the sharpness or focus of the boundary is not at all critical. For
example, Fig. 3 can be viewed through optometric
lenses to change the boundaries from being sharp and
in focus to a variety of fuzzy out-of-focus stages. Areas
with boundaries quite out of focus look essentially the
same as when they are in sharp focus.
What mechanism can we imagine that would discover
edges and characterize adjacent areas in a way consistent with our experiences with the happening, a mechanism that will also discover the reflectances in the
Mondrian even when it is in nonuniform illumination?
Let us imagine two light detectors placed to measure
the luminance from two different places on a piece of
paper. If the illumination is nonuniform, then the
luminances
at these two positions will, of course, be
different. When the two detectors are placed closer and
closer together, the luminances approach the same
value and the ratio of the outputs approaches unity.
This will be true of almost any two adjacent points.
However, if the two detectors bridge the boundary
between two areas of differing reflectance, then the
ratio of the outputs of these detectors will approach
the ratio of the reflectances. Thus, the simple procedure of taking the ratio between two adjacent points
can both detect an edge and eliminate the effect of
nonuniform illumination. Processing the entire image
in terms of the ratios of luminances at closely adjacent
points generates dimensionless numbers that are independent of illumination. As the distance between detectors is decreased, each number approaches a limit
equal to the ratio of the reflectances, the reflectances
themselves having not yet been ascertained.
FIELD OF VIEW
Given a procedure for determining the ratio of reflectances between adjacent areas, the next problem is
to obtain the ratio of reflectances between any two
widely separated
areas in an entire scene. We solve
the problem in the following way: Find the ratio of
luminances at the edge between a first and a second
area, and multiply this by the ratio of luminances at
the edge between the second and a third area. This
product of sequential ratios approaches the ratio of
reflectances between the first and third areas, regard-
AND RETINEX
less of the distribution of illumination. Similarly, we
can obtain the ratio of reflectances of any two areas in
an image, however remote they are from each other,
by multiplying the ratios at all the boundaries between
the starting area and the remote area. We can also
establish the ratio of the reflectance of any area on the
path to the reflectance of the first area by tapping off
the sequential product at that area.
Consider a Mondrian similar to the colored one in
complexity and randomness, but consisting of black,
gray, and white papers (see bound transparency, Fig. 4).
That is, in this Mondrian each piece of paper has the
same reflectance for all wavelengths.
The reflectances
of each area along one path between the top and the
bottom are shown in Fig. 5. If we apply the sequentialmultiplication
technique to these reflectances,
determine the ratio of the top reflectance to the bottom
reflectance, as shown in Fig. 5. Note that the number
we get by sequential multiplication, 75/12, equals the
number we would get if the bottom area were contiguous to the top area and we took the ratio of their
luminances.
We are now coming close to the solution
of the problem that we defined at the beginning of our
discussion. How can the eye ascertain the reflectance
of an area without, in effect, placing a comparison
standard next to the area? The sequential product can
be used as a substitute for the placement of two areas
to each other, thus defining a photometric
operation conceptually feasible for the eye.
a fluorescent
to illuminate
from below so that more light fell on the
bottom of the display than on the top. We adjusted
the position of the light so that exactly the same
luminance was coming to the eye from a high-reflectance
area at the top of the display and a low-reflectance area
near the bottom. If the luminance determined the
lightness of an area, the low-reflectance area and the
high-reflectance area should look essentially alike; in
fact, they do not. Although the luminances of the two
areas are equal, the high-reflectance area at the top
looks dramatically lighter than the low-reflectance area
at the bottom (see areas indicated by arrows in bound
transparency, Fig. 6).22 Clearly, the visual processes
that determine the lightness of an area are not governed
by the luminance of that area.
Figure 7 shows the luminances along a path from the
top of the Mondrian to the bottom. Note that the
luminance at the center of the top area is the same as
the luminance at the center of the bottom area. Considering the top area alone, note that the luminance
(in arbitrary units) increases from 118 at its center to
140 at its lower edge. The ratio between the bottom
edge of the first area and the top edge of the second
area is 140 to 80. The luminance of the second area
increases from 80 to 115 from upper edge to lower edge.
The ratio of the second area to the third is 115 to 150.
As we continue down the path, we obtain the ratios.
shown at the bottom of Fig. 7. The product of all the
75 X 43 X 53 X 20 X 58 =
FIG. 5. Reflectance along one path between the top and bottom
of a black-and-white
Mondrian. The numbers at the bottom
indicate the ratios of reflectances at adjacent edges along the
ratios along the path from the high-reflectance area at
the top to the low-reflectance area at the bottom is
6.25. This number is equal to the ratio of reflectances
of the top and bottom areas. Thus, without determining the reflectances and without determining the illumination, however it varies, we have determined a number
exactly equal to the ratio of reflectances of these two
areas. Yet the two areas have the same luminance as
each other and are remote from each other by the
whole width of the display. Furthermore, this procedure of sequential multiplication of edge ratios can
generate values equivalent to relative reflectance for
all areas along the path.
CONSISTENCY OF SEQUENTIAL PRODUCTS
ON DIFFERENT PATHS
Let a number of different paths start from a given
area and wander back and forth over the display, all
to arrive finally at a distant area, which we wish to
evaluate with respect to the starting area. If we compute the sequential products along each of these paths,
we obtain the ratio of reflectances of the remote area
to the starting area for each path. In this case the
starting and remote areas for all the paths are the
same, therefore the terminal sequential products are
identical.
If, instead of having all the paths start from a
single area, the paths start from different areas, wander
over the display, and all terminate in a single remote
January 1971
E. H. LAND AND J. J. McCANN
FIG. 7. Luminances of Mondrian (illuminated from below) at
particular points along the path from top to bottom. The numbers
at the bottom indicate the ratios of luminances at adjacent edges
along the path.
area, then once again the sequential products give the
ratios of reflectances of the starting areas to the single
terminating area. However, because all the starting
areas had different reflectances, the sequential products
at the single distant area will be different from each
other. Our ultimate purpose is to describe any area by
relating its reflectance to a single, standard, high reflectance somewhere in the Mondrian or to several
equally high reflectances. Therefore, we require at this
stage of our analysis that all the paths start from areas
having the same reflectance. If the value of the starting
reflectance is 100% (by some standard), then the
sequential product for any area in the display will be
numerically equal to the reflectance of the area (related
to the same standard). Therefore, we approach the
problem of locating a standard area by seeking the
area of highest reflectance. A variety of operations can
One that seems simple, but is not, is to scan the
entire scene to find the area or areas with the highest
reflectance. This technique requires two separate operations: finding the highest reflectance and then computing the sequential products. Now finding the highest
reflectance would require taking all the sequential
products, comparing the results, selecting the highest
value, and then starting all over again to determine
the reflectance relative to the area that had this
highest value. This second step requires that the information about the areas of highest reflectance be
sent back to the receptors, from wherever the operation of comparing and selecting takes place, and a
subsequent procedure such that every path starts with
an area thus identified as having the highest reflectance. Although this technique is mathematically valid
we feel that it is not readily transposed into biological
mechanisms.
We therefore sought a technique that can automatically establish the highest reflectance without a separate
first scanning step. We adopted the convention that the
initial ratio is the ratio of the signal of the second
receptor to that of the first (followed by the third to
the second, etc.). Then, regardless of the true reflectance
of an area, our technique supposes that the first receptor in any path is reporting from an area that
reflects 100% of the light. Because of the deliberately
adopted fiction that the starting area reflects 100%,
irrespective of its real reflectance, the sequential
product becomes greater than 1.0 whenever the path
reaches an area whose reflectance is higher than that
of the starting area. Attainment of a sequential product
greater than 1.0 indicates that the sequence should be
started afresh and that this new, higher reflectance
should be next supposed to be 100%. Note the very
important condition that the sequence is not started
afresh by a single ratio that is greater than 1.0, but
only when the sequential product for the whole chain
to that point becomes greater than 1.0. This distinction
is at the heart of the technique for finding the highest
reflectance in the path. As the path proceeds, the
sequential product always starts over at unity when
the path encounters an area with a reflectance higher
than the highest previously encountered. We will discuss later the role of sequential products tapped off
before the final reset to unity at the highest reflectance
on a path.
A PHYSICAL MODEL
Imagine a long fibrous path, like a wire of some kind,
on which pairs of photoreceptors
are mounted
together. These pairs do not know where the edges
fall. They take the ratio at adjacent points along the
wire. Most of the ratios will approach 1/1, indicating
no change. In the immediately following discussion,
let us assume that any ratio that approaches 1.0 is
exactly equal to 1.0. Later we will discuss how this
can be acceptable. When a pair of photoreceptors
happens to straddle an edge, they indicate a larger or
smaller ratio. If the pattern is lit from its bottom and
even if there is 10 times as much light falling on the
bottom as on the top, the close spacing of the photoreceptors insures that, at any given point, the difference
of illumination will be small. Every bridge pair of
photocells will read the ratio of adjacent points as 1.0
until an edge intervenes. The bridge pairs of photocells, not knowing anything about edges, sometimes
LIGHTNESS AND RETINEX TPEORY
generate ratios equal to 1.0 and other times generate
larger or smaller ratios.
Figure 8 is a specific example of how the machine
operates. The pattern consists of a series of papers that
reflect 60, 20, 40, 100, 60, 80, and 30% of the light
falling on them. Let us assume, for the moment, that
the illumination is uniform, so that we can assign one
value per area rather than many different luminances.
If we set the uniform illuminance equal to 100 in
arbitrary units, the luminance will be equal to the
percent reflectance of the papers. This facilitates comparison of the output of the machine with the reflectance of the display.
The members of the first pair of detectors read 60
and 20; as a bridge, they read the ratio as 20/60 or 0.33.
This means that the machine, having assigned to the
first area a lightness equivalent to 100% reflectance,
reads at the second area 33%. These values do not
correspond with the actual reflectances but are proportionately correct. The next pair lies within the
boundaries of an area and has a ratio of 20/20 or 1.0.
Thus, multiplying by 1.0 transmits the edge-ratio signal
across an area. We shall see later the benefits of treating
the system logarithmically; then, for pairs of receptors
between boundaries
the log of 1.0, namely 0, is added
to the log sequential product. The next reading on the
path is 40/20, which when multiplied by 20/60 equals
40/60 or 0.67, corresponding to a proportionately correct, but absolutely incorrect, reflectance of 67%.
The operation of the next pair of receptors shows
how the system automatically finds the highest reflectance and restarts there. The edge ratio from this
pair is 100/40. We have already had fractions from
edge ratios that are larger and smaller than 1.0. However, in this case, 100/40 times the continued product
40/60 equals 100/60 and this is the first sequential
product that has a value greater than 1.0. The policy
that we have established is that any value greater than
1.0 will be reset to equal 1.0. For all fresh starts, the
assigned value is 100%; thus the output with the
sequential
100/60 will also be 100%. Once
again, throughout the rest of the string of receptors,
the sequential product will establish the reflectances
relative to the reflectance of the area at which the
sequential product was reset to 100%. But this 100% is
either a real 100% reflectance or, being the highest
value on this whole path, is a permanent substitute for
the real 100% on this path. There will be no further
fresh starts, and the reflectances are from that point
on as close as they are going to be to real reflectance.
What do we do with the areas between the start and
the first maximum reflectance? If we think about the
properties of a long path that closes on itself, it becomes
clear that the highest reflectance on the chain will
finally dominate the chain, if we assume that the image
is stationary long enough for the system to reach a
steady state.
FIG. 8. Specific example of how the machine operates. The
numbers at the left are the luminances of various areas in a
display. Pairs of receptors that straddle the boundaries between
adjacent areas generate the ratios of reflectances shown in the
center column of figures. These ratios are multiplied to form
sequential products that are reset if larger than 1.0 and read off
the fiber, to form the output of the system.
If the paths do not circle back on themselves and
if there were only one area of maximum lightness in
the scene, then the output of lightness values would
still be highly accurate if the number of paths were
sufficiently large. Let us examine the properties of two
paths going in opposite directions. If we consider the
example in Fig. 8, the first path would have percentage
outputs of 100, 33, 67, 100, 60, 80, and 30. A path in
the opposite direction would have 60, 20, 40, 100, 75,
100, and 100. Thus averaging only two paths gives
E. H. LAND AND J. J. McCANN
to reflectances. Because the members of each bridge
are close to each other,
the readings
of the bridge
pairs on a pathway will not change significantly as the
illumination is made nonuniform. The machine will
continue to read approximate reflectances and will be
independent of luminance: It, is this competence that
is the essential purpose of the machine.
If we were to build an electronic model, we would
probably make some changes for practical reasons. The
most obvious change would be to use logarithmic
receptors so that any multiplication could be performed
by the summation of positive and negative voltages or
excitatory and inhibitory responses. Figure 9(a) shows
a simplified conception of the scheme. Two opposed
logarithmic receptors (A, B) first sum with each other
(C) and then sum with the continued product (D at E).
When the logarithm of the sequential product is greater
than 0, then the path restarts and the logarithm of the
sequential product is reset to 0. This operation is indicated in the diagram by the black square below E. This
total quantity is both the readout of the system (F)
and the logarithm of the continued product (D') that
is combined with the output of the next receptor pair.
Furthermore, a logarithmic system has properties that
assist in implementing the scheme of resetting the
chain where the advent of a new high yields a sequential ratio greater than unity. Because the logarithm
FIG. 9. A variety of equivalent sequential-products models. In
(a), two opposed logarithmic receptors (A,B) first sum with each
other (C) and then sum with the continued product (D at E).
This total quantity is both the readout of the system (F) and
the new continued product (D') that is combined with the next
receptor pair output. In (b), each photocell is the leading photocell for one bridge pair and the trailing photocell for the next
bridge pair. In (c), a third variation is perhaps more biologically
oriented. The receptor K transmits its signal to its synapses /
and E. Synapse I is an inhibitory synapse and adds to the sum
of J and the sequential product N. The new sequential product
is formed at L and is tapped off the chain between the two synapses I and E. Synapse E is excitatory and combines with this
new sequential product N' for the computation
of the next
sequential product.
the values 80, 27, 53, 100, 68, 90, and 65 compared to
the actual reflectances 60, 20, 40, toO, 60, 80, and 30.
The average of the two paths is more accurate than
either of the separate paths.
For convenience, these schematic examples have used
uniform illumination and luminance numerically equal
FIG. 10. Photograph of retinex machine reproducing the white,
gray, and black wheel. The spotlight on the far left illuminates
the wheel on the back wall and the camera on the center left
forms an inverted image of it. The photocell pairs in the camera
send the ratios of luminances to the electronics on the right which
computes the sequential product and transmits it to the display
below. The machine gives the same outputs regardless of the
position of the spotlight.
AND RETINEX
of 1.0 is 0, we use an electrical system that is negative
only and that will reset any positive potential to 0
voltage, thus limiting the sequential product.
Figure 10 shows a photograph of the retinex machine.
It consists of a camera, with photocells in the film
plane, electronics for computing the sequential product,
and a unit to display the sequential products. The
white, gray, black wheel mounted on the back wall is
illuminated by the spotlight on the left. The inverted
image of the wheel can be seen in the ground glass of
the camera on the left. Bridge pairs of photocells are
arranged on the ground glass so that each pair straddles
an edge in this image. The pairs of photocells are
silhouetted on the ground glass. The output of the
photocells is processed by the electronics to produce
a sequential product
for each area in the wheel. The
wires going from the electronics to the display in the
foreground transmit the sequential product to the
lamps mounted in boxes behind the ground-glass panel.
The lightnesses of these boxes, when the machine is
operating, are the correlates of the original reflectances.
No matter how drastically the illumination is changed
on the original papers in the wheel, the lightnesses in
the final display will be independent
of the changes
of illumination and hence independent of luminance.
Figure 11 shows a schematic diagram of the machine.23
APPROACHES
TO A NEURAL SYSTEM
Although, in the machine, the locations of the edges
are known, in the actual retinal image, the locations
of the edges are of course unknown, yet it is important
that a pair of receptors detect every edge. If any edge
is not detected, all the subsequent readings along the
path would be incorrect. If a great many pairs of
receptors are closely packed, then the probability of
missing an edge is small. Closest packing occurs in a
system in which a single receptor is in the leading side
of one bridge pair and the trailing side of the next
bridge [Fig. 9(b)].
If we are considering a small number
of receptor
pairs, widely spaced (as shown in Fig. 7), it is sufficient
to say that for each bridge the ratio of energies within
an area of uniform reflectance approached 1.0: thus
we eliminate the effect of uneven illumination. If, however, pursuing the purpose of capturing every edge, we
consider very large numbers of tightly packed receptors, we must be concerned with the fact that across
the expanse of an area of uniform reflectance,
though the ratios individually approach 1.0, the small
from each 1.0 for each pair leads to the
accumulation
of a substantial
from 1.0 on
the exit side of the area. However, we suggest that in
the physiologic model the very small systematic differences from 1.0 are lost at the synaptic thresholds,
thus making feasible the continuum of contiguous cells
in a chain of bridges. Such a chain cannot miss an
edge and will not react to substantial but gradual
FIG. 11. Schematic diagram for one receptor pair of the electronic embodiment of the system. The output of the photocell A
is logarithmically amplified and opposed to the logarithmically
amplified output of the photocell B. The opposed signals are
summed at C and then summed with the continued product D
at E. In the machine, as contrasted with the scheme in Fig.
9(a), the signal is amplified to drive bulb F and to isolate the
continued product output D' which is passed on to the next
receptor pair. The bulb F in the schematic diagram is in the
display panel. Because the bulbs were chosen so that, under the
particular condition of their use, they have an antilogarithmic
response, there is no separate antilog amplifier. The flux from the
bulb corresponds with the lightness value computed
sequential product up to that point on the chain.
changes of illumination across the field. Such a chain
will also be completely indifferent to change of illumination as a function of time.
The schemes in Figs. 9(a) and (b) lead to a third
important system. This is a biological system which
derives the sequential product by means of excitatory
and inhibitory synapses. In this biological system, the
electrical concept of resetting is replaced by the hypothesis that an inhibitory signal greater than the signal
coming down the chain will block it entirely rather
than making it negative.2 4 In this third scheme, a
signal travels along the chain, being increased or decreased by successive receptors until it meets an inhibitory signal that is larger than the signal from the
sequential product. At this point the old sequential
product is blocked and the receptor K transmits its
signal to its synapses I and E. Synapse I is an inhibitory synapse and operates on the signal from the sum
J plus the sequential product N. This operation forms
a new sequential product N' after I and is read out
from the chain between the two synapses I and E.
Synapse E is excitatory and combines its 'contribution
with this new sequential product N', and so on.
January 1971
WAVELENGTH
FIG. 12. Absorption curves of visual pigments. These curves
we calculated using the Dartnall nomogram2 8 and the maximum
wavelengths 570, 535, and 445 nm.
In all the diagrams in Fig. 9, each receptor has been
a member of only a single path. Just as a single receptor
can be a member of two or more bridges on the same
path, a single receptor can also be a member of many
bridges on a number of different paths. The readout
that corresponds
to the reflectance of a point in an
object can be the average of the sequential products
read out for a number of different paths that pass
through that point. The receptor can serve many paths,
and the readout can average the sequential products
of many paths at one point, without destroying the
individuality and independence of each path.
By designing computer programs based on the lightness model we have described here, and by designing
programs that relate computer to observers,25 we have
been able to arrive at a correlation between predicted
lightnesses and observations. Because much of this
computer work was carried on after the date of this
lecture, we shall describe it in a later paper.
SEQUENTIAL PRODUCTS AND THE
COLORED MONDRIAN
We have shown how a single retinex determines the
lightnesses on the black, white, and gray Mondrian.
The essence of retinex theory is that each retinex is
served by one set of cones, that there are three retinexes
and three sets of cones, and that each set of cones
contains a pigment with an absorption curve different
from that of the other two. All the cones with the
same spectral sensitivity cooperate to generate the
sequential product for their portion of the spectrum
and for their retinex. In building the theory of the
sequential product, we used the black, white, and gray
Mondrian rather than the colored Mondrian. When
we now turn to the colored Mondrian,
we must take
into account the facts that the three pigments in the
three sets of cones have broad absorption curves, and
that each colored area implies a variation of reflectance
over the bandwidth of each set of cones. Because the
three pigments in the three sets of cones have broad
absorption
curves26 -28 (Fig. 12) the signal fed into the
neural pathway
by a cone in one of these sets will
depend on the integral of the spectral product of the
absorbance of the pigment times the irradiance times
the reflectance of the paper in the colored Mondrian.
For these colored papers, the sequential ratio across
an edge between rectangles will equal the ratio of the
integrals, rather than the ratio of the luminances. (For
the black, white, and gray papers, the sequential
product obtained from a ratio of integrals is equal to
that obtained from the ratio of the luminances.) It is
important to emphasize that the integrals that form
the sequential ratios for a given retinex use in the
integrand the absorbance of the pigment for that
retinex. The substitution of the ratio of integrals for
the ratio of reflectances does not change the first
important characteristic of the sequential product,
namely, invariance with change of the over-all illumination of the whole Mondrian.
the variation
of reflectance
of a colored
paper across the response band of one pigment
weighting factor for a change of relative irradiance with
wavelength for the flux from that paper. Therefore,
for each retinex, the lightness scale for each of the
colored papers in the Mondrian may shift a little with
large changes of the wavelength composition of the
illumination used by that retinex.
The experiment described at the beginning of this
paper showed that changes of illuminance as great as
the ratio of the reflectances do not change the color
names of the papers. There were, however, some small
changes and we can now understand
these. If we compare the curves of the sharp-cut bandpass filters (Figs.
1 and 12) with the curves for the absorbance of the
visual pigments, we see that each pigment, although
absorbing principally from the light designed to illuminate it, also absorbs some light from the other filters.
Therefore, for any one retinex, the values of the
integrals at the junctions of the rectangles will vary
somewhat with changes of the relative illumination
from the three projectors. Consequently, there will be
a small change of relative lightness of a given area on
the three retinexes, a change small enough to be apparent on only a few of the colored rectangles.
The integral, over the absorption band of a pigment,
of the product of absorbance times irradiance times
reflectance, corresponds with the familiar integral in
colorimetry, but is used here in an entirely different
way, Here, the integrals are related to each other only
for one retinex (by the sequential product); the three
integrals for the three pigments for the flux coming from
a point on a colored paper are not compared. Whereas
the function of colorimetry is to classify reflectances
AND RETINEX
into categories with similar visual properties, the function of retinex theory is to tell how the eye can ascertain
reflectance in a field in which the illumination
is unknowable and the reflectance is unknown.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Julius J. Scarpetti for extensive
experimentation in reproducing the Mondrian experiments and for the production of the transparency
inserts. We are grateful to J. L. Benton and S. H. Perry
for their assistance, comments, and criticism in all
phases of this work, and to P. Dubois for his thoughtful
discussions. In addition, we wish to thank M. A.
Watson for her assistance with the many drafts of this