Model-Driven Data Acquisition in Sensor Networks∗
Amol Deshpande†
Carlos Guestrin‡
Samuel R. Madden§ ‡
Joseph M. Hellerstein† ‡
†UC Berkeley
‡Intel Research Berkeley
{amol,jmh}@cs.berkeley.edu
{guestrin,whong}@intel-research.net
 
Declarative queries are proving to be an attractive paradigm for interacting with networks of wireless sensors. The metaphor that “the
sensornet is a database” is problematic, however, because sensors
do not exhaustively represent the data in the real world. In order
to map the raw sensor readings onto physical reality, a model of
that reality is required to complement the readings. In this paper,
we enrich interactive sensor querying with statistical modeling techniques. We demonstrate that such models can help provide answers
that are both more meaningful, and, by introducing approximations
with probabilistic conﬁdences, signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient to compute in both time and energy. Utilizing the combination of a model
and live data acquisition raises the challenging optimization problem of selecting the best sensor readings to acquire, balancing the
increase in the conﬁdence of our answer against the communication
and data acquisition costs in the network. We describe an exponential time algorithm for ﬁnding the optimal solution to this optimization problem, and a polynomial-time heuristic for identifying
solutions that perform well in practice. We evaluate our approach on
several real-world sensor-network data sets, taking into account the
real measured data and communication quality, demonstrating that
our model-based approach provides a high-ﬁdelity representation of
the real phenomena and leads to signiﬁcant performance gains versus traditional data acquisition techniques.
Introduction
Database technologies are beginning to have a signiﬁcant impact in the emerging area of wireless sensor networks (sensornets). The sensornet community has embraced declarative
queries as a key programming paradigm for large sets of sensors. This is seen in academia in the calls for papers for leading conferences and workshops in the sensornet area ,
and in a number of prior research publications ( , , ,
etc). In the emerging industrial arena, one of the leading vendors (Crossbow) is bundling a query processor with their devices, and providing query processor training as part of their
customer support. The area of sensornet querying represents
an unusual opportunity for database researchers to apply their
expertise in a new area of computer systems.
∗This work was supported by Intel Corporation, and by NSF under the
grant IIS-0205647.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided
that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage,
the VLDB copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear,
and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Very Large Data Base
Endowment. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or special
permission from the Endowment.
Proceedings of the 30th VLDB Conference,
Toronto, Canada, 2004
Declarative querying has proved powerful in allowing programmers to “task” an entire network of sensor nodes, rather
than requiring them to worry about programming individual nodes. However, the metaphor that “the sensornet is a
database” has proven misleading.
Databases are typically
treated as complete, authoritative sources of information; the
job of a database query engine has traditionally been to answer a query “correctly” based upon all the available data.
Applying this mindset to sensornets results in two problems:
1. Misrepresentations of data: In the sensornet environment, it is impossible to gather all the relevant data. The
physically observable world consists of a set of continuous phenomena in both time and space, so the set
of relevant data is in principle inﬁnite. Sensing technologies acquire samples of physical phenomena at discrete points in time and space, but the data acquired by
the sensornet is unlikely to be a random (i.i.d.) sample of physical processes, for a number of reasons (nonuniform placement of sensors in space, faulty sensors,
high packet loss rates, etc). So a straightforward interpretation of the sensornet readings as a “database” may
not be a reliable representation of the real world.
2. Inefﬁcient approximate queries: Since a sensornet
cannot acquire all possible data, any readings from a
sensornet are “approximate”, in the sense that they only
represent the true state of the world at the discrete instants and locations where samples were acquired. However, the leading approaches to query processing in sensornets follow a completist’s approach, acquiring as much data as possible from the environment at a
given point in time, even when most of that data provides
little beneﬁt in approximate answer quality. We show
examples where query execution cost – in both time and
power consumption – can be orders of magnitude more
than is appropriate for a reasonably reliable answer.
Our contribution
In this paper, we propose to compensate for both of these deﬁciencies by incorporating statistical models of real-world processes into a sensornet query processing architecture. Models
can help provide more robust interpretations of sensor readings: for example, they can account for biases in spatial sampling, can help identify sensors that are providing faulty data,
and can extrapolate the values of missing sensors or sensor
readings at geographic locations where sensors are no longer
operational. Furthermore, models provide a framework for
optimizing the acquisition of sensor readings: sensors should
be used to acquire data only when the model itself is not suf-
ﬁciently rich to answer the query with acceptable conﬁdence.
Underneath this architectural shift in sensornet querying,
we deﬁne and address a key optimization problem: given a
query and a model, choose a data acquisition plan for the
sensornet to best reﬁne the query answer. This optimization
problem is complicated by two forms of dependencies: one
in the statistical beneﬁts of acquiring a reading, the other in
the system costs associated with wireless sensor systems.
First, any non-trivial statistical model will capture correlations among sensors: for example, the temperatures of geographically proximate sensors are likely to be correlated.
Given such a model, the beneﬁt of a single sensor reading can
be used to improve estimates of other readings: the temperature at one sensor node is likely to improve the conﬁdence of
model-driven estimates for nearby nodes.
The second form of dependency hinges on the connectivity of the wireless sensor network. If a sensor node far is
not within radio range of the query source, then one cannot acquire a reading from far without forwarding the request/result pair through another node near. This presents
not only a non-uniform cost model for acquiring readings, but
one with dependencies: due to multi-hop networking, the acquisition cost for near will be much lower if one has already
chosen to acquire data from far by routing through near.
To explore the beneﬁts of the model-based querying approach we propose, we are building a prototype called BBQ1
that uses a speciﬁc model based on time-varying multivariate Gaussians. We describe how our generic model-based architecture and querying techniques are speciﬁcally applied in
BBQ. We also present encouraging results on real-world sensornet trace data, demonstrating the advantages that models
offer for queries over sensor networks.
Overview of approach
In this section, we provide an overview of our basic architecture and approach, as well as a summary of BBQ. Our architecture consists of a declarative query processing engine that
uses a probabilistic model to answer questions about the current state of the sensor network. We denote a model as a probability density function (pdf), p(X1, X2, . . . , Xn), assigning
a probability for each possible assignment to the attributes
X1, . . . , Xn, where each Xi is an attribute at a particular sensor (e.g., temperature on sensing node 5, voltage on sensing
node 12). Typically, there is one such attribute per sensor
type per sensing node. This model can also incorporate hidden variables (i.e., variables that are not directly observable)
that indicate, for example, whether a sensor is giving faulty
values. Such models can be learned from historical data using
standard algorithms (e.g., ).
Users query for information about the values of particular attributes or in certain regions of the network, much as
they would in a traditional SQL database. Unlike database
queries, however, sensornet queries request real-time information about the environment, rather than information about
a stored collection of data. The model is used to estimate
sensor readings in the current time period; these estimates
form the answer the query. In the process of generating these
1BBQ is short for Barbie-Q: A Tiny-Model Query System
Probabilistic Model and Planner
Observation Plan
Probabilistic Queries
Query Results
Query Processor
"SELECT nodeId,
temp ± .1°C, conf(.95)
WHERE nodeID in {1..8}"
"1, 22.3 97%
2, 25.6 99%
3, 24.4 95%
4, 22.1 100%
"{[voltage,1],
[voltage,2],
[temp,4]}"
"1, voltage = 2.73
2, voltage = 2.65
4, temp = 22.1"
Sensor Network
Figure 1: Our architecture for model-based querying in sensor networks.
estimates, the model may interrogate the sensor network for
updated readings that will help to reﬁne estimates for which
its uncertainty is high. As time passes, the model may also
update its estimates of sensor values, to reﬂect expected temporal changes in the data.
In BBQ, we use a speciﬁc model based on time-varying
multivariate Gaussians; we describe this model below. We
emphasize, however, that our approach is general with respect to the model, and that more or less complex models
can be used instead. New models require no changes to the
query processor and can reuse code that interfaces with and
acquires particular readings from the sensor network. The
main difference occurs in the algorithms required to solve the
probabilistic inference tasks described in Section 3. These
algorithms have been widely developed for many practical
models (e.g., ).
Figure 1 illustrates our basic architecture through an example.
Users submit SQL queries to the database, which
are translated into probabilistic computations over the model
(Section 3).
The queries include error tolerances and target conﬁdence bounds that specify how much uncertainty the
user is willing to tolerate. Such bounds will be intuitive to
many scientiﬁc and technical users, as they are the same as the
conﬁdence bounds used for reporting results in most scientiﬁc
ﬁelds (c.f., the graph-representation shown in the upper right
of Figure 1). In this example, the user is interested in estimates of the value of sensor readings for nodes numbered 1
through 8, within .1 degrees C of the actual temperature reading with 95% conﬁdence. Based on the model, the system decides that the most efﬁcient way to answer the query with the
requested conﬁdence is to read battery voltage from sensors 1
and 2 and temperature from sensor 4. Based on knowledge of
the sensor network topology, it generates an observation plan
that acquires samples in this order, and sends the plan into the
network, where the appropriate readings are collected. These
readings are used to update the model, which can then be used
to generate query answers with speciﬁed conﬁdence intervals.
Notice that the model in this example chooses to observe
the voltage at some nodes despite the fact that the user’s query
Reading # vs. Voltage and Temperature
Temperature
Figure 2: Trace of voltage and temperature readings over a two day
period from a single mote-based sensor. Notice the close correlation
between the two attributes.
was over temperature. This happens for two reasons:
1. Correlations in Value: Temperature and voltage are
highly correlated, as illustrated by Figure 2 which shows
the temperature and voltage readings for two days of
sensor readings from a pair of Berkeley Mica2 Motes 
that we deployed in the Intel Research Lab in Berkeley,
California. Note how voltage tracks temperature, and
how temperature variations across motes, even though
of noticeably different magnitudes, are very similar. The
relationship between temperature and voltage is due to
the fact that, for many types of batteries, as they heat
or cool, their voltages vary signiﬁcantly (by as much as
1% per degree). The voltages may also decrease as the
sensor nodes consume energy from the batteries, but the
time scale at which that happens is much larger than the
time scale of temperature variations, and so the model
can use voltage changes to infer temperature changes.
2. Cost Differential: Depending on the speciﬁc type of
temperature sensor used, it may be much cheaper to
sample the voltage than to read the temperature. For
example, on sensor boards from Crossbow Corporation
for Berkeley Motes , the temperature sensor requires
several orders of magnitude more energy to sample as
simply reading battery voltage (see Table 1).
One of the important properties of many probabilistic models (including the one used in BBQ) is that they can capture
correlations between different attributes. We will see how we
can exploit such correlations during optimization to generate
efﬁcient query plans in Section 4.
Conﬁdence intervals and correlation models
The user in Figure 1 could have requested 100% conﬁdence
and no error tolerance, in which case the model would have
required us to interrogate every sensor. The returned result
could still include some uncertainty, as the model may not
have readings from particular sensors or locations at some
points in time (due to sensor or communications failures, or
lack of sensor instrumentation at a particular location). These
conﬁdence intervals computed from our probabilistic model
provide considerably more information than traditional sensor network systems like TinyDB and Cougar provide in this
setting. With those systems, the user would simply get no
data regarding those missing times and locations.
Conversely, the user could have requested very wide conﬁdence bounds, in which case the model may have been able to
answer the query without acquiring any additional data from
the network. In fact, in our experiments with BBQ on several real-world data sets, we see a number of cases where
strong correlations between sensors during certain times of
the day mean that even queries with relatively tight conﬁdence bounds can be answered with a very small number of
sensor observations. In many cases, these tight conﬁdences
can be provided despite the fact that sensor readings have
changed signiﬁcantly. This is because known correlations between sensors make it possible to predict these changes: for
example, in Figure 2, it is clear that the temperature on the
two sensors is correlated given the time of day. During the
daytime (e.g., readings 600-1200 and 2600-3400), sensor 25,
which is placed near a window, is consistently hotter than sensor 1, which is in the center of our lab. A good model will be
able to infer, with high conﬁdence that, during daytime hours,
sensor readings on sensor 25 are 1-2 degrees hotter than those
at sensor 1 without actually observing sensor 25. Again, this
is in contrast to existing sensor network querying systems,
where sensors are continuously sampled and readings are always reported whenever small absolute changes happen.
Typically in probabilistic modeling, we pick a class of
models, and use learning techniques to pick the best model in
the class. The problem of selecting the right model class has
been widely studied (e.g., ), but can be difﬁcult in some
applications. Before presenting the speciﬁc model class used
in BBQ, we note that, in general, a probabilistic model is only
as good at prediction as the data used to train it. Thus, it may
be the case that the temperature between sensors 1 and 25
would not show the same relationship during a different season of the year, or in a different climate – in fact, one might
expect that when the outside temperature is very cold, sensor
25 will read less than sensor 1 during the day, just as it does
during the night time. Thus, for models to perform accurate
predictions they must be trained in the kind of environment
where they will be used. That does not mean, however, that
well-trained models cannot deal with changing relationships
over time; in fact, the model we use in BBQ uses different
correlation data depending on time of day. Extending it to
handle seasonal variations, for example is a straightforward
extension of the techniques we use for handling variations
across hours of the day.
In BBQ, we use a speciﬁc probabilistic model based on timevarying multivariate Gaussians.
A multivariate Gaussian
(hereafter, just Gaussian) is the natural extension of the familiar unidimensional normal probability density function (pdf),
known as the “bell curve”. Just as with its 1-dimensional
counterpart, a Gaussian pdf over d attributes, X1, . . . , Xd can
be expressed as a function of two parameters: a length-d vector of means, µ, and a d × d matrix of covariances, Σ. Figure 3(A) shows a three-dimensional rendering of a Gaussian
over two attributes, X1 and X2; the z axis represents the joint
density that X2 = x and X1 = y. Figure 3(B) shows a contour plot representation of the same Gaussian, where each circle represents a probability density contour (corresponding to
the height of the plot in (A)).
Intuitively, µ is the point at the center of this probability
distribution, and Σ represents the spread of the distribution.
The ith element along the diagonal of Σ is simply the variance
of Xi. Each off-diagonal element Σ[i, j], i ̸= j represents
the covariance between attributes Xi and Xj. Covariance is
a measure of correlation between a pair of attributes. A high
absolute covariance means that the attributes are strongly correlated: knowledge of one closely constrains the value of the
other. The Gaussians shown in Figure 3(A) and (B) have a
high covariance between X1 and X2. Notice that the contours
are elliptical such that knowledge of one variable constrains
the value of the other to a narrow probability band.
In BBQ, we use historical data to construct the initial representation of this pdf p. In the implementation described
in this paper, we obtained such data using TinyDB (a traditional sensor network querying system)2. Once our initial
p is constructed, we can answer queries using the model,
updating it as new observations are obtained from the sensor network, and as time passes. We explain the details of
how updates are done in Section 3.2, but illustrate it graphically with our 2-dimensional Gaussian in Figures 3(B) -
3(D). Suppose that we have an initial Gaussian shown in Figure 3(B) and we choose to observe the variable X1; given
the resulting single value of X1 = x, the points along the
line {(x, X2) | ∀X2 ∈[−∞, ∞]} conveniently form an (unnormalized) one-dimensional Gaussian. After re-normalizing
these points (to make the area under the curve equal 1.0), we
can derive a new pdf representing p(X2 | X1 = x), which is
shown in 3(C). Note that the mean of X2 given the value of
X1 is not the same as the prior mean of X2 in 3(B). Then, after some time has passed, our belief about X1’s value will be
“spread out”, and we will again have a Gaussian over two
attributes, although both the mean and variance may have
shifted from their initial values, as shown in Figure 3(D).
Supported queries
Answering queries probabilistically based on a distribution
(e.g., the Gaussian representation described above) is conceptually straightforward. Suppose, for example, that a query
asks for an ϵ approximation to the value of a set of attributes,
with conﬁdence at least 1 −δ. We can use our pdf to compute the expected value, µi, of each attribute in the query.
These will be our reported values. We can the use the pdf
again to compute the probability that Xi is within ϵ from the
mean, P(Xi ∈[µi −ϵ, µi + ϵ]). If all of these probabilities meet or exceed user speciﬁed conﬁdence threshold, then
the requested readings can be directly reported as the means
µi. If the model’s conﬁdence is too low, then the we require
additional readings before answering the query.
Choosing which readings to observe at this point is an optimization problem: the goal is to pick the best set of attributes
to observe, minimizing the cost of observation required to
bring the model’s conﬁdence up to the user speciﬁed threshold for all of the query predicates. We discuss this optimization problem in more detail in Section 4.
In Section 3, we show how our query and optimization
engine are used in BBQ to answer a number of SQL queries,
2Though these initial observations do consume some energy up-front, we
will show that the long-run energy savings obtained from using a model will
be much more signiﬁcant.
Gaussian PDF over X1,X2 where Σ(X1,X2) is Highly Positive
Gaussian PDF over X1, X2 after Some Time
PDF over X2 After Conditioning on X1
Probability(X2 = x)
2D Gaussian PDF With High Covariance (!)
Figure 3: Example of Gaussians: (a) 3D plot of a 2D Gaussian
with high covariance; (b) the same Gaussian viewed as a contour
plot; (c) the resulting Gaussian over X2 after a particular value of
X1 has been observed; ﬁnally, (d) shows how, as uncertainty about
X1 increases from the time we last observed it, we again have a 2D
Gaussian with a lower variance and shifted mean.
including (i) simple selection queries requesting the value of
one or more sensors, or the value of all sensors in a given
geographic region, (ii) whether or not a predicate over one
or more sensor readings is true, and (iii) grouped aggregates
such as AVERAGE.
For the purposes of this paper, we focus on multiple oneshot queries over the current state of the network, rather than
continuous queries. We can provide simple continuous query
functionality by issuing a one-shot query at regular time intervals. In our experimental section, we compare this approach to existing continuous query systems for sensor networks (like TinyDB). We also discuss how knowledge of a
standing, continuous query could be used to further optimize
our performance in Section 6.
In this paper, there are certain types of queries which we
do not address. For example, BBQ is not designed for outlier detection – that is, it will not immediately detect when a
single sensor is reading something that is very far from its
expected value or from the value of neighbors it has been
correlated with in the past. We suggest ways in which our
approach can be amended to handle outliers in Section 6.
Networking model and observation plan format
Our initial implementation of BBQ focuses on static sensor
networks, such as those deployed for building and habitat
monitoring. For this reason, we assume that network topologies change relatively slowly. We capture network topology
information when collecting data by including, for each sensor, a vector of link quality estimates for neighboring sensor
nodes. We use this topology information when constructing
query plans by assuming that nodes that were previously connected will still be in the near future. When executing a plan,
if we observe that a particular link is not available (e.g., because one of the sensors has failed), we update our topology
model accordingly.We can continue to collect new topology
information as we query the network, so that new links will
also become available. This approach will be effective if the
topology is relatively stable; highly dynamic topologies will
need more sophisticated techniques, which is a problem we
brieﬂy discuss in Section 6.
In BBQ, observation plans consist of a list of sensor nodes
to visit, and, at each of these nodes, a (possibly empty) list
of attributes that need to be observed at that node. The possibility of visiting a node but observing nothing is included to
allow plans to observe portions of the network that are separated by multiple radio hops. We require that plans begin and
end at sensor id 0 (the root), which we assume to be the node
that interfaces the query processor to the sensor network.
Cost model
During plan generation and optimization, we need to be able
to compare the relative costs of executing different plans in
the network. As energy is the primary concern in batterypowered sensornets , our goal is to pick plans of minimum energy cost. The primary contributors to energy cost
are communication and data acquisition from sensors (CPU
overheads beyond what is required when acquiring and sending data are small, as there is no signiﬁcant processing done
on the nodes in our setting).
Our cost model uses numbers obtained from the data
sheets of sensors and the radio used on Mica2 motes with
a Crossbow MTS400 environmental sensor board. For
the purposes of our model, we assume that the sender and receiver are well synchronized, so that a listening sensor turns
on its radio just as a sending node begins transmitting3. On
current generation motes, the time required to send a packet
is about 27 ms. The ChipCon CC1000 radio on motes uses
about 15 mW of energy in both send and receive modes,
meaning that both sender and receiver consume about .4 mJ
of energy. Table 1 summarizes the energy costs of acquiring
readings from various sensors available for motes. In this paper, we primarily focus on temperature readings, though we
brieﬂy discuss other attributes as well in Section 5. Assuming we are acquiring temperature readings (which cost .5 J
per sample), we compute the cost of a plan that visits s nodes
and acquires a readings to be (.4× 2)× s+.5× a if there are
no lost packets. In Section 4.1, we generalize this idea, and
consider lossy communication. Note that this cost treats the
entire network as a shared resource in which power needs to
be conserved equivalently on each mote. More sophisticated
cost models that take into account the relative importance of
nodes close to the root could be used, but an exploration of
such cost models is not needed to demonstrate the utility of
our approach.
Model-based querying
As described above, the central element in our approach is
the use of a probabilistic model to answer queries about the
attributes in a sensor network. This section focuses on a few
speciﬁc queries: range predicates, attribute-value estimates,
3In practice, this is done by having the receiver periodically sample the
radio, listening for a preamble signal that indicates a sender is about to begin
transmission; when this preamble is heard, it begins listening continuously.
Though this periodic radio sampling uses some energy, it is small, because
the sampling duty cycle can be 1% or less (and is an overhead paid by any
application that uses the radio).
Energy Per
Sample (@3V), mJ
Solar Radiation 
Barometric Pressure 
Humidity and Temperature 
Table 1: Summary of Power Requirements of Crossbow MTS400
Sensorboard (From ). Certain sensors, such as solar radiation
and humidity (which includes a temperature sensor) require about a
second per sample, explaining their high per-sample energy cost.
and standard aggregates. We provide a review of the standard methodology required to use a probabilistic model to
answer these queries. This probabilistic model can answer
many other signiﬁcantly more complex queries as well; we
outline some of these directions in Section 6.
Probabilistic queries
A probability density function (pdf), or prior density,
p(X1, . . . , Xn) assigns a probability for each joint value
x1, . . . , xn for the attributes X1, . . . , Xn.
Range queries: We begin by considering range queries
that ask if an attribute Xi is in the range [ai, bi]. Typically, we
would need to query the sensor network to obtain the value of
the attribute and then test whether the query is true or false.
Using a probabilistic model, we can compute the probability
P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]). If this probability is very high, we are con-
ﬁdent that the predicate Xi ∈[ai, bi] is true. Analogously, if
the probability is very low, we are conﬁdent that the predicate
is false. Otherwise, we may not have enough information to
answer this query with sufﬁcient conﬁdence and may need to
acquire more data from the sensor network. The probability
P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]) can be computed in two steps: First, we
marginalize, or project, the pdf p(X1, . . . , Xn) to a density
over only attribute Xi:
p(x1, . . . , xn)dx1 . . . dxi−1dxi+1 . . . dxn.
Marginalization gives us the pdf over only Xi. We can then
compute P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]) simply by:
P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]) =
Range queries over multiple attributes can be answered by
marginalizing the joint pdf to that set of attributes. Thus, we
can use the joint probability density p(X1, . . . , Xn) to provide probabilistic answers to any range query. If the user
speciﬁes a conﬁdence level 1−δ, for δ ∈ , we can answer
the query if this conﬁdence is either P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]) > 1−δ
or P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]) < δ. However, in some cases, the computed conﬁdences may be low compared to the ones required
by the query, and we need to make new observations, that is,
to acquire new sensor readings.
Suppose that we observe the value of attribute Xj to be
xj, we can now use Bayes’ rule to condition our joint pdf
p(X1, . . . , Xn) on this value4, obtaining:
p(X1, . . . , Xj−1, Xj+1, . . . , Xn | xj) =
p(X1, . . . , Xj−1, xj, Xj+1, . . . , Xn)
conditional
probability
p(X1, . . . , Xj−1, Xj+1, . . . , Xn | xj), also referred as the
posterior density given the observation xj, will usually lead
to a more conﬁdent estimate of the probability ranges. Using
marginalization, we can compute P(Xi ∈[ai, bi] | xj),
which is often more certain than the prior probability
P(Xi ∈[ai, bi]). In general, we will make a set of observations o, and, after conditioning on these observations, obtain
p(X | o), the posterior probability of our set of attributes X
Example 3.1 In BBQ, the pdf is represented by a multivariate Gaussian with mean vector µ and covariance matrix Σ.
In Gaussians, marginalization is very simple. If we want to
marginalize the pdf to a subset Y of the attributes, we simply select the entries in µ and Σ corresponding to these attributes, and drop the other entries obtaining a lower dimensional mean vector µY and covariance matrix ΣYY. For a
Gaussian, there is no closed-form solution for Equation (1).
However, this integration problem is very well understood,
called the error function (erf), with many well-known, simple
approximations.
Interestingly, if we condition a Gaussian on the value of
some attributes, the resulting pdf is also a Gaussian. The
mean and covariance matrix of this new Gaussian can be
computed by simple matrix operations. Suppose that we observe value o for attributes O, the mean µY|o and covariance
matrix ΣY|o of the pdf p(Y | o) over the remaining attributes
are given by:
µY + ΣYOΣ−1
OO(o −µO),
ΣYY −ΣYOΣ−1
where ΣYO denotes the matrix formed by selecting the rows
Y and the columns O from the original covariance matrix
Σ. Note that the posterior covariance matrix ΣY|o does not
depend on the actual observed value o. We thus denote this
matrix by ΣY|O. In BBQ, by using Gaussians, we can thus
compute all of the operations required to answer our queries
by performing only basic matrix operations.
Value queries: In addition to range queries, a probability
density function can, of course, be used to answer many other
query types. For example, if the user is interested in the value
of a particular attribute Xi, we can answer this query by using
the posterior pdf to compute the mean ¯xi value of Xi, given
the observations o:
xi p(xi | o)dxi.
4The expression p(x|y) is read “the probability of x given y”, and represents the pdf of variable x given a particular value of y. Bayes’ rule allows
conditional probabilities to be computed in scenarios where we only have
data on the inverse conditional probability: p(x|y) = p(y|x)p(x)
We can additionally provide conﬁdence intervals on this estimate of the value of the attribute: for a given error bound ε >
0, the conﬁdence is simply given by P(Xi ∈[¯xi −ε, ¯xi +ε] |
o), which can be computed as in the range queries in Equation (1). If this conﬁdence is greater than the user speciﬁed
value 1 −δ, then we can provide a probably approximately
correct value for the attribute, without observing it.
AVERAGE aggregates:
Average queries can be answered in a similar fashion, by deﬁning an appropriate pdf.
Suppose that we are interested in the average value of a set
of attributes A. For example, if we are interested in the average temperature in a spatial region, we can deﬁne A to be
the set of sensors in this region. We can now deﬁne a random
variable Y to represent this average by Y = (P
i∈A Xi)/|A|.
The pdf for Y is simply given by appropriate marginalization
of the joint pdf over the attributes in A:
p(Y = y | o) =
p(x1, . . . , xn | o) 1
dx1 . . . dxn,
where 1[·] is the indicator function.5 Once p(Y = y | o) is
deﬁned, we can answer an average query by simply deﬁning
a value query for the new random variable Y as above. We
can also compute probabilistic answers to more complex aggregation queries. For example, if the user wants the average
value of the attributes in A that have value greater than t, we
can deﬁne a random variable Z:
i∈A Xi1(Xi > c)
i∈A 1(Xi > c) ,
0 is deﬁned to be 0. The pdf of Z is given by:
p(Z = z | o) =
p(x1, . . . , xn | o) 1
i∈A,xi>c xi
i∈A,xi>c 1
dx1 . . . dxn.
In general, this inference problem, i.e., computing these integrals, does not have a closed-form solution, and numerical
integration techniques may be required.
Example 3.2 BBQ focuses on Gaussians. In this case, each
posterior mean ¯xi can be obtained directly from our mean
vector by using the conditioning rule described in Example 3.1. Interestingly, the sum of Gaussian random variables
is also Gaussian.
Thus, if we deﬁne an AVERAGE query
i∈A Xi)/|A|, then the pdf for Y is a Gaussian. All
we need now is the variance of Y , which can be computed in
closed-form from those of each Xi by:
E[(Y −µY )2]
i∈A Xi −µi)2/|A|2],
i∈A E[(Xi −µi)2]
E[(Xi −µi)(Xj −µj)]) .
Thus, the variance of Y is given by a weighted sum of the
5The indicator function translates a Boolean predicate into the arithmetic
value 1 (if the predicate is true) and 0 (if false).
variances of each Xi, plus the covariances between Xi and
Xj, all of which can be directly read off the covariance matrix Σ. Therefore, we can answer an AVERAGE query over a
subset of the attributes A in closed-form, using the same procedure as value queries. For the more general queries that
depend on the actual value of the attributes, even with Gaussians, we require a numerical integration procedure.
Dynamic models
Thus far, we have focused on a single static probability density function over the attributes. This distribution represents
spatial correlation in our sensor network deployment. However, many real-world systems include attributes that evolve
over time. In our deployment, the temperatures have both
temporal and spatial correlations. Thus, the temperature values observed earlier in time should help us estimate the temperature later in time. A dynamic probabilistic model can
represent such temporal correlations.
In particular, for each (discrete) time index t, we should
estimate a pdf p(Xt
1, . . . , Xt
n | o1...t) that assigns a probability for each joint assignment to the attributes at time
t, given o1...t, all observations made up to time t. A dynamic model describes the evolution of this system over time,
telling us how to compute p(Xt+1
, . . . , Xt+1
| o1...t) from
1, . . . , Xt
n | o1...t). Thus, we can use all measurements
made up to time t to improve our estimate of the pdf at time
For simplicity, we restrict our presentation to Markovian
models, where given the value of all attributes at time t, the
value of the attributes at time t + 1 are independent of those
for any time earlier than t. This assumption leads to a very
simple, yet often effective, model for representing a stochastic dynamical system. Here, the dynamics are summarized by
a conditional density called the transition model:
, . . . , Xt+1
1, . . . , Xt
transition
, . . . , Xt+1
| o1...t) using a simple marginalization operation:
, . . . , xt+1
| o1...t) =
, . . . , xt+1
1, . . . , xt
1, . . . , xt
n | o1...t)dxt
1 . . . dxt
This formula assumes that the transition model p(Xt+1 | Xt)
is the same for all times t. In our deployment, for example,
in the mornings the temperatures tend to increase, while at
night they tend to decrease. This suggests that the transition
model should be different at different times of the day. In our
experimental results in Section 5, we address this problem by
simply learning a different transition model pi(Xt+1 | Xt)
for each hour i of the day. At a particular time t, we simply
use the transition model mod(t, 24). This idea can, of course,
be generalized to other cyclic variations.
Once we have obtained p(Xt+1
, . . . , Xt+1
| o1...t), the
prior pdf for time t + 1, we can again incorporate the measurements ot+1 made at time t + 1, as in Section 3.1, obtaining p(Xt+1
, . . . , Xt+1
| o1...t+1), the posterior distribution
at time t + 1 given all measurements made up to time t + 1.
This process is then repeated for time t + 2, and so on.
The pdf for the initial time t = 0, p(X0
1, . . . , X0
n), is initialized with the prior distribution for attributes X1, . . . , Xn.
This process of pushing our estimate for the density at time
t through the transition model and then conditioning on the
measurements at time t + 1 is often called ﬁltering. In contrast to the static model described in the previous section, ﬁltering allows us to condition our estimate on the complete
history of observations, which, as we will see in Section 5,
can signiﬁcantly reduce the number of observations required
for obtaining conﬁdent approximate answers to our queries.
Example 3.3 In BBQ, we focus on Gaussian distributions;
for these distributions the ﬁltering process is called a
Kalman ﬁlter.
The transition model p(Xt+1
, . . . , Xt+1
1, . . . , Xt
n) can be learned from data with two simple steps:
First, we learn a mean and covariance matrix for the joint
density p(Xt+1
, . . . , Xt+1
1, . . . , Xt
n). That is, we form
, . . . , Xt+1
1, . . . , Xt
for our attributes at
every consecutive times t and t + 1, and use these tuples to
compute the joint mean vector and covariance matrix. Then,
we use the conditioning rule described in Example 3.1 to
compute the transition model:
p(Xt+1 | Xt) = p(Xt+1, Xt)
Once we have obtained this transition model, we can answer
our queries in a similar fashion as described in Examples 3.1
Choosing an observation plan
In the previous section, we showed that our pdfs can be conditioned on the value o of the set of observed attributes to obtain
a more conﬁdent answer to our query. Of course, the choice
of attributes that we observe will crucially affect the resulting posterior density. In this section, we focus on selecting
the attributes that are expected to increase the conﬁdences in
the answer to our particular query at minimal cost. We ﬁrst
formalize the notion of cost of observing a particular set of
attributes. Then, we describe the expected improvement in
our answer from observing this set. Finally, we discuss the
problem of optimizing the choice of attributes.
Cost of observations
Let us denote a set of observations by O ⊆{1, . . . , n}. The
expected cost C(O) of observing attributes O is divided additively into two parts: the data acquisition cost Ca(O), representing the cost of sensing these attributes, and the expected
data transmission cost Ct(O), measuring the communication
cost required to download this data.
The acquisition cost Ca(O) is deterministically given by
the sum of the energy required to observe the attributes O, as
discussed in Section 2.5:
where Ca(i) is the cost of observing attribute Xi.
The deﬁnition of the transmission cost Ct(O) is somewhat
trickier, as it depends on the particular data collection mechanism used to collect these observations from the network,
and on the network topology. Furthermore, if the topology is
unknown or changes over time, or if the communication links
between nodes are unreliable, as in most sensor networks, this
cost function becomes stochastic. For simplicity, we focus on
networks with known topologies, but with unreliable communication. We address this reliability issue by introducing
acknowledgment messages and retransmissions.
More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne our network graph by a set of
edges E, where each edge eij is associated two link quality estimates, pij and pji, indicating the probability that a
packet from i will reach j and vice versa. With the simplifying assumption that these probabilities are independent,
the expected number of transmission and acknowledgment
messages required to guarantee a successful transmission between i and j is
pijpji . We can now use these simple values
to estimate the expected transmission cost.
There are many possible mechanisms for traversing the
network and collecting this data. We focus on simply choosing a single path through the network that visits all sensors
that observe attributes in O and returns to the base station.
Clearly, choosing the best such path is an instance of the
traveling salesman problem, where the graph is given by
the edges E with weights
pijpji . Although this problem is
NP-complete, we can use well-known heuristics, such as k-
OPT , that are known to perform very well in practice.
We thus deﬁne Ct(O) to be the expected cost of this (suboptimal) path, and our expected total cost for observing O can
now be obtained by C(O) = Ca(O) + Ct(O).
Improvement in conﬁdence
Observing attributes O should improve the conﬁdence of our
posterior density. That is, after observing these attributes, we
should be able to answer our query with more certainty6. For
a particular value o of our observations O, we can compute
the posterior density p(X1, . . . , Xn | o) and estimate our
conﬁdence as described in Section 3.1.
More speciﬁcally, suppose that we have a range query
Xi ∈[ai, bi], we can compute the beneﬁt Ri(o) of observing the speciﬁc value o by:
Ri(o) = max [P(Xi ∈[ai, bi] | o), 1 −P(Xi ∈[ai, bi] | o)] ,
that is, for a range query, Ri(o) simply measures our conﬁdence after observing o. For value and average queries, we
deﬁne the beneﬁt by Ri(o) = P(Xi ∈[¯xi −ε, ¯xi + ε] | o),
where ¯xi in this formula is the posterior mean of Xi given the
observations o.
However, the speciﬁc value o of the attributes O is not
known a priori. We must thus compute the expected beneﬁt
p(o)Ri(o)do.
This integral may be difﬁcult to compute in closed-form, and
we may need to estimate Ri(O) using numerical integration.
6This is not true in all cases; for range predicates, the conﬁdence in the
answer may decrease after an observation, depending on the observed value.
Example 4.1 The descriptions in Examples 3.1-3.3 describe
how the beneﬁts Ri(o) can be computed for a particular observed value o in the Gaussian models used in BBQ. For general range queries, even with Gaussians, we need to use numerical integration techniques to estimate the expected reward Ri(O) in Equation (3).
However, for value and AVERAGE queries we can compute this expression in closed-form, by exploiting the fact described in Example 3.1 that the posterior covariance ΣY|O
does not depend on the observed value o. Note that for these
queries, we are computing the probability that the true value
deviates by more than ϵ from the posterior mean value. This
probability is equal to the probability that a zero mean Gaussian, with covariance ΣY|O, deviates by more than ϵ from
0. This probability can be computed using the error function
(erf) and the covariance matrix ΣY|O. Thus, for value and
AVERAGE queries Ri(O) = Ri(o), ∀o, allowing us to compute Equation (3) in closed-form.
More generally, we may have range or value queries over
multiple attributes. Semantically, we deﬁne this type of query
as trying to achieve a particular marginal conﬁdence over
each attribute. We must thus decide how to trade off con-
ﬁdences between different attributes. For a query over attributes Q ⊆{1, . . . , n}, we can, for instance, deﬁne the total beneﬁt R(o) of observing value o as either the minimum
beneﬁt over all attributes, R(o) = mini∈Q Ri(o), or the average, R(o) =
i∈Q Ri(o). In this paper, we focus on
minimizing the total number of mistakes made by the query
processor, and use the average beneﬁt to decide when to stop
observing new attributes.
Optimization
In the previous sections, we deﬁned the expected beneﬁt
R(O) and cost C(O) of observing attributes O. Of course,
different sets of observed attributes will lead to different beneﬁt and cost levels. Our user will deﬁne a desired conﬁdence
level 1 −δ. We would like to pick the set of attributes O that
meet this conﬁdence at a minimum cost:
minimizeO⊆{1,...,n}
R(O) ≥1 −δ.
This general optimization problem is known to be NP-hard.
Thus, efﬁcient and exact optimization algorithms are unlikely
to exist (unless P=NP).
We have developed two algorithms for solving this optimization problem. The ﬁrst algorithm exhaustively searches
over the possible subsets of possible observations, O ⊆
{1, . . . , n}. This algorithm can thus ﬁnd the optimal subset
of attributes to observe, but has an exponential running time.
The second algorithm uses a greedy incremental heuristic. We initialize the search with an empty set of attributes,
O = ∅. At each iteration, for each attribute Xi that is not in
our set (i ̸∈O), we compute the new expect beneﬁt R(O ∪i)
and cost C(O ∪i). If some set of attributes G reach the desired conﬁdence, (i.e., for j ∈G, R(O ∪j) ≥1 −δ), then,
among the attributes in G, we pick the one with lowest total
cost C(O∪j), and terminate the search returning O∪j. Otherwise, if G = ∅, we have not reached our desired conﬁdence,
and we simply add the attribute with the highest beneﬁt over
cost ratio to our set of attributes:
This process is then repeated until the desired conﬁdence is
Experimental results
In this section, we measure the performance of BBQ on several real world data sets. Our goal is to demonstrate that BBQ
provides the ability to efﬁciently execute approximate queries
with user-speciﬁable conﬁdences.
Our results are based on running experiments over two realworld data sets that we have collected during the past few
months using TinyDB. The ﬁrst data set, garden, is a one
month trace of 83,000 readings from 11 sensors in a single
redwood tree at the UC Botanical Garden in Berkeley. In this
case, sensors were placed at 4 different altitudes in the tree,
where they collected collected light, humidity, temperature,
and voltage readings once every 5 minutes. We split this data
set into non-overlapping training and test data sets (with 2/3
used for training), and build the model on the training data.
The second data set, lab, is a trace of readings from 54 sensors in the Intel Research, Berkeley lab. These sensors collected light, humidity, temperature and voltage readings, as
well as network connectivity information that makes it possible to reconstruct the network topology. Currently, the data
consists of 8 days of readings; we use the ﬁrst 6 days for
training, and the last 2 for generating test traces.
Query workload
We report results for two sets of query workloads:
Value Queries: The main type of queries that we anticipate users would run on a such a system are queries asking
to report the sensor readings at all the sensors, within a speciﬁed error bound ϵ with a speciﬁed conﬁdence δ, indicating
that no more than a fraction 1−δ of the readings should deviate from their true value by ϵ. As an example, a typical query
may ask for temperatures at all the sensors within 0.5 degrees
with 95% conﬁdence.
Predicate Queries: The second set of queries that we use
are selection queries over the sensor readings where the user
asks for all sensors that satisfy a certain predicate, and once
again speciﬁes a desired conﬁdence δ.
We also looked at average queries asking for averages
over the sensor readings. Due to space constraints, we do
not present results for these queries.
Comparison systems
We compare the effectiveness of BBQ against two simple
strategies for answering such queries :
TinyDB-style Querying: In this model, the query is disseminated into the sensor network using an overlay tree structure , and at each mote, the sensor reading is observed.
The results are reported back to the base station using the
same tree, and are combined along the way back to minimize
communication cost.
Approximate-Caching:
The base-station maintains a
view of the sensor readings at all motes that is guaranteed
to be within a certain interval of the actual sensor readings
by requiring the motes to report a sensor reading to the basestation if the value of the sensor falls outside this interval.
Note that, though this model saves communication cost by
not reporting readings if they do not change much, it does not
save acquisition costs as the motes are required to observe the
sensor values at every time step. This approach is inspired by
work by Olston et al. .
Methodology
BBQ is used to build a model of the training data. This model
includes a transition model for each hour of the day, based on
Kalman ﬁlters described in Example 3.3 above. We generate traces from the test data by taking one reading randomly
from each hour. We issue one query against the model per
hour. The model computes the a priori probabilities for each
predicate (or ϵ bound) being satisﬁed, and chooses one or
more additional sensor readings to observe if the conﬁdence
bounds are not met. After executing the generated observation plan over the network (at some cost), BBQ updates the
model with the observed values from the test data and compares predicted values for non-observed readings to the test
data from that hour.
To measure the accuracy of our prediction with value
queries, we compute the average number of mistakes (per
hour) that BBQ made, i.e., how many of the reported values are further away from the actual values than the speciﬁed
error bound. To measure the accuracy for predicate queries,
we compute the number of predicates whose truth value was
incorrectly approximated.
For TinyDB, all queries are answered “correctly” (as we
are not modeling loss). Similarly, for approximate caching, a
value from the test data is reported when it deviates by more
than ϵ from the last reported value from that sensor, and as
such, this approach does not make mistakes either
We compute a cost for each observation plan as described
above; this includes both the attribute acquisition cost and
the communications cost. For most of our experiments, we
measure the accuracy of our model at predicting temperature.
Garden dataset: Value-based queries
We begin by analyzing the performance of value queries on
the garden data set in detail to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our architecture. The query we use for this experiment requires the system to report the temperatures at all motes to
within a speciﬁed epsilon, which we vary. In these experiments we keep conﬁdence constant at 95%, so we expect to
see no more than 5% errors. Figure 4 shows the relative cost
and number of errors made for each of the three systems. We
varied epsilon from between 0 and 1 degrees Celsius; as expected, the cost of BBQ (on the left of the ﬁgure) falls rapidly
as epsilon increases, and the percentage of errors (shown on
the right) stays well below the speciﬁed conﬁdence threshold
of 5% (shown as the horizontal line). Notice that for reasonable values of epsilon, BBQ uses signiﬁcantly less communication than approximate caching or TinyDB, sometimes by
an order of magnitude. In this case, approximate caching always reports the value to within epsilon, so it does not make
Approximate Caching
% of Mistakes
Approximate Caching
Figure illustrating the relative costs of BBQ versus
TinyDB and Approximate Queries, with varying epsilons and a con-
ﬁdence interval of 95%.
Time in Days
% of Nodes Observed
Epsilon 0.1
Epsilon 0.5
Epsilon 1.0
Figure 5: Figure showing the number of sensors observed over time
for varying epsilons.
“mistakes”, although the average observation error in approximate caching is close to BBQ (for example, in this experiment, with epsilon=.5, approximate caching has a root-meansquared error of .46, whereas BBQ this error is .12; in other
cases the relative performance is reversed).
Figure 5 shows the percentage of sensors that BBQ observes by hour, with varying epsilon, for the same set of garden experiments. As epsilon gets small (less than .1 degrees),
it is necessary to observe all nodes on every query, as the variance between nodes is high enough that it cannot infer the
value of one sensor from other sensor’s readings with such
accuracy. On the other hand, for epsilons 1 or larger, very
few observations are needed, as the changes in one sensor
closely predict the values of other sensors. For intermediate epsilons, more observations are needed, especially during
times when sensor readings change dramatically. The spikes
in this case correspond to morning and evening, when temperature changes relatively quickly as the sun comes up or
goes down (hour 0 in this case is midnight).
Garden Dataset: Cost vs. Conﬁdence
For our next set of experiments, we again look at the garden
data set, this time comparing the cost of plan execution with
conﬁdence intervals ranging from 99% to 80%, with epsilon
again varying between 0.1 and 1.0. The results are shown in
Figure 6(a) and (b). Figure 6(a) shows that decreasing conﬁdence intervals substantially reduces the energy per query, as
does decreasing epsilon. Note that for a conﬁdence of 95%,
with errors of just .5 degrees C, we can reduce expected perquery energy costs from 5.4 J to less than 150 mJ – a factor
of 40 reduction. Figure 6(b) shows that we meet or exceed
our conﬁdence interval in almost all cases (except 99% conﬁdence). It is not surprising that we occasionally fail to satisfy
these bounds by a small amount, as variances in our training
data are somewhat different than variances in our test data.
1 - Confidence
Epsilon .1
Epsilon .25
Epsilon .5
Epsilon .75
1 - Confidence
% of Mistakes
Epsilon .1
Epsilon .25
Epsilon .5
Epsilon .75
% Mistakes Allowed
Figure 6: Energy per query (a) and percentage of errors (b) versus
conﬁdence interval size and epsilon.
We also ran experiments comparing (1) the performance
of the greedy algorithm vs. the optimal algorithm, and (2) the
performance of the dynamic (Kalman Filter) model that we
use vs. a static model that does not incorporate observations
made in the previous time steps into the model. As expected,
the greedy algorithm performs slightly worse that the optimal
algorithm, whereas using dynamic models results in less observations than using static models. Due to space constraints,
we omit those experiments from this paper.
Garden Dataset: Range queries
We ran a number of experiments with range queries (also over
the garden data set). Figure 7 summarizes the average number of observations required for a 95% conﬁdence with three
different range queries (temperature in , temperature
in , and temperature in ). In all three cases, the
actual error rates were all at or below 5% (ranging from 1.5-
5%). Notice that different range queries require observations
at different times – for example, during the set of readings
just before hour 50, the three queries make observations during three disjoint time periods: early in the morning and late
at night, the model must make lots of observations to determine whether the temperature is in the range 16-17, whereas
during mid-day, it is continually making observations for the
range 20-21, but never for other ranges (because it can be sure
the temperature is above 20 degrees, but not 21!)
Time in Days
% of Nodes Observed
Range 
Range 
Range 
Figure 7: Graph showing BBQ’s performance on three different
range queries, for the garden data set with conﬁdence set to 95%.
Lab dataset
We also ran similar experiments on the lab dataset, which
because of the higher number of attributes in it, is a more
interesting dataset. Contrary to our initial expectation, temperatures in the lab are actually harder to predict compared
to the outdoors; human intervention (in particular, turning the
air conditioning on and off) introduces a lot of randomness in
this data. We report one set of experiments for this dataset,
but defer a more detailed study to future work.
Figure 8(a) shows the cost incurred in answering a value
query on this dataset, as the conﬁdence bound is varied. For
comparative purposes, we also plot the cost of answering the
query using TinyDB. Once again, we see that the as the required conﬁdence in answer drops, BBQ is able to answer the
query more efﬁciently, and is signiﬁcantly more cost-efﬁcient
than TinyDB for larger error bounds. Figure 8(b) shows that
BBQ was able to achieve the speciﬁed conﬁdence bounds in
almost all the cases.
Figure 9 shows an example traversal generated by executing a value based query with conﬁdence of 99% and epsilon
of .5 degrees C over the lab data. The two paths shown are
amongst the longer paths generated – one is the initial set of
observations needed to improve the model’s conﬁdence, and
the other is a traversal at 8am just as the day is starting to
1 - Confidence
Epsilon 0.25
Epsilon 0.5
1 - Confidence
Epsilon 0.75
Epsilon 1.0
1 - Confidence
% of Mistakes
Epsilon 0.25
Epsilon 0.5
Epsilon 0.75
Epsilon 1.0
% Mistakes Allowed
Figure 8: Energy per query (a) and percentage of errors (b) versus
conﬁdence interval size and epsilon for the Lab Data.
Extensions and future directions
In this paper, we focused on the core architecture for unifying
probabilistic models with declarative queries. In this section
we outline several possible extensions.
Conditional plans: In our current prototype, once an observation plan has been submitted to the sensor network, it
is executed to completion. A simple alternative would be
to generate plans that include early stopping conditions; a
more sophisticated approach would be to generate conditional
plans that explore different parts of the network depending on
the values of observed attributes. We have begun exploring
such conditional plans in a related project .
More complex models: In particular, we are interested in
building models that can detect faulty sensors, both to answer
fault detection queries, and to give correct answers to general
queries in the presence of faults. This is an active research
topic in the machine learning community (e.g., ), and we
expect that these techniques can be extended to our domain.
Outliers: Our current approach does not work well for
outlier detection. To a ﬁrst approximation, the only way to
detect outliers is to continuously sample sensors, as outliers
are fundamentally uncorrelated events. Thus, any outlier detection scheme is likely to have a high sensing cost, but we
expect that our probabilistic techniques can still be used to
avoid excessive communication during times of normal operation, as with the fault detection case.
Support for dynamic networks: Our current approach
of re-evaluating plans when the network topology changes
will not work well in highly dynamic networks. As a part
CONFERENCE
Figure 9: Two traversals of the lab network. An observation is
made at every circle. The query was a value-query over all 54 sensors with ϵ = .1 and δ = .99. These paths correspond to times when
the model’s variance is high – e.g., when the system is ﬁrst started,
and at around 8am when the sun begins to heat the lab, so many
observations are needed. For other hours, very few observations are
of our instrumentation of our lab space, we are beginning a
systematic study of how network topologies change over time
and as new sensors are added or existing sensors move. We
plan to use this information to extend our exploration plans
with simple topology change recovery strategies that can be
used to ﬁnd alternate routes through the network.
Continuous queries: Our current approach re-executes
an exploration plan that begins at the network root on every
query. For continuous queries that repeatedly request data
about the same sensors, it may be possible to install code in
the network that causes devices to periodically push readings
during times of high change (e.g., every morning at 8 am).
Related work
There has been substantial work on approximate query processing in the database community, often using model-like
synopses for query answering much as we rely on probabilistic models.
For example, the AQUA project 
proposes a number of sampling-based synopses that can provide approximate answers to a variety of queries using a fraction of the total data in a database. As with BBQ, such answers typically include tight bounds on the correctness of
answers. AQUA, however, is designed to work in an environment where it is possible to generate an independent random sample of data (something that is quite tricky to do in
sensor networks, as losses are correlated and communicating
random samples may require the participation of a large part
of the network). AQUA also does not exploit correlations,
which means that it lacks the predictive power of representations based on probabilistic models. propose exploiting
data correlations through use of graphical model techniques
for approximate query processing, but neither provide any
guarantees in the answers returned. Recently, Considine et
al. have shown that sketch based approximation techniques
can be applied in sensor networks .
Work on approximate caching by Olston et al., is also related , in the sense that it provides a bounded approximation of the values of a number of cached objects (sensors,
in our case) at some server (the root of the sensor network).
The basic idea is that the server stores cached values along
with absolute bounds for the deviation of those values; when
objects notice that their values have gone outside the bounds
known to be stored at the server, they send an update of our
value. Unlike our approach, this work requires the cached
objects to continuously monitor their values, which makes
the energy overhead of this approach considerable. It does,
however, enable queries that detect outliers, something BBQ
currently cannot do.
There has been some recent work on approximate, probabilistic querying in sensor networks and moving object
databases . This work builds on the work by Olston et al.
in that objects update cached values when they exceed some
boundary condition, except that a pdf over the range deﬁned
by the boundaries is also maintained to allow queries that estimate the most likely value of a cached object as well as an
conﬁdence on that uncertainty. As with other approximation
work, the notion of correlated values is not exploited, and the
requirement that readings be continuously monitored introduces a high sampling overhead.
Information Driven Sensor Querying (IDSQ) from Chu et
al. uses probabilistic models for estimation of target position in a tracking application. In IDSQ, sensors are tasked
in order according to maximally reduce the positional uncertainty of a target, as measured, for example, by the reduction
in the principal components of a 2D Gaussian.
Our prior work presented the notion of acquisitional query
processing(ACQP) – that is, query processing in environments like sensor networks where it is necessary to be sensitive to the costs of acquiring data. The main goal of an ACQP
system is to avoid unnecessary data acquisition. The techniques we present are very much in that spirit, though the
original work did not attempt to use probabilistic techniques
to avoid acquisition, and thus cannot directly exploit correlations or provide conﬁdence bounds.
BBQ is also inspired by prior work on Online Aggregation and other aspects of the CONTROL project .
The basic idea in CONTROL is to provide an interface that allows users to see partially complete answers with conﬁdence
bounds for long running aggregate queries. CONTROL did
not attempt to capture correlations between the different attributes, such that observing one attribute had no effect on the
systems conﬁdence on any of the other predicates.
The probabilistic querying techniques described here are
built on standard results in machine learning and statistics
(e.g., ). The optimization problem we address is a
generalization of the value of information problem . This
paper, however, proposes and evaluates the ﬁrst general architecture that combines model-based approximate query answering with optimizing the data gathered in a sensornet.
Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a novel architecture for integrating a database system with a correlation-aware probabilistic
model. Rather than directly querying the sensor network, we
build a model from stored and current readings, and answer
SQL queries by consulting the model. In a sensor network,
this provides a number of advantages, including shielding the
user from faulty sensors and reducing the number of expensive sensor readings and radio transmissions that the network
must perform. Beyond the encouraging, order-of-magnitude
reductions in sampling and communication cost offered by
BBQ, we see our general architecture as the proper platform
for answering queries and interpreting data from real world
environments like sensornets, as conventional database technology is poorly equipped to deal with lossiness, noise, and
non-uniformity inherent in such environments.