FUSING FEATURE ENGINEERING AND DEEP LEARNING: A
CASE STUDY FOR MALWARE CLASSIFICATION
Daniel Gibert, Quan Le
University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
{daniel.gibert, quan.le}@ucd.ie
Carles Mateu, Jordi Planes
Polytechnic School
University of Lleida
Lleida, Spain
{carles.mateu, jordi.planes}@udl.cat
Machine learning has become an appealing signature-less approach to detect and classify malware
because of its ability to generalize to never-before-seen samples and to handle large volumes of
data. While traditional feature-based approaches rely on the manual design of hand-crafted features
based on experts’ knowledge of the domain, deep learning approaches replace the manual feature
engineering process by an underlying system, typically consisting of a neural network with multiple
layers, that perform both feature learning and classiﬁcation altogether. However, the combination of
both approaches could substantially enhance detection systems. In this paper we present an hybrid
approach to address the task of malware classiﬁcation by fusing multiple types of features deﬁned by
experts and features learned through deep learning from raw data. In particular, our approach relies
on deep learning to extract N-gram like features from the assembly language instructions and the
bytes of malware, and texture patterns and shapelet-based features from malware’s grayscale image
representation and structural entropy, respectively. These deep features are later passed as input
to a gradient boosting model that combines the deep features and the hand-crafted features using
an early-fusion mechanism. The suitability of our approach has been evaluated on the Microsoft
Malware Classiﬁcation Challenge benchmark and results show that the proposed solution achieves
state-of-the-art performance and outperforms gradient boosting and deep learning methods in the
literature.
Keywords Malware Classiﬁcation · Machine Learning · Deep Learning · Feature Extraction · Feature Fusion
Introduction
The ﬁght against malware has never stopped since the dawn of computing. This ﬁght has turned out to be a never-ending
and cyclical arms race: as security analysts and researchers improve their defences, malware developers continue
to innovate, ﬁnd new infection vectors and enhance their obfuscation techniques. During the last decade, malware
threats have been expanding vertically (i.e. numbers and volumes) and horizontally (i.e. types and functionality) due
to the opportunities provided by technological advances 1. According to AV-Test 2, the total number of new malware
detections worldwide amounted to 677.66 million programs, and it is projected to surprass 700 million within 2020.
Traditionally, anti-malware engines relied on signature-based and heuristic-based methods to detect and block malware
before they performed any damage. On the one hand, signature-based methods identify malware by comparing its code
with the code of known malware that have already encountered, analyzed and recorded in a database. On the other
hand, heuristic-based methods examine the code and behavior of malware to look for certain malicious behaviors and
suspicious properties. Most anti-malware engines that employ heuristic analysis run the program commands within a
specialized virtual machine, to isolate the suspicious program from the real machine. Although effective, this type of
1 
2 
 
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
analysis is very time consuming because it involves setting up a safe environment every time a suspicious ﬁle has to be
As a result, the diversity, sophistication and availability of malicious software make the task of securing computer
networks and systems very challenging, and force security analysts and researchers to constantly improve their
cyberdefenses to keep pace with the attacks. During the last decade, due to the massive growth of malware streams,
organizations faced the daunting challenge of dealing with thousands of attacks a day while also experiencing a shortage
of cybersecurity skills and talent . In consequence, new methods started to be adopted to complement traditional
detection approaches and keep pace with new attacks and variants. This scenario presented a unique opportunity for
machine learning, as an alternative to signature-based approaches, to impact and revamp the cybersecurity landscape,
because of its ability to generalize to never-before-seen malware and to handle large volumes of data.
Traditional machine learning approaches for malware detection and classiﬁcation rely on the manual extraction of
hand-crafted features deﬁned by experts in the domain . However, these solutions depend almost entirely on
the ability of the experts to extract characterizing features that accurately represent malware, and, the computational and
memory requirements needed to extract some of these discriminant features, such as N-grams, limit their applicability
in the real-world . Lately, various approaches have been presented to automatically learn to extract N-gram like
features from malware without having to exhaustively enumerate all N-grams during training using deep learning ,
and approaches to automatically extract features from malware’s structural entropy representation , gray-scale
image representation , from the binary code or any compressed representation of it . For a complete
review of feature-based and deep learning approaches we refer the readers to and the references therein.
The task of malware detection and classiﬁcation includes multiple types of features and thus, by only taking as input the
raw bytes or opcodes sequence a great deal of useful information for classiﬁcation is ignored such as the characteristics
of the Portable Executable (PE) Headers, the import address table (IAT), etc. As a result, deep learning approaches tend
to perform poorly in comparison to multimodal approaches in the literature .
This paper presents an hybrid approach for malware classiﬁcation that addresses the aforementioned limitation of
deep learning approaches by combining deep and hand-crafted features using simple, but yet effective, early fusion
mechanism to train gradient boosting trees . As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst approach to ever try to combine
hand-crafted features deﬁned by experts with features automatically learned through deep learning for the task of
malware detection and classiﬁcation. The main idea behind is to fuse both the deep and hand-crafted features into a
single feature vector that is later used to train a single model to learn the correlation and interactions between each type
of features. Our approach extracts well-known features such as API function calls, section characteristics, the frequency
of usage of the registers, entropy features, and so on, and also extracts N-gram like features from the binary content
and the assembly language source code of malware , plus deep features from malware’s structural entropy 
and gray-scale image representation . This approach has been extensively assessed on the dataset provided by
Microsoft for the Big Data Innovation Gathering Challenge of 2015 , which has become the de facto standard
benchmark to evaluate machine learning models for malware classiﬁcation. Results show a 99.81% 10-fold cross
validation accuracy on the training set and a 0.0040 logarithmic loss on the test set, outperforming any feature-based
and deep learning-based approach in the literature.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methods employed to detect and classify malicious
software. Section 3 introduces the related research to address the problem of malware detection and classiﬁcation.
Section 4 provides a detailed description of our system, and the types of features extracted. Lastly, Section 5 describes
the experimentation and Section 6 summarizes our research and presents some remarks on the ongoing research trends.
Background
Next, it is introduced the necessary background required for the reader to understand malware forensics and the recently
rise of machine learning to complement traditional detection methods.
The Task of Malware Detection and Classiﬁcation
Malicious software, also known as malware, is any kind of software that has been speciﬁcally designed to disrupt, harm
or exploit any computer system or network. Typically, malware with similar characteristics and common behavior are
grouped into families, whereas a malware family usually encompasses samples of malware that have been generated
from the same code base. As malware keeps evolving, new variants or strains of a family might arise showing similar
traits in their variations, just as these families have. These variations usually differ in key areas, such as those dealing
with payload and infection. Therefore, the task of malware detection refers to the task of detecting whether a given
piece of software is malicious or not while the task of malware classiﬁcation refers to the task of distinguishing and
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
classifying malware into families. Although the task of detecting malware is crucial to stop and prevent an attack before
it causes damage, the task of malware classiﬁcation helps to better understand how the malicious software has infected
the system, its threat level and potential damage, and what can be done to defend against it and recover from the attack.
Traditional Detection Techniques
Traditionally, to detect malware, anti-malware engines relied on signature and heuristic detection. On the one hand,
signature detection involves comparing a program’s code with the code of known malware that has already been
encountered, analyzed and stored in a database, in order to ﬁnd footprints matching those of known malware. Typically,
if a program’s code match one or more of those footprints, it is labelled as malicious and it will be either deleted or
put into quarantine. For decades, this method of identifying malware has been the primary technique employed by
anti-malware engines because of its simplicity. However, this detection technique solely works against known malware,
limiting its protection against new forms of malware. In addition, modern malware can alter its signature to avoid
detection by employing code obfuscation, dynamic code loading, encryption, packing, etc.
To counter the limitations of signature detection, anti-malware engines adopted heuristic detection. Oppositely to
signature detection, which looks to match signatures or footprints found in known malicious ﬁles, heuristic detection
uses rules and/or algorithms to look for pieces of code which may indicate malicious intent. For instance, a common
technique is to look for speciﬁc commands or instructions that are not typically found in a benign application such as
the payload of some trojan, the replication mechanism of virus, etc. Traditional heuristic anti-malware engines use
some kind of rule-based or weight-based system to determine the maliciousness or the threat that a program poses
to the computer system or network. If these rules exceed a predetermined threshold, then an alarm is triggered and
a precautionary action is taken. However, these rules and heuristics have to be previously deﬁned by experts after
analyzing the behavior of malware, which is a complex and time consuming process, even for security experts.
A few decades ago, the number of threats attributed to malicious software was relatively low and simple hand-crafted
rules were sufﬁcient to detect the ongoing threats. However, during the last decade, malware has exploded in terms of
diversity, sophistication, and availability, and thus, the aforementioned detection and analysis techniques have been
unable to keep pace with the new attacks and variants. In addition, the shortage of experienced security researchers and
analysts plus the complexity of forensic investigations have contributed to strengthening the use of machine learning
as an appealing signature-less alternative to detect malware because of (1) its ability to generalize to never-before-seen
malware and (2) to handle large volumes of data.
Related Work
In this section, the related studies performed in the ﬁeld of malware detection and classiﬁcation that are powered by
machine learning are presented. For a complete review of the features and deep learning architectures deﬁned by experts
to build machine learning detection systems we refer the readers to Ucci et al. , Gibert et al. , and the references
Traditional machine learning approaches for malware detection and classiﬁcation rely on the manual extraction of
features deﬁned by security experts . Feature extraction is one key step to build a malware detection and
classiﬁcation system. It transforms raw data, i.e. binary executables, into numerical features that provide an abstract
representation of the original data. Common features are byte and opcode N-grams, API function calls, the frequency of
use of registers, characteristics extracted from the header and sections of executables, etcetera. However, these solutions
depend almost entirely on the ability of the security experts to extract a set of descriptive features that accurately
represent the malware characteristics. In addition, the computational and memory requirements needed to extract some
of these features, such as N-grams, far exceeds the capabilities of most existing systems and limit their applicability in
the real-world .
Lately, various approaches have been presented to automatically learn to extract N-gram like features from malware
without having to exhaustively enumerate all N-grams during training through deep learning. For instance,Gibert et
al. proposed a shallow convolutional neural network architecture that intrinsically learn to extract N-gram like
features from both the malware’s binary content and its assembly language source code, respectively. This is achieved
by a convolutional layer with ﬁlters of various sizes followed by a global max-pooling layer, which allow the model to
retrieve the features regardless of their location in the assembly language instructions and byte sequences. Recently,
other approaches have been proposed to detect malware based on their binary content. Raff et al. proposed
a shallow convolutional neural network architecture with a gated convolutional layer to capture the high location
invariance in malware’s binary content while Krˇcál et al. presented the deepest architecture to date, consisting of
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
an embedding layer followed by two convolutions, one max-pooling layer, two more convolutions, and a global average
pooling layer and four fully connected layers.
However, dealing with raw byte sequences directly is very challenging as it involves the classiﬁcation of sequences
of extreme lengths. For instance, the size of the executables may range from some KBs to hundreds of MBs, e.g.
100 MB correspond to a sequence of 100,000,000 bytes. To deal with these sequences of extreme length, various
approaches proposed to compress the information in the malware’s binary content.
For instance, Gibert et al. presented an approach to classify malware represented as a stream of entropy values.
In their work, the binary content is divided into chunks of code of ﬁxed size and afterwards, the information at each
chunk is compressed by calculating its entropy value. On the other hand, executables could be represented as grayscale
images . To represent a malware sample as a grayscale image, every byte has to be interpreted as one
pixel in an image, where values are in the (0:black, 255:white). Afterwards, the resulting 1-D array has to be
reorganized as a 2-D array.
Nevertheless, the task of malware detection and classiﬁcation is regarded as a multimodal task, as it includes multiple
types of features and thus, by only taking as input the assembly language instructions and the raw bytes sequence or a
compressed representation of it, a lot of useful information for characterizing malware is ignored. As a result, these
unimodal deep learning approaches that only take as input a single source of information tend to perform poorly in
comparison to multimodal approaches that extract different types of features from various modalities of
information. This is because these types of features or modalities provide complementary information to each other,
and reﬂect patterns not visible when working with individual modalities on their own. In fact, these approaches that
extract multiple types of features from malware remained unbeaten in terms of classiﬁcation performance and have
been the way to go for detecting and classifying malware.
To solve the aforementioned issues of deep learning approaches, we present a multimodal system that combines the
beneﬁts of feature engineering and deep learning to achieve state-of-the-art results in the task of malware detection and
classiﬁcation.
System Overview
The proposed classiﬁcation system extracts hand-engineered and deep features to address the task of malware classiﬁcation by combining the aforementioned features using a simple, but yet effective, early fusion mechanism in order to
train gradient boosting trees . Following, the components of the proposed system are described in detail. First, the
different types of features extracted are explained. Then, the deep learning architectures implemented to automatically
learn and extract deep features from raw data are introduced. Afterwards, it is described the proposed fusion mechanism
to combine the aforementioned features. Lastly, it is introduced the machine learning algorithm trained to categorize
malware into families. See Figure 1 for an overview of the system.
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed malware classiﬁcation system.
Hand-engineered Features
This system has been implemented to tackle the problem of Windows malware classiﬁcation and thus, the features have
been speciﬁcally designed to be extracted from executables in the Portable Executable (PE) ﬁle format, which is the
format for executables, DLLs, FON Font ﬁles and others in the Windows operating system.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
There are two common representations of a Windows malware executable: (1) the hexadecimal representation of
malware’s binary content (or hex view) and (2) the assembly language source code of malware (or assembly view).
On the one hand, the hex view of malware represents the machine code as a sequence of hexadecimal values. Cf.
Figure 2. The ﬁrst value indicates the starting address of the machine codes in the memory, and each hexadecimal value
Figure 2: Hexadecimal view of malware.
(byte) carry meaningful information of the Portable Executable ﬁle such as instruction codes and data. On the other
hand, the assembly language source code contains the symbolic machine code of the executable, i.e. the machine code
instructions, as well as function calls, memory allocation and variable information. Cf. Figure 3. To obtain the source
code, malware binaries have to be ﬁrst disassembled. Typically, it is used the Interactive Disassembler (IDA) tool 3,
Radare2 4 or Ghydra 5, among others. To build an accurate classiﬁer, we propose to extract hand-crafted features from
Figure 3: Assembly view of malware.
both representations, the hex view and the assembly view of the executables, to exploit the complementary information
provided by these two representations. More speciﬁcally, we decided to limit our proposed approach to only common
and well-known features in order to evaluate whether or not the classiﬁcation performance of the system improves
after the addition of deep features extracted by the deep learning models. Next, the hand-crafted features extracted from
the hexadecimal source code of malware’s binary content and the assembly language source code are presented.
3 
4 
5 
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Hexadecimal-based features
Hexadecimal-based features refer to those features extracted from the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary
content. Following you will ﬁnd a brief description of all the hexadecimal-based feature types used by our system.
Metadata information (BYTE_MD). Two features compose the metadata information extracted from the hexadecimal
view of malware, (1) the size of the ﬁle and (2) the address of the ﬁrst byte sequence.
Byte unigram features (BYTE_1G). Remember that in a byte sequence, each element can take one out of 256 different
values, i.e. ranging from 0 to 255 (the byte range). In addition, some elements are represented by the special
symbol ??, indicating that the corresponding byte has no mapping in the executable ﬁle (the contents of those
addresses are uninitialized within the ﬁle). However, better results can be achieved by only taking as input the
256 byte values . For this reason, we decided to leave the ?? out the experiments.
Entropy-based features (BYTE_ENT). Entropy has long been used in the security industry to detect the presence of
encrypted and compressed code as these tend to have higher entropy than native code . To sum up, the
entropy of a byte sequence refers to the amount of disorder of the distribution of bytes, whose value range
from 0 (order) to 8 (randomness). Generally speaking, if occurrences of all byte values are the same, the
entropy will be larger, but if certain byte values occur with higher probability, the entropy will be smaller.
Nevertheless, the use of simple entropy statistics may not be enough to detect malware as authors usually try
to conceal the encrypted and compressed code in a way that they bypass high entropy ﬁlters. For this reason,
the bytes sequence is typically represented as a stream of entropy values (aka structural entropy). See Figure 4.
To calculate the structural entropy of an executable, the bytes sequence is split into non-overlapping chunks of
ﬁxed size, e.g. 256, and for each chunk of code, its entropy value is computed as follows:
p(i) · logbp(i)
where H(X) is the measured entropy value of a given chunk of code X with values x1, . . . , xj, j is the
number of values in X, p(i) refers to the probability of appearances of the byte value i in X and n is equal to
255, i.e. byte code values are in the range of .
Figure 4: Structural entropy of a malware sample.
Consequently, we extracted various statistical features from the structural entropy of executables such as the
mean, variance, median, maximum, minimum entropy values, and the percentiles.
IMG-based features (BYTE_HARALICK, BYTE_LBP). Nataraj et al. proposed a method for visualizing and
classifying malware using image processing techniques. In their work, malware binaries are visualized
as grayscale images, with every byte reinterpreted as one pixel in the image. Then, the resulting array is
reorganized as a 2-D array and visualized as a grayscale image, where values are in the range , 0 for
black and 255 for white. The rational behind this representation is that images of malicious software from a
given family are similar between them but distinct from those belonging to a different family and thus, this
visual similarity can be exploited to classify malware. Cf. Figure 5.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Figure 5: Grayscale image representation of samples belonging to the Obfuscator.ACY and Gatak families, respectively.
Notice that the images of malicious software belonging to the same family are similar between them while distinct from
those images of malware belonging to the other family.
From these visual representation, we extracted Haralick and Local Binary Pattern features. On the
one hand, Haralick features are calculated by constructing a co-occurence matrix and computing the Haralick
equations, e.g. angular second-moment, contrast, correlation, etc. On the other hand, the local binary pattern
features of a given pixel are computed as follows. First, a 8 bit binary array is initialized with all values equal
to 0. Then, the given pixel is compared with its neighboring pixels in clockwise direction. If the value of the
neighboring pixel is greater or equal to 1 is assigned to its corresponding position. This results in a 8 bit binary
array with zeros and ones. Following, the 8-bit binary pattern is converted to a decimal number and it is stored
in the corresponding pixel location in the LBP mask. Finally, this process is applied to all pixels in the image
and, once the LBP values of all pixels have been calculated, the mask is normalized, resulting in 256 features.
Assembly-based features
Assembly-based features refer to those features extracted from the assembly language source code of malware.
Following you will ﬁnd a brief description of the the assembly-based feature types used by our system.
Metadata information (ASM_MD). Two features compose the metadata information extracted from the assembly
language source code of malware, (1) the size of the ﬁle and (2) the number of lines in the ﬁle.
Operation codes unigram features (ASM_OPC). An operation code or opcode is the portion of a machine language
instruction that speciﬁes the operation to be performed, e.g. ADD, MUL, SUB, etc. Instead of calculating the
frequency of all opcodes, we just selected a subset of 93 opcodes based on their commonness and frequency of
use in malicious applications . The full list of opcodes extracted from each assembly language source
code ﬁle can be found in the project’s repository 6.
Data deﬁne features (ASM_DD). Data deﬁne directives are used for reserving storage for variables. However, because
of packing, some malware samples do not contain any API call and barely a few operation codes. More
speciﬁcally, those samples of malware mostly contain db, dw and dd deﬁne directives, which are used for
setting byte, word, and double words, respectively. Subsequently, the frequency of use of the aforementioned
data deﬁne directives has high discriminative power for a number of malware families. The full list of data
deﬁne features can be found in Table 1.
Register features (ASM_REG). Registers are like variables built in the processor. Using registers instead of memory
to store values makes the process faster and cleaner. The x86 architecture of processors contains eight General-
Purpose Registers. All registers can be accessed in 16-bit and 32-bit modes. In 16-mode, the registers are
abbreviated using the abbreviations listed in Table 2. In 32-bit mode, it is added the preﬁx ’E’ to this two-letter
abbreviation. For instance, ’ECX’ it the counter register as a 32-bit value. Similarly, in the 64-bit version, the
’E’ is replaced with an ’R’. Thus, the 64-bit version of ’ECX’ is ’RCX’. In addition, the ﬁrst four registers,
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Table 1: List of features in the ASM_DD category .
Feature Name
Description
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the dw data deﬁne directive to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the db, dd and dw data deﬁne directives to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with 0 parameters to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with more than 0 parameters to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive in the .text section
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with one non-zero parameter to the .rdata section
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with one non-zero parameter to the .data section
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with one non-zero parameter to the .idata section
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with one non-zero parameter to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with one non-zero parameter in the unknown sections
db3_zero_all
Proportion of the db data deﬁne directive with 0 parameter with respect to the number of db data deﬁne directives with non-zero parameters
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive in the text section
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive to the .rdata section
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with four parameters
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with ﬁve parameters
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with six parameters
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with four parameters to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with ﬁve parameters to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with six parameters to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with four parameters in unknown sections
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with ﬁve parameters in unknown sections
Proportion of the dd data deﬁne directive with six parameters in unknown sections
Table 2: 16-bit naming convention of the eight General-Purpose Registers (GPR).
Register type
Description
Accumulator register (AX)
Employed in arithmetic operations (e.g. INC, DEC, ADD, SUB, etc).
Counter register (CX)
Employed in shift/rotate instructions and loops (e.g. JMP, JNZ, etc)
Data register (DX)
Employed in arithmetic and I/O operations (e.g. IN, INS, OUT, etc)
Base register (BX)
Employed as a pointer to data
Stack Pointer register (SP)
Pointer to the top of the stack
Stack Base Pointer register (BP)
Pointer to the base of the stack
Source Index register (SI)
Pointer to the source in stream operations
Destination Index register (DI)
Pointer to the destination in stream operations
AX, CX, DX and BX, can be addressed as two 8-bit halves 7. Moreover, there are six Segment registers used
to store the starting addresses of the code, the data and the stack segments, namely the Stack Segment, the
Code Segment, the Data Segment, the Extra Segment, the F Segment and the G Segment.
Symbols frequency (ASM_SYM). The usage of the following set of symbols -, +, *, ], [, ?, @ are extracted as features
because these characters are typically found in code that has been designed to evade detection by resorting to
indirect calls and to dynamic library loading.
Application Programming Interface (ASM_API). Application Programming Interface (API) functions and system
calls are related to services provided by the operating systems, in our case Windows. These functions provide
access to key operations such as network, security, system services, ﬁle management, and so on, and there
are the only way for software to access system resources managed by the operating system. As a result, API
function calls provide descriptive information with respect to the intent or behavior of a particular piece of
software. For this reason, we measured the frequency of use of a subset of 794 API functions based on their
frequency on a study of nearly 500 thousand malicious samples . The rational behind using only a subset
of API functions is that the total number of APIs is extremely large and considering all of them would bring
little to no meaningful information to the task of malware classiﬁcation. The subset of API functions extracted
from the assembly language source code ﬁle can be found in the project’s repository 8.
Pixel intensity features (ASM_PIXEL). Just as malware’s binary content, the assembly language source code of
malware can also be visualized as a grayscale image. Cf. Figure 6. In fact, the Winner’s of the Big Data
Innovators Gathering Challenge of 2015 9, and state-of-the-art approaches in the literature have shown
that the intensities of pixels in the assembly-based grayscale images work well when used in conjunction with
other features.
7 
9 
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Figure 6: Grayscale image representation of malware’s assembly language source code.
Section features (ASM_SEC). A Portable Executable (PE) ﬁle consists of various predeﬁned sections, e.g. .text,
.data, .bss, .rdata, .edata, .idata, .rsrc, .tls, and .reloc. However, malware authors usually employ obfuscation
techniques such as packing, which might modify the default sections and create new sections. For example,
the UPX packer (Ultimate Packer for Executables), one of the most popular and well-known packer, typically
creates two sections named UPX0 and UPX1. For this reason, we extracted different characteristics from the
sections in the PE executables related to the proportion of code in those sections with respect to the whole ﬁle.
The full list of section-based features is presented in Table 3.
Miscellaneous features (ASM_MISC). This feature category consists of the frequency of 95 manually chosen keywords from the assembly language source code , mostly consisting of strings and dlls. The full list of
miscellaneous features is listed in the project’s repository 10.
Deep Learning Architectures
Our system also automatically extracts features from raw data through deep learning. More speciﬁcally, it relies on
the extraction of N-gram like features from both the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary content (byte
N-grams) and its assembly language source code (opcode N-grams), shapelet-based features from malware’s structural
entropy, and texture patterns from malware’s binary content represented as grayscale images.
Texture-based Features from the Grayscale Image Representation of Malware
Instead of using well-know feature extractors, e.g. Haralick , Local Binary Patterns , etc, we implemented a
convolutional neural network to automatically learn discriminative features (BYTE_IMG_CNN) from the grayscale
image representation of malware given its superior performance for the task of malware classiﬁcation . In their
work, Gibert et al. compared the performance of CNN classiﬁers against various state-of-the-art feature extractors,
including Haralick, Local Binary Pattern, PCA, and GIST, for the task of malware classiﬁcation and the results show a
2.31%, 1.88%, 1.99%, and a 1.34% increase with respect to the classiﬁcation performance of the classiﬁers trained with
the LBP, Haralick, PCA and GIST features, respectively.
The architecture of our choice is the one used in the work of Gibert et al. . In particular, this architecture consists of
three convolutional blocks composed by a convolutional layer, max-pooling layer and a normalization layer, followed
by two fully-connected layers and a softmax layer. See Figure 7. Notice that the resulting grayscale images have been
resized to size equals 255 × 255 using the Lanzcos ﬁlter as in their work. For more details about the architecture we
refer the reader to the original article .
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Table 3: List of features in the ASM_SEC category .
Feature Name
Description
Total number of lines in the .bss section
Total number of lines in the .data section
Total number of lines in the .edata section
Total number of lines in the .idata section
Total number of lines in the .rdata section
Total number of lines in the .rsrc section
Total number of lines in the .text section
Total number of lines in the .tls section
Total number of lines in the .reloc section
Proportion of .bss section to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the .data section to the whole ﬁle
.edata_por
Proportion of the .edata section to the whole ﬁle
.idata_por
Proportion of the .idata section to the whole ﬁle
.rdata_por
Proportion of the .rdata section to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the .rsrc section to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the .text section to the whole ﬁle
Proportion of the .tls section to the whole ﬁle
.reloc_por
Proportion of the .reloc section to the whole ﬁle
Num_Section
Total number of sections
Unknown_Sections
Total number of unknown sections
Known_Sections_lines
Total number of lines in known sections
Unknown_Sections_lines
Total number of lines in unknown sections
Known_Sections_por
Proportion of known sections to all sections
Unknown_Sections_por
Proportion of the unknown sections to all sections
Shapelet-based Features from Malware’s Structural Entropy Representation
To complement the statistical hand-crafted features (BYTE_ENT) deﬁned in Section 4.1.1 we implemented a convolutional neural network architecture to learn features from the structural entropy representation of malware’s binary
content . Cf. Figure 8. As it has been documented in Gibert et al. and Baysa et al. , the structural entropy
of malware belonging to the same family is very similar while distinct from the structural entropy representation of
malware belonging to the other families. The rationale behind applying convolutional layers to the stream of entropy
values is to learn hierarchical shapelet-like features from this kind of representation. A shapelet is a subsequence of a
time series which is representative of a class (family). The idea behind is to distinguish the samples of malware belonging to different families by their local variations instead of their global structure However, brute-force shapelet-based
approaches are computationally expensive and thus, we used convolutional layers to learn which are the optimal
shapelets without exploring all possible candidates. More speciﬁcally, the convolutional layers can be seen as detection
ﬁlters for speciﬁc subsequences present in the structural entropy of malware, going from low-level features in the ﬁrst
layers to increasingly complex features in the last layers.
Byte and Opcode N-Gram like Features
One of the most common types of features to classify malware are N-grams . An N-gram is a contiguous sequence
of n items from a given sequence of text. The rationale behind using N-grams to detect malware is that malicious
software have structure, and N-grams work by capturing this structure (certain combinations of N-grams are more
likely in samples belonging to some malware families than others. For the task of malware detection and classiﬁcation,
N-grams can be extracted from the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary content and from the assembly
language source code, also known as byte N-grams and opcode N-grams, respectively.
Byte N-grams and opcode N-grams refer to the unique combination of every n consecutive bytes and opcodes as
individual features, respectively. As a result, N-gram based approaches construct a vector of features, where each
feature in the vector indicates the number of appearances of a particular N-gram. Consequently, the length of the feature
vector depends on the number of unique N-grams, which increases with N. This leads to two main shortcomings that
limit the applicability of N-grams in a real-world scenario (when N > 3). First, the resulting feature vector is very large
as the model has to store the count for all N-grams occurring in the dataset. Second, the feature vector is very sparse,
most features have zero values, increasing the space and time complexity of the resulting models. Generally, if there are
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Grayscale image
Conv 2D size 5 × 5 (strides 1)
Max-pooling 2D size 2 × 2
Layer normalization
Conv 2D size 3 × 3 (strides 1)
Max-pooling 2D size 2 × 2
Layer normalization
Conv 2D size 3 × 3 (strides 1)
Max-pooling 2D size 2 × 2
Layer normalization
Fully-connected layer
Output layer
Figure 7: Convolutional neural network architecture for classifying malware’s binary content represented as a grayscale
too many features,the machine learning models tend to ﬁt the noise in the training data. This is known as overﬁtting,
and it results in poor generalization on newer data. As a result, machine learning approaches based on N-grams for the
task of malware detection and classiﬁcation have limited the size of N to size 3 or 4, and applied feature selection and
dimensionality reduction techniques to reduce the dimensionality of the resulting feature vector.
Alternatively, Gibert et al. proposed a shallow convolutional neural network architecture to extract N-gram
like features from malware’s assembly language source code and binary content. Cf. Figure 9. This is achieved by
convolving various ﬁlters of different sizes k, where k ∈{3, 5, 7} in our case, which indicates the number of opcodes
and bytes to which is applied. Afterwards, a global max-pooling layer is applied to retrieve the maximum activation for
each feature map independently of their position in the input sequence. This can be seen as if a particular N-gram has
been found in the input sequence. Alternatively, one could employ a global average-pooling layer to retrieve the average
of the activations for each feature map. However, in our experiments the global max-pooling layer achieved higher
classiﬁcation results. For more details about the architecture we refer the reader to the original publications .
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Structural Entropy
Conv 1D size 3 (Stride 1)
Max-pooling 1D size 2
Conv 1D size 3 (stride 1)
Max-pooling 1D size 2
Conv 1D size 3 (stride 1)
Max-pooling 1D size 2
Fully-connected layer
Fully-connected layer
Output layer
Figure 8: Convolutional neural network architecture for classifying malware’s binary content represented as a stream of
entropy values.
Feature Fusion
At this point, the executable is represented as various feature vectors −→v , −→
w , −→x , ..., −→z , one for each type of features, e.g.
BYTE_MD, BYTE_1G, BYTE_ENT, etc, that provide an abstract view of their content. To integrate the feature vectors,
our system employs an early fusion mechanism to create a joint representation of the features from multiple modalities.
This fusion mechanism combines the various feature vectors by concatenating them into a single feature vector. Cf.
Figure 10. Afterwards, a single model is trained to learn the correlation and interactions between the features of each
modality. Given various feature vectors −→v , −→
w , −→x , ..., −→z containing the different types of features, the prediction of the
ﬁnal model, denoted as h, can be written as:
p = h ([−→v , −→
w , ..., −→z ]) = ([v1, v2, ..., vi, w1, w2, ..., wj, ..., z1, z2, ..., zk])
Gradient Boosting Trees
For classiﬁcation purposes, we trained our machine learning model using XGBoost , a parallel implementation of
the gradient boosting tree classiﬁer. The impact of XGBoost has been widely recognized in many machine learning and
data mining competitions, where approximately half of the winning solutions used XGBoost. Next, we review gradient
boosting tree algorithms. For a more detailed description of gradient boosting trees and XGBoost we refer the reader to
the original article .
Boosting is an ensemble learning technique for building a strong classiﬁer in the form of an ensemble of weak classiﬁers.
When the weak learners are decision trees, the resulting algorithm is called boosted trees. Gradient Boosting Trees
(GBT) is an ensemble learning technique that builds one tree at a time, where each new tree attempts to minimize the
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
4-dimensiomal Embedding
Conv 2D size 5 (stride 1)
Conv 2D size 3 (stride 1)
Conv 2D size 7 (stride 1)
Global max-pooling 2D
Global max-pooling 2D
Global max-pooling 2D
Feature concatenation
Output layer
Figure 9: Shallow convolutional neural network architecture to extract N-gram like features from the hexadecimal
representation of malware’s binary content. Notice that the only difference with respect to the architecture that extracts
N-gram like features from the assembly language source code of malware is the input. Instead of the raw bytes sequence,
the input is the sequence of opcodes extracted from the assembly code.
errors of the previous tree. This is achieved by combining sequentially the weak learners in a way that each new learner
ﬁts to the residuals from the previous steps so that the model improves. Afterwards, the ﬁnal model aggregates the
results from each step to build the strong learner. Notice that to detect the residuals a loss function should be used, e.g.
the logarithmic loss for classiﬁcation tasks. Subsequently, adding many trees sequentially, and each one focusing in the
errors from the previous one, makes boosting a highly efﬁcient and accurate model for classiﬁcation tasks.
Evaluation
The Microsoft Malware Classiﬁcation Challenge Dataset
The task of Windows malware detection has not received the same attention by the research community as other
domains, where rich datasets exist . In addition, the copyright laws that prevent sharing benign software has
exacerbated this situation. As a result, no dataset containing benign and malicious software is available to the public for
research. The only benchmark available for malware detection is the Ember dataset , which provides a collection of
features from PE ﬁles. However, the raw binaries are not included and thus, the application of deep learning or the
extraction of new features from the executables is not possible. To make things worse, even as malicious binaries may
be obtained for internal use through web services such as VirusTotal, its subsequent sharing of the binary or the vendor
antimalware labels assigned are prohibited. Furthermore, unlike other domains where data samples may be labeled
quickly and, in most cases by a non-expert, determining if a ﬁle is malicious or not is a very time consuming and
complex process, even for security experts. This issues makes it impossible to meaningfully compare accuracy across
works because different datasets with distinct labeling procedures are used from one work to another. For this reason,
instead of creating our own private dataset, we decided to evaluate our system with the data provided by Microsoft for
the Big Data Innovators Gathering Challenge of 2015, the only high-quality public labeled benchmark available for
malware classiﬁcation research .
This dataset has become the standard benchmark to evaluate machine learning approaches for malware classiﬁcation
and currently, it is publicly available in the Kaggle platform 11. It includes half a terabyte of data consisting of 10868
samples for training and 10873 samples for testing. To sum up, the dataset contains samples representing 9 different
malware families, where each sample has associated two ﬁles: (1) the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary
11 
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Feature vector −→v
Feature vector −→
Feature vector −→z
Figure 10: Early fusion strategy
content and (2) its corresponding assembly language source code, generated using the IDA Pro disassembler 12. Cf.
Figures 2 and 3. The families represented are the following: (1) Ramnit, (2) Lollipop, (3) Kelihos_ver3, (4) Vundo, (5)
Simda, (6) Tracur, (7) Kelihos_ver1, (8) Obfuscator.acy and (9) Gatak. Following, a brief description of the behavior of
each family is provided according to Microsoft Security Intelligence 13.
Ramnit. This worm family is reported to have the capability to steal your sensitive information such as saved FTP
credentials and browser cookies, and can spread via removable drives.
Lollipop. This adware family is reported to display ads in your browser as you navigate the Internet. In addition, it can
also redirect your search engine results, monitor your PC and download other applications.
Kelihos_ver3. This backdoor family is reported to install on the system in order to download other components, and
includes a backdoor that gives the attacker further control over the affected system. Computer systems affected
by this malware were used as bots in the Kelihos botnet, now deceased. Version 3 of the software.
Vundo. This trojan family is reported to cause popups and advertising for rogue anti-spyware programs.
Simda. This backdoor family is reported to install on the system to give an attacker remote control of the system. In
addition, this malware is reported to steal personal and system data, take screenshots and download additional
Tracur. This family of malware is reported to redirect you Internet search queries to malicious URLs to download and
install other malware.
Kelihos_ver1. This backdoor family is reported to install on the system in order to download other components, and
includes a backdoor that gives the attacker further control over the affected system. Computer systems affected
by this malware were used as bots in the Kelihos botnet, now deceased. Version 1 of the malicious software.
Obfuscator.ACY. This family of malware comprises software that has been obfuscated, that is, software that has tried
to hide its behavior or purpose so that anti-malware engines do not detect it. The software that lies underneath
this obfuscation can have any purpose.
Gatak. This trojan family is reported to silently download and install other software without the user’s consent.
12 
13 
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
As it can be observed in Table 4, the dataset is very imbalanced and the class distribution is not uniform among families,
i.e. the number of samples belonging to some families signiﬁcantly outnumber the number of samples belonging to the
remaining families.
Table 4: Class distribution in the Microsoft dataset 
Kelihos_ver3
TrojanDownloader
Kelihos_ver1
Obfuscator.ACY
Obfuscated malware
Experimental Setup
The system has been deployed on a machine with an Intel Core i7-7700k CPU, 2xGeforce GTX1080Ti GPUs and 64Gb
RAM. To implement the convolutional neural network architectures it has been used Tensorﬂow .
The generalization performance of our multimodal approach has been estimated using k-fold cross validation, with
k equals to 10. K-fold cross validation is a model validation technique to assess how accurately a predictive model
will perform in practice. In k-fold validation, the dataset is partitioned into k folds of equal size. Then, the following
procedure is followed for each one of the k folds:
• A model is trained using k −1 of the folds as training data.
• The resulting model is validated on the remaining fold of the data.
Afterwards, the performance measure reported is the average of the values achieved for each fold.
Next, are presented the performance metrics and the experiments carried out to evaluate our multimodal approach. In
particular, the experiments have been designed to evaluate the classiﬁcation performance of each individual subset of
features, to compare the performance of the model with and without hand-crafted and deep features, and to evaluate
the fusion of features using early fusion and the forward stepwise selection algorithm. Lastly, our approach has been
compared with the state-of-the-art approaches in the literature.
Performance Metrics
Regarding the performance metrics used to evaluate our approach, we will report two metrics, the accuracy and the
logarithmic loss.
The accuracy is simply the fraction of correct predictions. Formally, accuracy is deﬁned as follows:
accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
However, accuracy alone is not a good evaluation metric to assess the robustness of machine learning models in datasets
where there exist a large class imbalance. Subsequently, the multi-class logarithmic loss (logloss) has been used to to
assess the performance of the predictions. The logarithmic loss is the cross entropy between the distribution of true
labels and the predicted probabilities. Formally, it is deﬁned as follows:
logloss = −1
yi,j log(pi,j)
where N is the number of observations, M is the number of class labels, log is the natural logarithm, yi,j is 1 if the
observation i is in class j and 0 otherwise, and pi,j is the predicted probability that observation i is in class j. Notice
that for the test set it is only provided the multi-class logarithmic loss or logloss. This is because the labels of the
samples in the test set are not provided and to assess the performance of a given model you need to submit the predicted
probabilities to Kaggle.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Individual Subsets of Features Performance Analysis
Table 5 presents the 10-fold cross validation accuracy and logloss achieved by the machine learning models trained
using only an individual subset of features in the training and test sets. XGboost has various hyperparameters that are
completely tunable. Cf. Table 6. For now, we will skip the details of the hyperparameters and set all of them to their
baseline value. Table 5 gives us some clues about the discriminative power of each feature category. There are three
feature categories that have very low accuracy and high logarithmic loss in comparison to the remaining ones. The
feature categories are the following: BYTE_MD, ASM_MD, and ASM_PIXEL. This means that this type of features
alone are not enough to correctly categorize malware into families with high accuracy, but as described in Section 5.2.3,
some of them are very valuable in the construction of the multimodal boosted decision trees. Thus, we decided to
keep this features in our ﬁnal model. However, the classiﬁcation performance of the models trained on a single feature
category cannot compete with the state-of-the-art approaches in the literature. Thus, in the following sections various
mechanisms to fuse the different feature categories are studied. See Section 5.2.6.
Table 5: Classiﬁcation performance of each feature category
Feature Category
BYTE_HARALICK
BYTE_IMG_CNN
BYTE_ENT_CNN
BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN
ASM_NGRAMS_CNN
One beneﬁt of gradient boosting trees is that in order to construct the decision trees, they have to explicitly calculate the
importance for each feature in the dataset. Feature importance is a score that indicates how useful or valuable each
feature has been in the construction of the boosted decision trees. The more a particular feature has been selected to
make key decisions in the decision trees, the higher its relative importance. For a single decision tree, importance
is calculated by the amount each feature split point improves the performance measure, weighted by the number of
observations the node is responsible for. In the case of XGBoost, this performance measure is the purity (Gini index)
used to select the split points. These feature importances are then averaged across all of the decision trees within the
model to retrieve their ﬁnal importance scores. Accordingly, we included the top 20 most important features for each
feature category in A.
Table 6: List of hyperparameters and their values
Hyperparameter
Baseline Value
Best Value
Description
Step size shrinkage.
Maximum depth of a tree.
Minimum loss reduction required to make a further partition on a leaf node of the tree.
min_child_weight
Minimum sum of instance weight (hessian) needed in a child.
colsample_bytree
It is the subsample ratio of columns when constructing each tree.
Subsample ratio of the training instances.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Early-fusion Performance
This second experiment aims at studying the performance of the boosted trees models when trained with various feature
categories combined using early-fusion with and without the deep features. Subsequently, we trained the following
Hex-based hand-crafted features. It refers to the model trained using the features manually extracted from the
hexadecimal view of malware. Feature categories: BYTE_MD, BYTE_1G, BYTE_ENT, BYTE_HARALICK,
Hex-based hand-crafted & deep features. It refers to the model trained using both the hand-crafted and deep features
extracted from the hexadecimal view of malware. Feature categories: BYTE_MD, BYTE_1G, BYTE_ENT,
BYTE_LBP, BYTE_HARALICK, BYTE_IMG_CNN, BYTE_ENT_CNN, BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN.
Assembly-based hand-crafted features. It refers to the model trained using the features manually extracted from the
assembly view of malware. Feature categories: ASM_MD, ASM_OPC, ASM_PIXEL, ASM_REG, ASM_SYM,
ASM_API, ASM_DD, ASM_SEC, ASM_MISC.
Assemly-based hand-crafted & deep features. It refers to the model trained using both the hand-crafted and deep features extracted from the assembly view of malware. Feature categories: ASM_MD, ASM_OPC, ASM_PIXEL,
ASM_REG, ASM_SYM, ASM_API, ASM_DD, ASM_SEC, ASM_MISC, ASM_NGRAMS_CNN.
Hand-crafted features. It refers to the model trained using the features manually extracted from both the hexadecimal
and assembly view of malware. Feature categories:
BYTE_MD, BYTE_1G, BYTE_ENT, BYTE_HARALICK,
BYTE_LBP, ASM_MD, ASM_OPC, ASM_PIXEL, ASM_REG, ASM_SYM, ASM_API, ASM_DD, ASM_SEC,
Deep features. It refers to the model trained using the features transferred from the deep learning models. Feature
categories: BYTE_IMG_CNN, BYTE_ENT_CNN,
BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN, ASM_NGRAMS_CNN.
Hand-crafted & deep features. It refers to the model trained using both the hand-crafted and deep features extracted from the hexadecimal and the assembly view of malware. Feature categories: BYTE_MD, BYTE_1G,
BYTE_ENT, BYTE_HARALICK, BYTE_LBP, ASM_MD, ASM_OPC,
ASM_PIXEL, ASM_REG, ASM_SYM, ASM_API, ASM_DD, ASM_SEC, ASM_MISC, BYTE_IMG_CNN,
BYTE_ENT_CNN, BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN, ASM_NGRAMS_CNN.
Table 7: Classiﬁcation performance of the early-fusion models.
Feature Category
Hex-based hand-crafted features
Hex-based hand-crafted & deep features
Assembly-based hand-crafted features
Assembly-based hand-crafted & deep features
Hand-crafted features
Deep features
Hand-crafted & deep features
Table 7 presents the classiﬁcation performance of the aforementioned methods. It can be observed that the models
trained with both hand-crafted and deep features achieve higher accuracy and lower logarithmic loss than their handcrafted counterpart. However, the more complex model, the lower its performance. It can be observed that the model
trained with hand-crafted and deep features from both the hexadecimal and the assembly view of malware, contains
956 more features than the hand-crafted model, making it more prone to overﬁtting. Overﬁtting occurs when the
classiﬁcation model models too well the training data, that is, the details and noise in the training data, to the extent that
it negatively impacts the performance of the model on new data (fails to generalize to unseen data). For this reason,
the hyperparameters of the XGBoost models were tuned to avoid overﬁtting. In particular, we performed an heuristic
search over the hyperparameters listed in Table 6. Following, is provided a brief description of each hyperparameter:
• eta. Eta is the learning rate of our gradient boosted trees model. It indicates how much we update the prediction
with each successive tree. The lower the eta is, the more conservative the boosting process will be.
• max_depth. It refers to the maximum depth of a tree.The large max_depth is, the more complex and likely to
overﬁt the model will be.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
(a) Number of times a feature category has been used to split
the data across all trees.
(b) Average gain across all splits the feature categories have
been used in.
Figure 11: Importance of each feature category.
• gamma. The gamma is the minimum loss reduction required to make a further partition on a leaf node of the
tree. A larger gamma makes the algorithm more conservative.
• min_child_weight. It refers to the minimum sum of instance weight needed in a leaf. If the weight for every
instance is 1, it directly indicates to the minimum number of instances needed in a node.
• colsample_bytree. It indicates the subsample ratio of features when constructing each tree.
• subsample. It refers to the subsample ratio of the training instances. For instance, setting its value to 0.5 means
that XGBoost would randomly sample half of the training data prior to growing trees.
By training the boosted trees model using the best hyperparameters deﬁned in Table 6 we have been able to ﬁne-tune
the algorithm and reduce the logarithmic loss achieved on the test set from 0.008860 to 0.00636, the second lowest loss
reported in any published article by a single model so far, only behind the model trained using both the hand-crafted
and deep features extracted from the assembly view of malware, which achieved a logloss of 0.00516. Notice that
state-of-the-art approaches in the literature employ one or more ensemble learning techniques such as bagging.
However, the fact that the model trained with only the assembly features achieves better results than the model using all
features indicates that there are at least one or more subsets of features that do not apply to new data and negatively
affect the model’s ability to generalize. In addition, as it can be observed in Figure 11, the number of times a particular
feature occurs in the trees of the model greatly varies between categories. For instance, the model trained with all
features has used features from the BYTE_CNN, BYTE_CNN_IMG, ASM_CNN_OPCODES and ASM_PIXEL categories
840, 291, 310 and 300 times, respectively. On the other hand, metadata features (ASM_MD and BYTE_MD) and data
deﬁne features (ASM_DD) have not been used for building the ﬁnal model. However, it is not possible to know if it
is because of their unimportance or because the combination of other features achieves the same effect. Given this
circumstances, we decided to use various feature selection techniques to select the most discriminant subset of features.
Feature Selection
Fusing all subsets of features into a single feature vector produces a feature vector of size equals to 3349, quite large
compared to the number of training instances, which is 10868. However, as it can be observed in Section 5.2.3, a
feature vector with all features is not optimal and produces an overﬁtted model, i.e. a model with poor generalization
performance. What is happening is known as the Hughes phenomenon. That is, as the number of features grows, the
classiﬁer’s performance increases until it reaches the optimal number of features. Afterwards, the performance of
the classiﬁer decreases as the dimensionality of the feature space increases, under the assumption that the number of
training samples remains ﬁxed.
In theory, the classiﬁcation algorithm used to train our models (see Section 4.4) naturally selects which features are
most important when constructing the decision trees. However, as it can be observed in Section 5.2.3, when the model
is trained using all features it ends up overﬁtting the training data and performing poorly on the test set. In consequence,
univariate feature selection has been investigated to select a subset of the features that have a major statistically
signiﬁcant relationship with the target variable (the malware families) based on various univariate statistical tests. More
speciﬁcally, the best subset of features has been selected using the Chi-squared , the ANOVA F-value , and
the Mutual Information score functions. Unfortunately, as it can be observed in Table 8, the models trained using
univariate feature selection performed poorly in comparison to the models presented in Section 5.2.3. Our intuition is
that, as univariate feature selection works by selecting the features that have a signiﬁcant statistical relationship with the
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
target variable (class or family) and does not take into account the relationship between features, it might be discarding
features that alone are not very discriminant but work well in combination with other features. In consequence, a
wrapper method to select the best subset of features has been proposed.
Table 8: List of models trained using the K best features according to various univariate metrics and their evaluation
with XGBoost.
Chi square
ANOVA f-value
Mutual Information
Forward Stepwise Selection Technique
Starting with a model containing no features, the forward stepwise selection algorithm gradually increases the feature
set by adding subsets of features, one by one. To determine the subset of features to add at each step, it is used the
logarithmic loss achieved on the validation set using K-fold cross validation, where K equals 3. That is, at each step,
we add to the feature set the subset of features that produce the minimum value of the logarithmic loss. This process
stops when adding more subsets of features does not decrease the value of the logarithmic loss. The rationale behind
using a smaller K than in Section 5.2.3 is that it greatly reduces the training computational time as it reduces to three
the number of models to be trained. Unfortunately, as it can be observed in Table 9, although adding more subsets of
Table 9: Gradual addition of feature categories using the forward stepwise selection algorithm.
Feature Category
Number of features
C1: ASM_NGRAMS_CNN
C2: C1 + ASM_PIXEL
C3: C2 + BYTE_IMG_CNN
C4: C3 + ASM_API
C5: C4 + BYTE_1G
C6: C5 + BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN
C7: C6 + ASM_OPC
C8: C7 + BYTE_LBP
C9: C8 + ASM_MD
C10: C9 + ASM_REG
features decrease the logarithmic loss on the validation set, when the model is evaluated on the test set, better results
have been achieved by a model with a smaller subset of features. In this case, the lowest logarithmic loss on the test set
has been achieved by a model trained using only two feature subsets: (1) ASM_NGRAMS_CNN, and (2) ASM_PIXEL.
Comparison with the State-Of-The-Art
Given that previous feature selection techniques have not achieved better results than the model trained using only the
assembly features, we built the ﬁnal model using as features those extracted from the assembly language source code,
ASM_MD, ASM_OPC, ASM_PIXEL, ASM_REG, ASM_SYM, ASM_API,
ASM_DD, ASM_SEC, ASM_MISC, ASM_NGRAMS_CNN, plus three feature subsets from the binary content,
BYTE_1G, and BYTE_NGRAMS_CNN. The reason is that adding any other of the feature subsets deteriorates the
classiﬁcation performance of the system.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
Next, our approach is compared with the state-of-the-art methods in the literature that are based on feature engineering
and deep learning. Only approaches that have evaluated their methods using the Microsoft benchmark and employ
K-fold cross validation have been selected for comparison. This has been done to ensure fairness when comparing the
methods. Take into account that methods evaluated on different datasets are not directly comparable, and most often
than not, the source code is not available online or it does not work properly, i.e. the parameters have been optimized for
their own dataset, there are missing libraries, etc. For this reason, the results presented in Table 10 are those published
in their original publications, without modiﬁcations.
Table 10: Comparison with the state-of-the-art methods on the Microsoft Malware Classiﬁcation Challenge benchmark.
Those approaches that their authors have not tested their performance on the test set or did not make public the K-fold
cross validation accuracy or logarithmic loss appear with a ‘-’ mark. Approaches with a ‘*’ mark indicate that they
performed 5-fold cross validation instead of 10-fold cross validation. Approaches that have not performed K-fold cross
validation but have used a single hold-out validation set are marked with "**".
10-fold Cross Validation
Narayanan et al. 
Grayscale images
Kebede et al. **
Grayscale images
Gibert et al. 
Grayscale images
Kalash et al. **
Grayscale images
Liu et al. 
Grayscale images
Vinayakumar et al. 
Grayscale images
Lo et al. 
Grayscale images
Qiao et al. 
Grayscale images
Sudhakar and Kumar 
Grayscale images
Xiao et al. 
Grayscale images
Çayır et al. **
Grayscale images
Lin and Yeh 
Grayscale images
Yuan et al. 
Markov images
Kim et al. 
RGB images
Jiang et al. 
RGB images
Zhang et al. 
RGB images
Gibert et al. 
Structural entropy
Xiao et al. 
Structural entropy
Yan et al. 
Control ﬂow graph
Hu et al. 
Opcode 4-grams
Gibert et al. 
Opcode sequence
Gibert et al. 
Opcode sequence
McLaughlin et al. 
Opcode sequence
Youseﬁ-Azar et al. 
Byte sequence
Drew et al. 
Byte sequence
Raff et al. 
Byte sequence
Krˇcál et al. 
Byte sequence
Kim and Cho 
Byte sequence
Le et al. 
Compressed byte sequence
Gibert et al. 
Compressed byte sequence
Messay-Kebede et al. 
Opcode statistics and byte sequence
Gibert et al. 
Opcode and byte sequences
Gibert et al. 
API calls, Opcode and byte sequences
Gao et al. *
Hand-crafted features
Ahmadi et al. *
Hand-crafted features
Zhang et al. 
Hand-crafted features
Proposed system
Hand-crafted and deep features
As it can be observed, our multimodal approach achieves the highest accuracy and lowest logarithmic loss in the training
set using K-fold cross validation, and the lowest logarithmic loss in the test set, outperforming any machine learning
approach presented in the literature so far. This has been possible thanks to the N-gram like features extracted by the
shallow convolutional neural networks from both the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary content and
its assembly language source code. This features are not only discriminant but also computationally inexpensive in
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
comparison to traditional N-gram features, which require to manually enumerate all N-grams during training, and
later reduce and select a smaller subset of characterizing N-grams by employing feature selection or dimensionality
reduction techniques. In addition, our approach outperformed state-of-the-art approaches without employing sampling
techniques, stacking and ensemble learning techniques as in Zhang et al. and Ahmadi et al. .
Conclusions
In this paper, we present a novel multimodal approach that combines feature engineering and deep learning to extract
features from both the hexadecimal representation of malware’s binary content and its assembly language source code
to achieve state-of-the-art performance in the task of malware classiﬁcation. To the best of our knowledge, this research
is the ﬁrst application to combine feature engineering and deep learning using a simple, but yet effective, early fusion
mechanism for the problem of malware classiﬁcation. The success of our multimodal approach would not had been
possible without the extraction of the N-gram like features using the shallow convolutional neural networks trained
on the bytes and opcodes sequence representing malware’s binary content and its assembly language source code,
respectively, which provide a computational inexpensive way to extract long N-gram like features without having to
exhaustively enumerate all N-grams during training. Furthermore, by fusing hand-crafted features and deep features we
have been able to combine the strengths of both approaches, descriptive domain-speciﬁc features and the ability of deep
learning to automatically learn to extract features from sequential data without relying on the experts’ knowledge of the
Reported results allow to assess its effectiveness with respect to the state-of-the-art for the task of malware classiﬁcation,
achieving the highest accuracy and lowest logarithmic loss reported in the Microsoft benchmark so far, while only using
a single model to generate the ﬁnal predictions.
Future Work
One future line of research could be the design and development of new architectures to extract features from malware’s
representation as grayscale images or its structural entropy as they perform below average in comparison with other
features. In addition, a second line of research could be the analysis of the performance of various texture pattern
extractors, to complement the Haralick and Local Binary Pattern feature extractors. Lastly, a third line of research could
be the study of ensemble learning techniques such as blending and bagging, to build a stronger classiﬁer by combining
multiple models. In addition, the following limitations and open research questions should be dealt with in order to
address the threat of malware.
Limitations of Deep Learning
With the vertical (numbers and volumes) and horizontal ( types and functionality) expansion of malware threats during
the last decade, malware detection has remained a hot topic as the number of yearly publications addressing the task
demonstrate and it is still far from being solved. Recently, deep learning has started being adopted because of its ability
to extract features from raw data . However, its application to the task of malware detection and classiﬁcation
has been limited so far due to the computational resources required to train such models. Take into account that
depending on the type of input we might end up dealing with sequences of millions of time steps, which far exceeds
the length of the input of any previous deep learning sequence classiﬁer, leading to a huge consumption of the GPU
memory in the ﬁrst convolutional layers and the use of large ﬁlter widths and strides to balance the memory usage and
the computational workload. This has forced researchers to explore alternatives to reduce and compress the information
in the bytes sequence to make it a manageable problem .
In addition, contrarily to computer vision, where the features extracted by deep learning aim to replace previous feature
extractors, for the problem of malware detection the features learned through deep learning greatly differ from those
usually extracted by domain experts to provide an abstract representation of the executable. More speciﬁcally, deep
learning is only capable to substitute N-gram features, one of the many types of features usually extracted to characterize
the executables. In consequence, machine learning systems trained on hand-engineered features tend to outperform
deep learning approaches. For an extended description of common features extracted by domain experts we refer the
readers to the work of Anderson et al. and the references therein.
Open Research Questions
Persistent research efforts have been made using machine learning to address the threat of malware. However, machine
learning models have proved to be susceptible to adversarial examples and concept drift.
Fusing Feature Engineering and Deep Learning: A Case Study for Malware Classiﬁcation
On the one hand, adversarial examples are inputs to a machine learning model that have been speciﬁcally crafted to
exploit the weakness of the ML model in order to incorrectly label the malicious sample as benign. For instance,
Hu et al. proposed to craft the adversarial examples using a generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture
named MalGAN, which learns which API imports should be added to the original sample to bypass detection. Sucio et
al. proposed to modify the existing bytes of a binary by appending content of benign executables and by using the
Fast Gradient Method to modify the random bytes appended at the end of the executables until the adversarial
example evades detection. Demetrio et al. proposed a functionality-preserving black-box optimization attack based
on the injection of content of benign executables. To do so, they either inject code at the end of the ﬁle or within
some newly-created section. Demetrio et al. proposed three functionality-preserving attacks against ML-based
models. These attacks, named Full DOS, Extend, and Shift, inject a crafted payload by manipulating the DOS header,
extending it, and shifting the content in the ﬁrst section, respectively. Given the success of the aforementioned attacks,
countermeasures must be developed in other to mitigate the threat of malware. One mitigation strategy may be to
consider features that are not affected by the changes at the section or byte level. Another countermeasure may be
adversarial retraining. That is, including adversarial examples generated by the aforementioned attacks on the training
On the other hand, concept drift refers to the problem of changing underlying relationships in the data over time.
Traditional machine learning methods assume that the mapping learned from historical data will be valid for new data
in the future and the relationships between input and output do not change over time. However, malware is pushed to
evolve in order to evade detection, making this assumption false. Moreover, malicious software, as any other piece
of software, naturally evolve over time due to changes resulting from adding features, ﬁxing bugs, porting to new
environments, etcetera. Therefore, the performance of any ML-based detector naturally degrades over time as malware
evolves. To tackle concept drift, Jordaney et al. proposed a framework to identify aging classiﬁcation models during
deployment. This is done by assessing the quality of the prediction made by the machine learning model. It builds and
make use of p-values to compute a per-class threshold to identify unreliable predictions. The idea behind is to detect
when the model’s performance starts to degrade before it actually happens. Contrarily, Pendlebury et al. proposed a
set of space and time constraints that eliminate "spatial bias", training and testing distributions not representative of the
real-world data, and "temporal bias", incorrect time splits of training and testing sets. In addition, they introduced a set
of time-aware performance metrics that allows for the comparison of different classiﬁers while considering time decay.
Following the aforementioned research, new approaches might be developed to deal with concept drift by classiﬁcation
with rejection, in which examples that have drifted far away from the training distribution, and thus are likely to be
misclassiﬁed by the ML models, are quarantined.
Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from Enterprise Ireland, the Spanish Science and Innovation Ministry funded project
PID2019-111544GB-C22, the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 847402. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied, of CeADAR,
University College Dublin, and the University of Lleida.
Conﬂicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that may appear to
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.