Scalable Object Detection using Deep Neural Networks
Dumitru Erhan Christian Szegedy Alexander Toshev Dragomir Anguelov
{dumitru, szegedy, toshev, dragomir}@google.com
Deep convolutional neural networks have recently
achieved state-of-the-art performance on a number of
image recognition benchmarks, including the ImageNet
Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge .
The winning model on the localization sub-task was a network that predicts a single bounding box and a conﬁdence
score for each object category in the image. Such a model
captures the whole-image context around the objects but
cannot handle multiple instances of the same object in the
image without naively replicating the number of outputs for
each instance. In this work, we propose a saliency-inspired
neural network model for detection, which predicts a set of
class-agnostic bounding boxes along with a single score for
each box, corresponding to its likelihood of containing any
object of interest. The model naturally handles a variable
number of instances for each class and allows for crossclass generalization at the highest levels of the network. We
are able to obtain competitive recognition performance on
VOC2007 and ILSVRC2012, while using only the top few
predicted locations in each image and a small number of
neural network evaluations.
1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision. A common paradigm to address this problem
is to train object detectors which operate on a subimage and
apply these detectors in an exhaustive manner across all locations and scales. This paradigm was successfully used
within a discriminatively trained Deformable Part Model
(DPM) to achieve state-of-art results on detection tasks .
The exhaustive search through all possible locations and
scales poses a computational challenge. This challenge becomes even harder as the number of classes grows, since
most of the approaches train a separate detector per class.
In order to address this issue a variety of methods were
proposed, varying from detector cascades, to using segmentation to suggest a small number of object hypotheses
 .
In this paper, we ascribe to the latter philosphy and propose to train a detector, called “DeepMultiBox”,’ which
generates a few bounding boxes as object candidates. These
boxes are generated by a single DNN in a class agnostic
manner. Our model has several contributions. First, we de-
ﬁne object detection as a regression problem to the coordinates of several bounding boxes. In addition, for each predicted box the net outputs a conﬁdence score of how likely
this box contains an object. This is quite different from traditional approaches, which score features within predeﬁned
boxes, and has the advantage of expressing detection of objects in a very compact and efﬁcient way.
The second major contribution is the loss, which trains
the bounding box predictors as part of the network training.
For each training example, we solve an assignment problem
between the current predictions and the groundtruth boxes
and update the matched box coordinates, their conﬁdences
and the underlying features through Backpropagation. In
this way, we learn a deep net tailored towards our localization problem. We capitalize on the excellent representation
learning abilities of DNNs, as recently exepliﬁed recently in
image classiﬁcation and object detection settings ,
and perform joint learning of representation and predictors.
Finally, we train our object box predictor in a classagnostic manner. We consider this as a scalable way to enable efﬁcient detection of large number of object classes.
We show in our experiments that by only post-classifying
less than ten boxes, obtained by a single network application, we can achieve state-of-art detection results. Further,
we show that our box predictor generalizes over unseen
classes and as such is ﬂexible to be re-used within other
detection problems.
2. Previous work
The literature on object detection is vast, and in this section we will focus on approaches exploiting class-agnostic
ideas and addressing scalability.
Many of the proposed detection approaches are based on
part-based models , which more recently have achieved
impressive performance thanks to discriminative learning
and carefully crafted features . These methods, however,
 
rely on exhaustive application of part templates over multiple scales and as such are expensive. Moreover, they scale
linearly in the number of classes, which becomes a challenge for modern datasets such as ImageNet.
To address the former issue, Lampert et al. use a
branch-and-bound strategy to avoid evaluating all potential
object locations. To address the latter issue, Song et al. 
use a low-dimensional part basis, shared across all object
classes. A hashing based approach for efﬁcient part detection has shown good results as well .
A different line of work, closer to ours, is based on the
idea that objects can be localized without having to know
their class. Some of these approaches build on bottom-up
classless segmentation . The segments, obtained in this
way, can be scored using top-down feedback . Using the same motivation, Alexe et al. use an inexpensive classiﬁer to score object hypotheses for being an object or not and in this way reduce the number of location
for the subsequent detection steps. These approaches can
be thought of as Multi-layered models, with segmentation
as ﬁrst layer and a segment classiﬁcation as a subsequent
layer. Despite the fact that they encode proven perceptual
principles, we will show that having deeper models which
are fully learned can lead to superior results.
Finally, we capitalize on the recent advances in Deep
Learning, most noticeably the work by Krizhevsky et
al. . We extend their bounding box regression approach
for detection to the case of handling multiple objects in a
scalable manner. DNN-based regression, to object masks
however, has been applied by Szegedy et al. .
last approach achieves state-of-art detection performance
but does not scale up to multiple classes due to the cost of a
single mask regression.
3. Proposed approach
We aim at achieving a class-agnostic scalable object detection by predicting a set of bounding boxes, which represent potential objects. More precisely, we use a Deep
Neural Network (DNN), which outputs a ﬁxed number of
bounding boxes. In addition, it outputs a score for each box
expressing the networkconﬁdence of this box containing an
To formalize the above idea, we encode the i-th
object box and its associated conﬁdence as node values of
the last net layer:
Bounding box: we encode the upper-left and lower-right
coordinates of each box as four node values, which can
be written as a vector li ∈R4. These coordinates are
normalized w. r. t. image dimensions to achieve invariance to absolute image size. Each normalized coordinate is produced by a linear transformation of the last
hidden layer.
Conﬁdence: the conﬁdence score for the box containing
an object is encoded as a single node value ci ∈ .
This value is produced through a linear transformation
of the last hidden layer followed by a sigmoid.
We can combine the bounding box locations li, i
{1, . . . K}, as one linear layer. Similarly, we can treat collection of all conﬁdences ci, i ∈{1, . . . K} as the output as
one sigmoid layer. Both these output layers are connected
to the last hidden layers.
At inference time, out algorithm produces K bounding boxes.
In our experiments, we use K = 100 and
K = 200. If desired, we can use the conﬁdence scores
and non-maximum suppression to obtain a smaller number
of high-conﬁdence boxes at inference time. These boxes are
supposed to represent objects. As such, they can be classi-
ﬁed with a subsequent classiﬁer to achieve object detection.
Since the number of boxes is very small, we can afford powerful classiﬁers. In our experiments, we use another DNN
for classiﬁcation .
Training Objective
We train a DNN to predict bounding
boxes and their conﬁdence scores for each training image
such that the highest scoring boxes match well the ground
truth object boxes for the image. Suppose that for a particular training example, M objects were labeled by bounding
boxes gj, j ∈{1, . . . , M}. In practice, the number of predictions K is much larger than the number of groundtruth
boxes M. Therefore, we try to optimize only the subset of
predicted boxes which match best the ground truth ones. We
optimize their locations to improve their match and maximize their conﬁdences. At the same time we minimize the
conﬁdences of the remaining predictions, which are deemed
not to localize the true objects well.
To achieve the above, we formulate an assignment problem for each training example. We xij ∈{0, 1} denote the
assignment: xij = 1 iff the i-th prediction is assigned to
j-th true object. The objective of this assignment can be
expressed as:
Fmatch(x, l) = 1
xij||li −gj||2
where we use L2 distance between the normalized bounding box coordinates to quantify the dissimilarity between
bounding boxes.
Additionally, we want to optimize the conﬁdences of the
boxes according to the assignment x. Maximizing the con-
ﬁdences of assigned predictions can be expressed as:
Fconf(x, c) = −
xij log(ci)−
xij) log(1−ci)
In the above objective P
j xij = 1 iff prediction i has been
matched to a groundtruth. In that case ci is being maximized, while in the opposite case it is being minimized. A
different interpretation of the above term is achieved if we
j xij view as a probability of prediction i containing an
object of interest. Then, the above loss is the negative of the
entropy and thus corresponds to a max entropy loss.
The ﬁnal loss objective combines the matching and con-
ﬁdence losses:
F(x, l, c) = αFmatch(x, l) + Fconf(x, c)
subject to constraints in Eq. 1. α balances the contribution
of the different loss terms.
Optimization
For each training example, we solve for an
optimal assignment x∗of predictions to true boxes by
x F(x, l, c)
subject to
xij ∈{0, 1},
where the constraints enforce an assignment solution. This
is a variant of bipartite matching, which is polynomial in
complexity. In our application the matching is very inexpensive – the number of labeled objects per image is less
than a dozen and in most cases only very few objects are
Then, we optimize the network parameters via backpropagation. For example, the ﬁrst derivatives of the backpropagation algorithm are computed w. r. t. l and c:
(li −gj)x∗
Training Details
While the loss as deﬁned above is in
principle sufﬁcient, three modiﬁcations make it possible to
reach better accuracy signiﬁcantly faster.
The ﬁrst such
modiﬁcation is to perform clustering of ground truth locations and ﬁnd K such clusters/centroids that we can use as
priors for each of the predicted locations. Thus, the learning algorithm is encouraged to learn a residual to a prior, for
each of the predicted locations.
A second modiﬁcation pertains to using these priors in
the matching process: instead of matching the N ground
truth locations with the K predictions, we ﬁnd the best
match between the K priors and the ground truth. Once
the matching is done, the target conﬁdences are computed
as before. Moreover, the location prediction loss is also
unchanged: for any matched pair of (target, prediction)
locations, the loss is deﬁned by the difference between
the groundtruth and the coordinates that correspond to the
matched prior. We call the usage of priors for matching
prior matching and hypothesize that it enforces diversiﬁcation among the predictions.
It should be noted, that although we deﬁned our method
in a class-agnostic way, we can apply it to predicting object
boxes for a particular class. To do this, we simply need to
train our models on bounding boxes for that class.
Further, we can predict K boxes per class.
Unfortunately, this model will have number of parameters growing linearly with the number of classes. Also, in a typical setting, where the number of objects for a given class
is relatively small, most of these parameters will see very
few training examples with a corresponding gradient contribution. We argue thusly that our two-step process – ﬁrst
localize, then recognize – is a superior alternative in that
it allows leveraging data from multiple object types in the
same image using a small number of parameters.
4. Experimental results
4.1. Network Architecture and Experiment Details
The network architecture for the localization and classiﬁcation models that we use is the same as the one used
by . We use Adagrad for controlling the learning rate
decay, mini-batches of size 128, and parallel distributed
training with multiple identical replicas of the network,
which achieves faster convergence. As mentioned previously, we use priors in the localization loss – these are computed using k-means on the training set. We also use an α
of 0.3 to balance the localization and conﬁdence losses.
The localizer might output coordinates outside the crop
area used for the inference. The coordinates are mapped
and truncated to the ﬁnal image area, at the end. Boxes are
additionally pruned using non-maximum-suppression with
a Jaccard similarity threshold of 0.5. Our second model
then classiﬁes each bounding box as objects of interest or
“background”.
To train our localizer networks, we generated approximately 30 million images from the training set, applying
the following procedure to each image in the training set.
The samples are shufﬂed at the end. To train our localizer
networks, we generated approximately 30 million images
from the training set by applying the following procedure
to each image in the training set. For each image, we generate the same number of square samples such that the total
number of samples is about ten million. For each image, the
samples are bucketed such that for each of the ratios in the
ranges of 0 −5%, 5 −15%, 15 −50%, 50 −100%, there is
an equal number of samples in which the ratio covered by
the bounding boxes is in the given range.
The selection of the training set and most of our hyperparameters were based on past experiences with non-public
data sets. For the experiments below we have not explored
any non-standard data generation or regularization options.
In all experiments, all hyper-parameters were selected
by evaluating on a held out portion of the training set (10%
random choice of examples).
4.2. VOC 2007
The Pascal Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge 
is the most commong benchmark for object detection algorithms. It consists mainly of complex scene images in which
bounding boxes of 20 diverse object classes were labelled.
In our evaluation we focus on the 2007 edition of VOC,
for which a test set was released. We present results by
training on VOC 2012, which contains approx. 11000 images. We trained a 100 box localizer as well as a deep net
based classiﬁer .
Training methodology
We trained the classiﬁer on a data set comprising of
• 10 million crops overlapping some object with at least
0.5 Jaccard overlap similarity. The crops are labeled
with one of the 20 VOC object classes.
• 20 million negative crops that have at most 0.2 Jaccard
similarity with any of the object boxes. These crops
are labeled with the special “background” class label.
The architecture and the selection of hyperparameters followed that of .
Evaluation methodology
In the ﬁrst round, the localizer model is applied to the maximum center square crop in the image. The crop is resized
to the network input size which is 220 × 220. A single
pass through this network gives us up to hundred candidate boxes. After a non-maximum-suppression with overlap threshold 0.5, the top 10 highest scoring detections are
kept and were classiﬁed by the 21-way classiﬁer model in
a separate passes through the network. The ﬁnal detection
score is the product of the localizer score for the given box
multiplied by the score of the classiﬁer evaluated on the
maximum square region around the crop. These scores are
passed to the evaluation and were used for computing the
precision recall curves.
4.3. Discussion
First, we analyze the performance of our localizer in isolation. We present the number of detected objects, as de-
ﬁned by the Pascal detection criterion, against the number
of produced bounding boxes. In Fig. 1 plot we show results
obtained by training on VOC2012. In addition, we present
results by using the max-center square crop of the image as
input as well as by using two scales: the max-center crop by
a second scale where we select 3 × 3 windows of size 60%
of the image size.
Detection rate
Number of boxes
One shot (max center crop)
Max center + 1 scale
Max center + 2 scales
Figure 1. Detection rate of class “object” vs number of bounding
boxes per image. The model, used for these results, was trained on
As we can see, when using a budget of 10 bounding
boxes we can localize 45.3% of the objects with the ﬁrst
model, and 48% with the second model. This shows better
perfomance than other reported results, such as the objectness algorithm achieving 42% . Further, this plot shows
the importance of looking at the image at several resolutions. Although our algorithm manages to get large number
of objects by using the max-center crop, we obtain an additional boost when using higher resolution image crops.
Further, we classify the produced bounding boxes by a
21-way classiﬁer, as described above. The average precisions (APs) on VOC 2007 are presented in Table 1. The
achieved mean AP is 0.29, which is on par with state-of-art.
Note that, our running time complexity is very low – we
simply use the top 10 boxes.
Example detections and full precision recall curves are
shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively. It is important to
note that the visualized detections were obtained by using
only the max-centered square image crop, i. e. the full image was used. Nevertheless, we manage to obtain relatively
small objects, such as the boats in row 2 and column 2, as
well as the sheep in row 3 and column 3.
4.4. ILSVRC 2012 Detection Challenge
For this set of experiments, we used the ILSVRC
2012 detection challenge dataset. This dataset consists of
544,545 training images labeled with categories and locations of 1,000 object categories, relatively uniformly distributed among the classes. The validation set, on which
the performance metrics are calculated, consists of 48,238
Training methodology
In addition to a localization model that is identical (up to
the dataset on which it is trained on) to the VOC model, we
Figure 2. Sample of detection results on VOC 2007.
potted plant
Figure 3. Precision-recall curves on selected VOC classes.
DeepMultiBox
3-layer model 
Felz. et al. 
Girshick et al. 
Szegedy et al. 
DeepMultiBox
3-layer model 
Felz. et al. 
Girshick et al. 
Szegedy et al . 
Table 1. Average Precision on VOC 2007 test of our method, called DeepMultiBox, and other competitive methods. DeepMultibox was
trained on VOC2012 training data, while the rest of the models were trained on VOC2007 data.
also train a model on the ImageNet Classiﬁcation challenge
data, which will serve as the recognition model. This model
is trained in a procedure that is substantially similar to that
of and is able to achieve the same results on the classiﬁcation challenge validation set; note that we only train
a single model, instead of 7 – the latter brings substantial
beneﬁts in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, but is 7× more
expensive, which is not a negligible factor.
Inference is done as with the VOC setup: the number
of predicted locations is K = 100, which are then reduced
by Non-Max-Suppression (Jaccard overlap criterion of 0.4)
and which are post-scored by the classiﬁer: the score is the
product of the localizer conﬁdence for the given box multiplied by the score of the classiﬁer evaluated on the minimum square region around the crop. The ﬁnal scores (detection score times classiﬁcation score) are then sorted in
descending order and only the top scoring score/location
pair is kept for a given class (as per the challenge evaluation criterion).
In all experiments, the hyper-parameters were selected
by evaluating on a held out portion of the training set (10%
random choice of examples).
Evaluation methodology
The ofﬁcial metric of the “Classiﬁcation with localization“
ILSVRC-2012 challenge is detection@5, where an algorithm is only allowed to produce one box per each of the 5
labels (in other words, a model is neither penalized nor rewarded for producing valid multiple detections of the same
class), where the detection criterion is 0.5 Jaccard overlap
with any of the ground-truth boxes (in addition to the matching class label).
Table 4.4.2 contains a comparison of the proposed
dubbed DeepMultiBox,
with classifying the
ground-truth boxes directly and with the approach of inferring one box per class directly.
The metrics reported
are detection5 and classiﬁcation5, the ofﬁcial metrics for
the ILSVRC-2012 challenge metrics. In the table, we vary
the number of windows at which we apply the classiﬁer
(this number represents the top windows chosen after nonmax-suppression, the ranking coming from the conﬁdence
scores). The one-box-per-class approach is a careful reimplementation of the winning entry of ILSVRC-2012 (the
“classiﬁcation with localization” challenge), with 1 network
trained (instead of 7).
Table 2. Performance of Multibox (the proposed method) vs. classifying ground-truth boxes directly and predicting one box per
One-box-per-class
Classify GT directly
DeepMultiBox, top 1 window
DeepMultiBox, top 3 windows
DeepMultiBox, top 5 windows
DeepMultiBox, top 10 windows
DeepMultiBox, top 25 windows
We can see that the DeepMultiBox approach is quite
competitive: with 5-10 windows, it is able to perform about
as well as the competing approach. While the one-box-perclass approach may come off as more appealing in this particular case in terms of the raw performance, it suffers from
a number of drawbacks: ﬁrst, its output scales linearly with
the number of classes, for which there needs to be training
data. The multibox approach can in principle use transfer
learning to detect certain types of objects on which it has
never been speciﬁcally trained on, but which share similarities with objects that it has seen1. Figure 5 explores this
hypothesis by observing what happens when one takes a localization model trained on ImageNet and applies it on the
1For instance, if one trains with ﬁne-grained categories of dogs, it will
likely generalize to other kinds of breeds by itself
Figure 4. Some selected detection results on the ILSVRC-2012 detection challenge validation set.
VOC test set, and vice-versa. The ﬁgure shows a precisionrecall curve: in this case, we perform a class-agnostic detection: a true positive occurs if two windows (prediction
and groundtruth) overlap by more than 0.5, independently
of their class. Interestingly, the ImageNet-trained model is
able to capture more VOC windows than vice-versa: we
hypothesize that this is due to the ImageNet class set being
much richer than the VOC class set.
Secondly, the one-box-per-class approach does not generalize naturally to multiple instances of objects of the same
type (except via the the method presented in this work,
for instance). Figure 5 shows this too, in the comparison
between DeepMultiBox and the one-per-class approach2.
Generalizing to such a scenario is necessary for actual image understanding by algorithms, thus such limitations need
to be overcome, and our method is a scalable way of doing
so. Evidence supporting this statement is shown in Figure 5
shows that the proposed method is able to generally capture
more objects more accurately that a single-box method.
5. Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, we propose a novel method for localizing objects in an image, which predicts multiple bounding
boxes at a time. The method uses a deep convolutional neural network as a base feature extraction and learning model.
It formulates a multiple box localization cost that is able to
take advantage of variable number of groundtruth locations
2In the case of the one-box-per-class method, non-max-suppression is
performed on the 1000 boxes using the same criterion as the DeepMulti-
Box method
of interest in a given image and learn to predict such locations in unseen images.
We present results on two challenging benchmarks,
VOC2007 and ILSVRC-2012, on which the proposed
method is competitive. Moreover, the method is able to
perform well by predicting only very few locations to be
probed by a subsequent classiﬁer. Our results show that the
DeepMultiBox approach is scalable and can even generalize
across the two datasets, in terms of being able to predict locations of interest, even for categories on which it was not
trained on. Additionally, it is able to capture multiple instances of objects of the same class, which is an important
feature of algorithms that aim for better image understanding.
In the future, we hope to be able to fold the localization
and recognition paths into a single network, such that we
would be able to extract both location and class label information in a one-shot feed-forward pass through the network. Even in its current state, the two-pass procedure (localization network followed by categorization network) entails 5-10 network evaluations, each at roughly 1 CPU-sec
(modern machine). Importantly, this number does not scale
linearly with the number of classes to be recognized, which
makes the proposed approach very competitive with DPMlike approaches.