Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS in MDCT
cardiac imaging
Guang-Hong Chena
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705
and Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705
Jiang Hsieh
GE Healthcare, 300N Grandview Boulevard, Waukesha, Wisconsin 53188
Received 4 March 2009; revised 12 April 2009; accepted for publication 13 April 2009;
published 8 May 2009
The current paradigm for temporal resolution improvement is to add more source-detector units
and/or increase the gantry rotation speed. The purpose of this article is to present an innovative
alternative method to potentially improve temporal resolution by approximately a factor of 2 for all
MDCT scanners without requiring hardware modiﬁcation. The central enabling technology is a
most recently developed image reconstruction method: Prior image constrained compressed sensing
PICCS. Using the method, cardiac CT images can be accurately reconstructed using the projection
data acquired in an angular range of about 120°, which is roughly 50% of the standard short-scan
angular range 240° for an MDCT scanner. As a result, the temporal resolution of MDCT cardiac
imaging can be universally improved by approximately a factor of 2. In order to validate the
proposed method, two in vivo animal experiments were conducted using a state-of-the-art 64-slice
CT scanner GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI at different gantry rotation times and different heart
rates. One animal was scanned at heart rate of 83 beats per minute bpm using 400 ms gantry
rotation time and the second animal was scanned at 94 bpm using 350 ms gantry rotation time,
respectively. Cardiac coronary CT imaging can be successfully performed at high heart rates using
a single-source MDCT scanner and projection data from a single heart beat with gantry rotation
times of 400 and 350 ms. Using the proposed PICCS method, the temporal resolution of cardiac CT
imaging can be effectively improved by approximately a factor of 2 without modifying any scanner
hardware. This potentially provides a new method for single-source MDCT scanners to achieve
reliable coronary CT imaging for patients at higher heart rates than the current heart rate limit of
70 bpm without using the well-known multisegment FBP reconstruction algorithm. This method
also enables dual-source MDCT scanner to achieve higher temporal resolution without further
hardware modiﬁcations. © 2009 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.
DOI: 10.1118/1.3130018
Key words: MDCT, cardiac imaging, temporal resolution, coronary angiography
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in multidetector computed tomography
MDCT technology have enabled relatively high quality,
three-dimensional coronary computed tomography angiography using intravenous contrast agents injected through a peripheral intravenous catheter. In MDCT, the temporal resolution is primarily limited by the gantry rotation speed.1,2 In
order to accurately reconstruct an image using current reconstruction methods, the projection data acquired within an angular range of 180° plus the fan angle is required. Since the
fan angle for a typical MDCT scanner is about 60°, the minimally required data acquisition angular range is about 240°.
This short-scan angular range covers about 2/3 of a complete circle. This fact determines that the typical temporal
aperture of MDCT is about 50%–70% of the gantry rotation
time for a complete rotation. As a result, the best temporal
resolution of a single-source MDCT scanner is about 135 ms
when the rotation speed of 270 ms is used and about 175 ms
for 350 ms gantry rotation speed is used. For such a high
gantry rotation speed, it is highly nontrivial to maintain the
stability and functionality of the components on the gantry
and meet the regulatory safety requirements for a MDCT
scanner. Given these design considerations, it will be extremely challenging to increase the current gantry rotation
speed by a factor of 2 such that the temporal resolution can
be improved by a factor of 2.
Instead of increasing the gantry rotation speed to achieve
higher temporal resolution, a design concept using multiple
x-ray source-detector assemblies was introduced.3–7 Due to
the limited room available on a CT gantry, commercially
available MDCT systems introduced thus far have used two
source-detector units. The angular difference between the
two x-ray source positions is about 90°Fig. 1. Thus, when
the acquired projection data from the two source-detector
Med. Phys. 36 „6…, June 2009
0094-2405/2009/36„6…/2130/6/$25.00
© 2009 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.
units are combined, each source only needs to travel slightly
more than half of the short-scan angular range. As a result, a
complete data set for accurate reconstruction of the heart can
be acquired in a narrower cardiac window, and the temporal
resolution is improved by approximately a factor of 2. For a
gantry rotation speed of 330 ms, using the dual-sourcedetector design, the achievable temporal resolution is about
83 ms. This represents the best achievable temporal resolution among all of the state-of-the-art MDCT scanners.
In this article, instead of signiﬁcant hardware modiﬁcations, we propose to use a novel image reconstruction algorithm,
constrained
compressed
PICCS,8–10 to achieve temporal resolution improvement for
any single-source or dual-source MDCT scanner. For brevity,
the method is referred to as temporal resolution improvement
using PICCS TRI-PICCS. The basic framework of the proposed TRI-PICCS method is presented in Fig. 2. The essential innovation in the proposed method is to only use half of
the short-scan data and a low temporal resolution prior image for cardiac reconstruction. Note that the short-scan angular range is about 240°, which is the minimal data sufﬁciency condition to reconstruct the entire cross section within
the scanning ﬁeld of view. When the cardiac window is narrowed to half of the short-scan window, the available 120°
angular range normally does not enable accurate image reconstruction, and the images are contaminated by limitedview-angle shading artifacts. In fact, without a priori information, this image reconstruction problem is the classical
FIG. 1. Dual-source CT cardiac data acquisitions. The ﬁrst source S1 travels from A to B, while the second source S2 travels from D to C. The
short-scan angular range ADBC consists of the union of the angular ranges
of the two sources. The data acquisition takes place within the same cardiac
gating window, as shown in ECG signal sample.
FIG. 2. Illustration of the proposed temporal resolution improvement using PICCS TRI-PICCS method. A standard FBP image reconstruction method is used
to reconstruct a prior image from a short-scan data set acquired within a wide cardiac window labeled by two narrow solid bars in the top panel of the ﬁgure.
In the second step, only half of the short-scan data is used to reconstruct two separate cardiac images using the new TRI-PICCS algorithm. In each case, the
short-scan reconstruction was used as the prior image. The resulting images middle right and lower right were reconstructed using cardiac windows of
one-half the width. The reconstructed images clearly demonstrate how the motion artifacts in the prior image arrows in the upper right image are eliminated
when the cardiac window is reduced by a factor of 2. This effectively improves the temporal resolution by a factor of approximately 2.
Chen, Tang, and Hsieh: Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS „TRI-PICCS…
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 6, June 2009
tomosynthetic reconstruction problem that usually does not
have an algorithm to enable accurate image reconstruction.
The key enabling factor in our TRI-PICCS method is the
incorporation of a prior image, which is reconstructed from
the short-scan angular range. Essentially, the limited-viewangle shading artifacts are eliminated by requiring that the
reconstructed target image has some similarity with the prior
image, which does not have limited-view-angle shading artifacts. This constraint is imposed by minimizing a cost function which will be explained in detail in the next section.
Two commonly encountered sampling problems in x-ray
tomographic reconstruction are the view angle undersampling problem and the limited-view-angle problem. In the
ﬁrst case, the angular range of x-ray source trajectory is suf-
ﬁcient to provide accurate reconstruction, but sampling density is too low. In the second case, the angular range is insufﬁcient for accurate reconstruction, as determined by the
Tuy data sufﬁciency condition.11 When a prior image of the
image object is available, the PICCS algorithm may be applied to both problems in order to address the above two
problems which may appear in different clinical applications.8–10 In this article, we will use the PICCS algorithm
to address the limited-view-angle problem, which is a key in
our attempt to improve temporal resolution using data from
an angular range of about 120°. Given the data acquisition
employed for cardiac MDCT imaging, the limited-viewangle trajectory used here will be densely sampled. The prior
image will be reconstructed with a short-scan angular range
600–700 view angles, while the subset of the data used
in the TRI-PICCS algorithm for temporal enhancement is
composed of 300–350 view angles. Thus, the problem that
TRI-PICCS must address is that of mitigating limited-viewangle induced artifacts. As a matter of fact, TRI-PICCS uses
the similarity between the prior image and the target image
to effectively mitigate the low frequency shading artifacts
typically induced by limited-view-angle acquisitions.
II. METHOD AND MATERIALS
II.A. Brief review of the PICCS algorithm
In following, for completion, we introduce mathematical
details of the original PICCS algorithm. When a prior image
is available, it can then be utilized to signiﬁcantly sparsify
the target image. As shown in Fig. 3, when a subtraction of
the target image I from the prior image Ip is performed,
the subtracted image, I−Ip, is signiﬁcantly more sparse than
I. When the total number of nonzero image pixels is
counted in these three images, there are only 2700 pixels in
the subtracted image, which is only about 3% of the total
pixels in the target or the prior image. When an image is
sparsiﬁed, it has been widely demonstrated12–16 by signal and
image processing community that the image can be iteratively reconstructed using signiﬁcantly fewer data samples.
Sparser an image is, fewer data are needed to accurately
reconstruct the image. One important condition to enable this
accurate image reconstruction is that the acquired data
should be well distributed in the entire frequency space, although the sampling pattern does not have to be uniform.
When the frequency space is not well sampled as in our
limited-view-angle problem, the shading artifacts are still inevitably present in the reconstructed image. In PICCS algorithm, we require that the gradient of the difference between
the to-be-reconstructed target image, I, and the prior image
without the limited-view-angle shading artifacts to be minimized thus, dissimilarity between the target image and the
prior image is minimized to eliminate the potential limitedview-angle shading artifacts in the target image. This is
achieved by minimizing the following objective function:
minm,nI −Ip1.
However, in coronary CTA imaging, the situation becomes
more challenging due to the signiﬁcant motion induced
streaking artifacts present in the prior image. Without a delicate treatment, these artifacts will be present in the ﬁnal image Fig. 3, middle image, the blurred object, and the surrounding four small objects move during data acquisition,
leading to degraded image quality. In PICCS algorithm, an
additional term, the total variation of the to-be-reconstructed
target image, was added to the above objective function to
remove these potential motion streaks. The relative weight of
these two terms is prescribed by a weighting factor . As a
result, the mathematics in our PICCS algorithm is to iteratively solve the following constrained minimization problem:
minm,nI −Ip1 + 1 −m,nI1
such that PI = Y.
The 1-norm in the above equation is the sum of the absolute
value of each image pixel in an image. P is the system projection operator that calculates the ray sum along a given
x-ray path and Y represents the measured x-ray projection
values. The discrete gradient transform in Eq. 1 is deﬁned
m,nI = Im + 1,n −Im,n2 + Im,n + 1 −Im,n2.
Several methods can be used to solve the constrained minimization problem in Eq. 1. In this article, it was solved in
two alternating steps. In the ﬁrst step, images were reconstructed using the algebraic reconstruction technique ART
Ref. 17 to meet the constraint PI=Y. Regarding this data
constraint condition, two remarks are in order: First, the
equality cannot be exactly fulﬁlled when data contain noise.
But a relaxation factor has been introduced in the ART algo-
FIG. 3. Comparison of sparsity with and without the subtraction operation.
The total numbers of nonzero pixels for the target left, prior middle, and
difference right images are roughly 76 000, 78 000, and 2700, respectively.
Chen, Tang, and Hsieh: Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS „TRI-PICCS…
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 6, June 2009
rithm to account for this inexactness in data consistency constraint. Second, when the PICCS algorithm is applied to improve temporal resolution, only those projection data from
the selected range of view angles corresponding to the target
cardiac window Fig. 2 are used. In the second step, the
m,nI−IP1+1−m,nI1
minimized using the gradient descent method.18 Due to the
fact that the projection data set is limited in an angular range
of about 120°, when the constraint PI=Y is imposed in the
ART step, shading artifacts will appear in the ART image.
These artifacts make it dissimilar from the prior image.
m,nI−IP1+1
−m,nI1 is minimized, motion streaks and dissimilarity
relative to the prior image will be reduced in the reconstructed image. The iterative procedure was stopped when
the squared difference of two successive images reached a
predetermined threshold.12,14,15 In this article, the weighting
factor  is chosen to be 0.5 and we ﬁnd that for almost all
applications, =0.5 leads to rather robust image reconstruction.
II.B. In vivo experimental data acquisitions
In order to demonstrate that, using the TRI-PICCS
method, temporal resolution can be improved by a factor of
approximately 2 in MDCT cardiac imaging without hardware modiﬁcation on state-of-the-art MDCT scanners, we
retrospectively analyzed the data acquired using a porcine
model and a state-of-the-art 64-slice CT scanner GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI installed in our department.
Data from two different in vivo animal experiments were
analyzed. In this ﬁrst animal experiment, the heart rate was
approximately 836 bpm during the acquisition. A “cine
mode” with a 0.4 s gantry rotation period was employed in
data acquisitions the acquisition speed is slower than the
maximum gantry rotation speed of 350 ms to further challenge the algorithm. The animal was scanned at 120 kVp
and 500 mA under ventilation. Using the ECG signal, a cardiac gating window with width of 267 ms centered at 68%
R-R was used to select projection data, this cardiac window
corresponds to a short-scan angular range of 235° for the GE
MDCT scanner. As a result, 642 cone-beam projections were
selected in this short-scan angular range.
In the second animal experiment, animal was scanned at
higher heart rate and used a standard coronary CTA helical
scanning protocol at gantry rotation time of 350 ms. A 181 lb
swine was scanned on the same GE Lightspeed 64-slice
scanner under ventilation. The imaging parameters were
120 kVp, 600 mA, a pitch of 0.24, and a gantry rotation
period of 350 ms. The heart rate was around 965 bpm
during the acquisition. Similar to the ﬁrst animal experiment,
short-scan data was selected from a 250 ms cardiac window
centered at 68% of the R-R peak in the ECG signal. The
images were reconstructed using the standard FDK conebeam reconstruction algorithm.19
III. RESULTS
III.A. The ﬁrst animal experiment using cine
data acquisitions
As shown in the volume rendered images in Fig. 4, residual cardiac motion caused strong motion artifacts around
the right coronary labeled by the red circle. As a result, an
artifactual vessel was created in the reconstructed axial image Fig. 5, see also Fig. 2. The TRI-PICCS method was
then applied to improve temporal resolution. The left image,
which was reconstructed with a low temporal resolution, was
used as a prior image in TRI-PICCS reconstruction. As
shown in both the volume rendered image in Fig. 4 and the
single image slice in Figs. 2 and 5 after applying the TRI-
PICCS method, the artifactual vessel is removed. In addition
to the improvement in the reconstruction accuracy of the
coronary arteries, one can also appreciate the improved delineation of the cardiac chambers labeled by the red ellipse
in Fig. 5. In the image reconstructed with the ﬁltered back
projection FBP algorithm, the boundary between the left
atrium and the left ventricle is blurred by motion, after the
TRI-PICCS method was applied, the boundary between
chambers is clearly visible.
III.B. The second animal experiment using helical
data acquisitions
As shown in the volume rendered FBP images in Fig. 6,
strong motion artifacts appeared around the RCA region. Ac-
FIG. 4. Comparison of image quality with FBP left and with TRI-PICCS
FIG. 5. Comparison of the image quality for two reconstructions: FBP reconstruction without TRI-PICCS at 200 ms temporal resolution left and
with TRI-PICCS at 100 ms temporal.
Chen, Tang, and Hsieh: Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS „TRI-PICCS…
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 6, June 2009
tually, motion artifacts distorted the RCA into two disconnected vessels. The improvement in image quality can be
appreciated in the volume rendered images shown in Fig. 6.
One can see that a continuous segment of the RCA is visualized with TRI-PICCS reconstruction. Image quality improvement can also be appreciated in axial image slices, as
shown in Fig. 7. Images in the left column were reconstructed using the conventional FBP method and images in
the right column were reconstructed using the proposed TRI-
PICCS method with the corresponding FBP image in the left
column as the prior image. In TRI-PICCS images, the vessels were reconstructed with sharp edges and the boundaries
between the cardiac chambers and myocardium are clearly
visible. In contrast, strong motion artifacts are rampant in the
corresponding FBP images to blur the structures.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The results from the above two in vivo animal experimental studies clearly demonstrated that the proposed TRI-
PICCS method enables to improve the temporal resolution
by a factor of approximately 2 in single-source MDCT scanners for high heart rate up to 100 bpm in both “cine” mode at
400 ms gantry rotation time and helical scanning mode at
350 ms gantry rotation time. Motion artifacts caused by
strong residual cardiac motions in the short-scan cardiac gating window are corrected using the TRI-PICCS method and
projection data from one-half of the short-scan gating window. There is no limited-view- angle shading artifacts presented in the TRI-PICCS images.
We would also like to present a comparison between our
TRI-PICCS method Fig. 2, the dual- source hardware
method Fig. 1 for temporal resolution improvement. The
similarity between the TRI-PICCS and dual-source methods
is that image reconstruction for a given image slab only involves projection data from a single heart beat. Thus, the
temporal resolution for both our TRI-PICCS method and the
dual-source method are independent of the heart rate and
regularity. As a result, improvement in the temporal resolution directly leads to a relaxation on heart rate limit. Similar to the dual-source method, a factor of 2 improvement in
the temporal resolution using the TRI-PICCS method may
potentially enable single-source CT scanner to reconstruct
reliable cardiac CT images for patients with higher heart
rates up to 100 bpm.
There are several potential future enhancements in our
studies: The ﬁrst one is that we only applied the TRI-PICCS
method to a single-source 64-slice VCT scanner case, but the
TRI-PICCS algorithm can equally be applied to the dualsource MDCT scanner to further improve temporal resolution. The second limitation is that we simply divided a
short-scan cardiac gating window into two consecutive cardiac windows and each represents a new cardiac phase. From
the current results, it is anticipated that the TRI-PICCS
method may enable accurate image reconstruction for a narrower cardiac window which implies the potential to improve temporal resolution more. A more systematic research
is ongoing to investigate the achievable temporal resolution
improvement in MDCT cardiac imaging.
One ﬁnal remark on the TRI-PICCS method is the computation time. Currently, it takes several hour CPU time to
reconstruct a cardiac phase. However, when the more and
more popular GPU method20–24 is used, the reconstruction
time can be signiﬁcantly reduced to the order of minutes to
enable immediate clinical use. The GPU-based acceleration
is ongoing to accelerate the PICCS reconstruction in our
group. Results will be published somewhere else.
In conclusion, using in vivo animal experimental studies,
a new method based on PICCS has been proposed and validated to improve the temporal resolution by approximately
factor of 2 for MDCT scanners without any hardware modi-
FIG. 6. Comparison of performance between single-source FBP reconstruction left and TRI-PICCS reconstruction right. Note that the motion artifacts in the RCA are removed after applying TRI-PICCS.
FIG. 7. Comparison of the image quality for a helical cardiac scan at 350 ms
gantry rotation speed. The images in the left column were reconstructed
using the conventional FBP method and the images in the right with the
TRI-PICCS method. The arrows and elliptical circles correspond to regions
where artifacts can be visualized in the FBP case but are corrected in the
TRI-PICCS case.
Chen, Tang, and Hsieh: Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS „TRI-PICCS…
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 6, June 2009
ﬁcation on CT scanners. The proposed TRI-PICCS method
may enable high quality coronary CTA imaging using singlesource MDCT scanners at higher heart rates than the current
upper limit of 70 bpm. Since the TRI-PICCS method only
uses data from a single heart beat, it does not suffer the
synchronization problem between the gantry rotation motion
and cardiac motion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work is partially supported by the National Institutes
of Health through Grant No. R01 EB005712 and GE Healthcare. The authors thank Dr. Michael Van Lysel and Dr.
Michael Spiedel for help in animal data acquisitions and Dr.
Brian Nett, Joe Zambelli, Nick Bevins, Tim Szczykutowicz,
and Steve Brunner for editorial assistance in the preparation
of this article.
aAuthor to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:
 ; Present address: L1167, Wisconsin Institutes for
Medical Research, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705; Telephone: 608263-0089; Fax: 608265-9840.
1J. Hsieh, Computed Tomography: Principles, Design Artifacts, and Recent Advances SPIE, Bellingham, WA, 2003.
2W. Kalender, Computed Tomography: Fundamentals, System Technology,
Image Quality, Applications MCD, Munich, Germany, 2002.
3R. A. Robb et al., “High-speed three-dimensional x-ray computed tomography: The dynamic spatial reconstructor,” Proc. IEEE 713, 308–319
4J. Hsieh and R. Senzig, “Dual cardiac CT scanner,” US Patent No.
6421412B1 2002.
5T. G. Flohr et al., “First performance evaluation of a dual-source CT
DSCT system,” Eur. Radiol. 162, 256–268 2006.
6H. Bruder et al., “Imaging tomography apparatus with at least two
irradiator-detector combinations,” US Patent No. 7016455B2 2006.
7M. Kachelriess, M. Knaup, and W. A. Kalender, “Multithreaded cardiac
CT,” Med. Phys. 337, 2435–2447 2006.
8G.-H. Chen, J. Tang, and S. Leng, “Prior image constrained compressed
sensing PICCS: A method to accurately reconstruct dynamic CT images
from highly undersampled data sets,” Med. Phys. 353, 660–663 2008.
9G.-H. Chen, J. Tang, and S. Leng, “Prior image constrained compressed
sensing PICCS,” Photons Plus Ultrasound: Imaging and Sensing 2008:
The Ninth Conference on Biomedical Thermoacoustics, Optoacoustics,
and Acousto-optics, San Jose, CA SPIE, Bellingham, WA, 2008.
10S. Leng et al., “High temporal resolution and streak-free four-dimensional
cone-beam computed tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol. 5320, 5653–5673
11H. K. Tuy, “An Inversion-Formula for Cone-Beam Reconstruction,”
SIAM J. Appl. Math. 433, 546–552 1983.
12D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 524,
1289–1306 2006.
13M. Lustig, D. Donoho, and J. M. Pauly, “Sparse MRI: The application of
compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging,” Magn. Reson. Med. 586,
1182–1195 2007.
14E. J. Candes, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles:
Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 522, 489–509 2006.
15E. J. Candes and T. Tao, “Near-optimal signal recovery from random
projections: Universal encoding strategies?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory
5212, 5406–5425 2006.
16E. J. Candes, M. B. Wakin, and S. P. Boyd, “Enhancing sparsity by
reweighted ell-1 minimization,” J. Fourier Anal. Appl. 14, 877–905
17G. T. Herman, Image Reconstruction from Projections: The Fundamental
of Computerized Tomography Academic, New York, 1980.
18W. H. Press, Numerical Recipes in C, 2nd ed., New York: Cambridge
University Press, New York, 1992.
19L. A. Feldkamp, L. C. Davis, and J. W. Kress, “Practical cone-beam
algorithm,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis 16, 612–619 1984.
20J. S. Kole and F. J. Beekman, “Evaluation of accelerated iterative x-ray
CT image reconstruction using ﬂoating point graphics hardware,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 514, 875–889 2006.
21F. Xu and K. Mueller, “Real-time 3D computed tomographic reconstruction using commodity graphics hardware,” Phys. Med. Biol. 5212,
3405–3419 2007.
22F. Xu and K. Mueller, “Accelerating popular tomographic reconstruction
algorithms on commodity PC graphics hardware,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.
52, 654–663 2005.
23M. Churchill et al., “Hardware-accelerated cone-beam reconstruction on a
mobile C-arm,” Proceedings of the SPIE Medical Imaging, 2007, Vol.
6510, p. 5S-1-8.
24H. Yang et al., “Accelerating backprojections via CUDA architecture,”
Proceedings of the Ninth International Meeting on Fully 3D Image Reconstruction, 2007, p. 52–55.
Chen, Tang, and Hsieh: Temporal resolution improvement using PICCS „TRI-PICCS…
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 6, June 2009