Swinburne Research Bank
 
Given, Jock
Book review: \'The wealth of networks: how social
production transforms markets and freedom\', by
Yochai Benkler
Information Economics and Policy
 
Copyright:
Copyright © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
This is the author’s version of a work that was
accepted for publication in Information Economics
and Policy. Changes resulting from the publishing
process, such as peer review, editing, corrections,
structural formatting, and other quality control
mechanisms may not be reflected in this
document. Changes may have been made to this
work since it was submitted for publication. A
definitive version was subsequently published in
Information Economics and Policy, [VOL 19, ISSUE
 
This is the author’s version of the work, posted here with the permission of the publisher for your
personal use. No further distribution is permitted. You may also be able to access the published
version from your library.
The definitive version is available at:
 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Swinburne University of Technology | CRICOS Provider 00111D | swinburne.edu.au
This is an author-prepared post-print of a review whose final and
definitive form has been published at
Information Economics and Policy, Vol. 19, no. 9 , pp. 278-28
The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom
Yochai Benkler
New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 2006, xii + 515 pp., US$40.00, ISBN 978
0 30011056 2
This is a fascinating and humane book about the future of information, innovation,
culture, the economy and society. Yochai Benkler, ‘the leading intellectual of the
information age’ according to Lawrence Lessig, has a big idea whose impact is already
apparent in the remarkable cases he details. He calls it ‘social production’―individuals
working alone or together to produce goods and services without being paid for them in
the market or subsidised by the state. Benkler recognises it is not a new concept. Indeed,
he thinks it is already pervasive, the ‘dark matter of our economic production universe’
(p. 117). People give directions to strangers, help out at school sports days, donate blood.
Nor does he think human behaviour has changed, so that people are suddenly more cooperative or altruistic. What he thinks ‘is special about our moment is the rising efficacy
of individuals and loose, non-market affiliations as agents of political economy’ (p. 16).
This, for Benkler, is primarily a technical and economic shift. The processing, storage
and communication technologies of our times, he argues, are making it much easier and
cheaper for individuals to organise themselves into affiliations of all shapes, sizes and
durations to ‘socially produce’ economically valuable outputs. The widespread
availability of personal computers with affordable, high-speed connections to the Internet
means the capacity to produce and distribute information, knowledge and culture has
been ‘radically decentralised’. A ‘networked information economy’ has superceded the
‘industrial information economy’, which was dominated by high capital costs. It is now
much more feasible for people motivated by something other than money and who do not
control vast resources to co-operate to make big things happen. Information, knowledge
and culture, for Benkler, are the biggest things around.
Extending Coase’s analysis of the firm, Benkler argues that social production offers
public and private organisations a new way of getting something done. Rather than
choosing between doing it themselves or contracting it out to a profit-seeking
organisation, they may be able to tap the non-monetary drives of people sufficiently
interested to contribute perhaps even a tiny, unnoticed share of their time or resources.
The job gets done, people feel good about it. Depending on the task, Benkler thinks the
results might even be better than goods and services produced by markets, the state or
some combination of them.
The remarkable results of social production can be seen in open-source computer
software, created and modified not by a single development team within a commercial
organisation like Microsoft, but by many individuals whose improvements become
available to all other users. It has acquired a large or dominant place in software for web-
and email-servers and web-scripting. The powerful super-computer, SETI@home, was
created by aggregating the idle processing capacity of millions of individual computers
whose users volunteer them for the job. Each performs tiny computational tasks which
together create staggering processing capacity. The on-line encyclopaedia Wikipedia,
whose entries are written and modified by interested volunteers, has become a serious
rival to commercially produced encyclopaedias like Britannica. Slashdot offers ‘news for
nerds’, written, edited and ranked by its readers. File-sharing applications like Napster
and Kazaa mobilised the capacity of networked PCs to create highly efficient storage and
distribution systems. Multi-player online games draw huge numbers of participants who
make up characters and actions rather than consume linear narratives constructed by
The possibilities and implications of these new forms of production, Benkler argues, are
immense. Individual autonomy and freedom expand; participation in the political system
grows; a more critical culture emerges; social justice improves; global development is
fairer. Determined to distinguish his analysis from early internet Utopianism, Benkler
explores several areas where he thinks this could occur, or where existing forms of social
production provide useful models―open-source software; academic research and
publication; and commons-based scientific research about food and medicines. Unlike
markets, which provide incentives to solve problems whose beneficiaries can afford to
pay, like teenage acne, he thinks social production will be more likely to address
problems like HIV/AIDS in the developing world, because it will be motivated by the
passion of some people whose resources and expertise can be combined in newly
productive ways.
These are big claims and Benkler argues them carefully, drawing on a wide range of
disciplines. He is a lawyer, but places a lot of emphasis on economics, technology and
political theory. Happy to be described as a ‘soft determinist’, he thinks technology ‘sets
some parameters of individual and social action…it can make some behaviours obsolete
by increasing the efficacy of directly competitive strategies’, although he accepts that
very different social relations can emerge around the same technology (p. 17). Whether
networked information technology will improve innovation, freedom and justice depends
on social choices made about how it is deployed. The second-last chapter is devoted to
the policies he thinks are needed if social production is to thrive. It sets out a familiar
critique of recent trends in United States law and policy about intellectual property,
information and telecommunications, along with praise for the Federal Communications
Commission’s more recent embrace of commons-based licensing of spectrum for some
wireless devices.
When Benkler is riffing around the idea of social production, explaining what it has
already achieved, pushing it into new territory, seeing how far it can go, what kinds of
problems it might help to solve, what kinds of obstacles it might confront, the book is
absorbing. Eventually, however, I found the idea applied too confidently to too many
different circumstances, with too little understanding of the role social production already
plays, and Benkler’s thinking too heavily shaped by the narrow experience of academics,
lawyers and computer scientists as producers of information.
The oppositions he sets up between monetary (bad) and non-monetary (good) motives,
between property-based (bad) and commons-based (good) forms of production, are
puzzling. A shift away from market and state-sponsored production to social production
will, he thinks, bring the ‘rich diversity of social life smack into the middle of our
economy and our productive lives’, as though it is not already there (p. 53). Someone
who creates a wonderful piece of music or animation or takes a fine photograph and
wants to be remunerated for their work is seen as a ‘romantic maximiser’, seeking to
enrich themselves only by excluding non-payers. Someone who makes their work
available for free, perhaps hoping for fame or a position in the market economy,
however, is a social producer, engaged in a politically progressive act. A friend of mine,
who earns a living three days a week developing pricing models for a
telecommunications company, chuckled when told about this new ‘modality of
production’, social production. ‘Men are finally noticing it because they are doing some
themselves,’ she said. Looking at the two young children she spends the rest of her time
raising, she said ‘I produce people. They are sooo non-profitable.’ Many people who
share Benkler’s commitment to social justice are already engaged in a mix of activities,
selling some goods or services in markets, attracting some state or philanthropic subsidies
and doing a lot of sharing and unremunerated helping out. Why we would all be better off
if they shifted from sales and subsidies to more non-market-motivated sharing, and how
they would eat while they did it, is not clear.
Benkler rejects the self-interested homo economicus of mainstream economics, but he
likes the conclusion that goods and services should be priced at their marginal cost. Since
the marginal cost of digitally-stored and delivered information is close to zero,
information should be free. Because it is both an output and an input, reducing the price
of information would encourage people to use more of it, benefiting individuals and
society. The same argument could be made about any other product that is an input to
other production processes, but giving the output away is unlikely to attract people to
invest their time and capital in making it. Benkler is also comfortable with the crosssubsidies that economists tend to abhor. Professors give away their research, crosssubsidised by teaching or publication subsidies. Musicians give away their music, crosssubsidised by live performances. Lawyers give away information, cross-subsidised by
other services. Benkler is much more confident than I am that these and similar models
are necessarily better, from the point of view of individual autonomy, democracy and
freedom, than simply paying people for the work they do.
He is especially enthusiastic about the capacity for social production to improve the
quality of the media. The ‘mass media’ he criticises, however, is a much less diverse and
complex creature than the media I see, hear and engage with. Occasionally Benkler
mentions movies, but it is always ‘Hollywood’, not Bollywood or any of the other
cinemas around the world sustained by markets, state subsidy and an apparently neverending supply of often poorly-remunerated passion and craft. There is hardly a hint that
cinema, including Hollywood cinema, may be a complicated instrument that has
liberated, explored and expanded human capacity, while also, in some ways, at some
times, in some places, stifled it. Benkler spends a lot of time on academic journal
publishing, which he acknowledges is a highly unusual model, but never discusses
commercial book publishing, a media sector with a much more decentralised capital base
than television, and therefore a much more useful case study for the emerging networked
information economy.
What he mostly means by ‘the mass media’ is broadcast television in the United States.
This now attracts less than half the audience for television, which itself is just one part,
though still a big and important part, of America’s media. It is certainly not the world’s
media. This leads to a structural critique which is almost all about limited channel,
advertiser-supported media. It is not much help in understanding digital multi-channel
pay TV with hundreds of channels, the cinema, DVD, music or books, which all get
summarised into ‘the mass media’. The critique is also mainly about one-way, so-called
passive media, which is constantly contrasted with active, participatory online media.
Audiences for the former are zombies on couches passively receiving ‘the finished goods
of industrial information producers’. Participants in the latter are the agents of a
democratic, progressive, folk culture. Talk radio does not straddle the two, but remains
firmly mass media, representing only ‘the pornography and violence of political
discourse’. Even if you are regularly depressed by the output of ‘the media’, perfectly
able to share Benkler’s optimism about both the experience to date and the potential of
online and mobile media, it is harder to accept that a system that produced the Marx
Brothers and Meryl Streep can be so completely barren, or to believe that blogs and
emails sent to listservs are necessarily more self-expressive acts than calls made to Fox
News. When confronting some of the evidence of what is happening in online media,
especially the concentration levels, Benkler stresses that it should not be judged against
some hypothetical, Utopian standard, only against ‘the mass media’. But having
caricatured it so comprehensively, it is hardly a contest.
I’m not sure Benkler is right about quite how much of the capital required to produce and
distribute information, knowledge and culture has been ‘radically decentralised’. He
recognises as much in acknowledging the importance of common carrier principles in the
development of the open internet using telecommunications infrastructure; his continuing
concern about ‘net neutrality’; and his demand for more liberal access to twentieth
century cultural outputs like music and images to support twenty-first century cultural
production. His summary claim that ‘What the emerging networked information
economy…needs, in almost all cases, is not regulatory protection, but regulatory
abstinence’, contradicts the long list of specific dangers that have already been averted by
state action, the problems he identifies in Chapter 11 that seem unlikely to be adequately
addressed without it, and, as John Quiggin has pointed out, the internet’s own statesponsored origins.
I am wary of Benkler’s conviction about the results of social production, or even that it
will be commons-based, rather than market-based, activities that are most encouraged by
the technologies of the networked information economy. More than two years on from
the finalisation of his text, two new landmarks of social production, MySpace and
YouTube, have arrived and been acquired, their diversely-motivated social producers
now feeding the bottom-lines of News Corporation and Google. It is the kind of thing
‘Hollywood’ and ‘the music industry’ have been doing for generations, drawing the
innovation that so often occurs in the margins into the mainstream. Rupert Murdoch,
scourge of over-priced movie stars, must be pleased to discover he doesn’t have to pay
his new creatives. Technologies do set parameters for what is possible, or easier, or
cheaper, but it is difficult to judge, except with hindsight, exactly what the parameters set
by particular technologies are. I agree with Lior Strahilevitz, who, in a perceptive review
of Benkler’s book, argues ‘Social production is like tofu. It has no values of its own. It
absorbs the preferences of its users.’ Anna Funder’s Stasiland describes arguably the
most complete system of social surveillance ever devised, in the former East Germany.
The state sponsored a lot of it but the key to its comprehensiveness lay in the active
participation even of those who were not required to do so. Non-monetary motivations
like fear and mistrust drove a terrifying, socially-produced outcome.
Benkler is an optimist about human nature and the capacities of the technologies of our
times. He has done a brilliant job of articulating some striking achievements and
emerging possibilities, and his heart is in social justice. He wants change, and pessimists
don’t achieve much of that.