Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2021–2031
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adversarial Examples for Evaluating Reading Comprehension Systems
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
 
Percy Liang
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
 
Standard accuracy metrics indicate that
reading comprehension systems are making rapid progress, but the extent to which
these systems truly understand language
remains unclear.
To reward systems
with real language understanding abilities, we propose an adversarial evaluation scheme for the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD). Our method
tests whether systems can answer questions about paragraphs that contain adversarially inserted sentences, which are automatically generated to distract computer
systems without changing the correct answer or misleading humans. In this adversarial setting, the accuracy of sixteen
published models drops from an average
of 75% F1 score to 36%; when the adversary is allowed to add ungrammatical
sequences of words, average accuracy on
four models decreases further to 7%. We
hope our insights will motivate the development of new models that understand
language more precisely.
Introduction
Quantifying the extent to which a computer system exhibits intelligent behavior is a longstanding
problem in AI . Today, the standard paradigm is to measure average error across
a held-out test set. However, models can succeed
in this paradigm by recognizing patterns that happen to be predictive on most of the test examples,
while ignoring deeper, more difﬁcult phenomena
 .
In this work, we propose adversarial evaluation
for NLP, in which systems are instead evaluated
on adversarially-chosen inputs. We focus on the
Article: Super Bowl 50
Paragraph: “Peyton Manning became the ﬁrst quarterback ever to lead two different teams to multiple Super
Bowls. He is also the oldest quarterback ever to play
in a Super Bowl at age 39. The past record was held
by John Elway, who led the Broncos to victory in Super
Bowl XXXIII at age 38 and is currently Denver’s Executive Vice President of Football Operations and General
Manager. Quarterback Jeff Dean had jersey number 37
in Champ Bowl XXXIV.”
Question: “What is the name of the quarterback who
was 38 in Super Bowl XXXIII?”
Original Prediction: John Elway
Prediction under adversary: Jeff Dean
An example from the SQuAD dataset.
The BiDAF Ensemble model originally gets the
answer correct, but is fooled by the addition of an
adversarial distracting sentence (in blue).
SQuAD reading comprehension task , in which systems answer questions
about paragraphs from Wikipedia. Reading comprehension is an appealing testbed for adversarial
evaluation, as existing models appear successful
by standard average-case evaluation metrics: the
current state-of-the-art system achieves 84.7% F1
score, while human performance is just 91.2%.1
Nonetheless, it seems unlikely that existing systems possess true language understanding and reasoning capabilities.
Carrying out adversarial evaluation on SQuAD
requires new methods that adversarially alter reading comprehension examples. Prior work in computer vision adds imperceptible adversarial perturbations to input images, relying on the fact that
such small perturbations cannot change an image’s
true label . In contrast, changing even one word of a
1 
SQuAD-explorer/
paragraph can drastically alter its meaning.
Instead of relying on semantics-preserving perturbations, we create adversarial examples by adding
distracting sentences to the input paragraph, as
shown in Figure 1.
We automatically generate
these sentences so that they confuse models, but
do not contradict the correct answer or confuse
humans. For our main results, we use a simple
set of rules to generate a raw distractor sentence
that does not answer the question but looks related;
we then ﬁx grammatical errors via crowdsourcing. While adversarially perturbed images punish
model oversensitivity to imperceptible noise, our
adversarial examples target model overstability—
the inability of a model to distinguish a sentence
that actually answers the question from one that
merely has words in common with it.
Our experiments demonstrate that no published
open-source model is robust to the addition of adversarial sentences. Across sixteen such models,
adding grammatical adversarial sentences reduces
F1 score from an average of 75% to 36%.
a smaller set of four models, we run additional
experiments in which the adversary adds nongrammatical sequences of English words, causing
average F1 score to drop further to 7%. To encourage the development of new models that understand language more precisely, we have released
all of our code and data publicly.
The SQuAD Task and Models
The SQuAD dataset contains 107,785 human-generated reading comprehension questions about Wikipedia articles. Each
question refers to one paragraph of an article, and
the corresponding answer is guaranteed to be a
span in that paragraph.
When developing and testing our methods, we
focused on two published model architectures:
BiDAF and Match-LSTM . Both are deep learning architectures that predict a probability distribution over the
correct answer. Each model has a single and an
ensemble version, yielding four systems in total.
We also validate our major ﬁndings on twelve
other published models with publicly available
test-time code:
ReasoNet Single and Ensemble versions ,
Reader Single and Ensemble versions (Hu et al.,
Structural Embedding of Dependency
Trees (SEDT) Single and Ensemble versions , jNet , Ruminating Reader , Multi-
Perspective Context Matching (MPCM) Single
version , RaSOR , Dynamic Chunk Reader (DCR) , and the Logistic Regression Baseline . We did not run these models
during development, so they serve as a held-out set
that validates the generality of our approach.
Standard Evaluation
Given a model f that takes in paragraph-question
pairs (p, q) and outputs an answer ˆa, the standard
accuracy over a test set Dtest is simply
Acc(f) def
(p,q,a)∈Dtest
v((p, q, a), f),
where v is the F1 score between the true answer
a and the predicted answer f(p, q) for details).
Adversarial Evaluation
General Framework
A model that relies on superﬁcial cues without
understanding language can do well according
to average F1 score, if these cues happen to be
predictive most of the time. Weissenborn et al.
 argue that many SQuAD questions can
be answered with heuristics based on type and
keyword-matching. To determine whether existing models have learned much beyond such simple
patterns, we introduce adversaries that confuse de-
ﬁcient models by altering test examples. Consider
the example in Figure 1: the BiDAF Ensemble
model originally gives the right answer, but gets
confused when an adversarial distracting sentence
is added to the paragraph.
We deﬁne an adversary A to be a function that
takes in an example (p, q, a), optionally with a
model f, and returns a new example (p′, q′, a′).
The adversarial accuracy with respect to A is
Adv(f) def
(p,q,a)∈Dtest
v(A(p, q, a, f), f)).
While standard test error measures the fraction of
the test distribution over which the model gets the
correct answer, the adversarial accuracy measures
Classiﬁcation
Comprehension
Tesla moved
to the city of
Chicago in 1880.
Tadakatsu moved
to the city of
Chicago in 1881.
Considers the two
Considers the two
to be different
to be the same
Adversarial examples in computer vision exploit model oversensitivity to small perturbations. In contrast, our adversarial examples
work because models do not realize that a small
perturbation can completely change the meaning
of a sentence. Images from Szegedy et al. .
the fraction over which the model is robustly correct, even in the face of adversarially-chosen alterations. For this quantity to be meaningful, the adversary must satisfy two basic requirements: ﬁrst,
it should always generate (p′, q′, a′) tuples that are
valid—a human would judge a′ as the correct answer to q′ given p′. Second, (p′, q′, a′) should be
somehow “close” to the original example (p, q, a).
Semantics-preserving Adversaries
In image classiﬁcation, adversarial examples are
commonly generated by adding an imperceptible
amount of noise to the input . These perturbations do
not change the semantics of the image, but they
can change the predictions of models that are oversensitive to semantics-preserving changes.
language, the direct analogue would be to paraphrase the input . However, high-precision paraphrase generation is challenging, as most edits to a sentence do actually
change its meaning.
Concatenative Adversaries
Instead of relying on paraphrasing, we use perturbations that do alter semantics to build concatenative adversaries, which generate examples of the
form (p + s, q, a) for some sentence s. In other
words, concatenative adversaries add a new sentence to the end of the paragraph, and leave the
question and answer unchanged. Valid adversarial
examples are precisely those for which s does not
contradict the correct answer; we refer to such sentences as being compatible with (p, q, a). We use
semantics-altering perturbations to that ensure that
s is compatible, even though it may have many
words in common with the question q. Existing
models are bad at distinguishing these sentences
from sentences that do in fact address the question,
indicating that they suffer not from oversensitivity
but from overstability to semantics-altering edits.
Table 1 summarizes this important distinction.
The decision to always append s to the end of
p is somewhat arbitrary; we could also prepend
it to the beginning, though this would violate the
expectation of the ﬁrst sentence being a topic sentence. Both are more likely to preserve the validity
of the example than inserting s in the middle of p,
which runs the risk of breaking coreference links.
Now, we describe two concrete concatenative
adversaries, as well as two variants. ADDSENT,
our main adversary, adds grammatical sentences
that look similar to the question.
In contrast,
ADDANY adds arbitrary sequences of English
words, giving it more power to confuse models.
Figure 2 illustrates these two main adversaries.
ADDSENT uses a four-step procedure to generate
sentences that look similar to the question, but do
not actually contradict the correct answer. Refer
to Figure 2 for an illustration of these steps.
In Step 1, we apply semantics-altering perturbations to the question, in order to guarantee that the
resulting adversarial sentence is compatible. We
replace nouns and adjectives with antonyms from
WordNet , and change named entities and numbers to the nearest word in GloVe
word vector space2 with
the same part of speech.3 If no words are changed
during this step, the adversary gives up and immediately returns the original example. For example, given the question “What ABC division handles domestic television distribution?”, we would
change “ABC” to “NBC” (a nearby word in vector space) and “domestic” to “foreign” (a WordNet
antonym), resulting in the question, “What NBC
division handles foreign television distribution?”
In Step 2, we create a fake answer that has the
same “type” as the original answer. We deﬁne a set
2 We use 100-dimensional GloVe vectors trained on
Wikipedia and Euclidean distance to deﬁne nearby words.
3 We choose the nearest word whose most common gold
POS tag in the Penn Treebank matches
the predicted POS tag of the original word, according to
CoreNLP. If none of the nearest 100 words satisfy this, we
just return the single closest word.
Article: Nikola Tesla
Paragraph: "In January 1880, two of Tesla's uncles
put together enough money to help him leave
Gospić for Prague where he was to study.
Unfortunately, he arrived too late to enroll at
Charles-Ferdinand University; he never studied
Greek, a required subject; and he was illiterate in
Czech, another required subject. Tesla did, however,
attend lectures at the university, although, as an
auditor, he did not receive grades for the courses."
Question: "What city did Tesla move to in 1880?"
Answer: Prague
Model Predicts: Prague
Tadakatsu moved the city of
Chicago to in 1881.
What city did Tesla move to
What city did Tadakatsu move to
Adversary Adds: Tadakatsu moved to the city
of Chicago in 1881.
Model Predicts: Chicago
Convert into
Fix errors with
crowdworkers,
verify resulting
sentences with
other crowdworkers
spring attention income getting reached
spring attention income other reached
Adversary Adds: tesla move move other george
Model Predicts: george
Repeat many times
Randomly initialize d words:
Greedily change one word
fake answer
Figure 2: An illustration of the ADDSENT and ADDANY adversaries.
of 26 types, corresponding to NER and POS tags
from Stanford CoreNLP ,
plus a few custom categories (e.g., abbreviations),
and manually associate a fake answer with each
type. Given the original answer to a question, we
compute its type and return the corresponding fake
answer. In our running example, the correct answer was not tagged as a named entity, and has
the POS tag NNP, which corresponds to the fake
answer “Central Park.”
In Step 3, we combine the altered question and
fake answer into declarative form, using a set of
roughly 50 manually-deﬁned rules over CoreNLP
constituency parses. For example, “What ABC division handles domestic television distribution?”
triggers a rule that converts questions of the
form “what/which NP1 VP1 ?” to “The NP1 of
[Answer] VP1”. After incorporating the alterations and fake answer from the previous steps, we
generate the sentence, “The NBC division of Central Park handles foreign television distribution.”
The raw sentences generated by Step 3 can be
ungrammatical or otherwise unnatural due to the
incompleteness of our rules and errors in constituency parsing. Therefore, in Step 4, we ﬁx errors in these sentences via crowdsourcing. Each
sentence is edited independently by ﬁve workers
on Amazon Mechanical Turk, resulting in up to
ﬁve sentences for each raw sentence. Three additional crowdworkers then ﬁlter out sentences that
are ungrammatical or incompatible, resulting in a
smaller (possibly empty) set of human-approved
sentences. The full ADDSENT adversary runs the
model f as a black box on every human-approved
sentence, and picks the one that makes the model
give the worst answer.
If there are no humanapproved sentences, the adversary simply returns
the original example.
A model-independent adversary. ADDSENT
requires a small number of queries to the model
under evaluation. To explore the possibility of an
adversary that is completely model-independent,
we also introduce ADDONESENT, which adds
a random human-approved sentence to the paragraph. In contrast with prior work in computer
vision , ADDONESENT does not require any access
to the model or to any training data: it generates
adversarial examples based solely on the intuition
that existing models are overly stable.
For ADDANY, the goal is to choose any sequence
of d words, regardless of grammaticality. We use
local search to adversarially choose a distracting
sentence s = w1 w2 . . . wd. Figure 2 shows an
example of ADDANY with d = 5 words; in our
experiments, we use d = 10.
We ﬁrst initialize words w1, . . . , wd randomly
from a list of common English words.4 Then, we
run 6 epochs of local search, each of which iterates
over the indices i ∈{1, . . . , d} in a random order.
For each i, we randomly generate a set of candidate words W as the union of 20 randomly sampled common words and all words in q. For each
x ∈W, we generate the sentence with x in the i-th
position and wj in the j-th position for each j ̸= i.
We try adding each sentence to the paragraph and
query the model for its predicted probability distribution over answers. We update wi to be the x that
minimizes the expected value of the F1 score over
the model’s output distribution. We return immediately if the model’s argmax prediction has 0 F1
score. If we do not stop after 3 epochs, we randomly initialize 4 additional word sequences, and
search over all of these random initializations in
ADDANY requires signiﬁcantly more model access than ADDSENT: not only does it query the
model many times during the search process, but
it also assumes that the model returns a probability distribution over answers, instead of just a single prediction. Without this assumption, we would
have to rely on something like the F1 score of the
argmax prediction, which is piecewise constant
and therefore harder to optimize. “Probabilistic”
query access is still weaker than access to gradients, as is common in computer vision .
We do not do anything to ensure that the sentences generated by this search procedure do not
contradict the original answer.
In practice, the
generated “sentences” are gibberish that use many
question words but have no semantic content (see
Figure 2 for an example).
Finally, we note that both ADDSENT and
ADDANY try to incorporate words from the question into their adversarial sentences. While this is
an obvious way to draw the model’s attention, we
were curious if we could also distract the model
without such a straightforward approach. To this
end, we introduce a variant of ADDANY called
ADDCOMMON, which is exactly like ADDANY
except it only adds common words.
4 We deﬁne common words as the 1000 most frequent
words in the Brown corpus .
ADDONESENT
Table 2: Adversarial evaluation on the Match-
LSTM and BiDAF systems. All four systems can
be fooled by adversarial examples.
ADDONESENT
ReasoNet-E
Mnemonic-E
Ruminating
Mnemonic-S
ReasoNet-S
Table 3: ADDSENT and ADDONESENT on all sixteen models, sorted by F1 score the original examples. S = single, E = ensemble.
Experiments
For all experiments, we measure adversarial F1
score across 1000 randomly sampled examples from the SQuAD development set (the test set is not publicly available).
Downsampling was helpful because ADDANY
and ADDCOMMON can issue thousands of model
queries per example, making them very slow. As
the effect sizes we measure are large, this downsampling does not hurt statistical signiﬁcance.
Main Experiments
Table 2 shows the performance of the Match-
LSTM and BiDAF models against all four adversaries.
Each model incurred a signiﬁcant accuracy drop under every form of adversarial evaluation. ADDSENT made average F1 score across the
four models fall from 75.7% to 31.3%. ADDANY
was even more effective, making average F1 score
fall to 6.7%. ADDONESENT retained much of the
effectiveness of ADDSENT, despite being modelindependent. Finally, ADDCOMMON caused aver-
ADDONESENT
Table 4: Human evaulation on adversarial examples. Human accuracy drops on ADDSENT mostly
due to unrelated errors; the ADDONESENT numbers show that humans are robust to adversarial
sentences.
age F1 score to fall to 46.1%, despite only adding
common words.
We also veriﬁed that our adversaries were general enough to fool models that we did not use during development. We ran ADDSENT on twelve
published models for which we found publicly
available test-time code; we did not run ADDANY
on these models, as not all models exposed output distributions. As seen in Table 3, no model
was robust to adversarial evaluation; across the
sixteen total models tested, average F1 score fell
from 75.4% to 36.4% under ADDSENT.
It is noteworthy that the Mnemonic Reader
models outperform the other
models by about 6 F1 points. We hypothesize that
Mnemonic Reader’s self-alignment layer, which
helps model long-distance relationships between
parts of the paragraph, makes it better at locating
all pieces of evidence that support the correct answer. Therefore, it can be more conﬁdent in the
correct answer, compared to the fake answer inserted by the adversary.
Human Evaluation
To ensure our results are valid, we veriﬁed that
humans are not also fooled by our adversarial examples. As ADDANY requires too many model
queries to run against humans, we focused on
ADDSENT. We presented each original and adversarial paragraph-question pair to three crowdworkers, and asked them to select the correct answer by copy-and-pasting from the paragraph. We
then took a majority vote over the three responses
(if all three responses were different, we picked
one at random). These results are shown in Table 4.
On original examples, our humans are
actually slightly better than the reported number
of 91.2 F1 on the entire development set.
ADDSENT, human accuracy drops by 13.1 F1
points, much less than the computer systems.
Moreover, much of this decrease can be explained by mistakes unrelated to our adversarial
sentences. Recall that ADDSENT picks the worst
case over up to ﬁve different paragraph-question
pairs. Even if we showed the same original example to ﬁve sets of three crowdworkers, chances are
that at least one of the ﬁve groups would make a
mistake, just because humans naturally err. Therefore, it is more meaningful to evaluate humans on
ADDONESENT, on which their accuracy drops by
only 3.4 F1 points.
Next, we sought to better understand the behavior
of our four main models under adversarial evaluation. To highlight errors caused by the adversary,
we focused on examples where the model originally predicted the (exact) correct answer. We divided this set into “model successes”—examples
where the model continued being correct during
adversarial evaluation—and “model failures”—
examples where the model gave a wrong answer
during adversarial evaluation.
Manual veriﬁcation
First, we veriﬁed that the sentences added by
ADDSENT are actually grammatical and compatible. We manually checked 100 randomly chosen BiDAF Ensemble failures.
We found only
one where the sentence could be interpreted as answering the question: in this case, ADDSENT replaced the word “Muslim” with the related word
“Islamic”, so the resulting adversarial sentence
still contradicted the correct answer.
Additionally, we found 7 minor grammar errors, such
as subject-verb disagreement (e.g., “The Alaskan
Archipelago are made up almost entirely of hamsters.”) and misuse of function words (e.g., “The
gas of nitrogen makes up 21.8 % of the Mars’s atmosphere.”), but no errors that materially impeded
understanding of the sentence.
We also veriﬁed compatibility for ADDANY.
We found no violations out of 100 randomly chosen BiDAF Ensemble failures.
Error analysis
Next, we wanted to understand what types of errors the models made on the ADDSENT examples.
In 96.6% of model failures, the model predicted
a span in the adversarial sentence. The lengths of
the predicted answers were mostly similar to those
of correct answers, but the BiDAF models occasionally predicted very long spans. The BiDAF
Single model predicted an answer of more than
29 words—the length of the longest answer in the
SQuAD development set—on 5.0% of model failures; for BiDAF Ensemble, this number was 1.6%.
Since the BiDAF models independently predict
the start and end positions of the answer, they can
predict very long spans when the end pointer is in-
ﬂuenced by the adversarial sentence, but the start
pointer is not. Match-LSTM has a similar structure, but also has a hard-coded rule that stops it
from predicting very long answers.
We also analyzed human failures—examples
where the humans were correct originally, but
wrong during adversarial evaluation.
predicted from the adversarial sentence on only
27.3% of these error cases, which conﬁrms that
many errors are normal mistakes unrelated to adversarial sentences.
Categorizing ADDSENT sentences
We then manually examined sentences generated
by ADDSENT.
In 100 BiDAF Ensemble failures, we found 75 cases where an entity name
was changed in the adversarial sentence, 17 cases
where numbers or dates were changed, and 33
cases where an antonym of a question word was
used.5 Additionally, 7 sentences had other miscellaneous perturbations made by crowdworkers
during Step 4 of ADDSENT. For example, on a
question about the “Kalven Report”, the adversarial sentence discussed “The statement Kalven
cited” instead; in another case, the question, “How
does Kenya curb corruption?”
was met by the
unhelpful sentence, “Tanzania is curbing corruption” (the model simply answered, “corruption”).
Reasons for model successes
Finally, we sought to understand the factors that
inﬂuence whether the model will be robust to adversarial perturbations on a particular example.
First, we found that models do well when the question has an exact n-gram match with the original
paragraph. Figure 3 plots the fraction of examples for which an n-gram in the question appears
verbatim in the original passage; this is much
higher for model successes. For example, 41.5%
of BiDAF Ensemble successes had a 4-gram in
common with the original paragraph, compared to
only 21.0% of model failures.
We also found that models succeeded more often on short questions. Figure 4 shows the dis-
5 These numbers add up to more than 100 because more
than one word can be altered per example.
n (size of n−gram)
Percent of examples with n−gram match
Model success
Model failure
ML Ensemble
BiDAF Single
BiDAF Ensemble
Figure 3: Fraction of model successes and failures on ADDSENT for which the question has an
exact n-gram match with the original paragraph.
For each model and each value of n, successes are
more likely to have an n-gram match than failures.
Model under Evaluation
Targeted Model
BiDAF Single
BiDAF Ens.
BiDAF Single
BiDAF Ens.
Table 5: Transferability of adversarial examples
across models. Each row measures performance
on adversarial examples generated to target one
particular model; each column evaluates one (possibly different) model on these examples.
tribution of question length on model successes
and failures; successes tend to involve shorter
questions. For example, 32.7% of the questions
in BiDAF Ensemble successes were 8 words or
shorter, compared to only 11.8% for model failures. This effect arises because ADDSENT always
changes at least one word in the question.
long questions, changing one word leaves many
others unchanged, so the adversarial sentence still
has many words in common with the question. For
short questions, changing one content word may
be enough to make the adversarial sentence completely irrelevant.
k (number of words in question)
Percent of questions with at most k words (%)
Model success
Model failure
ML Ensemble
BiDAF Single
BiDAF Ensemble
For model successes and failures on
ADDSENT, the cumulative distribution function of
the number of words in the question (for each k,
what fraction of questions have ≤k words). Successes are more likely to involve short questions.
Transferability across Models
In computer vision, adversarial examples that fool
one model also tend to fool other models ; we
investigate whether the same pattern holds for us.
Examples from ADDONESENT clearly do transfer
across models, since ADDONESENT always adds
the same adversarial sentence regardless of model.
Table 5 shows the results of evaluating the
four main models on adversarial examples generated by running either ADDSENT or ADDANY
against each model.
ADDSENT adversarial examples transfer between models quite effectively;
in particular, they are harder than ADDONESENT
examples, which implies that examples that fool
one model are more likely to fool other models. The ADDANY adversarial examples exhibited
more limited transferability between models. For
both ADDSENT and ADDANY, examples transferred slightly better between single and ensemble
versions of the same model.
Training on Adversarial Examples
Finally, we tried training on adversarial examples,
to see if existing models can learn to become more
Due to the prohibitive cost of running
ADDSENT or ADDANY on the entire training set,
we instead ran only Steps 1-3 of ADDSENT (everything except crowdsourcing) to generate a raw
adversarial sentence for each training example.
We then trained the BiDAF model from scratch on
Training data
ADDSENTMOD
Effect of training the BiDAF Single
model on the original training data alone (ﬁrst
column) versus augmenting the data with raw
ADDSENT examples (second column).
the union of these examples and the original training data. As a control, we also trained a second
BiDAF model on the original training data alone.6
The results of evaluating these models are
shown in Table 6. At ﬁrst glance, training on adversarial data seems effective, as it largely protects
against ADDSENT. However, further investigation
shows that training on these examples has only
limited utility.
To demonstrate this, we created
a variant of ADDSENT called ADDSENTMOD,
which differs from ADDSENT in two ways: it
uses a different set of fake answers (e.g., PERSON
named entities map to “Charles Babbage” instead
of “Jeff Dean”), and it prepends the adversarial
sentence to the beginning of the paragraph instead of appending it to the end. The retrained
model does almost as badly as the original one on
ADDSENTMOD, suggesting that it has just learned
to ignore the last sentence and reject the fake answers that ADDSENT usually proposed. In order
for training on adversarial examples to actually
improve the model, more care must be taken to
ensure that the model cannot overﬁt the adversary.
Discussion and Related Work
Despite appearing successful by standard evaluation metrics, existing machine learning systems
for reading comprehension perform poorly under adversarial evaluation. Standard evaluation is
overly lenient on models that rely on superﬁcial
cues. In contrast, adversarial evaluation reveals
that existing models are overly stable to perturbations that alter semantics.
To optimize adversarial evaluation metrics, we
may need new strategies for training models. For
certain classes of models and adversaries, efﬁcient
training strategies exist: for example, Globerson
and Roweis train classiﬁers that are optimally robust to adversarial feature deletion. Ad-
6 All previous experiments used parameters released by
Seo et al. 
versarial training can be
used for any model trained with stochastic gradient descent, but it requires generating new adversarial examples at every iteration; this is feasible for images, where fast gradient-based adversaries exist, but is infeasible for domains where
only slower adversaries are available.
We contrast adversarial evaluation, as studied
in this work, with generative adversarial models.
While related in name, the two have very different
goals. Generative adversarial models pit a generative model, whose goal is to generate realistic outputs, against a discriminative model, whose
goal is to distinguish the generator’s outputs from
real data .
Bowman et al. and Li et al. used
such a setup for sentence and dialogue generation,
respectively.
Our setup also involves a generator and a discriminator in an adversarial relationship; however, our discriminative system is tasked
with ﬁnding the right answer, not distinguishing
the generated examples from real ones, and our
goal is to evaluate the discriminative system, not
to train the generative one.
While we use adversaries as a way to evaluate language understanding, robustness to adversarial attacks may also be its own goal for tasks
such as spam detection. Dalvi et al. formulated such tasks as a game between a classiﬁer and
an adversary, and analyzed optimal strategies for
each player. Lowd and Meek described an
efﬁcient attack by which an adversary can reverseengineer the weights of a linear classiﬁer, in order to then generate adversarial inputs. In contrast
with these methods, we do not make strong structural assumptions about our classiﬁers.
Other work has proposed harder test datasets
for various tasks. Levesque proposed the
Winograd Schema challenge, in which computers must resolve coreference resolution problems
that were handcrafted to require extensive world
knowledge. Paperno et al. constructed the
LAMBADA dataset, which tests the ability of language models to handle long-range dependencies.
Their method relies on the availability of a large
initial dataset, from which they distill a difﬁcult
subset; such initial data may be unavailable for
many tasks. Rimell et al. showed that dependency parsers that seem very accurate by standard metrics perform poorly on a subset of the
test data that has unbounded dependency constructions. Such evaluation schemes can only test models on phenomena that are moderately frequent in
the test distribution; by perturbing test examples,
we can introduce out-of-distribution phenomena
while still leveraging prior data collection efforts.
While concatenative adversaries are well-suited
to reading comprehension, other adversarial methods may prove more effective on other tasks. As
discussed previously, paraphrase generation systems could be used for
adversarial evaluation on a wide range of language
tasks. Building on our intuition that existing models are overly stable, we could apply meaningaltering perturbations to inputs on tasks like machine translation, and adversarially choose ones
for which the model’s output does not change. We
could also adversarially generate new examples
by combining multiple existing ones, in the spirit
of Data Recombination .
The Build It, Break It shared task encourages researchers to adversarially design minimal pairs to fool sentiment analysis and
semantic role labeling systems.
Progress on building systems that truly understand language is only possible if our evaluation
metrics can distinguish real intelligent behavior
from shallow pattern matching. To this end, we
have released scripts to run ADDSENT on any
SQuAD system, as well as code for ADDANY. We
hope that our work will motivate the development
of more sophisticated models that understand language at a deeper level.
Acknowledgments.
We thank Pranav Rajpurkar
for his help with various SQuAD models. This
work was supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-114747,
and funding from Facebook AI Research and Microsoft.
Reproducibility.
experiments
//worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/
0xc86d3ebe69a3427d91f9aaa63f7d1e7d/.