UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam ( 
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
A power fallacy
Wagenmakers, E.-J.; Verhagen, J.; Ly, A.; Bakker, M.; Lee, M.D.; Matzke, D.; Rouder, J.N.;
Morey, R.D.
10.3758/s13428-014-0517-4
Publication date
Document Version
Final published version
 
Behavior Research Methods
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act ( 
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Verhagen, J., Ly, A., Bakker, M., Lee, M. D., Matzke, D., Rouder, J. N.,
& Morey, R. D. . A power fallacy. Behavior Research Methods, 47(4), 913-917.
 
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, Singel 425, 1012 WP Amsterdam, The Netherlands. You
will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:26 Mar 2025
Behav Res 47:913–917
DOI 10.3758/s13428-014-0517-4
A power fallacy
Eric-Jan Wagenmakers · Josine Verhagen ·
Alexander Ly · Marjan Bakker · Michael D. Lee ·
Dora Matzke · Jeffrey N. Rouder · Richard D. Morey
Published online: 1 October 2014
© Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2014
Abstract The power fallacy refers to the misconception
that what holds on average –across an ensemble of hypothetical experiments– also holds for each case individually.
According to the fallacy, high-power experiments always
yield more informative data than do low-power experiments.
Here we expose the fallacy with concrete examples, demonstrating that a particular outcome from a high-power experiment can be completely uninformative, whereas a particular
outcome from a low-power experiment can be highly informative. Although power is useful in planning an experiment,
it is less useful—and sometimes even misleading—for making inferences from observed data. To make inferences
from data, we recommend the use of likelihood ratios or
Bayes factors, which are the extension of likelihood ratios
beyond point hypotheses. These methods of inference do
not average over hypothetical replications of an experiment,
but instead condition on the data that have actually been
observed. In this way, likelihood ratios and Bayes factors
rationally quantify the evidence that a particular data set
provides for or against the null or any other hypothesis.
E.-J. Wagenmakers () · J. Verhagen · A. Ly · M. Bakker ·
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam,
Weesperplein 4, 1018 XA Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: 
University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA USA
J. N. Rouder
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO USA
R. D. Morey
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
Keywords Hypothesis test · Likelihood ratio · Statistical
evidence · Bayes factor
It is well known that psychology has a power problem.
Based on an extensive analysis of the literature, estimates
of power (i.e., the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is false) range at best from 0.30 to 0.50 .
Low power is problematic for several reasons. First, underpowered experiments are more susceptible to the biasing
impact of questionable research practices .
Second, underpowered experiments are, by definition, less
likely to discover systematic deviations from chance when
these exist. Third, as explained below, underpowered experiments reduce the probability that a significant result
truly reflects a systematic deviation from chance .
These legitimate concerns suggest that power is not only
useful in planning an experiment, but should also play a role
in drawing inferences or making decisions based on the collected data . For
instance, authors, reviewers, and journal editors may argue
that: (1) for a particular set of results of a low-power experiment, an observed significant effect is not very diagnostic;
or (2) for a particular set of results from a high-power experiment, an observed non-significant effect is very diagnostic
(i.e., it supports the null hypothesis). However, power is
a pre-experimental measure that averages over all possible
outcomes of an experiment, only one of which will actually
be observed. What holds on average, across a collection of
Behav Res 47:913–917
hypothetically infinite unobserved data sets, need not hold
for the particular data set we have collected. This difference
is important, because it counters the temptation to dismiss
all findings from low-power experiments or accept all findings from high-power experiments. Below we outline the
conditions under which a low-power experiment is uninformative: when the only summary information we have is the
significance of the effect (i.e., p < α). When we have more
information about the experiment, such as test statistics or,
better, the data set itself, a low-power experiment can be
very informative.
A basic principle of science should be that inference is
conditional on the available relevant data . If
an experiment has yet to be conducted, and many data sets
are possible, all possible data sets should be considered. If
an experiment has been conducted, but only summary information is available, all possible data sets consistent with
the summary information should be considered. But if an
experiment has been conducted, and the data are available,
then only the data that were actually observed should be
incorporated into inference.
When power is useful for inference
As Ioannidis and colleagues have emphasized, low power
is of concern not only when a non-significant result is
obtained, but also when a significant result is obtained:
“Low statistical power (because of low sample size of studies, small effects, or both) negatively affects the likelihood
that a nominally statistically significant finding actually
reflects a true effect.” .
To explain this counter-intuitive fact, suppose that all that
is observed from the outcome of an experiment is the summary p < α (i.e., the effect is significant). Given that it
is known that p < α, and given that it is known that the
power equals 1 −β, what inference can be made about the
odds of H1 vs H0 being true? Power is the probability of
finding a significant effect when the alternative hypothesis
is true, Pr (p < α | H1) and, similarly, the probability of
finding a significant effect when the null hypothesis is true
equals Pr (p < α | H0). For prior probabilities of true null
hypotheses Pr (H0) and true alternative hypotheses Pr (H1),
it then follows from probability theory that
Pr (H1 | p < α)
Pr (H0 | p < α) = Pr (p < α | H1)
Pr (p < α | H0) × Pr (H1)
Thus (1 −β)/α is the extent to which the observation that
p < α changes the prior odds that H1 rather than H0 is true.
Bakker, van Dijk, and Wicherts estimated that
the typical power in psychology experiments to be 0.35.
This means that if one conducts a typical experiment and
observes p < α for α = 0.05, this information changes
the prior odds by a factor of .35/.05 = 7. This is a moderate level of evidence .1 When p < α for α = 0.01, the change in prior odds
is 0.35/0.01 = 35. This is stronger evidence. Finally, when
p < α for α = 0.005 , the change in
prior odds is 0.35/0.005 = 70. This level of evidence is
an order of magnitude larger than that based on the earlier
experiment using α = 0.05. Note that doubling the power
to 0.70 also doubles the evidence.
Equation 1 highlights how power affects the diagnosticity
of a significant result. It is therefore tempting to believe that
high-power experiments are always more diagnostic than
low-power experiments. This belief is false; with access to
the data, rather than the summary information that p < α,
we can go beyond measures of diagnosticity such as power.
As Sellke, Bayarri, and Berger put it: “(...) if
a study yields p = .049, this is the actual information, not
the summary statement 0 < p < .05. The two statements
are very different in terms of the information they convey,
and replacing the former by the latter is simply an egregious
Example 1: a tale of two urns
Consider two urns that each contain ten balls. Urn H0 contains nine green balls and one blue ball. Urn H1 contains
nine green balls and one orange ball. You are presented with
one of the urns and your task is to determine the identity
of the urn by drawing balls from the urn with replacement.
Unbeknownst to you, the urn selected is urn H1.
In the first situation, you plan an experiment that consists
of drawing a single ball. The power of this experiment is
defined as Pr (reject H0 | H1) = Pr (“draw orange ball” |
H1) = 0.10. This power is very low. Nevertheless, when the
experiment is carried out you happen to draw the orange
ball. Despite the experiment having very low power, you
were lucky and obtained a decisive result. The experimental data permit the completely confident inference that you
were presented with urn H1.
In the second situation, you may have the time and the
resources to draw more balls. If you draw N balls with
1While odds lie on a naturally meaningful scale calibrated by betting, characterizing evidence through verbal labels such as “moderate”
and “strong” is necessarily subjective . We
believe the labels are useful because they facilitate scientific communication, but they should only be considered an approximate descriptive
articulation of different standards of evidence.
Behav Res 47:913–917
replacement, the power of your experiment is 1 −(0.9)N.
You desire 90 % power and therefore decide in advance to
draw 22 balls. When the experiment is carried out you happen to draw 22 green balls. Despite the experiment having
high power, you were unlucky and obtained a result that is
completely uninformative.
Example 2: the t-test
Consider the anomalous phenomenon of retroactive facilitation of recall . The
central finding is that people recall more words when these
words are to be presented again later, following the test
phase. Put simply, people’s recall performance is influenced by events that have yet to happen. In the design
used by Bem , each participant performed a standard
recall task followed by post-test practice on a subset of the
words. For each participant, Bem computed a “precognition
score”, which is the difference in the proportion of correctly
recalled items between words that did and did not receive
post-test practice.
Suppose that a researcher, Dr. Z, tasks two of her students to reproduce Bem’s Experiment 9 . Dr. Z
gives the students the materials, but does not specify the
number of participants that each should obtain. She intends
to use the data to test the null hypothesis against a specific
effect size consistent with Bem’s results. As usual, the null
hypothesis states that effect size is zero (i.e., H0 : δ = 0),
whereas the alternative hypothesis states that there is a specific effect (i.e., H1 : δ = δa). Dr. Z chooses δa = 0.3, a
result consistent with the data reported by Bem , and
plans to use a one-sided t test for her analysis.
A likelihood ratio analysis
The two students, A and B, set out to replicate Bem’s
findings in two experiments. Student A is not particularly
interested in the project and does not invest much time,
obtaining only 10 participants. The power of A’s experiment
is 0.22, which is quite low. Student A sends the data to Dr.
Z, who is quite disappointed in the student; nevertheless,
when Dr. Z carries out her analysis the t value she finds is
5.0 (p = .0004).2
Figure 1a shows the distribution of p under the null and
alternative hypotheses. Under the null hypothesis, the distribution of p is evenly spread across the range of possible
p values (horizontal blue line). Under the alternative that
2In order to obtain a t value of 5 with a sample size of only 10 participants, the precognition score needs to have a large mean or a small
Fig. 1 A dissociation between power and evidence. The panels show
distributions of p values under the null hypothesis (horizontal blue
line) and alternative hypothesis (red curve) in Student a’s and b’s
experiments, restricted to p < 0.05 for clarity. The vertical dashed
line represents the p value found in each of the two experiments. The
experiment from Student a has low power (i.e., the p-curve under
H1 is similar to that under H0) but nonetheless yields an informative
result; the experiment from Student b has high power (i.e., the p-curve
under H1 is dissimilar to that under H0) but nonetheless yields an
uninformative result
the effect size is δa = 0.3, however, p values tend to gather
near 0 (upper red curve). The low power of the experiment
can be seen by comparing the area under the null hypothesis’ blue line to the left of p = 0.05 with that under the
alternative’s red curve; the area is only 4.4 times larger.
However, for the observed p value, the information is
greater. We can compute the likelihood ratio of the observed
data by noting the relative heights of the densities at the
observed p value (vertical dashed line). The probability
of the observed p value under the alternative is 9.3 times
higher under the alternative hypothesis than under the null
hypothesis. Although not at all decisive, this level of evidence is generally considered substantial . The key point is that it is possible to obtain
informative results from a low-power experiment, even
though this was unlikely a priori.
Student B is more excited about the topic than Student A,
working hard to obtain 100 participants. The power of Student B’s experiment is 0.91, which is quite high. Dr. Z is
considerably happier with Student B’s work, correctly reasoning that Student B’s experiment is likely to be more
informative than Student A’s. When analyzing the data,
however, Dr. Z observes a t value of 1.7 (p = 0.046).3
Figure 1b shows the distribution of p under the null and
alternative hypotheses. As before, the distribution of p is
uniform under the null hypothesis and right-skewed under
the the alternative that the effect size is δa = 0.3. The high
power of the experiment can be seen by comparing the area
under the null hypothesis’ blue line to the left of p = 0.05
3In order to obtain a t value of 1.7 with a sample size of 100, the the
precognition score needs to have a small mean or a high variance.
Behav Res 47:913–917
with that under the alternative’s red curve; the area is 18.2
times larger.
However, for the observed p value, the information is
almost completely uninformative, as the probability of the
observed p value under the alternative is only 1.83 times
higher under the alternative hypothesis than under the null
hypothesis. The key point is that it is possible to obtain
uninformative results from a high-power experiment, even
though this was unlikely a priori.
A Bayes factor analysis
For the above likelihood ratio analysis we compared the
probability of the observed p value under the null hypothesis H0 : δ = 0 versus the alternative hypothesis H1 : δ =
δa = 0.3. The outcome of this analysis critically depends
on knowledge about the true effect size δa. Typically, however, researchers are uncertain about the possible values of
δa. This uncertainty is explicitly accounted for in Bayesian
hypothesis testing by quantifying the uncertainty in δa through the assignment of a prior distribution.
The addition of the prior distribution means that instead of
a single likelihood ratio, we use a weighted average likelihood ratio, known as the Bayes factor. In other words, the
Bayes factor is simply a likelihood ratio that accounts for
the uncertainty in δa.
More concretely, in the case of the t test example above,
the likelihood ratio for observed data Y is given by
LR10 = p (Y | H1)
p (Y | H0) =
tdf (tobs)
where tdf, δ
N (tobs) is the ordinate of the non-central tdistribution and tdf (tobs) is the ordinate of the central
t-distribution, both with df degrees of freedom and evaluated at the observed value tobs. To obtain a Bayes factor, we
then assign δa a prior distribution. One reasonable choice
of prior distribution for δa is the default standard Normal
distribution, H1 : δa
∼N(0, 1), which can be motivated as a unit-information prior . This prior can be
adapted for one-sided use by only using the positive half of
the normal prior . For this
prior, the Bayes factor is given by
B10 = p (Y | H1)
p (Y | H0)
p (tobs | δa)p (δa | H1) dδa
p (t | δ = 0)
N (tobs)N+(0, 1) dδa
tdf (tobs)
LR10(δa)N+(0, 1) dδa.
where N+ denotes a normal distribution truncated below at
Still intrigued by the phenomenon of precognition, and
armed now with the ability to calculate Bayes factors, Dr.
Z conduct two more experiments. In the first experiment,
she again uses 10 participants. Assuming the same effect
size δa = 0.3, the power of this experiment is still 0.22.
The experiment nevertheless yields t = 3.0 (p = .007).
For these data, the Bayes factor equals B10 = 12.4, which
means that the observed data are 12.4 times more likely
to have occurred under H1 than under H0. This is a nonnegligible level of evidence in support of H1, even though
the experiment had only low power.
In the second experiment, Dr. Z again uses 100 participants. The power of this experiment is 0.91, which is
exceptionally high, as before. When the experiment is carried out she finds that t = 2.0 (p = 0.024). For these
observed data, the Bayes factor equals B10 = 1.38, which
means that the observed data are only 1.38 times more likely
to have occurred under H1 than under H0. This level of evidence is nearly uninformative, even though the experiment
had exceptionally high power.
In both examples described above, the p value happened
to be significant at the .05 level. It may transpire, however, that a nonsignificant result is obtained and a power
analysis is then used to argue that the nonsignificant outcome provides support in favor of the null hypothesis. The
argument goes as follows: “We conducted a high-power
experiment and nevertheless we did not obtain a significant
result. Surely this means that our results provide strong
evidence in favor of the null hypothesis.” As a counterexample, consider the following scenario. Dr. Z conducts a
third experiment, once again using 100 participants for an
exceptionally high power of 0.91. The data yield t = 1.2
(p = .12). The result is not significant, but neither do the
data provide compelling support in favor of H0: the Bayes
factor equals B01 = 2.8, which is a relatively uninformative
level of evidence. Thus, even in the case that an experiment
has high power, a non-significant result is not, by itself,
compelling evidence for the null hypothesis. As always, the
strength of the evidence will depend on both the sample size
and the closeness of the observed test statistic to the null
The likelihood ratio analyses and the Bayes factor analyses both require that researchers specify an alternative
distribution. For a likelihood ratio analysis, for instance, the
same data will carry different evidential impact when the
comparison involves H1 : δa = 0.3 than when it involves
H1 : δa = 0.03. We believe the specification of an acceptable H1 is a modeling task like any other, in the sense
that it involves an informed choice that can be critiqued,
probed, and defended through scientific argument. More
importantly, the power fallacy is universal in the sense that
Behav Res 47:913–917
it does not depend on a specific choice of H1; the scenarios sketched here are only meant as concrete examples to
illustrate the general rule.
Conclusion
On average, high-power experiments yield more informative results than low-power experiments . Thus, when planning an
experiment, it is best to think big and collect as many
observations as possible. Inference is always based on
the information that is available, and better experimental
designs and more data usually provide more information.
However, what holds on average does not hold for each
individual case. With the data in hand, statistical inference
should use all of the available information, by conditioning on the specific observations that have been obtained
 . Power is best understood as a pre-experimental concept that averages over all
possible outcomes of an experiment, and its value is largely
determined by outcomes that will not be observed when
the experiment is run. Thus, when the actual data are available, a power calculation is no longer conditioned on what
is known, no longer corresponds to a valid inference, and
may now be misleading.
Consequently, as we have demonstrated here, it is
entirely possible for low-power experiments to yield strong
evidence, and for high-power experiments to yield weak
evidence. To assess the extent to which a particular data
set provides evidence for or against the null hypothesis, we
recommend that researchers use likelihood ratios or Bayes
factors. After a likelihood ratio or Bayes factor has been
presented, the demand of an editor, the suggestion of a
reviewer, or the desire of an author to interpret the relevant
statistical evidence with the help of power is superfluous at
best and misleading at worst.
Author Note
This work was supported by an ERC grant from the
European Research Council. Correspondence concerning this article
may be addressed to Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, University of Amsterdam, Department of Psychology, Weesperplein 4, 1018 XA Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Email address: .