DISTRIBUTED DIALOGUE POLICIES FOR MULTI-DOMAIN STATISTICAL DIALOGUE
MANAGEMENT
M. Gaˇsi´c, D. Kim, P. Tsiakoulis and S. Young
Cambridge University Engineering Department
Statistical dialogue systems offer the potential to reduce costs by
learning policies automatically on-line, but are not designed to
scale to large open-domains.
This paper proposes a hierarchical
distributed dialogue architecture in which policies are organised in
a class hierarchy aligned to an underlying knowledge graph. This
allows a system to be deployed using a modest amount of data to
train a small set of generic policies. As further data is collected,
generic policies can be adapted to give in-domain performance. Using Gaussian process-based reinforcement learning, it is shown that
within this framework generic policies can be constructed which
provide acceptable user performance, and better performance than
can be obtained using under-trained domain speciﬁc policies. It is
also shown that as sufﬁcient in-domain data becomes available, it
is possible to seamlessly improve performance, without subjecting
users to unacceptable behaviour during the adaptation period and
without limiting the ﬁnal performance compared to policies trained
from scratch.1
Index Terms— open-domain, multi-domain, dialogue systems,
POMDP, Gaussian process
1. INTRODUCTION
Statistical spoken dialogue systems allow policies to be learned directly from data thereby avoiding the need for hand-crafting dialogue
decisions . Furthermore, the recent introduction of sampleefﬁcient reinforcement learning algorithms has substantially reduced
the number of training dialogues required to train effective policies and this has enabled systems to be trained on-line in direct
interaction with human users .
Current approaches to statistical dialogue assume that all possible dialogue states can be encapsulated in a single real-valued vector
referred to as a belief state b and that dialogue decisions can be de-
ﬁned by a policy which maps belief states into actions π(b) →a.
This model works well for applications in speciﬁc limited domains
and it is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to allow a speciﬁc domain to be adapted
and extended on-the-ﬂy in direct interaction with human users .
However, it does not readily scale to support multiple domains in
which the user wishes to move from one topic to another.
In order to support large and potentially open domains, techniques that can reuse existing knowledge and adapt on-line are
needed. Such a system has extensive knowledge which could be
structured in the form of a hierarchical ontology populated with
We would like to thank Nesrine Ben Mustapha for providing the
ontologies used here.
This work was partly supported by PARLANCE
(www.parlance-project.eu), an EU Seventh Framework Programme project
(grant number 287615).
1Note: due to an error in the conﬁguration settings, some of the results
presented in the original version of this paper in the proceedings were not
directly comparable. This version of the paper has the corrected results.
instances of the various types of entity that it knows about. Following Google, such data structures are frequently referred to as
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) and they have already been explored in
connection with spoken language understanding tasks . For
the purposes of this paper, we consider a KG to be a tree-structured
class hierarchy in which each class represents a domain or topic by
a set of properties (slot-value pairs), and derived classes represent
specialisations of that domain that inherit slots from their parent and
add additional slots speciﬁc to the specialisation. For example (see
Fig 1), a generic venue class might deﬁne the common properties
of a venue such as name, area, phone, etc. A derived class such
as restaurant will then inherit the common properties of a venue,
but add restaurant-speciﬁc slots such as type of food, whether kidsallowed, etc. Actual entities are then class instances in which each
slot has a speciﬁc value. The goal of a typical dialogue might then
be to identify speciﬁc instances which match the user’s constraints
(e.g. “Find a restaurant nearby serving Italian food”).
restaurant
restaurant
Fig. 1. Training a generic venue policy model MV on data pooled
from two subdomains DR + DH (left); and training speciﬁc policy
models MR and MH using the generic policy MV as a prior and
additional in-domain training data (right).
One way to build a dialogue manager which can operate across a
large knowledge graph is to decompose the dialogue policy into a set
of topic speciﬁc policies that are distributed across the class nodes
in the graph. Initially, there will be relatively little training data and
the system will need to rely on generic policies attached to high level
generic class nodes which have been trained on whatever examples
are available from across the pool of derived classes. As more data
is collected, speciﬁc policies can be trained for each derived class2.
An example of this is illustrated in Fig 1. On the left side is the
initial situation where conversations about hotels and restaurants are
conducted using a generic model MV trained on example dialogues
from both the hotel and restaurant domains. Once the system has
been deployed and more training data has been collected, speciﬁc
2cf analogy with speech recognition adaptation using regression trees 
restaurant and hotel models MR and MH can be trained.3
This type of multi-domain model assumes an agile deployment
strategy which can be succinctly described as “deploy, collect data,
and reﬁne”. Its viability depends on the following assumptions:
1. it is possible to construct generic policies which provide
acceptable user performance across a range of differing domains;
2. as sufﬁcient in-domain data becomes available, it is possible to seamlessly adapt the policy to improve performance,
without subjecting users to unacceptable disruptions in performance during the adaptation period.
The aim of this paper is to investigate the validity of these assumptions.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2,
the use of Gaussian process-based reinforcement learning (GPRL) is
brieﬂy reviewed. The key advantage of GPRL in this context is that
in addition to being data efﬁcient, it directly supports the use of an
existing model as a prior thereby facilitating incremental adaptation.
In Section 3, various strategies for building a generic policy are considered and evaluated. In Section 4, sub-domain policy adaptation
is examined using the associated generic policy as a prior. Results
are then presented for live on-line adaptation with human users in
Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, conclusions are presented.
2. GP-BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
The input to a statistical dialogue manager is typically an N-best list
of scored hypotheses obtained from the spoken language understanding unit. Based on this input, at every dialogue turn, a distribution
of possible dialogue states called the belief state, an element of belief space b ∈B, is estimated. The quality of a dialogue is deﬁned
by a reward function r(b, a) and the role of a dialogue policy π is
to map the belief state b into a system action, an element of action
space a ∈A, at each turn so as to maximise the expected cumulative
The expected cumulative reward for a given belief state b and
action a is deﬁned by the Q-function:
Q(b, a) = Eπ
γτ−t−1rτ|bt = b, at = a
where rτ is the immediate reward obtained at time τ, T is the dialogue length and γ is a discount factor, 0 < γ ≤1. Optimising the
Q-function is then equivalent to optimising the policy π.
GP-Sarsa is an on-line reinforcement learning algorithm that
models the Q-function as a Gaussian process :
Q(b, a) ∼GP (m(b, a), k((b, a), (b, a)))
where m(b, a) is the prior mean and the kernel k(·, ·) is factored into
separate kernels over belief and action spaces kB(b, b′)kA(a, a′).
For a training sequence of belief state-action pairs B
[(b0, a0), . . . , (bt, at)]T and the corresponding observed immediate rewards r = [r1, . . . , rt]T, the posterior of the Q-function for
any belief state-action pair (b, a) is given by:
Q(b, a)|r, B ∼N(Q(b, a), cov((b, a), (b, a)))
3Here a model M is assumed to include input mappings for speech understanding, a dialogue policy π and output mappings for generation. In this
paper, we are only concerned with dialogue management and hence the dialogue policy component π of each model.
where the posterior mean and covariance take the form:
Q(b, a) = k(b, a)THT(HKHT + σ2HHT)−1(r −m),
cov((b, a), (b, a)) = k((b, a), (b, a))−
k(b, a)THT(HKHT + σ2HHT)−1Hk(b, a)
where k(b, a) = [k((b0, a0), (b, a)), . . . , k((bt, at), (b, a))]T, K
is the Gram matrix , H is a band matrix with diagonal [1, −γ],
m = [m(b0, a0), . . . , m(bt, at)]T and σ2 is an additive noise factor which controls how much variability in the Q-function estimate
is expected during the learning process. Function m() is 0 for the
initial GP model estimation, and is subsequently set to the posterior
mean of the previous GP model during incremental adaptation (see
 for details).
To use GPRL for dialogue, a kernel function must be deﬁned on
both the belief state space B and the action space A. Here we use
the Bayesian Update of Dialogue State (BUDS) dialogue model 
and we use the same approach as in for deﬁning the kernel function. The action space consists of a set of slot-dependent and slotindependent summary actions which are mapped to master actions
using a set of rules and the kernel is deﬁned as:
kA(a, a′) = δa(a′)
where δa(a′) = 1 iff a = a′, 0 otherwise. The belief state consists
of the probability distributions over the Bayesian network hidden
nodes that relate to the dialogue history for each slot and the value
of each user goal slot. The dialogue history nodes can take a ﬁxed
number of values, whereas user goals range over the values deﬁned
for that particular slot in the ontology and can have very high cardinalities. User goal distributions are therefore sorted according to
the probability assigned to each value since the choice of summary
action does not depend on the values but rather on the overall shape
of each distribution. The kernel function over both dialogue history
and user goal nodes is based on the expected likelihood kernel ,
which is a simple linear inner product. The kernel function for belief
space is then the sum over all the individual hidden node kernels:
kB(b, b′) =
where bh is the probability distribution encoded in the hth hidden
node. The dimensionality of the belief space grows with the number
of slots and the cardinality of each. The impact of the latter can be
mitigated by truncating the values to just the k most probable .
The impact of a large and growing number of slots requires some
form of partitioning of belief space. The distributed policy design
proposed in this paper is one approach to dealing with this.
3. DESIGNING A GENERIC POLICY
To investigate the distributed policy model described in Section 1,
dialogue policies were built for restaurants and hotels in San Francisco, USA, referred to as SFRestaurant and SFHotel respectively.
SFRestaurant contains 239 entities and SFHotel has 182 entites.
These subdomains are described by ontologies that were automatically generated using information from the web . A description
of slots and the values that they take is given in Table 1, where bold
identiﬁes the goal slots that can be speciﬁed by the user and the
remaining slots are informational slots that the user can query.
In GPRL, the computation of Q(b, a) requires the kernel function to be evaluated between (b, a) and each of the belief-action
points in the training data. If the training data consists of dialogues
from subdomains (restaurants and hotels in this case) which have
Table 1. Slots and their cardinalities for the two subdomains. Bold
indicates slots that can be speciﬁed by the user to constrain a search,
the remainder are informable slots. The stars indicate abstract slots
in the abstract and renorm styles of generic policy.
SFRestaurant
pricerange
pricerange
dogsallowed
goodformeal
hasinternet
kids-allowed
acceptscards
domain-speciﬁc slots and actions, a strategy is needed for computing
the kernel function between domains. Here three different strategies
are considered.
The ﬁrst and simplest is to consider only slots that are common
to both subdomains R and H:
kB(bH, bR) =
When goal nodes are paired with differing cardinalities (eg name in
Table 1), the shorter vector is padded with zeros. Similarly, the kernel over actions only considers actions that are the same in both subdomains and in other cases returns 0. This strategy is referred to as
mutual. In the second strategy, non-matching slots are renamed as
slot-1, slot-2, etc and treated as abstract slots so that they are the same
in both subdomains, these are the starred rows in Table 1. Hence for
example, food is matched with dogs allowed, and so on. As with the
mutual case, when goal nodes are paired with differing cardinalities,
the shorter vector is padded with zeros. This strategy is referred to
as abstract. Finally, a variation of the abstract strategy is considered
where, instead of padding the shorter goal vectors with zeros, the
longer vectors are normalised to match the length of the shorter. We
refer to this strategy as renorm. Adaptation strategies based on 
are also possible but are reliant on increasing the dimensionality.
In order to investigate the effectiveness of these strategies,
generic policies were trained and then tested in both subdomains. In
all cases the training data consisted of an equal number of restaurant
and hotel dialogues. In addition, in-domain policies were trained
as a reference. Training and testing was performed on an agendabased simulated user operating on the dialogue act level .
The reward function allocates −1 at each turn to encourage shorter
dialogues, plus 20 at the end of each successful dialogue. The user
simulator includes an error generator and this was set to generate
incorrect user inputs 15% of time. For each condition, 10 policies
were trained using different random seeds using differing numbers
of training dialogues.
Each policy is then evaluated using 1000
dialogues on each subdomain. The overall average reward, success
rate and number of turns is given in Table 2 together with a 95%
conﬁdence interval.
The most important measure is the average
reward, since the policies are trained to maximise this.
There are two important conclusions to be drawn from these results. First, all generic policies perform better than the in-domain
policies trained only on the data available for that subdomain (i.e.
half of the training data available for the generic policy in this case)
Table 2. Comparison of strategies for training generic policies. Indomain performance is measured in terms of reward, success rate
and the average number of turns per dialog. Results are given with a
95% conﬁdence interval.
SFRestaurant
3.26 ± 0.21
60.02 ± 0.97
8.65 ± 0.08
5.00 ± 0.21
68.17 ± 0.91
8.55 ± 0.07
3.88 ± 0.21
62.60 ± 0.95
8.56 ± 0.07
4.48 ± 0.21
67.35 ± 0.92
8.89 ± 0.08
4.49 ± 0.21
67.44 ± 0.92
8.89 ± 0.08
7.95 ± 0.17
83.02 ± 0.75
8.55 ± 0.07
8.68 ± 0.15
86.67 ± 0.67
8.54 ± 0.07
8.28 ± 0.16
84.63 ± 0.71
8.52 ± 0.07
8.58 ± 0.15
86.21 ± 0.68
8.52 ± 0.07
8.60 ± 0.16
86.32 ± 0.68
8.56 ± 0.07
3.58 ± 0.21
62.07 ± 0.96
8.75 ± 0.07
4.83 ± 0.21
69.08 ± 0.92
8.89 ± 0.08
4.81 ± 0.21
68.00 ± 0.92
8.71 ± 0.08
5.27 ± 0.20
70.01 ± 0.90
8.64 ± 0.07
4.64 ± 0.21
68.59 ± 0.92
8.96 ± 0.08
8.40 ± 0.16
84.90 ± 0.71
8.46 ± 0.06
8.92 ± 0.15
87.48 ± 0.65
8.45 ± 0.06
8.69 ± 0.15
85.83 ± 0.68
8.36 ± 0.06
8.89 ± 0.15
87.19 ± 0.66
8.44 ± 0.06
8.85 ± 0.15
87.45 ± 0.65
8.55 ± 0.07
and this is especially the case when training data is limited. Secondly, in the majority of cases the strategies using abstract slots provide the best performance.
4. ADAPTATION OF IN-DOMAIN POLICIES USING A
GENERIC POLICY AS A PRIOR
We now investigate the effectiveness of a generic policy as a prior
for training an in-domain policy as in the right hand side of Fig. 1.
Since the strategy of using abstract slots provided the best overall
generic performance and renorm strategy gave comparable performance, only abstract generic policies are used from now on. In order to examine the best and worst case, the abstract generic priors
(from the 10 randomly seeded examples) that gave the best performance and the worst performance on each sub-domain trained with
500 and 5000 dialogues were selected. This results in four prior
policies for each subdomain: abstract-500-worst, abstract-500-best,
abstract-5000-worst and abstract-5000-best. In addition, a policy
with no prior was also trained for each subdomain (i.e. the policy
was trained from scratch). After every 5000 training dialogues each
policy was evaluated with 1000 dialogues. The results are given in
Fig. 2 and 3 with a 95%conﬁdence interval. Performance at 0 training dialogues corresponds to using the generic policy as described in
the previous section, or using a random policy for the no prior case.
The results from Figs. 2 and 3 demonstrate that the performance
of the policy in the initial stages of learning are signiﬁcantly improved using the generic policy as a prior, even if that prior is trained
on a small number of dialogues and even if it was the worst performing prior from the batch of 10 training sessions. These results also
show that the use of a generic prior does not limit the optimality of
the ﬁnal policy. In fact, the use of a prior can be seen as resetting the
variance of a GP which could lead to better sample efﬁciency .
This may be the reason why in some cases the no-prior policies do
Training dialogues
abstract-500-worst
abstract-500-best
abstract-5000-worst
abstract-5000-best
Fig. 2. Training policies with different priors – SFRestaurant
Training dialogues
abstract-500-worst
abstract-500-best
abstract-5000-worst
abstract-5000-best
Fig. 3. Training policies with different priors – SFHotel
not catch up with the adapted policies.
In Table 3, the performance of the best performing generic prior
is compared to the performance of the same policy adapted using
an additional 50K dialogues. The results show that additional indomain adaptation has the potential to improve the performance further. So when enough training data is available, it is beneﬁcial to
create individual in-domain policies rather than continuing to train
the generic policy. The reason behind this may be that the optimal
performance can only be reached when the training and the testing
conditions match.
5. ADAPTATION IN INTERACTION WITH HUMAN USERS
In order to investigate how the use of a generic policy as a prior inﬂuences training in interaction with human users, a generic policy was
adapted on-line in a real-time spoken dialogue system using subjects
recruited via Amazon Mturk. Each user was assigned speciﬁc tasks
in the SFRestaurant subdomain and then asked to call the system in
a similar set-up to that described in . After each dialogue the
users were asked whether they judged the dialogue to be successful
or not. Based on that binary rating, the subjective success was calculated as well as the average reward. An objective rating was also
computed by comparing the system outputs with the assigned task
speciﬁcation. During training, only dialogues where both objective
and subjective score were the same were used.
Two training schedules were performed in the SFRestaurant subdomain – one training from scratch without a prior and the other performing adaptation using the best generic prior obtained after 5000
training dialogues on the user simulator. For each training schedule
Table 3. Performance of best generic prior when adapted using 50K
additional dialogues. Results are given with one standard error.
SFRestaurant
best prior
8.66 ± 0.35
85.40 ± 2.19
8.32 ± 0.20
9.62 ± 0.30
89.60 ± 1.90
8.24 ± 0.19
best prior
9.76 ± 0.31
88.80 ± 1.96
7.95 ± 0.21
10.27 ± 0.27
92.50 ± 1.64
8.20 ± 0.21
three sessions were performed and the results were averaged to reduce any random variation. Fig. 4 shows the moving average reward
as a function of the number of training dialogues. The moving window was set to 100 dialogues so that after the initial 100 dialogues
each point on the graph is an average of 300 dialogues. The shaded
area represents a 95% conﬁdence interval. The initial parts of the
graph exhibit more randomness in behaviour because the number of
training dialogues is small.
Moving average reward
Fig. 4. Training in interaction with human users on SFRestaurant –
moving average reward
The results show an upward trend in performance particularly
for the policy that uses no prior. However, the performance obtained
with the prior is signiﬁcantly better than without a prior both in terms
of the reward and the success rate. Equally importantly, unlike the
system trained from scratch with no prior, the users of the adapted
system are not subjected to poor performance during the early stages
of training.
6. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has proposed a distributed multi-domain dialogue architecture in which dialogue policies are organised in a class hierarchy aligned to an underlying knowledge graph. The class hierarchy allows a system to be deployed by using a modest amount of
data to train a small set of generic policies. As further data is collected, generic policies can be adapted to give in-domain performance. Using Gaussian process-based reinforcement learning, it has
been shown that it is possible to construct generic policies which provide acceptable in-domain user performance, and better performance
than can be obtained using under-trained domain speciﬁc policies.
To construct a generic policy, a design consisting of all common slots
plus a number of abstract slots which can be mapped to domainspeciﬁc slots works well. It has also been shown that as sufﬁcient
in-domain data becomes available, it is possible to seamlessly adapt
to improve performance, without subjecting users to unacceptable
disruptions in performance during the adaptation period and without limiting the ﬁnal performance compared to policies trained from
scratch. Future work will investigate the problem of ﬁnding adequate mappings for generic policies and training them with human
7. REFERENCES
 JD Williams and SJ Young,
“Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes for Spoken Dialog Systems,” Computer
Speech and Language, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 393–422, 2007.
 SJ Young, M Gasic, B Thomson, and JD Williams, “Pomdpbased statistical spoken dialogue systems: a review,” Proceedings IEEE, vol. 101, no. 5, pp. 1160–1179, 2013.
 M Gaˇsi´c, F Jurˇc´ıˇcek, S Keizer, F Mairesse, J Schatzmann,
B Thomson, K Yu, and S Young, “Gaussian Processes for Fast
Policy Optimisation of POMDP-based Dialogue Managers,” in
Proceedings of SIGDIAL, 2010.
 M Geist and O Pietquin, “Managing Uncertainty within the
KTD Framework,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Active
Learning and Experimental Design, Sardinia (Italy), 2011.
 M Gaˇsi´c and S Young,
“Gaussian Processes for POMDP-
Based Dialogue Manager Optimization,” TASLP, vol. 22, no.
 M Gaˇsi´c, D Kim, P Tsiakoulis, M Henderson, M Szummer,
B Thomson, and S Young, “Incremental on-line adaptation of
POMDP-based dialogue managers to extended domains,” in
Proceedings of Interspeech, 2014.
 G¨okhan T¨ur, Minwoo Jeong, Ye-Yi Wang, Dilek Hakkani-T¨ur,
and Larry P Heck, “Exploiting the semantic web for unsupervised natural language semantic parsing,” in Proceedings of
Interspeech, 2012.
 Larry P Heck, Dilek Hakkani-T¨ur, and G¨okhan T¨ur, “Leveraging knowledge graphs for web-scale unsupervised semantic
parsing.,” in Proceedings of Interspeech, 2013, pp. 1594–1598.
 M.J F. Gales,
“The Generation And Use Of Regression
Class Trees For MLLR Adaptation,”
Tech. Rep. CUED/F-
INFENG/TR.263, Cambridge University Engineering Dept,
 Y Engel, S Mannor, and R Meir, “Reinforcement learning with
Gaussian processes,” in Proceedings of ICML, 2005.
 CE Rasmussen and CKI Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2005.
 B Thomson and S Young, “Bayesian update of dialogue state:
A POMDP framework for spoken dialogue systems,” Computer Speech and Language, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 562–588, 2010.
 M Gaˇsi´c, C Breslin, M Henderson, D Kim, M Szummer,
B Thomson, P Tsiakoulis, and S Young, “POMDP-based dialogue manager adaptation to extended domains,” in Proceedings of SIGDIAL, 2013.
 T Jebara, R Kondor, and A Howard, “Probability product kernels,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 5, pp. 819–844, Dec. 2004.
 N Ben Mustapha, MA Aufaure, H Baazaoui-Zghal, and
H Ben Ghezala, “Query-driven approach of contextual ontology module learning using web snippets,”
Special issue on
Database Management and Information Retrieval, Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, 2013.
 Hal Daume III, “Frustratingly easy domain adaptation,” in
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
of Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic, June
2007, pp. 256–263, Association for Computational Linguistics.
 J Schatzmann, B Thomson, K Weilhammer, H Ye, and
SJ Young, “Agenda-Based User Simulation for Bootstrapping
a POMDP Dialogue System,” in Proceedings of HLT, 2007.
 S Keizer, M Gaˇsi´c, F Jurˇc´ıˇcek, F Mairesse, B Thomson, K Yu,
and S Young,
“Parameter estimation for agenda-based user
simulation,” in Proceedings of SIGDIAL, 2010.
 Robert C. Grande, Thomas J. Walsh, and Jonathan P. How,
“Sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning with gaussian processes,” in Proceedings of the 31th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2014, Beijing, China, 21-26 June
2014, 2014, pp. 1332–1340.
 F Jurˇc´ıˇcek, S Keizer, M Gaˇsi´c, F Mairesse, B Thomson, K Yu,
and S Young, “Real user evaluation of spoken dialogue systems using Amazon Mechanical Turk,” in Proceedings of Interspeech, 2011.
 M Gaˇsi´c, C. Breslin, M. Henderson, M. Szummer, B Thomson, P. Tsiakoulis, and S Young, “On-line policy optimisation
of Bayesian Dialogue Systems by human interaction,” in Proceedings of ICASSP, 2013.