LoCoH: Nonparameteric Kernel Methods for Constructing
Home Ranges and Utilization Distributions
Wayne M. Getz1,2*, Scott Fortmann-Roe1, Paul C. Cross3,4., Andrew J. Lyons1., Sadie J. Ryan1.¤, Christopher C. Wilmers5
1 Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America, 2 Mammal
Research Institute, Department of Zoology and Entomology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa, 3 Northern Rocky Mountain Science Center,
U.S. Geological Survey, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, United States of America, 4 Department of Ecology, Montana State University,
Bozeman, Montana, United States of America, 5 Environmental Studies Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, California, United States of
Parametric kernel methods currently dominate the literature regarding the construction of animal home ranges (HRs) and
utilization distributions (UDs). These methods frequently fail to capture the kinds of hard boundaries common to many natural
systems. Recently a local convex hull (LoCoH) nonparametric kernel method, which generalizes the minimum convex polygon
(MCP) method, was shown to be more appropriate than parametric kernel methods for constructing HRs and UDs, because of
its ability to identify hard boundaries (e.g., rivers, cliff edges) and convergence to the true distribution as sample size increases.
Here we extend the LoCoH in two ways: ‘‘fixed sphere-of-influence,’’ or r-LoCoH (kernels constructed from all points within
a fixed radius r of each reference point), and an ‘‘adaptive sphere-of-influence,’’ or a-LoCoH (kernels constructed from all points
within a radius a such that the distances of all points within the radius to the reference point sum to a value less than or equal
to a), and compare them to the original ‘‘fixed-number-of-points,’’ or k-LoCoH (all kernels constructed from k-1 nearest
neighbors of root points). We also compare these nonparametric LoCoH to parametric kernel methods using manufactured
data and data collected from GPS collars on African buffalo in the Kruger National Park, South Africa. Our results demonstrate
that LoCoH methods are superior to parametric kernel methods in estimating areas used by animals, excluding unused areas
(holes) and, generally, in constructing UDs and HRs arising from the movement of animals influenced by hard boundaries and
irregular structures (e.g., rocky outcrops). We also demonstrate that a-LoCoH is generally superior to k- and r-LoCoH (with
software for all three methods available at 
Citation: Getz WM, Fortmann-Roe S, Cross PC, Lyons AJ, Ryan SJ, et al LoCoH: Nonparameteric Kernel Methods for Constructing Home Ranges
and Utilization Distributions. PLoS ONE 2(2): e207. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207
INTRODUCTION
Ecology is currently undergoing a revolution in terms of our ability
to collect large sets of data with unprecedented precision on the
position of individuals in the landscape (e.g. plus-minus several
meters using current GPS technology ) at regularly spaced
intervals of time. This revolution is leading to the emergence of
movement ecology, a new subfield of ecology . GPS position
data is often used to construct home ranges (HRs) or utilization distributions (UDs) , where the former are bounded
areas used by animals for some defined purpose (e.g. foraging or
seeking mates), while the latter are represented by isopleths
demarcating regions in space with different probabilities or rates of
usage by individuals.
Currently, the boundary of the HR is commonly delimited
using the 95% isopleth of an unbounded UD, where the UD is
typically constructed using the symmetric bivariate Gaussian (i.e.
a parametric) kernel method , although other methods
may be preferred when the UD is multimodal . For comparative and other reasons enumerated below, bounds on the
innermost 95% of the data are also used to estimate the areas of
HRs even for methods of construction that are able to produce
HRs bounded by a 100% isopleth of a UD (e.g. the minimum
convex polygon—MCP, bounded parametric kernel methods, our
LoCoH methods). In the future, use of the 95% isopleth to bound
HRs may change in view of Bo¨rger et al.’s recent study in
which they recommend estimating the area of HRs using isopleths
in the 50–90% range. They demonstrate that using isopleths in
this range produces area estimates that are less biased by sample
size than when using isopleths above 90% or below 50% (the latter
sometimes being used to estimate core areas of HR use).
The reasons for omitting outlying points in estimating the size of
HRs are threefold: (1) locations based on relatively inaccurate
triangulation of radio collars result in imprecise location estimates
(this is philosophically consistent with the parametric kernel
methods, such as the radially symmetric—i.e. one parameter—
bivariate Gaussian or harmonic kernels, that associate a smooth
distribution with each data point); (2) HR area estimates using
MCP and parametric kernel construction methods are very
sensitive to outlying points ; and (3) outlying points may well
reflect exploratory animal movements rather than those necessary
for survival and reproduction. The first of these three points is no
Academic Editor: Tim Coulson, Imperial College, United Kingdom
Received January 5, 2007; Accepted January 18, 2007; Published February 14,
Copyright:  2007 Getz et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.
Funding: NSF EID and James S McDonnell Foundation Grants to WMG. EPA STAR
and NSF Bioinformatics Postdoctoral Grans to SJR.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
. These authors contributed equally to this work.
¤ Current address: Department of Anthropological Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, United States of America
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
longer relevant for methods applied to GPS data since these data
are spatially precise .
Here we describe extensions to a recently developed local convex
hull (LoCoH) approach that produces bounded HRs and has
been shown to have superior convergence properties compared to
the parametric kernel methods used in constructing HRs and UDs.
This LoCoH method is both a generalization of the minimum
convex polygon (MCP) method and essentially a non-parametric
kernel method. LoCoH applies the MCP construction to a subset of
data localized in space, and the local convex polygon (i.e. local hull)
is constructed using the k-1 nearest neighbors of each data point,
thereby producing a set of nonparametric kernels whose union is
the UD. Thus LoCoH uses kernels with forms arising directly out of
the data, unlike parametric kernels that have a form specified in
most cases by a one parameter function (e.g. symmetric bivariate
Gaussian centered on the data point with width parameter h), even
though the union of these parametric kernels can produce rather
irregular surfaces with multiple peaks.
The advantage of LoCoH’s direct use of data becomes evident
when constructing UDs from data influenced by idiosyncratic
geometries such as geomorphological boundaries and holes (e.g.
lakes or rocky outcrops) associated with the space over which
animals move . In particular, as illustrated in examples
considered here and elsewhere , , LoCoH methods are
more adept than parametric kernel methods at locating such
geographical features as reserve boundaries, rivers, lakes, inhospitable terrain, and so on. Further, these features can be
assessed automatically by linking LoCoH constructions with
spectral images provided by new remote sensing technologies that
have resolutions matching or exceeding those of the data (e.g. 1–
10 m resolution SPOT imagery, Quickbird and Superbird images,
IKONOS satellite imagery ). Statistical analyses can then be
carried out to address ecological questions relating, among other
things, to resource use or social behavior .
In this paper, we present two modifications of the ‘‘fixed k’’
LoCoH method, which has been referred to as the k-NNCH (knearest neighbor convex hulls) because each local kernel is a kpoint convex hull constructed from a root point and its k-1 nearest
neighbors . The first modification is a ‘‘fixed radius’’ r, or r-
LoCoH, method in which all the points in a fixed ‘‘sphere of
influence’’ of radius r around each root point are used to construct
the local hulls. The second modification is an adaptive, or a-
LoCoH, method in which all points within a variable sphere
around a root point are used to construct the local hulls such that
the sum of the distances between nearby points and the root point
is less than or equal to a. Thus the adaptive method allows the
number of points involved in the construction of the LoCoH
kernels to increase with increasing density of data.
After presenting a description of the methods and reviewing the
MSHC approach (minimum spurious hole covering—see ) to
selecting an appropriate value for k, r, or a, we compare the
performance of parametric kernel and LoCoH methods in
estimating UD isopleths from data generated from known
distributions with challenging spatial features (e.g. narrow valleys
or corridors). We then compare results obtained from the
application of parametric and LoCoH kernel methods to both
manufactured and real data, the latter from GPS collars placed on
African buffalo in the Kruger National Park, South Africa. In
particular, we demonstrate the superior performance of LoCoH
compared with parametric kernel methods in the context of
estimating the size of HRs and delineating geological and
ecological features in home ranges.
Finally, we note that links to software for the implementation of
LoCoH using ArcView/ArcGIS, or in the R Statistical package
Adehabitat, or as a web application can be found at 
cnr.berkeley.edu.
A. Constructions
Fixed number of points: k-LoCoH
As elaborated in more
detail in Getz and Wilmers , the method begins by
constructing the convex hull associated with each point (the
root) and its k-1 nearest neighbors. The union of all these hulls is
finite and can be used to represent the home range of the
associated individual. (For a method based on a-hulls see Burgman
and Fox . To obtain a UD, the hulls are ordered from the
smallest to the largest, where the smallest hulls are indicative of
frequently used areas. By progressively taking the union of these
from the smallest upwards, until x% of points are included (with
some rounding error), the boundaries of the resulting union
represents the x% isopleth of the densest set of points in the UD.
Depending on convention the HR can be defined as the area
bounded by the 100% isopleth of the UD or, for purposes of
comparison, the 95% isopleth which is the one most commonly
used for UDs constructed from more traditional, particularly noncompact, kernels such as the symmetric bivariate Gaussian.
Fixed radius: r-LoCoH
Instead of choosing, as in the fixed k
LoCoH, the k-1 nearest neighbors to each point, we use all points
at distance r or closer to the root point to construct the local hull
associated with the root and all points within a ‘‘sphere of
influence’’ of radius r. Since all the local convex hulls now are
approximately the same size, to construct the UD we sort these
hulls from those containing the most points to those containing the
fewest, with a size (area) sorting only being used to order hulls
containing the same number of points. As before, we progressively
take the union of hulls from most to fewest points and smallest to
largest when they have the same number of points until x% of
points (with some rounding error) are included. Also, as before, the
boundaries of the resulting union represent the x% isopleth of the
densest set of points in the HR.
If r is sufficiently small so that some points have only one or no
neighbors then in the one-neighbor case the point is connected to
the construction by a line, while in the no-neighbors case the point
is isolated from the construction. In both cases, the points do not
contribute any area to the construction. If the proportion of such
points is p then the area bounded by the construction is the
100(12p)% isopleth. If construction of a 100% isopleth is needed,
then the algorithm can be modified to include at least the two
nearest neighbors irrespective of the value of r.
The above method for constructing a fixed radius LoCoH is
reminiscent of fixed kernel methods that use kernels with finite
support, such as the uniform or Epanechnikov kernels , except
in LoCoH the elements are data dependent and hence variable in
shape while the parametric kernels have the same repeated
element associated with each point.
Adaptive or a-LoCoH method
The adaptive or a-LoCoH
method uses all points within a variable sphere around a root point
such that the sum of the distances between these points and the
root point is less than or equal to a. Essentially, this method adjusts
the radius of the circle that circumscribes each local convex hull,
such that smaller convex hulls arise in high use areas, thereby
providing more clearly defined isopleths in regions where data are
more abundant. Thus, for example, the a-LoCoH method is
particularly useful in defining UD boundaries that arise when an
individual regularly visits the shore of a lake, the edge of a cliff, or
the bank of a river. Also, provided the value a exceeds the sum of
the two greatest distances between points in our data set, the
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
construction will always produce the 100% isopleth while keeping
the radius of LoCoH elements small in high density regions of the
data. On the other hand, if a does not exceed the sum of the two
greatest distances between points in our data set, then to obtain the
100% isopleth we need to specify that at least the two nearest
neighbors are always included irrespective of the value of a.
Rules for selecting k, r or a
For relatively low values of k, r,
or a, the resulting LoCoH construction from the union of the
LoCoH elements associated with each data point may contain
many unused areas (or holes) that disappear with increasing k, r, or
a. For HRs with known topologies (i.e. where the number of holes
that the UD should contain is known ahead of time) the
‘‘minimum spurious hole covering’’ (MSHC) rule may be
used to select the smallest value of k, r, or a that produces
a covering that has the same topology as the given set (e.g. see
Figs. 1 and 2). If the topology of the UD is not known, we can
guess its genus (number of holes) by identifying relatively large
physical features, such as lakes, mountain peaks, or inhospitable
habitats. We expect these objects to produce real holes in the data
that should be reflected in the UD construction. Of course, real
holes at scales that are relatively small compared with the size of
the home range may be missed. Differences between real and
spurious holes in LoCoH constructions may be evident in plots of
area covered by the UD against the value of the parameter k, r, or
a: with increasing parameter values the estimated area may level
off once all spurious holes are covered , but should
increase again when one or more real holes becomes totally or
partially spuriously covered. Identifying these plateaus in UD
construction determines the value to use. We denote these values
by kˆ, rˆ and aˆ. Only experience with the method, however, will
reveal appropriate methods for deciding when this leveling off has
been achieved. While this MSHC rule is subjective, we show in
this paper that the a-LoCoH method is remarkably robust to
changes in the parameter a.
For our manufactured data sets where the boundaries of the
areas are known, or in cases of field data where the boundaries of
particular holes are known, values of the parameters for k, r, and
a can be obtained by minimizing the sum of Type I and II errors
(Type I errors arise from excluding regions that are part of the HR
Figure 1. The actual points used in the analysis, selected at random within boundaries defined in the methods to conform with the specified isopleth
rules, are plotted here in the upper row for data sets A, B, and C. For each set, the 20% isopleth surrounds the densest aggregation of points that
appear as relatively black areas in each of the plots. UDs constructed using the fixed kernel least-squares cross-validation method for these data are
illustrations in the lower row (sizes have been adjusted to provide visual correspondence—where precise estimates of the fits are given in Table 1).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g001
Figure 2. Kruger National Park, showing the location of the four collared
buffalo used in the empirical data test of the study. The Satara and
Lower Sabie regions are shown as insets 1 and 2, respectively.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g002
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
while Type II errors arise from including regions that are not: see
 ) in terms of how well our LoCoH methods identify the
boundaries of the areas in question. As a starting point for finding
these optimal values, denoted by k*, r*, and a*, a set of heuristic
values, denoted by k1, r1, and a1 respectively, were selected using
the following ‘‘rules of thumb:’’
values (n is the number of points in the set)
N r1 is half of the maximum nearest neighbor distance between
points (i.e. the radius of a sphere that will allow all points to be
joined to at least one additional point)
N a1 is maximum distance between any two points in the data set.
Parametric kernel constructions
For purposes of comparison we constructed UDs using symmetric bivariate Gaussian
kernels. Although we sought to use the optimized value for the
width parameter, h, using the least-squares cross-validation
(LSCV) method (see ; but see for problems with this
method), for one of the generated data sets and for the buffalo
data, the method did not converge using either the R-Adehabitat
toolbox or the Animal Movement Extension for ArcView 3.x .
This is a common problem with the method so we used
Silverman’s ad-hoc method instead for generating the width
parameter h .
Manufactured Data
We manufactured three datasets (Fig. 1
A–C) with known 20% and 100% isopleths so that we could use
these to compare the accuracy of our three methods.
Dataset A: The 100% isopleth is constructed from a ring
centered at the (x,y) = (20,0) with an inner radius of one and an
outer radius of five. The ring contains 78% of the points and was
connected by a corridor width of 14 and a height of 0.5 containing
2% of the points. This corridor connects to a circle located at (0, 0)
with a radius of one that contains 20% of the highest density points
in the construction. Thus this circle is also the 20% isopleth. We
randomly distributed 1,000 points in the dataset according to the
isopleth rules: 78% in the ring, 20% in the small dense circle and
2% in the connecting corridor. The area bounded by the densest
20% and the 100% isopleths is 3.1 and 85.3 units respectively.
Dataset B: The polygon defined by joining lines to the ordered
set of points (210, 0), (22, 2), (27, 8), (0, 3), (2, 10), (2, 1), (10,
23), (2, 22), (2, 28), and (0, 23) is the 100% isopleth boundary
for these data. The 20% densest point aggregation is within the
triangle (2, 22), (2, 28), and (0, 23). A rectangular hole in the
data set is bounded by the lower left corner of (20.5, 21.5), and
has a width and height of 1.5 and 3 respectively. We randomly
distributed 1,002 points in the dataset concordant with the isopleth
rules, but otherwise at random. The area bounded by the densest
20% and the 100% isopleths is 6.0 and 68.0 units respectively.
Dataset C: The 100% isopleth was created from a circle
centered at (0, 0) and radius 10, with two circular holes of radius
2.2 centered at (4, 4) and (24, 4) and a triangular hole with
vertices (26.5, 23), (6.5, 23), and (0, 27). We constructed the
20% isopleth from a circle centered at (0, 0) with a radius of one.
Lastly, we randomly distributed 1,002 points in the dataset
concordant with the isopleth rules, but otherwise at random. The
area bounded by the densest 20% and the 100% isopleths is 3.1
and 257.0 units respectively.
Buffalo data
We collected field data on African buffalo
movements using VHF and GPS collars place on individuals from
November 2000 to August 2006 in the Satara and Lower Sabie
regions of the Kruger National Park. For the purposes of
demonstrating the LoCoH methodology we restrict our analyses
to GPS recordings of locations taken once an hour from four adult
females over the following periods of times: female T13, July 15,
2005 to Oct 29, 2005; female T15, Sept 16, 2005 to Feb 16, 2006;
female T7, Sept 15, 2005 to Jan 29, 2006; female T16, July 27,
2005 to October 8, 2005. These data were collected in decimal
degrees and re-projected to Universal Transverse Mercator
(UTM) [WGS84, Zone 36S] in ArcGIS 9. These data represent
two buffalo at each of two sites in Kruger National Park: the first is
the Satara region (T07 and T15) and the second is the Lower
Sabie region (T13 and T16) (Fig. 2). In both regions, areas within
the range of the buffalo are known to be physically inaccessible. A
7.7 km2 fenced exclosure exists in the Satara region while a small
ridge (,4.15 km2) that is too steep for the buffalo to climb exists
within the Lower Sabie region. Both the exclosure and ridge serve
as ‘‘known holes’’ that can be used to assess the performance of the
methods, as discussed below.
C. Analysis
Error analysis using manufactured data
For each of the
datasets we constructed k-, r-, and a-LoCoH UDs over a range of
parameter values. In every case, we calculated the Type I and
Type II errors associated with the 20% and 100% isopleth
constructions. We took the total error to be the sum of Type I and
Type II errors for the isopleth in question; although for some
applications, if the relative importance of Type I and II errors
differs, a weighted sum can be used. Here we simply define the
optimal k, r, or a to be the values that minimize the total error for
the corresponding method. As discussed above, for the symmetric
bivariate Gaussian kernel method we followed the convention of
using the 95% isopleth to bound the UDs, but also included the
99% isopleth for purposes of comparison. We then identified the
isopleth that minimized the total error.
We constructed images of the resulting LoCoH UDs for our
optimal parameter values, as well as half and twice the optimal
Lastly, we examined how the total error of the UDs constructed
using the different methods changed as we used different sample
sizes. We generated random samples containing 1000, 800, 600,
400, and 200 points using the specifications and isopleth rules
outlined earlier for each manufactured dataset. We repeated this
process 15 times (this number is relatively low but suffices if we are
generating estimates purely for comparative purposes among
methods) as a way of generating error estimates (i.e. for a total of
75 samples per dataset). We located the optimal value of k, r, and
a for each sample and plotted the resulting total error as a function
of sample size.
Error analysis using Buffalo data
For purposes of comparison, we generated UDs for each of the four individuals using each
of the 4 different methods. Since we were uncertain over what
range of values we should explore the performance of our MSHC
algorithm, we initially constructed UDs using our heuristic rules
for selecting k1, r1, and a1. For the two data sets from Satara, for
which the exclosure is precisely known, we then assessed to what
extent the known holes were covered with these initial parameter
guesses and used this information to locate the values of the
parameters where the known holes were completely covered for
the first time—that is the MSHC parameter values kˆ, rˆ, and aˆ. For
all three methods we always ensured that at least the two nearest
neighbors were included: thus in all cases the 100% isopleth could
be constructed. We then divided the intervals [0,kˆ], [0,rˆ], and [0,aˆ]
into 20 subsections and calculated the proportion of the known
holes covered for each of the 20 parameter values in question with
respect to the two data sets under consideration.
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
Manufactured Data
For each of the three data sets we plot in Figs 3A–C the total errors
associated with the k-LoCoH, r-LoCoH, and a-LoCoH constructions of home ranges (100% isopleth) and the 20% isopleths as
a function of the parameters, k, r and a respectively. In the case of
the home range constructions, the optimal value of r (i.e. the value
that minimizes the total error associated with the r-LoCoH
constructions) is evident from the graphs. For the k-LoCoH home
range constructions, the optimum k is obvious for data set A, but
less so for data sets B and C. On the other hand, the total error
curves for the a-LoCoH home range construction become rather
flat beyond small values of a and the optimum value is not that
obvious from the graph (which is why, as we will see below, that
this method is the most robust of the three LoCoH methods). For
all the cases the value of the parameters that minimize total error
for the HR are given in Table 1 where, for purposes of comparison, the errors associated with the symmetric bivariate Gaussian
kernel construction are listed for the 95% isopleths, the 99%
isopleths, as well as the isopleth constructions that minimized the
total error (to within a resolution of isopleths differing by J%). All
three LoCoH methods have errors that are considerably lower
than those of the symmetric bivariate Gaussian kernel (GK)
constructions. In particular, the a-LoCoH estimates were either
best (data sets A and C) or tied for best (data set B) with error levels
between 8.6–8.8%, while the optimal GK estimate error levels
where 20.9%, 22.2%, and 14.6% for data sets A–C respectively:
Figure 3. Type I (dotted line), Type II (dashed line) and Total Error (solid line) (percentages) associated with the construction of 100% and 20%
isopleths are plotted for the k-LoCoH, r-LoCoH, and a-LoCoH methods as a function of the parameters, k, r and a respectively for the three data sets
(A, B, and C).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g003
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
that is, error rates of around 2–3 times those of the a-LoCoH
constructions.
Also note in Table 1 that the Type I and Type II errors
associated with the three LoCoH methods are relatively similar,
whereas this is not generally true for the symmetric bivariate
Gaussian kernel method. In addition, the plots of error levels for
the LoCoH constructions (Fig. 3) indicate that a-LoCoH constructions were less sensitive than the k- and r-LoCoH constructions to
variation in the proportional changes to the values of the
parameters around their optimal values. With regard to errors
associated with estimating the construction of the 20% isopleth,
the r-LoCoH method breaks down as soon as the value of r
increase beyond a critical value (e.g. in datasets A and C around
the radius of the core set of points in the data sets), while the
k-LoCoH and a-LoCoH methods are more reliable, with the
former actually performing better for data set B and the latter
performing better for data sets A and C.
For each of the three data sets, the errors of the LoCoH models
are plotted as a function of sample size for the optimal (i.e. error
minimizing) values of the parameters (Figs. 4A–C). For all values
and all cases the errors decrease with sample size. For dataset A,
r-LoCoH moves quickly from performing the best (but well within
the error bars) for the smallest sample size to performing by far the
worst for the largest sample size. a-LoCoH is consistently strong
throughout this dataset. For dataset B, k- and a-LoCoH have
nearly identical accuracy except for the smallest sample size where
a-LoCoH obtains a smaller error. r-LoCoH lags behind across all
sample sizes in this dataset. In dataset C, the three methods
perform roughly equally (within the error bars) with r-LoCoH
appearing to be slightly superior, followed by a-LoCoH, and lastly
by k-LoCoH.
The optimal value k* increased with sample size for all three
data sets (Table 2) with the heuristic initial guess k1~
very close to the optimal value for all three sets of data when
n = 200 but not as close when n = 1000: in the latter case a rule of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
=2&16 works better than the heuristic rule. As
expected, the optimal value of r decreased with increasing point
density. The optimal value of a also decreased, but not strictly
monotonically (Table 2). The heuristic rule for r produced a value
r1 that was generally lower than the optimal r* by factor of 1.5 to 3.
Table 1. Total Error, with Type I and Type II Errors in parentheses for manufactured data sets A–C, as a percentage of total home
range size, is listed for estimates obtained using the three LoCoH methods (100% isopleths and optimal—that is error
minimizing—values k*, r* and a*) and the Gaussian kernel (GK) method (95%, 99% and optimal isopleths).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Data (true area)
A (85.3 units)
B (68.0 units)
C (257.0 units)
13.4% (8.8%, 4.6%)
8.7% (4.9%, 3.8%)
9.0% (6.7%, 2.3%)
15.0% (8.4%, 6.6%)
10.3% (5.9%, 4.4%)
8.8% (5.6%, 3.2%)
8.8% (5.9%, 2.9%)
8.7%$ (4.6%, 4.0%)
8.6% (5.4%, 3.2%)
27.3% (22.2%, 5.2%)
30.3% (2.9%, 27.4%)
20.2% (14.9%, 5.2%)
20.9% (10.4%, 10.4%)
56.6% (0.4%, 56.2%)
15.0% (3.9%, 11.1%)
GK minimum*
20.9% (10.4%, 10.4%)
22.2% (10.9%, 11.5%)
14.6% (6.1%, 8.6%)
(isopleth)**
The best estimate is in bold type.
&optimal values reflect integer resolution for k and 0.25 resolution for r and a; *minimizes total error; $0.1 difference in sum due to rounding; **search resolution is
a quarter of a percent apart.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.t001
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Figure 4. The effect of sample size on the optimal (i.e. error minimizing) value of parameters, k, r and a and total errors associated with the
construction of the 100% isopleth using the k-LoCoH (solid line), r-LoCoH (dashed line), and a-LoCoH (dotted line) methods respectively for the three
data sets (A, B, and C). Mean and standard error for fifteen randomly generated datasets for each sample size are plotted.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g004
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
On the other hand, the heuristic rule for a produced a value a1 that
was surprisingly close to a*, in some cases being very close, and
others being too high or low by a factor of only 0.2.
In Figs. 5–7, the UDs for the half-optimal, optimal, and twiceoptimal parameter values are plotted for data sets A, B and C,
respectively. These constructions illustrate that the a-LoCoH
method is the least sensitive to changes in the value of the
parameter a, r-LoCoH the most sensitive, and k-LoCoH is intermediate. Moreover, of the three methods, k-LoCoH is most likely
to create spurious holes (Type I errors) at half the optimal k value,
while r-LoCoH is most likely to fill in real holes (Type II errors).
For the sake of completeness and to permit visual comparisons,
the fixed kernel least-square cross validation UDs (95th percentile)
are plotted for data sets A, B, and C in Fig. 1, where we see that for
all three sets of data, unlike the LoCoH method, the method fails
to identify any of the holes.
Buffalo data
Silverman’s parametric kernel method yielded considerably
larger area estimates in three of the four cases than the MSHC a-
LoCoH method (Table 3; Fig. 8a, T07: 244 vs. 173; Fig. 8c, T13:
142 vs. 95; Fig. 8d, T16: 84 vs. 55). Only in one case was the
situation reversed (Table 3; Fig. 8b, T15: 121 vs. 153): this appears
to be a function of the distribution of the data into a few highdensity areas with a few oddly shaped sparse regions. Both the
kernel method and the a-LoCoH method at the 95% isopleth
exclude a number of these points, but the a-LoCoH method locally
accommodates the denser areas, which, in this case, includes them.
The kernel method, applying a constant function, drops all but the
95% densest areas according to a single metric.
In the Satara area (Figs. 8a and b) the hashed object embedded
in the UD is a large animal exclosure. In the Lower Sabie area,
a ridge area that is too steep for buffalo is shown as a hashed object
(Figs. 8c and d). Both the MSHC a-LoCoH and parametric kernel
methods left at least half of the enclosure at Satara uncovered
when the 95% isopleth was used as a boundary, but impressively
so did the 100% isopleth boundary of the MSHC a-LoCoH.
(Figs. 8a–b) (the 100% isopleth of the parametric kernel method
covers the entire exclosure). The parametric kernel method failed
to identify the ridge area embedded within the T13 data in Lower
Sabie by completely covering the ridge, while the MSCH a-
LoCoH 95% isopleth defined the left boundary of the ridge rather
clearly and even left the ridge partially uncovered in the 100%
isopleth construction (Figs. 8c and d). The MSHC a-LoCoH also
covered less of the ridge in both the 95% and 100% isopleth
constructions than the parametric kernel method did for its 95%
isopleth construction.
Note that the symmetric bivariate Gaussian kernel UDs have
slightly jagged boundaries because they are generated from an
underlying grid, while LoCoH UDs are generated directly from
the polygonal elements.
DISCUSSION
statistics,
nonparametric
assumptions than the corresponding parametric methods. In the
case of UD constructions, both parametric and LoCoH kernel
methods require common assumptions about data to avoid
misinterpretations that come from bias with respect to the way
the data are collected. By definition, however, parametric kernel
methods always involve additional assumptions about the form of
the distributions governing the data that nonparametric methods
do not make. Thus, although traditional kernel methods can
produce UDs and HRs that follow highly irregular data, they are
still based upon parametric kernels that require the investigator to
specify their functional form. LoCoH kernels, on the other hand,
take their form directly from the data, thereby relieving the
investigator of the burden and bias associated with choosing
a functional form for the kernels. Further, parametric kernel UD
constructions are almost always based on non-compact (i.e.
unbounded) symmetric bivariate Gaussian kernels. This implies
an ad-hoc decision must be made on which isopleth to use in HR
constructions. Although, typically, the 95th percentile is used a 90th
percentile boundary may decrease sample size bias and
handle poor convergence of area estimates with increasing sample
size better. In the latter case, areas of the true home range are
invariably omitted. Also, in some cases (as we mention in our
methods section) the LSCV method for selecting the best value for
the symmetric bivariate Gaussian smoothing or width parameter h
does not converge and an ad-hoc method must be used to select its
Even bounded parametric kernel methods (e.g. Epanechnichov
kernels) will always overshoot the data by an amount equal to the
value of the kernel radius parameter h, no matter how dense the
data. On the other hand, LoCoH methods do not overshoot the
data, since they use the data directly; and hence converge on true
boundaries as the density of data increases . The only errors
that LoCoH makes are small: it locally approximates the actual
boundary by fitting a line between the two points closest to the true
boundary element in question. In essence, our analysis suggests
that we should move beyond the assumption, implicit in
parametric kernel methods, that all points are internal and
recognize that many animals not only visit the boundaries of their
range, but may even patrol them as a way of warding of
competitors .
Table 2. Comparison of our heuristic rules for choosing initial parameter values k1, r1 and a1 and optimal parameter values k*, r*
and a* for the manufactured data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Data (true area)
A: 200 points
13.5 (0.70)
1.41 (0.18)
2.37 (0.05)
25.5 (0.04)
24.9 (1.00)
1000 points
14.5 (0.42)
0.56 (0.00)
1.67 (0.06)
25.7 (0.00)
23.3 (0.84)
B: 200 points
11.9 (0.48)
0.74 (0.08)
1.51 (0.04)
18.4 (0.12)
15.5 (0.74)
1000 points
20.6 (0.60)
0.57 (0.00)
0.79 (0.00)
19.6 (0.00)
14.0 (0.23)
C: 200 points
12.7 (0.42)
1.00 (0.03)
3.10 (0.05)
19.7 (0.03)
24.4 (0.82)
1000 points
17.3 (0.27)
0.46 (0.00)
0.79 (0.03)
19.9 (0.00)
20.7 (0.59)
Mean values are given with standard error in parentheses calculated over 15 different samplings of the data.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.t002
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
In a previous publication, we demonstrated the superiority of k-
LoCoH over symmetric bivariate Gaussian kernel methods ,
whether fixed or adaptive and using Silvermen’s ad-hoc or the
least-squares-cross-validation algorithm ) for selecting the
smoothing parameter, for identifying holes in UDs and estimating
the areas of HRs. From the results presented here, it is clear that a-
LoCoH is superior to both r-LoCoH and k-LoCoH. A priori it was
not clear to us whether k or r-LoCoH would be the superior
method, but with hindsight, r-LoCoH is generally the worst
performer because it is essentially a non-parametric kernel method
in which all elements are approximately the same size (determined
by the value of r). On the other hand, the k-LoCoH method adapts
the size of the kernel elements resulting in smaller kernels in
regions with a higher density of locations. The a-LoCoH method
also has this latter adaptive property; but additionally results in the
construction of more robust UDs, because it is the method that is
the most insensitive to suboptimal value choices for its kernel
parameter (as illustrated in Figs. 5–7). Further, for the datasets
we analyzed, our heuristic rule for selecting a1 typically provided
a value that was within 30% of the value a* while our heuristic
rules for r1 and k1 fluctuated from almost the same to twice as
large as the corresponding MSHC values in the case of k-
LoCoH, and from 1/3 to 3 times less than corresponding MSHC
values in the case of r-LoCoH. Thus, researchers should feel
more confident using a1 than r1 or k1 when a priori information
on holes is unavailable. Further this confidence in a1 over r1 or k1
still applies even if we modify our heuristic rules for selecting r1
and k1 to:
N r1 is the maximum of all the nearest neighbor distances
associated with the data
3 where n is the number of points in the set.
Figure 5. Illustrations of UDs constructed for data set A using k-LoCoH, r-LoCoH, and a-LoCoH methods with half, actual, and twice the optimal k, r
and a parameter values. The darkest to lightest areas represent ascending decile areas from the 10th to 100th percentile isopleths.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g005
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
In this modified case, both r1 and k1 would only be with 50% of
r* and k* respectively. Further, it is not clear that these two rules
would remain robust as sample size increase, while, from Table 2,
our heuristic rule for a seems much less affected by changes to
sample size than is the case for r and k. Thus our overall conclusion
is that a-LoCoH is the best method unless some compelling reason
exists to have all the kernels constructed either from the same
number of points (k-LoCoH) or for all to be of similar size (r-
There has been some confusion about the need for points to
have a certain temporal properties. This issue has recently been
clarified by Bo¨rger et al. , and it is becoming clear that
Figure 6. Illustrations of UDs constructed for data set B using k-LoCoH,
r-LoCoH, and a-LoCoH methods with half, actual, and twice the optimal
k, r and a parameter values. The darkest to lightest areas represent
ascending decile areas from the 10th to 100th percentile isopleths.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g006
Figure 7. Illustrations of UDs constructed for data set B using k-LoCoH,
r-LoCoH, and a-LoCoH methods with half, actual, and twice the optimal
k, r and a parameter values. The darkest to lightest areas represent
ascending decile areas from the 10th to 100th percentile isopleths.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g007
Figure 8. Comparisons of UD constructions using an a-LoCoH estimators where the value of the parameter is aˆ obtained using the MSHC method
(see text for details), and a parametric kernel, where the smoothing parameter h is calculated using the ad-hoc method of Silverman . Panels: a.
collar T07 and b. collar T15, both in the Satara Region; and c. collar T13 and d. collar T16. both in the Lower Sabie Region. Black circles are GPS collar
locations and the hatched shape is the exclosure in a. and b. and the ridge area in c. and d. The left figure of each panel shows the 100% isopleth in
light grey and the 95% isopleth in dark grey, using the a-LoCoH method. The right figure of each panel shows the 100% kernel in light grey and the
95% parametric kernel in dark grey.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000207.g008
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
February 2007 | Issue 2 | e207
important biological information is contained in spatiotemporal
autocorrelations of data points . It is important to note,
however, that an assumption necessary to ensure the construction
of adequate unbiased UDs is that the data points have been
collected suitably often to obtain a representative sample of points
over time to cover all modes of behavior. If this is not the case,
then we have to be careful how we interpret the resulting UDs. In
particular, as the sampling intensity decreases, say to twice or four
times a day, it becomes increasingly likely that sparse, but regular
sampling may coincide with particular activities (e.g. sleeping,
drinking, eating) and result in UDs biased towards these activities.
Moreover, the scale at which the utilization can be interpreted will
still depend on the frequency of data points, even for extremely
regularly spaced points. For example, our buffalo data, collected at
hourly was still too sparse relative to rate of movement of
individuals with regard to identifying small physical obstacles on
the landscape, including a small hill that we know is not utilized by
buffalo in the Kruger National Park.
As with any numerical method that draws directly upon data,
LoCoH HR estimates and UD constructions are only as good as
the data they rely upon to carry out the numerical computations. If
these data are particularly noisy, then holes will be filled and sharp
boundaries blurred. Fortunately, the resolution of GPS data is
sufficient to accurately assess the location of sharp boundaries to
within a couple of meters when information is collected at
appropriately high frequencies (i.e. as they relate to the rate at
which individuals move along the boundaries of their range).
Assuming high quality data, the great advantage of LoCoH over
parametric kernel methods is that LoCoH estimates convergence
to true values with increasing sample size. This allows one to study
the convergence properties by comparing estimates using a tenth,
quarter, half, and all the data. If half the data, for example gives an
estimate, within a desired tolerance of the estimate obtained by all
the data (e.g. 1% or 0.1%), then one can be confident about the
precision of the estimate. Of course, one can also carry out
bootstrapping procedures to obtain standard errors . In the
end, if one is interested in detecting features in the environment
that may influence the way animals utilize space, there is not
substitute for using several different methods—both parametric
and nonparametric—to construct maps overlaid on geographical
and physical feature maps and visually comparing and inspecting
the results to identify features that may be attracting, repealing, or
excluding individuals.
In summary, LoCoH methods are superior to bounded and,
especially, unbounded parametric kernel methods for constructing
UDs and HRs because they directly draw upon the actual spatial
structure of data that may well be influenced by hard boundaries
and irregular exclusionary areas in the environment. Also, our
analysis indicates that the a-LoCoH nonparametric kernel method
is generally superior to the other methods that we considered, both
in constructing UDs and in estimating the size of HRs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tabitha Graves and Shirli Bar-David for editorial comments; as
well as Craig Hay, Justin Bowers, Julie Wolhuter, Robert Dugtig, Augusta
Mabunda, Khutani Bulunga, and the veterinary staff at the Kruger
National Park for their assistance with the field data collection.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: WG SF. Performed the
experiments: SF AL. Analyzed the data: WG SF AL SR. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: PC. Wrote the paper: WG PC SF SR