The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research
Vol. 11, 2011, pp. 69 - 84
ISSN: 1577-8517
Submitted June 2011
DOI: 10.4192/1577-8517-v11_4
Accepted July 2011
Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection in
Accounting Data: An Audit Approach1
Sutapat Thiprungsri. Rutgers University. USA. 
Miklos A. Vasarhelyi. Rutgers University. USA. 
Abstract This study examines the application of cluster analysis in the accounting domain,
particularly discrepancy detection in audit. Cluster analysis groups data so that points within a
single group or cluster are similar to one another and distinct from points in other clusters.
Clustering has been shown to be a good candidate for anomaly detection. The purpose of this study
is to examine the use of clustering technology to automate fraud filtering during an audit. We use
cluster analysis to help auditors focus their efforts when evaluating group life insurance claims.
Claims with similar characteristics have been grouped together and small-population clusters have
been flagged for further investigation. Some dominant characteristics of those clusters which have
been flagged are large beneficiary payment, large interest payment amounts, and long lag between
submission and payment.
Keywords: Continuous auditing, cluster analysis, anomaly detection, insurance industry.
1. INTRODUCTION
This study examines the application of cluster analysis in the accounting
domain, in particular its application to discrepancy detection in the field of audit.
Clustering is an unsupervised learning algorithm, which means that data are
analyzed without the presence of predetermined labels (e.g. “fraudulent/non-
1 We would like to thank Mr. JP Krahel, the participants of the Rutgers CarLab workshops and many other
colleagues for their many suggestions.
70 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
fraudulent”) . Clustering is a technique for grouping data points
so that points within a single group (or “cluster”) are similar, while points in
different clusters are dissimilar. As an unsupervised learning algorithm, clustering
is a good candidate for fraud and anomaly detection techniques because it is often
difficult to identify abnormal / suspicious transactions. Clustering can be used to
group transactions so that different levels of attention and effort can be applied to
each cluster. The purpose of this study is to apply clustering techniques to the
audit field. Automated fraud filtering can be of great value as a preventive tool
 . We apply cluster analysis to a unique dataset provided
by a major US insurance company and examine the resulting outliers. Clusterbased outliers help auditors focus their efforts when evaluating group life
insurance claims. Some dominant characteristics of outlier clusters are large
beneficiary payment, large interest payment amounts, and long lag between
submission and payment.
In the next section, we discuss the problem, followed by a review of the
relevant multidimensional clustering literature is reviewed. We then explain the
insurance claims setting, present results, and conclude.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Anomaly and Anomaly Detection
Outliers are observations that deviate so much from other observations that
they may have been generated by a different mechanism .
Anomalies occur for many reasons. For example, data may come from different
classes, there may be natural variation in data or measurement, or collection error
may have occurred .
Chandola et al. suggest that anomalies can be classified into three
categories: 1) point anomalies, 2) contextual anomalies, and 3) collective
anomalies. A point anomaly is an individual data instance which is identified as
anomalous with respect to the rest of the data. A contextual anomaly occurs when
a data instance is anomalous in a specific context. For example, a temperature of
35F is considered normal in winter, but anomalous in summer . Collective anomaly occurs when a collection of related data instances is
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 71
anomalous. Duan et al. suggests that abnormal events may exhibit both
temporal and spatial locality, forming small outlier clusters. This phenomenon is
called a “cluster-based outlier”.
Anomaly detection is the task of identifying observations with characteristics
that significantly differ from the rest of the data . Applications
of anomaly detection include fraud, credit card fraud, network intrusion, to name
a few. Regardless of domain, anomaly detection generally involves three basic
steps: 1) identifying normality by calculating some “signature” of the data, 2)
determining some metric to calculate an observation’s degree of deviation from
the signature, and 3) setting thresholds which, if exceeded, mark an observation as
anomalous . A variety of methods for each step has been used in
many fields.
Chandola et al. suggest that, with respect to label availability, anomaly
detection can operate in one of three modes: 1) supervised, 2) semi-supervised,
and 3) unsupervised. Supervised anomaly detection assumes the availability of a
training data set which has instances labeled as normal or anomalous. Semisupervised anomaly detection assumes that the training data set includes only
normal instances. A model corresponding to normal behavior will be built and
used to identify anomalous instances in the test data. Unsupervised anomaly
detection does not require any training dataset, instead simply assuming far fewer
anomalies than normal instances.
2.2 Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection
Chandola et al. propose that clustering based techniques for anomaly
detection can be grouped into three categories:
1. The first group assumes that normal instances belong to a cluster while
anomalies do not belong to any cluster. Examples include DBSCAN-Density-
Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise ,
ROCK-Robust Clustering using links , SNN cluster-
Shared Nearest Neighbor Clustering , FindOut algorithm
 and WaveCluster algorithm .
72 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
These techniques apply a clustering algorithm to the data set and identify
instances that do not belong to a cluster as anomalous.
2. The second group assumes that normal data instances lie closer to the nearest
cluster centroid (or center) while anomalies are far away from the nearest
cluster centroid . Self-Organizing Maps (SOM)
introduced by Kohonen are used for anomaly detection in many
different applications, including fraud detection and
network intrusion detection . The techniques in this group involve two steps: grouping data
into clusters, and calculating distances from cluster centroids to identify
anomaly scores. Chen et al. use local outlier factor (LOF) values to
measure the outlying behavior among peer groups to gauge the financial
performance of companies.
3. The third group assumes that normal data instances belong to large, dense
clusters, while anomalies belong to small or sparse clusters . He et al. propose a technique called FindCBLOF to determine
the size of the clusters and the distance between an instance and the nearest
cluster centroid. Combining these two values return the Cluster-Based Local
Outlier Factor (CBLOF). Applying the technique to detect anomalies in
astronomical data, Chaudhary et al. propose an anomaly detection
model using k-d trees (k dimensional tree – a k-dimensional space
partitioning data structure for optimizing points) providing partitions of data
in linear time. Sun et al. propose a technique called CD-trees. Both
techniques define sparse clusters as anomalies.
3. THE SETTING: INSURANCE GROUP CLAIMS
This study focuses on data from the group life claims business of a major US
insurance company. Group life claims is a type of group insurance marketed to
corporate clients, typically covering most of their employees, often with different
levels of available or required coverage.
Group life insurance is sold to companies in volume. For example, Company A
buys group life insurance for 100 employees; while individual life insurance is
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 73
sold individually to John Doe. From the perspective of the insurance provider, the
purchasing company is the customer in the former case; while the insured is the
customer in the latter. The insurance company manages policies and claims from
these two types differently. Importantly for our case, group insurance providers
will not keep the information on insured individuals as individual providers do.
Information regarding a particular insured employee is collected and entered when
a claim is received.
The nature of group life insurance carries many risks for policy administration
and audit. Very little is known about the type of risks or possible fraudulent
actions within the group life claim insurance. The fraudulent claims previously
found by internal auditors were happenstance and/or through hotline. The types of
related risks identified by internal auditors are, for example, duplicate payments,
fictitious names, improper/incorrect information entered into the systems, and
suspicious payment amounts. Several tests are performed to check for the
reasonableness of the amount of payments. The issues that ensue were drawn
from a series of studies performed with the insurance files of several companies.
Current internal audit tests in the insurance context are, unfortunately, not very
effective. For example, auditors check for fictitious insured names or fictitious
beneficiary names. However, the definition of “fictitious name” is not clear;
internal auditors must use judgment to identify suspected fictitious names. Manual
data collection hinders data quality and test usefulness. For example, –calculating
the age from birth date, death date and hiring date is not possible. Given a wrong
dates of birth and death for an individual, resulting ages could be invalid. For
example, there are several cases in which an insured’s age, derived from a
calculation ((Death date-Birth date)/365), is one digit (0-9 years old). The result
would be normal if the data is for normal life insurance. However, an insured
cannot be younger than the legal working age for group life insurance. Internal
auditors are well aware of the problems and the shortcoming in their audits and
are seeking innovative methods to control and reduce the risk of fraudulent
claims. The purpose of this study is to apply the use of cluster technology to the
internal audit process.
74 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
The dataset contains the records of group life claim payments issued in the first
quarter of 2009. The data include 208 attributes related to group life claims under
one of five basic categories:
Group / company
Beneficiary
Clients submit a paper claim document to the insurance company. The claim
document is then scanned and saved as a PDF file. The information will be
manually entered into a verification system. Because the data is manually entered,
several mistakes can be found in the data, some intentional and others due to
carelessness. There are other cases in which the insured’s death date is prior to
birth or employment date. However, some mistakes are not so easily identified.
For example, by using the data, a calculated age of the insured can be reasonable
misleading, For example establishing a much earlier age than retirement age.
Some may argue that the retirement date can be used to estimate the age and/or
birth date. However, one individual can retire at age 60; while another retires at
50. It is impossible to identify the exact age when the insured decided to retire
from the job. In the insurance industry, data is often old and entered over many
years into many different legacy systems that were kept to support particular types
of policies. With the passage of time, fields can be reused and the quality of edits
and the underlying data deteriorates.
The sample contains 40,080 group life insurance claims paid out in the first
quarter of 2009. After multiple examinations of the raw data and consultation with
the internal auditor (a presumable domain expert), suggestions on attribute
selection were given. Based on current internal audit control tests, payments are
the major concern of this business unit. The value of the payment that the
beneficiary initially receives is called the beneficiary payment. Depending on the
state where the insured lives, the location of the company, and/or the where the
beneficiary lives, if the payment is not made immediately after the claim is
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 75
received/approved, interest may accumulate. If so, the total payment that the
beneficiary receives will consist of the beneficiary payment and interest payment.
Several existing tests relate to reasonableness of interest and beneficiary
payments. The internal auditors have expressed an interest in better and more
useful techniques to test the reasonableness of the values.
Due to aforementioned data quality issues, and after consultation with expert
internal auditors, a new dataset was created based on the original data. Two newly
created attributes were selected for clustering:
Percentage: Total interest payment / Total beneficiary payment
AverageDTH_PMT: Average number of days between the death date and the
payment date . The steps in K-mean
clustering are as follows :
1. Choose a value for K, the total number of clusters to be determined.
2. Choose K instances (data points) within the dataset at random. These are the
initial cluster centers.
3. Use simple Euclidean distance to assign to remaining instances to their closet
cluster center.
4. Use the instances in each cluster to calculate a new mean for each cluster.
2 The software used for this analysis includes SAS and Weka. The data set was cleaned and transformed using
SAS statistical package, exported into a comma separated value (CSV) file, and converted into ARFF
(Attribute-Relation File Format) before being fed into Weka.
76 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
5. If the new mean values are identical to the mean values of the previous
iteration the process terminates. Otherwise, use the new means as cluster
centers and repeat steps 3-5.
Several numbers of clusters are tested. The number of cluster is chosen so that
adding another cluster will not create a significantly improved model. The
stopping point is determined by checking the percentage of variance explained as
a function of number of clusters. When the first few clusters are added, they will
add much explanation of variances. At some point, the marginal gain in variance
explained will be reduced. The ideal number of clusters chosen should be at the
point where the marginal gain begins to fall.
3.3 Anomaly Detection
Instead of selecting clustering techniques
which require
programming, a simple clustering technique which can be easily performed on
open source software, WEKA3, is used. The purpose of this paper is to provide an
example of how cluster analysis can be used for auditing. We chose a technique
that is easy to use and interpret. This research assumes that both individual
observations and small clusters can be outliers. Most points in the dataset should
not be outliers. Outliers are identified in two ways. First, observations that have
low probability of being a member of a cluster (i.e. are far away from other cluster
members) are identified as outliers. The probability of 0.6 is used as a cut-off
point. Second, clusters with small populations (less than 1% of the total) are
considered outliers.
4. RESULTS
Because of the simplicity and suitability of the techniques to the data type,
simple K-mean has been used as the clustering procedure. The 40,080 claims
which are paid in the first quarter of 2009 are used in the analysis. The number of
clusters selected is eight.
Enhanced results from Weka are shown in Table 1.
3 WEKA(Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis) is an open source software develop by University
of Weikato, New Zealand. It is freeware and offers functionality for many machine learning techniques; for
example, various clustering techniques (such as DBSCAN, K-Mean, Cobweb, and etc), Decision Tree,
Bayesian Network, Support Vector Machine, etc.).
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 77
Table 1: Clustering result with 2 variables
Using two attributes, eight clusters are formed. About 90% of claims are
grouped into cluster 7 and 6% are in cluster 0 (Table 1). Three clusters (1, 2, and
5) have membership of less than 1% (54, 84 and 31 members, respectively).
Examining the characteristics of these less populated clusters, we discover some
unusual characteristics. Claims in these clusters have high interest/beneficiary
payment percentage and/or claims with long period of time from death dates to
payment dates.
=== Run information ===
Cluster centroids:
N_AverageDTH_PMT
N_percentage
Clustered Instances
0 2523 ( 6%)
1 54 ( 0%)
2 84 ( 0%)
3 222 ( 1%)
4 295 ( 1%)
5 31 ( 0%)
6 768 ( 2%)
7 36103 ( 90%)
Relation: TestSetPayment2
Scheme: weka.clusterers.SimpleKMeans -N 8 -A "weka.core.EuclideanDistance -R first-last" -I 500 -S 10
N_percentage
N_AverageDTH_PMT
Attributes: 3
Instances: 40080
Missing values globally replaced with mean/mode
Within cluster sum of squared errors: 3.9256036521001687
Number of iterations: 55
Test mode: evaluate on training data
=== Model and evaluation on training set ===
Clusters with small number of
population
78 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
Claims in cluster 5 have high interest/beneficiary payment percentage and a
long period between the death dates and the payment date. Cluster 1 claims
have long period from death to payment dates.
Claims in cluster 2 have high interest/beneficiary payment.
The total number of claims identified as possible anomalies from cluster-based
outliers is 169. In addition to identifying small clusters, the probability of
individual observations’ cluster membership is examined. The claims, which have
lower than 0.6 probabilities of belonging to the cluster they are assigned to, are
identified as possible anomalies. 568 claims fit this criterion.
The visualized results are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2 (with clusters
Figure 1: Visualization of the cluster assignment for 2 attributes clustering;
N_Percentage and N_AverageDTH_PMT
Clusters 1, 2 and 5 are less (and more sparsely) populated. The characteristics
of claims in these clusters are different from the majority of claims in other
clusters. Having different characteristics does not necessarily signify abnormality
or fraud. There are possible legitimate reasons; for example, high interest may be
due to claim age. If the insured died long before a claim was submitted,
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 79
accumulated interest would be high.
Figure 2: Visualization of the clustering result (two attributes) with cluster marked.
Giving that legitimate explanations are possible, it is wise to focus checks on
those claims where non-fraudulent explanations are not available. For example, if
a claim has a very high interest but the claim is young and the insured is only
recently deceased, the internal auditor must investigate why interest is high. With
a small number of claims identified, the internal auditor may also be free to
perform additional calculations to check if the amount of interest is reasonable
given the length of time the claim is present in the system and the length of time
since the insured passed away.
To verify if cluster analysis can identify anomalies in accounting systems,
suspicious cluster/individual claims should be selected for the further
investigation by the internal auditor. Follow-up results would improve the model.
80 The International Journal of Digital Accounting Research Vol. 11
5. CLUSTER ANALYSIS AND ITS APPLICATION IN AUDITING
In addition to identifying groups within a dataset, clustering can be used to
identify suspicious transactions or observations. Flagged transactions differ
significantly from their peers. Transactions can be flagged due to extreme values,
either low or high. These transactions can result from unintentional error or
possible fraud. Further investigations will ideally distinguish between the two.
Due to cost concerns , it is impossible for internal auditors to
investigate all the flagged transaction. Therefore, decisions on materiality will
have to be made concerning which flagged transactions should be pursued.
Immaterial suspicious transactions may be left aside.
With the increasing complexity of transaction systems, fraudsters have new
opportunities to commit fraud and outsmart the system. Auditors must seek new
and innovative audit methods. Cluster analysis may flag transactions not
identified via other methodologies. While universal detection is never guaranteed,
flagged transactions demonstrate suspicious characteristics worth investigating.
Feedback from internal auditors can be very useful in improving the model.
Whether flagged transactions end up being errors, fraud, or normal transactions,
the validation of the results will provide inside knowledge which may be useful
for the improvement of the model. Clustering results also provide more insight
into the nature of the transactions by placing alike transactions into group and
pointing out heterogeneities’ in alike transactions.
CONCLUSIONS
Prior literature suggests many fraud detection techniques using data mining
 . These models require fraud samples
(i.e. fraud/none fraud firms), which would make the model inapplicable in other
real world settings. This inapplicability stems from the extreme difficulty, if not
outright impossibility, of identifying fraudulent firms or transactions with total
confidence. Cluster analysis as an unsupervised learning algorithm is a good
candidate for fraud and anomaly detection because it sidesteps this difficulty. Our
study examines the possibility of using clustering techniques for auditing. Cluster
Thiprungsri & Vasarhelyi Cluster Analysis for Anomaly Detection… 81
analysis is applied to a dataset from a major life insurance company in the United
States. Claims with similar characteristics are grouped together into clusters.
Clusters with small populations and single claims which differ from other claims
in the same cluster are flagged for further investigation.
Cluster analysis will always produce grouping. Several parameters are
available for the researcher to customize cluster analysis. While one may select
different options from others, there is no one correct method. Moreover, the
resulting groups may or may not be fruitful for further analysis. Researchers need
the expertise of people with domain knowledge for proper evaluation. This study
is a preliminary step toward applying cluster analysis in the field of auditing. We
show that cluster analysis may be a useful audit technology.
Cluster analysis is a very promising technique that can be integrated into a
schema of continuous system monitoring and assurance. Archival studies of data
trends will reveal acceptable clusters, problematic ones, and the ability to measure
distance from clusters. Experience, judgment, and monitoring procedures will
parameterize these clusters, and categorize data. Progressively, clustering findings
canl be impounded into a priori payment processing filters and block transactions
with bad weightings from processing. These filtered transactions will be routed to
the continuous auditors for review and subsequent action.