Challenges in Representation Learning: A report
on three machine learning contests
Ian J. Goodfellow1, Dumitru Erhan2, Pierre Luc Carrier, Aaron Courville,
Mehdi Mirza, Ben Hamner, Will Cukierski, Yichuan Tang, David Thaler,
Dong-Hyun Lee, Yingbo Zhou, Chetan Ramaiah, Fangxiang Feng, Ruifan Li,
Xiaojie Wang, Dimitris Athanasakis, John Shawe-Taylor, Maxim Milakov,
John Park, Radu Ionescu, Marius Popescu, Cristian Grozea, James Bergstra,
Jingjing Xie, Lukasz Romaszko, Bing Xu, Zhang Chuang, and Yoshua Bengio
1 Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montr´eal QC H3T 1N8, Canada,
 
2 Google, Venice, CA 90291, USA,
 
Abstract. The ICML 2013 Workshop on Challenges in Representation
Learning3 focused on three challenges: the black box learning challenge,
the facial expression recognition challenge, and the multimodal learning challenge. We describe the datasets created for these challenges and
summarize the results of the competitions. We provide suggestions for organizers of future challenges and some comments on what kind of knowledge can be gained from machine learning competitions.
Keywords: representation learning, competition, dataset
Introduction
This paper describes three machine learning contests that were held as part of
the ICML workshop “Challenges in Representation Learning.” The purpose of
the workshop, organized by Ian Goodfellow, Dumitru Erhan, and Yoshua Bengio,
was to explore the latest developments in representation learning, with a special
emphasis on testing the capabilities of current representation learning algorithms
(See for a recent review) and pushing the ﬁeld towards new developments via
these contests. Ben Hamner and Will Cukierski handled all issues related to
Kaggle hosting and ensured that the contests ran smoothly. Google provided
prizes for all three contests. The winner of each contest received $350 while the
runner-up received $150. A diverse range of competitors spanning academia,
industry, and amateur machine learning provided excellent solutions to all three
problems. In this paper, we summarize their solutions, and discuss what we can
learn from them.
The black box learning challenge
3 
 
5DQGRPFKRLFH
/RJLVWLFUHJUHVVLRQ
=&$OD\HUQHW
OD\HUQHWZRUN
OD\HUQHWZRUN
Fig. 1. Histogram of accuracies obtained
submissions
2013 dataset. Organizer-provided baselines
shown in red.
The black box learning challenge4
was designed with two goals in mind.
First, the data was obfuscated, so that
competitors could not use humanin-the-loop techniques like visualizing
ﬁlters to guide algorithmic development. A common criticism of deep
learning is that it is an art requiring
an expert practitioner. By keeping the
domain of the data secret, this contest
reduced the usefulness of the human
practitioner. This idea was similar to
a recent DARPA-organized unsupervised and transfer learning challenge
 which used obfuscated data and required submission of a representation
of the data that would then be used
on the competition server to train a very weak classiﬁer. In this contest, we allowed competitors to use any method; using representation learning was not a
requirement. The second goal of this contest was to test the ability of algorithms
to beneﬁt from extra unsupervised data. To this end, we provided only very few
labeled examples.
This contest introduced the Black Box Learning 2013 dataset.
The scripts needed to re-generate it are available for download5. The dataset
is an obfuscated subset of the second (MNIST-like) format of the Street View
House Numbers dataset . Dumitru Erhan created the dataset. The original
data contained 3,072 features (pixels) which he projected down to 1875 by multiplication by a random matrix. He also removed one class (the “4”s). These
measures obfuscated the data so competitors did not know what task they were
solving. The organizers did not reveal the source of the dataset until after the
contest was over. To make the challenge emphasize semi-supervised learning,
only 1,000 labeled examples were kept for training. Another 5,000 were used for
the public leaderboard. For these examples, the labels are not provided to the
competitors, but the features are. Each team may upload predictions for these
examples twice per day. The resulting accuracy is published publicy. The public
test set is thus a sort of validation set, but also gives one’s competitors information. Another 5,000 examples were used for the private test set. The features
for these examples are given to the competitors as well, but only the contest
administrators see the accuracy on them until after the contest has ended. The
private test set is used to determine the winner of the contest. We also provided
130,000 unlabeled examples drawn from a set speciﬁed to be “less diﬃcult” by
the creators of SVHN.
4 
5 
218 teams submitted 1963 entries to the contest. 75 teams beat the best
baseline (a 3-layer MLP) provided by the organizers. See Fig. 1 for a histogram
of all the teams’ performance. David Thaler won the contest with an accuracy
of 70.22% using blending of three models that used sparse ﬁltering for feature
learning, random forests for feature selection , and support vector machines 
for classiﬁcation. Other competitors such as Lukasz Romaszko also obtained
very competitive results with sparse ﬁltering. This was an interesting outcome
because sparse ﬁltering has usually been perceived as an inexpensive and simple method that gives good but not optimal results. David Thaler and Lukasz
Romaszko both observed that learning the sparse ﬁltering features on the combination of the labeled and unlabeled data worked worse than learning the features
on just the labeled data. This may be because the labeled data was drawn from
the more diﬃcult portion of the SVHN dataset. Dong-Hyun Lee ﬁnished second in the contest, having independently rediscovered entropy regularization .
This very simple means of semi-supervised learning proved surprisingly eﬀective
and merits more attention. In third place, Dimitris Athanasakis and John Shawe-
Taylor developed a new feature section / combination mechanism combined with
MKL. Other top scorers included Jingjing Xie, Bing Xu and Zhang Chuang, that
developed ensemble voting techniques for use with denoising autoencoders 
and maxout networks .
A recent trend in deep learning has been to forego unsupervised learning
entirely following recent improvements to discriminative training. This is probably a result of most datasets having several labeled examples. In this contest,
with only 1,000 labeled training examples, most of the top scorers still needed
to make use of the unlabeled data in some way.
The facial expression recognition challenge
In the facial expression recognition challenge6 we invited competitors to design
the best system for recognizing which emotion is being expressed in a photo
of a human face. In this contest, we wanted to compare methods on a task
that is well studied but using a completely new dataset. This avoids issues of
overﬁtting to the test set of a repeatedly used benchmark dataset. One reason
to hold such a contest is that it allows us to compare feature learning methods
to hand-engineered features in as fair a manner as possible.
This contest introduced the Facial Expression Recognition 2013 
dataset. It is available for download7. FER-2013 was created by Pierre Luc Carrier and Aaron Courville. It is part of a larger ongoing project. The dataset
was created using the Google image search API to search for images of faces
that match a set of 184 emotion-related keywords like “blissful”, “enraged,” etc.
These keywords were combined with words related to gender, age or ethnicity,
to obtain nearly 600 strings which were used as facial image search queries. The
6 
7 
ﬁrst 1000 images returned for each query were kept for the next stage of processing. OpenCV face recognition was used to obtain bounding boxes around each
face in the collected images. Human labelers than rejected incorrectly labeled
images, corrected the cropping if necessary, and ﬁltered out some duplicate images. Approved, cropped images were then resized to 48x48 pixels and converted
to grayscale. Mehdi Mirza and Ian Goodfellow prepared a subset of the images
for this contest, and mapped the ﬁne-grained emotion keywords into the same
seven broad categories used in the Toronto Face Database . The resulting
dataset contains 35887 images, with 4953 “Anger” images, 547 “Disgust” images, 5121 “Fear” images, 8989 “Happiness” images, 6077 “Sadness” images,
4002 “Surprise” images, and 6198 “Neutral” images.
Ian Goodfellow performed some small-scale experiments to estimate the human performance on this task. He collected 1500 images of members of the LISA
lab acting out the seven facial expressions. This dataset contains no label noise
per se, though poor acting abilities mean that the Bayes rate could be quite
high. On this dataset, human accuracy was 68±5%. FER-2013 could theoretical
suﬀer from label errors due to the way it was collected, but Ian Goodfellow found
that human accuracy on FER-2013 was 65±5%. While there may be label errors,
they do not make the task signiﬁcantly harder, at least not for a human. James
Bergstra also determined the best performance of a “null” model, consisting of a
convolutional network with no learning except in the ﬁnal classiﬁer layer. Using
the TPE hyperparameter optimization algorithm, he found that the best such
convolutional network obtains an accuracy of 60%. Using an ensemble of such
models, he obtained an accuracy of 65.5%. See for details.
56 teams submitted on the ﬁnal dataset. Of these, four beat the best “null”
ensemble model (which was not presented until after the contest was over–many
more teams beat the simpler baselines provided by the organizers). Their scores
are presented in Table 1. The top three teams all used convolutional neural
networks trained discriminatively with image transformations. The winner,
Yichuan Tang, used the primal objective of an SVM as the loss function for
training. This loss function has been applied to neural networks before, but he
additionally used the L2-SVM loss function, a new development that gave great
results on the contest dataset and others.
One of the questions we hoped to answer in this workshop is whether or not
feature learning algorithms are ahead of other methods. Radu Ionescu, Marius
Popescu, and Cristian Grozea provided the strongest submission that did not
use feature learning. Their approach used SIFT and MKL. This approach
put their performance close to that of Maxim Milakov, who submitted the third
best convolutional network. These results suggest that convolutional networks
are indeed capable of outperforming hand-designed features, but the diﬀerence
in accuracy is not extreme. It’s unclear whether the performance of the best
deep network has reached the Bayes rate on this task or not.
8 
Table 1. Private test set accuracy on FER-13
Yichuan Tang
Unsupervised
Yingbo Zhou, Chetan Ramaiah
Maxim Milakov8
Maxim Milakov
Radu + Marius + Cristi 
Radu Ionescu, Marius Popescu,
Cristian Grozea
The multimodal learning challenge
The multimodal learning challenge9 was intended to spur development of algorithms that discover a uniﬁed semantic representation of examples that have
more than one input representation. In this case, the two input modalities were
images and text.
Competitors were advised to use the small ESP game dataset for training
data, but all public sources of training data were allowed. The small ESP game
dataset consists of 100,000 images of varying sizes that were annotated by players
of an online game. Each image is tagged with on average 14 words, with a
vocabulary of over 4,000 words.
In order to provide a new test set, Ian Goodfellow manually labeled 1,000
images obtained by Google image search queries for some of the most commonly
used words in the small ESP game dataset. The labels were intended to resemble
those in the training set. For example, they include incorrect spellings that were
common in the training set. This dataset is available for download10.
Kaggle does not yet provide the kinds of evaluation metrics typically used
for multimodal learning, so the organizers devised a multimodal classiﬁcation
task. Each test image would be accompanied by two labels from the test set,
with the classiﬁcation task being to report which of the two labels is correct.
Unfortunately, because this is a matching task, it proved too easy to yield interesting machine learning results. Yichuan Tang found that a base classiﬁer with
low accuracy could be coupled with the Hungarian algorithm to compute the optimal matching. The optimal matching constructed in this way obtained 100%
accuracy. The contest ended in a three-way tie with 100% test accuracy. The
winners were “RBM” (Yichuan Tang), “MMDL” (Fangxiang Feng, Ruifan
Li, and Xiaojie Wang), and “AlbinoSnowman” (John Park). RBM won the tie
by submitting the ﬁrst perfect solution. The tie between MMDL and AlbinoSnowman was broken because MMDL submitted a model ﬁle for veriﬁcation and
AlbinoSnowman did not.
If a similar contest is organized in the future, we recommend labeling twice
as many test images as are needed, then discarding half of the images and using
their labels as the incorrect label for the remaining labels. This removes the
9 
10 
matching aspect of the problem and forces the classiﬁer to label each image
independently.
Advice to contest organizers
Organizing a contest requires a signiﬁcant amount of work from all parties involved. We oﬀer some suggestions for running a succesful contest:
Allocation of time: Budget time for the following tasks: Before the contest
launches: Creation of new datasets, veriﬁcation that state of the art algorithms
perform well but have room for improvement on the dataset, preparation of
baseline solutions, design of rules for the contest. During the contest:
Fielding questions (on contest rules, how to use the contest website, etc.), resolving
portability issues with contest baselines. After the contest Veriﬁcation of the
winners’ submissions, distributing the private test data, preparing presentations
and papers about the contest.
Designing rules: Some things to consider: Should “transductive” methods that are allowed to observe all test set inputs be allowed? Are contestants
prohibited from labeling the public leaderboard test data and training or crossvalidating with it? What about training with outside data, or scraping the web
for higher resolution versions of input images? How will you enforce the rules?
Datasets that humans can label present many diﬃculties. Remember that you
need to prevent not just training on the test set, but also selecting hyperparameters on it. The best way to do this is to require all entrants to upload their
trained models at the end of the contest. The organizers release the test set only
after all models are frozen. Entrants then run their submission on the test set
and upload the predictions . The organizers then verify that the winning submissions’ predictions were indeed generated by the previously uploaded model.
Using this system is a powerful deterrent to cheating. In order to run the contest smoothly, it is important to plan these measures in advance and put them
in the rules from the start. We initially had fewer cheating deterrants in place,
expecting only a small number of competitors from the academic deep learning
community, but within days of launching the contest someone had already handlabeled the entire public test set for the multimodal learning contest. Note that
contestants are interested in obtaining a high rank on the leaderboard even if
they do not win a prize (on Kaggle, one can earn “Kaggle points” for placing in
the top 10% or 25% of a contest). It’s important to reserve the right to verify
all submissions and remove leaderboard entries that can’t be veriﬁed.
Diﬃculty and participation rate: Err on the side of making the contest
too hard rather than too easy. We erred on the side of making the contests
easy, in order to increase participation, and this made the multimodal contest
too easy to be interesting. While past workshop-based contests have had a low
participation rate the participation rate problem can be completely solved by hosting the
contest on Kaggle. Even our least popular challenge had 26 teams.
Organize multiple contests simultaneously. The marginal cost of running a second or third contest is low compared to the ﬁxed cost of launching one
contest, and the additional contests provide some insurance that you will obtain
interesting results even if one contest turns out to be poorly devised.
Provide baselines and a leaderboard. Baselines boost participation since
entrants don’t need to write boilerplate code to load the data, etc.
Discussion and conclusion
Competitions oﬀer a diﬀerent and important viewpoint on machine learning algorithms than research papers do. Research papers are expected to be extremely
novel. When writing research papers, the most talented machine learning practitioners focus their skills on tuning methods that they themselves invented.
Contests oﬀer the opportunity to see what happens when a diﬀerent incentive
structure is applied: skilled practitioners use whatever means they think will
help them win, regardless of how novel the method is or whether they invented
it. The use of a completely new test set also makes the results of the contest a
more realistic evaluation of generalization error. When interpreting the results
of a contest, it is important to remember that a contest is not a controlled experiment complete with statistical analysis. However, contests can serve to refocus
our attention on algorithms that perform well, but may not otherwise receive
their due attention in the research community. This year’s contest highlighted
the performance of SVM loss functions, sparse ﬁltering, and entropy regularization. We hope these results help machine learning practitioners improve the
performance of their algorithms, and that future contest organizers are able to
use this report to plan more contests that highlight more eﬀective algorithms.