Ordinal Depth Supervision for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Georgios Pavlakos1, Xiaowei Zhou2, Kostas Daniilidis1
1 University of Pennsylvania
2 Zhejiang University
Our ability to train end-to-end systems for 3D human
pose estimation from single images is currently constrained
by the limited availability of 3D annotations for natural images. Most datasets are captured using Motion Capture
(MoCap) systems in a studio setting and it is difﬁcult to
reach the variability of 2D human pose datasets, like MPII
or LSP. To alleviate the need for accurate 3D ground truth,
we propose to use a weaker supervision signal provided by
the ordinal depths of human joints. This information can be
acquired by human annotators for a wide range of images
and poses. We showcase the effectiveness and ﬂexibility of
training Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) with these ordinal relations in different settings, always achieving competitive performance with ConvNets trained with accurate
3D joint coordinates. Additionally, to demonstrate the potential of the approach, we augment the popular LSP and
MPII datasets with ordinal depth annotations. This extension allows us to present quantitative and qualitative evaluation in non-studio conditions. Simultaneously, these ordinal annotations can be easily incorporated in the training
procedure of typical ConvNets for 3D human pose. Through
this inclusion we achieve new state-of-the-art performance
for the relevant benchmarks and validate the effectiveness
of ordinal depth supervision for 3D human pose.
1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has been one of the most remarkable successes for deep learning approaches. Leveraging large-scale datasets with extensive 2D annotations has
immensely beneﬁted 2D pose estimation ,
semantic part labeling and multi-person pose estimation . In contrast, the complexity of collecting
images with corresponding 3D ground truth has constrained
3D human pose datasets in small scale or strictly in
studio settings . The goal of this paper is to demonstrate that in the absence of accurate 3D ground truth, endto-end learning can be competitive by using weaker supervision in the form of ordinal depth of the joints (Figure 1).
Aiming to boost end-to-end discriminative approaches,
Z(right ankle) < Z(right hip)
Z(left knee) > Z(right knee)
Z(right elbow) > Z(right wrist)
Z(left shoulder) < Z(right shoulder)
Z(right knee) < Z(left hip)
Z(left wrist) = Z(left elbow)
Z(head) > Z(right ankle)
Z(right hip) = Z(left hip)
Z(right ankle) < Z(neck)
Ordinal depth relations
2D keypoints
Input image
3D human pose
Figure 1: Summary of our approach. In the absence of accurate 3D ground truth we propose the use of ordinal depth
relations (closer-farther) of the human body joints for endto-end training of 3D human pose estimation systems.
different techniques attempt to augment the training data.
Synthetic examples can be produced in abundance ,
but there is no guarantee that they come from the same distribution as natural images. Multi-view systems for accurate capture of 3D ground truth can work outdoors , but
they need to be synchronized and calibrated, so data collection is not practical and hard to scale. These limitations
have favored reconstruction approaches, e.g., , which
employ reliable 2D pose detectors and recover 3D pose in a
subsequent step using the 2D joint estimates. Unfortunately,
even in the presence of perfect 2D correspondences, the ﬁnal 3D reconstruction can be erroneous. This 2D-to-3D reconstruction ambiguity is mainly attributed to the binary
ordinal depth relations of the joints (closer-farther) .
Leveraging image-based evidences, such as occlusion and
shading, can largely resolve the ambiguity, yet this information is discarded by reconstruction approaches.
Motivated by the particular power of ordinal depth relations at resolving reconstruction ambiguities and the fact
that this information can be acquired by human annotators,
we propose to use ordinal depth relations to train ConvNets
 
for 3D human pose estimation. Since humans can easily
perceive pose and they are better at estimating ordinal
depth than explicit metric depth , annotators can provide pairwise ordinal depth relations for a wide range of
imaging conditions, activities, and viewpoints. We develop
on the idea of ordinal relations demonstrating their ﬂexibility and effectiveness in a variety of settings: 1) we use
them to predict directly the depths of joints, 2) we combine
them with 2D keypoint annotations to predict 3D poses,
3) we demonstrate how they can be incorporated within a
volumetric representation of 3D pose . In every case,
the weak supervision signal provided by these ordinal relations leads to a competitive performance compared to fully
supervised approaches that employ the actual 3D ground
truth. Additionally, to motivate the use of ordinal depth
relations for human pose, we provide ordinal depth annotations for two popular 2D human pose datasets, LSP 
and MPII . This extension allows us to provide quantitative and qualitative evaluation of our approach in non-studio
settings. Simultaneously, these ordinal annotations for inthe-wild images can be easily incorporated in the training
procedure of typical ConvNets for 3D human pose leading
to new state-of-the-art results for the standard benchmarks
of Human3.6M and HumanEva-I. These performance bene-
ﬁts underline the effectiveness of ordinal depth supervision
for human pose problems and provide motivation for further
exploration using the available annotations.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose the use of ordinal depth relations of human
joints for 3D human pose estimation to bypass the need
for accurate 3D ground truth.
• We showcase the ﬂexibility of the ordinal relations
by incorporating them in different network settings,
where we always achieve competitive results to training with the actual 3D ground truth.
• We augment two popular 2D pose datasets (LSP and
MPII) with ordinal depth annotations and demonstrate
the applicability of the proposed approach to 3D pose
estimation in non-studio conditions.
• We include our ordinal annotations in the training procedure of typical ConvNets for 3D human pose and
exemplify their effectiveness by achieving new stateof-the-art results on the standard benchmarks.
2. Related work
Since the literature on 3D human pose estimation is vast,
here we discuss works closely related to our approach and
refer the interested reader to Saraﬁanos et al. for a recent survey on this topic.
Reconstruction approaches: A long line of approaches
follows the reconstruction paradigm by employing 2D pose
detectors to localize 2D human joints and using these locations to estimate plausible 3D poses . Zhou et
al. use 2D heatmaps from a 2D pose ConvNet to
reconstruct 3D pose in a video sequence. Bogo et al. ﬁt
a statistical model of 3D human shape to the predicted 2D
joints. Alternatively, a network can also handle the step of
lifting 2D estimates to 3D poses . Notably, Martinez et al. achieve state-of-the-art results with a simple multilayer perceptron that regresses 3D joint locations,
given 2D keypoints as input. Despite the success of this
paradigm, it comes with important drawbacks. No imagebased evidence is used during the reconstruction step, the
result is too reliant on an imperfect 2D pose detector and
even for perfect 2D correspondences, the 3D estimate might
fail because of the reconstruction ambiguity. In contrast, by
using ordinal depth relations we can leverage rich imagebased information during estimation, without relinquishing
the accuracy of reconstruction approaches, which can also
be integrated in our framework (Section 3.4).
Discriminative approaches:
Discriminative approaches
are orthogonal to the reconstruction paradigm since they estimate the 3D pose directly from the image. Prior work uses
ConvNets to regress the coordinates of the 3D joints , to regress 3D heatmaps , or to classify each image in the appropriate pose class . The
main critique of these end-to-end approaches is that images
with corresponding 3D ground truth are required for training. Our work attempts to relax this important constraint,
by training with weak 3D information in the form of ordinal depth relations for the joints and 2D keypoints. Weak
supervision was also used in recent work by constraining the lengths of the predicted limbs. However, we argue
that our supervision does not simply constraint the output
of the network, but also provides novel information for inthe-wild images and further enhances training.
Generating training examples: The limited availability
of 3D ground truth for training 3D human pose ConvNets
has also been addressed in various ways in recent works.
The most straightforward solution is to use graphics to augment the training data . Differently, Rogez and
Schmid propose a collage approach by composing human parts from different images to produce combinations
with known 3D pose. In both cases though, most examples do not reach the detail and variety level that in-the-wild
images have. Mehta et al. record multiple views outdoors and estimate accurate 3D ground truth for every view.
However, multi-view systems need to be synchronized and
calibrated, so large-scale data collection is not trivial.
3D annotations: Prior works have also relied on humans
to perceive and annotate 3D properties that are lost through
the projection of a 3D scene on a 2D image. Bell et al. 
and Chen et al. annotate the ordinal relations for the
apparent depth of pixels in the image. In the work of Xiang et al. , humans align 3D CAD models with single images to provide viewpoint information. Concerning
3D human pose annotations, the famous poselets work from
Bourdev and Malik uses an interactive tool for annotators to adjust the 3D pose, making the procedure laborious.
Maji et al. provide 3D annotations for human pose, but
only in the form of yaw angles for head and torso. The idea
of ordinal depth relations is also explored by Pons-Moll et
al. where attributes regarding the relative 3D position
of the body parts are included in their posebits database.
Different to them, we provide annotations by humans for a
much larger set of images (i.e., more than 15k images with
our annotations compared to 1k for the posebits dataset),
and instead of exploring an extensive set of pose attributes,
we propose a cleaner training scheme that requires only 2D
keypoint locations and ordinal depth relations. In recent
work, Lassner et al. estimate proposals of 3D human
shape ﬁts for single images which are accepted or rejected
by annotators. Despite the rich ground truth in case of a
good ﬁt, many automatic proposals are of low quality, leading to many discards. Our work aims for a more balanced
solution where 3D annotations have a weaker form, but the
task is easy for humans, so that they can provide annotations
on a large scale for practically any available image.
Ordinal relations: There is a long history for learning
from ordinal relations, outside the ﬁeld of computer vision, with particular interest in the area of information retrieval, where many algorithms for learning-to-rank have
been developed . In the context of computer vision, previous works have used relations to learn apparent
depth or reﬂectance of a scene. We share a
common motivation with these approaches in the sense that
ordinal relations are easier for humans to annotate, compared to metric depth or absolute reﬂectance values.
3. Technical approach
In this section we present our proposed approach for different settings of 3D human pose estimation. First, in Section 3.1 we predict only the depths of the human joints, relying on ordinal depth relations and a ranking loss for training. Then, in Section 3.2 we combine the ordinal relations
with 2D keypoint annotations to predict the 3D pose coordinates. In Section 3.3 we explore the incorporation of ordinal
relations within a volumetric representation for 3D human
pose . Finally, Section 3.4 presents the extension of the
previous networks with a component designed to encode a
geometric 3D pose prior.
3.1. Depth prediction
Our initial goal is to establish the training procedure such
that we can leverage ordinal depth relations to learn to predict the depths of human joints. This is the simplest case,
where instead of explicitly predicting the 3D pose, we only
predict depth values for the joints.
Let us represent the human body with N joints. For each
joint i we want to predict its depth zi. The provided data are
in the form of pairwise ordinal depth relations. For a pair
of joints (i, j), we denote the ordinal depth relation as r(i,j)
taking the value:
• +1, if joint i is closer than j,
• −1, if joint j is closer than i,
• 0, if their depths are roughly the same.
The ConvNet we use for this task takes the image as input
and predicts N depth values zi, one for each joint. Given
the r(i,j) relation and assuming that the ConvNet is producing the depth estimates zi and zj for the two corresponding
joints, the loss for this pair is:
log (1 + exp(zi −zj)) ,
r(i,j) = +1
log (1 + exp(−zi + zj)) ,
r(i,j) = −1
(zi −zj)2,
r(i,j) = 0.
This is a differentiable ranking loss expression, which has
similarities with early works on the learning-to-rank literature and was also adopted by for apparent depth
estimation. Intuitively, it enforces a large margin between
the values zi and zj if one of them has been annotated as
closer than the other, otherwise it enforces them to be equal.
Denoting with I the set of pairs of joints that have been annotated with an ordinal relation, the complete expression for
the loss takes the form:
An interesting property of this loss is that we do not require the relations for all pairs of joints to be available during training. The loss can be computed based only on the
subset of pairs that have been annotated. Additionally, the
relations do not have to be consistent, i.e., no strict global
ordering is required. Instead, the ConvNet is allowed to
learn a consensus from the provided relationships by minimizing the incurred loss. This is a helpful property in case
there are ambiguities in the annotations.
3.2. Coordinate prediction for 3D pose
Our initial ConvNet only predicts the depths of the human joints. To enable full 3D pose reconstruction, we additionally need to precisely localize the corresponding joints
on the image. Given the ConvNet used in the previous section, the most natural extension is to enrich its output by
predicting the 2D coordinates of the joints as well. Thus,
we predict 2N additional values which correspond to the
pixel coordinates w = (x, y) of each joint. We consider this
combination of 2D keypoints with ordinal depth as a form
marginalized depth
marginalized
2D heatmap
volumetric prediction
Figure 2: Visualization of the volumetric output for an individual joint. The predictions are volumetric, but in the
absence of accurate 3D ground truth, the supervision is applied independently on the 2D image plane and the depth
dimension. The marginalized likelihoods are computed by
means of sum-pooling operations.
of weak 3D information and we refer to the corresponding
ConvNet as the weakly supervised version.
Let us denote with wn the ground truth 2D location for
joint n, and with ˆwn the corresponding ConvNet prediction.
Assuming the availability of 2D keypoint annotations, the
familiar L2 regression loss can be applied:
∥wn −ˆwn∥2
By combining the ranking loss for the values zn and the regression loss for the keypoint coordinates wn, we can train
the ConvNet end-to-end: L = Lrank + λLkeyp, where the
value λ = 100 is used for our experiments.
3.3. Volumetric prediction for 3D pose
Apart from direct regression of the 3D pose coordinates,
recent work has investigated the use of a volumetric representation for 3D human pose . In this case, the space
around the subject is discretized, and the ConvNet predicts
per-voxel likelihoods for every joint in the 3D space. The
training target for the volumetric space is a 3D Gaussian
centered at the 3D location of each joint. However, without explicit 3D ground truth, supervising the same volume
is not trivial. To demonstrate the general applicability of
ordinal relations, we adapt this representation, to make it
compatible with ordinal depth supervision as well.
To bypass the seemingly complex issue, we propose to
preserve the volumetric structure of the output, but decompose the supervision a) in the 2D image plane and b) the z
dimension (depth), as presented in Figure 2. Precisely, for
every joint n, the ConvNet predicts score maps Ψn, which
can be transformed to a probability distribution, by applying a softmax operation σ. So, the joint n is located in position u = (x, y, z) with probability p(u|n) = σ[Ψn]u. The
marginalized probability distribution in the 2D plane is:
p(x, y|n) =
and can be computed efﬁciently as a sum-pooling operation across all the slices of the volume. This operation is
equivalent to adopting a weak perspective camera model.
Similarly, the marginalized probability distribution for the
depth dimension is:
and can again be computed as a sum-pooling operation
across all the pixels of a slice.
This decomposition has
the advantage that even if we do not have complete 3D
ground truth, we can still supervise the ConvNet. The 2D
image plane (values of equation 4) and the depth dimension (values of equation 5) are supervised independently,
but they are connected by the underlying volumetric representation which enforces the 3D consistency. Our loss
function takes the form: L = Lrank + λLheat. The loss
for the z-dimension, Lrank, is the same ranking loss as before (equation 2), where we recover depth for each joint
by taking the mean value of the estimated soft distribution:
z zp(z|n). For the x-y dimensions, the target for
each keypoint is a heatmap with a Gaussian centered around
its ground truth location and Lheat is an L2 loss between the
predicted and the ground truth heatmaps .
We stress here that the alterations presented up to this
point refer only to the supervision type, without interfering
with the network architecture. This allows most of the stateof-the-art discriminative ConvNets to be
used as-is, and be complemented with the proposed ordinal
depth supervision when 3D ground truth is not available.
3.4. Integration with a reconstruction component
The strength of the aforementioned networks is that they
leverage image-based information to resolve the singleview depth ambiguities and produce depth estimates zn that
respect the ordinal depths of the human joints. However,
the predicted depth values do not typically match the exact
metric depths of the joints, since no full 3D pose example has been used to train the networks. This motivates us
to enhance the architecture with our proposed reconstruction component, which takes as input the estimated 2D keypoints wn and the ordinal depth estimates zn, for all joints
n, and reconstructs the 3D pose, S ∈Rn×3. This inputoutput relation is presented in Figure 3a. Conveniently, for
(a) The reconstruction component.
2D keypoints
depth estimates
Reconstruction
(b) Integration of the reconstruction component.
Figure 3: (a) The reconstruction component is a multi-layer
perceptron with two bilinear units . The input is the
concatenation of the pixel locations of the joints (xi, yi),
and the ordinal depths zi, while the output is the 3D pose
coordinates Si. (b) Integration of the reconstruction module
in the full framework. The ConvNet of Section 3.2 or 3.3
estimates 2D keypoint locations and depths which are used
by the reconstruction module to predict a coherent 3D pose.
the training of this component we require only MoCap data,
which are available in abundance. During training, we simply project each 3D pose skeleton to the 2D image plane. To
simulate the input, we use the projected 2D joint locations
and a noisy version of the depths of the joints, such that the
majority of their ordinal relations are preserved, while their
values might not necessarily match the actual depth. Denoting with ˆSi the output 3D joints of the ConvNet and with Si
the joints of the 3D pose that was used to generate the input,
our supervision is an L2 loss:
∥Sn −ˆSn∥2
This module can be easily incorporated in an end-to-end
framework by using as input the output of the ConvNet from
Section 3.2 or Section 3.3. This is presented schematically
in Figure 3b. The beneﬁt from employing such a reconstruction module is demonstrated empirically in Section 4.
4. Empirical evaluation
This section concerns the empirical evaluation of the
proposed approach. First, we present the benchmarks that
we employed for quantitative and qualitative evaluation.
Then, we provide some essential implementation details of
the approach. Finally, quantitative and qualitative results
are presented on the selected datasets.
4.1. Datasets
We employed two standard indoor benchmarks, Human3.6M and HumanEva-I , along with a recent
dataset captured in indoor and outdoor conditions, MPI-
INF-3DHP . Additionally, we extended two popular 2D human pose datasets, Leeds Sports Pose dataset
(LSP) and MPII human pose dataset (MPII) with
ordinal depth annotations for the human joints.
Human3.6M: It is a large-scale dataset captured in an indoor environment that contains multiple subjects performing typical actions like “Eating” and “Walking”. Following
the most popular protocol (e.g., ), we train using subjects S1,S5,S6,S7, and S8 and test on subjects S9 and S11.
The original videos are downsampled from 50fps to 10fps
to remove redundancy. A single model is trained for all
actions. Results are reported using the mean per joint error and the reconstruction error, which allows a Procrustes
alignment of the prediction with the ground truth.
HumanEva-I: It is a smaller scale dataset compared to Human3.6M, including fewer users and actions. We follow the
typical protocol (e.g., ), where the training sequences of
subjects S1, S2 and S3 are used for training and the validation sequences of the same subjects are used for testing. We
train a single model for all actions and users, and we report
results using the reconstruction error.
MPI-INF-3DHP: It is a recent dataset that includes both
indoor and outdoor scenes. We use it exclusively for evaluation, without employing the training data, to demonstrate
robustness of the trained model under signiﬁcant domain
shift. Following the typical protocol ( ), results are
reported using the PCK3D and the AUC metric.
LSP + MPII Ordinal: Leeds Sports Pose and MPII
human pose are two of the most widely used benchmarks for 2D human pose. Here we extend both of them,
offering ordinal depth annotations for the human joints. For
LSP we annotate all the 2k images, while for MPII we annotate the subset of 13k images used by Lassner et al. .
Annotators were presented with a pair of joints for each
image and answered which joint was closer to the camera.
The option “ambiguous/hard to tell” was also offered. We
considered 14 joints, excluding thorax and spine joints of
MPII, which are often not used for training (e.g., ). The
questions for each image were continued until a global ordering could be inferred for all the joints. By enforcing a
global ordering we conveniently do not encounter any contradicting annotations. More importantly though, this approach signiﬁcantly decreased annotation time. If the relative questions had to be answered for all joints, then we
would require
= 91 questions for each image. In contrast, with the procedure we followed, we could get a global
ordering with roughly 17 questions per image in the mean
case. This resulted in 5 times faster annotation time. Additionally, we observed that annotators were much more ef-
Architecture
Supervision
ordinal supervision
prediction
direct regression
coordinate
weakly supervised
regression
fully supervised 
weakly supervised
fully supervised 
regression
weakly supervised
hourglasses fully supervised 
Table 1: Effect of training with the actual 3D ground truth,
versus employing weaker ordinal depth supervision on Human3.6M. The results are mean per joint errors (mm).
ﬁcient when they were asked continuously about a speciﬁc
pair of joints, instead of changing the pair of focus. As a
result, we created groups of 50 images containing questions
about the same pair of joints. This way we could get annotations at a rate of 3.5 secs per question, meaning that in
total the procedure required roughly 1 minute per image.
We clarify that our goal for this dataset is to provide a
novel information source (ordinal depth) for in-the-wild images. We do not use it for evaluation, since it is not a mm
level accuracy benchmark like Human3.6M or HumanEva-
I. Furthermore, the goal is not to conduct a computational
study concerning the level of accuracy that humans perceive
3D poses as this has been already examined in the past .
In contrast, we use these annotations to demonstrate that: a)
they can boost performance of 3D human pose estimation
for standard benchmarks, and b) they assist our ConvNets to
proper generalize and make them applicable in non-studio
conditions, or in cases with signiﬁcant domain shift.
4.2. Implementation details
For the ConvNets that predict 2D keypoints and/or
depths, we follow the hourglass design .
output is in coordinate form (Sections 3.1 and 3.2), we
use one hourglass with a fully connected layer in the end,
while when we have volumetric target (Section 3.3), we use
two hourglasses (unless stated otherwise). For comparisons
with the state-of-the-art, we follow a mixed training strategy
combining images with 3D ground truth from the respective
dataset (Human3.6M or HumanEva-I), with LSP+MPII Ordinal images. For the LSP+MPII Ordinal examples, the loss
is computed based on the human annotations (weak supervision), while for the respective dataset examples, the loss
is computed based on the known ground truth (full supervision). We train the network with a batch size of 4, learning rate set to 2.5e-4, and using rmsprop for the optimization. Augmentation for rotation (±30◦), scale (0.75-1.25)
and ﬂipping (left-right) is also used. The duration of the
Human3.6M + 2D keyp
Human3.6M + 2D keyp + Ord
Human3.6M + 2D keyp
Human3.6M + 2D keyp + Ord + Rec
Table 2: Ablative study on Human3.6M demonstrating the
effect of incorporating additional data sources in the training procedure (2D keypoints and ordinal depth relations),
as well as integrating a rconstruction component. The numbers are mean per joint errors (mm).
Human3.6M + 2D keyp
Human3.6M + 2D keyp + Ord
Table 3: Ablative study on MPI-INF-3DHP demonstrating
that supervision through our ordinal annotations is important for proper generalization.
training depends on the size of the dataset (300k iterations
for Human3.6M data only, 2.5M iterations for mixed Human3.6M and LSP+MPII Ordinal data, 1.5M iterations for
mixed HumanEva-I and LSP+MPII Ordinal data). For the
reconstruction component (Section 3.4), we follow the design of . We train the network with a batch size of 64,
learning rate set to 2.5e-4, we use rmsprop for the optimization, and the training lasts for 200k iterations.
4.3. Ablative studies
Ordinal supervision: First, we examine the effect of using ordinal depth supervision versus employing the actual
3D groudtruth for training. For this part, we focus on Human3.6M which is a large scale benchmark and provides
3D ground truth to perform the quantitative comparison.
To deﬁne the ordinal depth relations, the depth values for
each pair of joints are considered. If they differ less than
100mm, then the corresponding relation is set to r = 0
(similar depth). Otherwise, it is set to r = ±1, depending on which joint is closer. Since for this comparison we
want to focus on the form of supervision, this is the only
set of experiments that uses ordinal depth relations inferred
from 3D ground truth. For the remaining evaluations, all
ordinal depth relations were provided by human annotators.
Following the analysis of Section 3, we explore three different prediction schemes, i.e., depth prediction, coordinate
regression and volume regression. For each one of them, we
compare a version where ordinal supervision is used, versus
Direct. Discuss Eating Greet Phone Photo
Pose Purch. Sitting SitingD Smoke
Wait WalkD Walk WalkT
Tekin et al. (CVPR’16)
88.8 125.3 118.0 182.7 112.4
118.4 138.8
65.8 125.0
Zhou et al. (CVPR’16)
87.1 103.2 116.2 143.3 106.9
107.4 118.1
97.7 113.0
Du et al. (ECCV’16)
104.9 122.1 139.1 135.9 105.9
120.0 117.7
106.5 126.5
Zhou et al. (ECCVW’16)
98.8 113.4 125.2
99.0 107.3
Chen et al. (CVPR’17)
90.0 107.9 107.3 139.2
106.7 106.2
90.6 114.2
Tome et al. (CVPR’17)
86.3 110.7
Rogez et al. (CVPR’17)
92.2 105.7
Pavlakos et al. (CVPR’17)
Nie et al. (ICCV’17)
95.6 103.9 103.0
Tekin et al. (ICCV’17)
Zhou et al. (ICCV’17)
Martinez et al. (ICCV’17)
Table 4: Detailed results on Human3.6M . Numbers are mean per joint errors (mm). The results of all approaches are
obtained from the original papers. We outperform all other approaches across the table.
Direct. Discuss Eating Greet Phone Photo Pose Purch. Sitting SitingD Smoke
Wait WalkD Walk WalkT
Akhter & Black * (CVPR’15)
177.6 161.8 197.8 176.2 186.5 195.4 167.3
177.8 181.9
176.2 198.6
192.7 181.1
Ramakrishna et al. * (ECCV’12)
149.3 141.6 154.3 157.7 158.9 141.8 158.1
160.4 161.7
150.0 174.8
150.2 157.3
Zhou et al. * (CVPR’15)
87.9 116.8 108.3 107.3
106.0 102.2
106.5 110.4
115.2 106.7
Bogo et al. (ECCV’16)
Moreno-Noguer (CVPR’17)
Pavlakos et al. (CVPR’17)
Martinez et al. (ICCV’17)
Table 5: Detailed results on Human3.6M . Numbers are reconstruction errors. The results of all approaches are obtained
from the original papers, except for (*), which were obtained from . We outperform all other approaches across the table.
employing the actual 3D ground truth for training. The detailed results are presented in Table 1. Interestingly, in all
cases, the weaker ordinal supervision signal is competitive
and achieves results very close to the fully supervised baseline. The gap increases only when we employ more powerful architectures, i.e., the volume regression case with two
hourglass components. In fact, in this case the average error
is already very low (below 80mm), and one would expect
that for even lower prediction errors, the highly accurate
3D ground truth would be necessary for training.
Improving 3D pose detectors: After the sanity check that
ordinal supervision is competitive to training with the full
3D ground truth, we explore using ordinal depth annotations provided by humans, to boost the performance of a
standard ConvNet for 3D human pose . As detailed in
Section 4.2, we follow a mixed training strategy, leveraging
Human3.6M images with 3D ground truth and LSP+MPII
Ordinal images with our annotations. Data augmentation
using natural images with 2D keypoint annotations is a standard practice , but here we also consider
the effect of our ordinal depth supervision. Optionally, the
reconstruction component can be used at the end of the network, helping with coherent 3D pose prediction. The detailed results of the ablative study are presented in Table 2.
Unsurprisingly, using more training examples improves
performance. The supervision with 2D keypoints is helpful
(line 2), however the addition of our ordinal depth supervision provides novel information to the network and further
improves the results (line 3). The reﬁnement step using the
reconstruction module (lines 4 and 5) is also beneﬁcial, and
helps providing coherent 3D pose results. In fact, the last
line corresponds to state-of-the-art results for this dataset,
which we discuss in more detail in Section 4.4.
Robustness to domain shift:
Besides boosting current
state-of-the-art models, we ultimately aspire to use our ordinal supervision for better generalization of the trained models so that they are applicable for in-the-wild images. To
demonstrate this potential, we test our approach on the MPI-
INF-3DHP dataset. This dataset is not considered exactly
in-the-wild, but has a signiﬁcant domain shift compared to
Human3.6M. The complete results for this ablative experiment are presented in Table 3. Interestingly, the model
trained only on Human3.6M data (line 1) has embarrassing
performance, because of heavy overﬁtting. Using additional
in-the-wild images with 2D keypoints (line 2) is helpful,
but from inspection of the results, the beneﬁt comes mainly
from better 2D pose estimates, while depth prediction is
generally mediocre. The best generalization comes after incorporating also the ordinal depth supervision (line 3), elevating the model to state-of-the-art results.
Radwan et al. 
75.1 99.8 93.8 79.2 89.8 99.4 89.5
Wang et al. 
71.9 75.7 85.3 62.6 77.7 54.4 71.3
Simo-Serra et al. 65.1 48.6 73.5 74.2 46.6 32.2 56.7
Bo et al. 
46.4 30.3 64.9 64.5 48.0 38.2 48.7
Kostrikov et al. 
44.0 30.9 41.7 57.2 35.0 33.3 40.3
Yasin et al. 
35.8 32.4 41.6 46.6 41.4 35.4 38.9
Moreno-Noguer 
19.7 13.0 24.9 39.7 20.0 21.0 26.9
Pavlakos et al. 
22.1 21.9 29.0 29.8 23.6 26.0 25.5
Martinez et al. 
19.7 17.4 46.8 26.9 18.2 18.6 24.6
18.8 12.7 29.2 23.5 15.4 14.5 18.3
Table 6: Results on the HumanEva-I dataset. Numbers are reconstruction errors (mm). The results of all approaches are obtained from the original papers.
4.4. Comparison with state-of-the-art
Human3.6M: We use for evaluation the same ConvNet
with the previous section, which follows a mixed training
strategy and includes the reconstruction component. The
detailed results in terms of mean per joint error and reconstruction error are presented in Tables 4 and 5 respectively. Our complete approach achieves state-of-the-art results across all actions and metrics, with relative error reduction over 10% on average.
Since most other works
(e.g., ) also use in-the-wild images with
2D keypoints for supervision, most of the improvement for
our approach comes from augmenting training with ordinal
depth relations for these examples. In particular, the error
decrease with respect to previous work is more signiﬁcant
for challenging actions like Sitting Down, Photo or Sitting,
with a lot of self-occlusions and rare poses. This beneﬁt can
be attributed to the greater variety of the LSP+MPII Ordinal
images not just in terms of appearance (this also beneﬁts the
other approaches), but mainly in terms of 3D poses which
are observed from our ConvNet in a weak 3D form.
HumanEva-I: The ConvNet architecture remains the same,
where HumanEva-I and LSP+MPII Ordinal images are used
for mixed training. The reconstruction component is trained
only on HumanEva-I MoCap. Our results are presented in
Table 6 and show important accuracy beneﬁt over previous
approaches. On average, the relative error reduction is again
over 10%, which is a solid improvement considering the
numbers for this dataset have mostly saturated.
MPI-INF-3DHP: For MPI-INF-3DHP, we report results
using the same ConvNet we trained for Human3.6M, with
Human3.6M and LSP+MPII Ordinal images. In Table 7
we compare with two recent baselines which are not trained
on this dataset, and we outperform them, with particularly
large margin for the Outdoor sequence.
Studio Outdoor
3DPCK 3DPCK 3DPCK 3DPCK AUC
Mehta et al. 
Zhou et al. 
Detailed results on the test set of MPI-INF-
3DHP . The results for all approaches are taken from
the original papers. No training data from this dataset have
been used for training by any method.
Figure 4: Typical qualitative results from MPI-INF-3DHP,
from the original and a novel viewpoint.
4.5. Qualitative evaluation
In Figure 4 we have collected a sample of 3D pose output for our approach, focusing on MPI-INF-3DHP, since it
is the main dataset that we evaluate without touching the
training data. A richer collection of success and failure examples is included in the supplementary material.
5. Summary
The goal of this paper was to present a solution for training end-to-end ConvNets for 3D human pose estimation in
the absence of accurate 3D ground truth, by using a weaker
supervision signal in the form of ordinal depth relations of
the joints. We investigated the ﬂexibility of these ordinal
relations by incorporating them in recent ConvNet architectures for 3D human pose and demonstrated competitive
performance with their fully supervised versions. Furthermore, we extended the MPII and LSP datasets with ordinal depth annotations for the human joints, allowing us to
present compelling results for non-studio conditions. Finally, these annotations were incorporated in the training
procedure of recent ConvNets for 3D human pose, achieving state-of-the-art results in the standard benchmarks.
Project Page:
 
projects/ordinal
Acknowledgements: We gratefully appreciate support through the following grants: NSF-IIP-1439681 (I/UCRC), ARL RCTA W911NF-10-2-
0016, ONR N00014-17-1-2093, DARPA FLA program and NSF/IUCRC.