Recommending Interesting Activity-Related Local Entities
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709
 
Ryen W. White
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
 
Peter Bailey
Microsoft Bing
Bellevue, WA 98004
 
When searching for entities with a strong local character (e.g., a
museum), people may also be interested in discovering proximal
activity-related entities (e.g., a café). Geographical proximity is a
necessary, but not sufficient, qualifier for recommending other
entities such that they are related in a useful manner (e.g., interest
in a fish market does not imply interest in nearby bookshops, but
interest in other produce stores is more likely). We describe and
evaluate methods to identify such activity-related local entities.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – search process, selection process.
General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Experimentation.
Local entities, entity resolution, entity-entity matching.
1. INTRODUCTION
People are frequently interested in finding out information about
specific local entities, say the Museum of Modern Art (MOMA)
in the city of New York, NY. They may be tourists and planning a
trip, or residents exploring their city. In addition to retrieving Web
documents matching users’ search queries for the specific local
entity, modern Web search engines may provide a rich and diverse results page with additional information related to the query.
Understanding the local user intent behind such users’ queries
offers an opportunity to surface recommendations about other
interesting activity-related local entities. For example, after visiting MOMA, a shopping trip or a visit to a local bar may be common activities. These relationships may not be commutative: an
interest in a bar is unlikely to imply an interest in nearby cultural
centers. Similarly, an interest in a cupcake shop may mean an
interest in other nearby cupcake shops, not some different class of
local entity. Lastly, as observed by Jones et al. , the nature of
the entity and/or corresponding activity may imply a different
willingness to travel. Thus for suggesting activity-related local
entities, an interest in a major city attraction may indicate an interest in other city attractions several miles away, but an interest
in a bar may only suggest interest in other nearby bars or cafés.
2. IDENTIFYING LOCAL ENTITIES
This work describes a procedure for identifying related local entities. Xiao et al. , similarly motivated about local relatedness,
observed behavior in geographic (local map vertical) search logs
and derived mechanisms to identify co-located queries at different
geographic region resolutions. Our algorithms are unrelated to
theirs, and we focus on identifying entities, not queries. Note that
although we conduct our study in the context of Seattle, WA, the
methods described could be applied to any city of reasonable size.
2.1 Pre-processing and Geocoding
Unlike Wang et al.’s approach , which works to extract dominant locations (either explicit or implicit) associated with queries,
we focused on identifying an entity’s location. The first step involves the identification of URLs that may be relevant to the location of interest. We obtained clickthrough logs from the Bing Web
search engine and mined queries and the URLs that users clicked
on for those queries, providing us with implicit associations between queries and URLs. We extracted URLs containing “seattle”
in the associated query string, and identified address-based queries and their query-URL mapping. For example, the query [pike
place market, pike street, seattle] could map to pikeplacemarket.org, describing the local entity Pike Place Market. To remove
infrequently-visited sites, we also use browsing logs from a widely-distributed browser plugin, and retained URLs that appear in
those logs and the clickthrough logs. This left us with a set of five
to ten thousand URLs, potentially describing a local Seattle entity.
To determine the physical location for each entity we use the Bing
Maps Geocoding API (microsoft.com/maps/developers), which
processes queries and returns their geocoded locations. Geocoding
results over 100 miles from Seattle were removed from analysis.
2.2 Entity Resolution
We employ entity resolution to get from a URL to other URLs
that refer to the same entity. Starting from every URL in the set
created using the steps above we find the query which sends the
most traffic to that URL (the canonical query). We then look at
the top URLs by clickthrough rate for this query, and select those
which attract more than 5% of the total click count. These URLs
comprise an entity cluster, and we assign as the canonical entity
the URL with the highest total click count of the set.
2.3 Entity Recommendation
Entities are represented by their canonical URL from Section 2.2.
Entity-entity matching algorithms recommend related entities by
processing entity information, location information, and clickthrough or session data, to generate an affinity matrix,
is the number of entities, and the entry
determines the relatedness between entities and
Click graph: Search engine result-page clickthrough data from
one year of Bing search logs are incorporated by using the canonical URLs as starting points and performing a two-step graph walk
(URL to queries then back out to URLs) to obtain related URLs.
Search sessions: The frequency of URL co-occurrence in search
sessions from one-week of browsing logs, comprising search engine queries and post-query navigation (as described in ), is
used to compute the degree of relatedness between entities.
We also study a number of extensions to each of these methods:
Merged: We combine the two matrices using a convex weight.
Max-flow: We run a max-flow algorithm on the merged affinity
matrix to generate a new affinity matrix
corresponds to the maximum amount of flow that can be pushed from
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’11, July 24–28, 2011, Beijing, China.
ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.
entity to entity . For efficiency, this is restricted to a twohop max-flow where flow can travel up to two edges.
Hitting time: We run a hitting time algorithm on the merged affinity matrix to create a new matrix
is proportional
to the expected time before a random walk from reaches .
3. JUDGING ENTITIES
Evaluating our entity resolution and recommendations requires
ground truth data, preferably from human raters, who may be able
to determine inter-entity relationships. To this end, we recruited
judges from Amazon Mechanical Turk (turkers).
3.1 Selection
We generated sets of URL-URL pairs via a graph walk over : for
every canonical URL, we pull a few URLs from that cluster, a few
URLs which are one hop away, two hops away, etc. to form the
other half of the URL-URL pair. This ensures that we have pairs
covering a spectrum from unrelated to exact matches to be judged.
3.2 Methodology
Judges considered the following scenario: You are planning an
outing in the city and you are searching for ideas for what to do.
There are a few locations you have heard about or are already
looking to visit, and you would like to find more attractions / restaurants / shopping / etc. to round out your day. We presented
people with URL-URL pairs for each of the suggested URLs in
each cluster, and asked them to rate the relatedness between the
entity associated with the recommended entity and the reference
entity on a four-point scale: 1=URLs are unrelated, 2=URLs are
related, 3=URLs are obviously related, and 4=URLs are the same
entity. Distance data estimating the physical distance between the
recommended entity and the reference entity were also provided.
Three of the authors judged a set of 20 entities and cluster URLs
to establish a gold standard data set that was used in selecting
turkers. For example, for Seattle Art Museum (seattleartmuseum.org), visiting the Seattle Aquarium (seattleaquarium.org) may
be a good related activity and received an average rating of three,
whereas a visit to a local garden and stone company (lakeviewstone.com) received an average rating of one. The Fleiss’s kappa
( ) between authors was 0.74, signifying substantial agreement
and suggesting that the task was reasonable for remote judges.
We scaled out the study to turkers. To control for the quality of
the ratings, we did two things. First, we assigned a qualification
test drawn from our gold standard truth data, in which each of the
volunteers had to attain over 50% correct to attempt any of our
human intelligence tasks (HITs). Next, each HIT contained three
questions, one drawn from our gold standard set and two novel
questions. Each time a HIT was submitted we verified that the
turker answer matched our ground truth. We used this to update
the qualification score, taking a running average with a weight of
0.05. This continual assessment strategy was employed to ensure
that turkers did not work hard to pass the initial qualification and
then not devote similar effort to the post-qualification tasks,
whose ratings were important for our study. Turkers with qualification below 50% had their ratings excluded from our test data.
3.3 Judgments
In total, we obtained 3,426 URL-URL rating pairs. These raw
numbers include both duplicates and those which raters did not
agree on. Fleiss’s
was 0.43, signifying moderate agreement
between our raters. Each URL-URL pair rated by three separate
turkers, and the rating was used only if all three turkers agreed.
We had just over 800 questions where all three raters agreed. We
use those questions for the evaluation of the performance of our
entity resolution and entity-entity recommendations.
4. FINDINGS
4.1 Entity Resolution
Many different URLs can refer to the same local entity (e.g., for
the local entity bethscafe.com, we may also return the yelp.com
and citysearch.com pages for the same café). Recommending
duplicates may create a poor user experience, and we did not want
to reward an algorithm for finding duplicate entities. We use the
method for resolving entities described in Section 2.2, and evaluate it using our human labeled data. Two URLs are regarded as
the same entity iff the human rating is four. The
score, the
harmonic mean of precision and recall, was 0.63, suggesting that
we can detect duplicate entities with reasonable accuracy.
4.2 Entity Recommendation
To evaluate entity recommendation, two entities are considered
related if turkers assigned a rating of two or three, and unrelated if
the rating was one. Any non-zero entry in
was counted as a
classification. Table 1 shows the
scores for each of the recommendation algorithms described earlier. We used
wanted to weight precision and recall equally.
scores for entity recommendation algorithms.
Merging the click-graph and search-sessions methods led to improved performance over either method alone (0.44 vs. 0.39/0.26).
Enhancements to the merged model using max-flow and hitting
time algorithms led to further improvements. One explanation for
the poor performance of the search sessions is less data (one week
of browsing versus one year of click logs). However, the fact that
it can still obtain an
score that is 72% of the click graph score
with much less data suggests that sessions may be valuable.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We studied methods for identifying related local entities and identifying duplicate entities using search and browsing behavior. Our
methods performed well in both tasks. Entity recommendations
based on a combination of clicks and session data performed particularly well, especially when enhanced with max-flow and hitting time. Future work involves developing new and improved
algorithms with more log data, evaluating models with a larger set
of judgments, and scaling recommendations to multiple locations.