A-Fast-RCNN: Hard Positive Generation via Adversary for Object Detection
Xiaolong Wang
Abhinav Shrivastava
Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
How do we learn an object detector that is invariant to
occlusions and deformations? Our current solution is to use
a data-driven strategy – collect large-scale datasets which
have object instances under different conditions. The hope
is that the ﬁnal classiﬁer can use these examples to learn
invariances. But is it really possible to see all the occlusions in a dataset? We argue that like categories, occlusions and object deformations also follow a long-tail. Some
occlusions and deformations are so rare that they hardly
happen; yet we want to learn a model invariant to such occurrences. In this paper, we propose an alternative solution.
We propose to learn an adversarial network that generates
examples with occlusions and deformations. The goal of
the adversary is to generate examples that are difﬁcult for
the object detector to classify. In our framework both the
original detector and adversary are learned in a joint manner. Our experimental results indicate a 2.3% mAP boost
on VOC07 and a 2.6% mAP boost on VOC2012 object detection challenge compared to the Fast-RCNN pipeline. We
also release the code1 for this paper.
1. Introduction
The goal of object detection is to learn a visual model
for concepts such as cars and use this model to localize
these concepts in an image.
This requires the ability to
robustly model invariances to illuminations, deformations,
occlusions and other intra-class variations. The standard
paradigm to handle these invariances is to collect large-scale
datasets which have object instances under different conditions. For example, the COCO dataset has more than
10K examples of cars under different occlusions and deformations. The hope is that these examples capture all possible variations of a visual concept and the classiﬁer can then
effectively model invariances to them. We believe this has
been one of the prime reasons why ConvNets have been so
successful at the task of object detection: they are able to
use all this data to learn invariances.
However, like object categories, we believe even occlusions and deformations follow a long-tail distribution. That
1 
Real World Occlusions
Occlusions Created by Adversarial Networks
Real World Deformations
Figure 1: We argue that both occlusions and deformations
follow a long-tail distribution. Some occlusions and deformations are rare. In this paper, we propose to use an adversarial network to generate examples with occlusions and
deformations that will be hard for an object detector to classify. Our adversarial network adapts as the object detector
becomes better and better. We show boost in detection accuracy with this adversarial learning strategy empirically.
is, some of the occlusions and deformations are so rare that
there is a low chance that they will occur in large-scale
datasets. For example, consider the occlusions shown in
Figure 1. We notice that some occlusions occur more often than others (e.g., occlusion from other cars in a parking
garage is more frequent than from an air conditioner). Similarly, some deformations in animals are common (e.g., sitting/standing poses) while other deformations are very rare.
invariances
rare/uncommon occlusions and deformations?
collecting even larger datasets is one possible solution, it is
not likely to scale due to the long-tail statistics.
Recently, there has been a lot of work on generating
images (or pixels) . One possible way to learn
 
about these rare occurrences is to generate realistic images
by sampling from the tail distribution.
However, this is
not a feasible solution since image generation would require training examples of these rare occurrences to begin with. Another solution is to generate all possible occlusions and deformations and train object detectors from
them. However, since the space of deformations and occlusions is huge, this is not a scalable solution. It has been
shown that using all examples is often not the optimal solution and selecting hard examples is better. Is there
a way we can generate “hard” positive examples with different occlusions and deformations and without generating
the pixels themselves?
How about training another network: an adversary that
creates hard examples by blocking some feature maps spatially or creates spatial deformations by manipulating feature responses. This adversary will predict what it thinks
will be hard for a detector like Fast-RCNN and in turn
the Fast-RCNN will adapt itself to learn to classify these adversarial examples. The key idea here is to create adversarial examples in convolutional feature space and not generate
the pixels directly since the latter is a much harder problem.
In our experiments, we show substantial improvements in
performance of the adversarial Fast-RCNN (A-Fast-RCNN)
compared to the standard Fast-RCNN pipeline.
2. Related Work
In recent years, signiﬁcant gains have been made in the
ﬁeld of object detection. These recent successes build upon
the powerful deep features learned from the task of ImageNet classiﬁcation . R-CNN and OverFeat object detection systems led this wave with impressive results
on PASCAL VOC ; and in recent years, more computationally efﬁcient versions have emerged that can efﬁciently
train on larger datasets such as COCO .
For example, Fast-RCNN shares the convolutions across different
region proposals to provide speed-up, Faster-RCNN 
and R-FCN incorporate region proposal generation in
the framework leading to a completely end-to-end version.
Building on the sliding-window paradigm of the Overfeat
detector, other computationally-efﬁcient approaches have
emerged such as YOLO , SSD and DenseBox .
Thorough comparisons among these methods are discussed
Recent research has focused on three principal directions
on developing better object detection systems.
direction relies on changing the base architecture of these
networks. The central idea is that using deeper networks
should not only lead to improvements in classiﬁcation 
but also object detection . Some recent work in this
direction include ResNet , Inception-ResNet and
ResNetXt for object detection.
The second area of research has been to use contextual
reasoning, proxy tasks for reasoning and other top-down
mechanisms for improving representations for object detection . For example, use
segmentation as a way to contextually prime object detectors and provide feedback to initial layers.
 uses skipnetwork architecture and uses features from multiple layers of representation in conjunction with contextual reasoning. Other approaches include using a top-down features for
incorporating context and ﬁner details which
leads to improved detections.
The third direction to improve a detection systems is to
better exploit the data itself. It is often argued that the recent
success of object detectors is a product of better visual representation and the availability of large-scale data for learning. Therefore, this third class of approaches try to explore
how to better utilize data for improving the performance.
One example is to incorporate hard example mining in an
effective and efﬁcient setup for training region-based ConvNets . Other examples of ﬁndind hard examples for
training include .
Our work follows this third direction of research where
the focus is on leveraging data in a better manner. However, instead of trying to sift through the data to ﬁnd hard
examples, we try to generate examples which will be hard
for Fast-RCNN to detect/classify. We restrict the space of
new positive generation to adding occlusions and deformations to the current existing examples from the dataset.
Speciﬁcally, we learn adversarial networks which try to predict occlusions and deformations that would lead to misclassiﬁcation by Fast-RCNN. Our work is therefore related
to lot of recent work in adversarial learning . For example, techniques have been
proposed to improve adversarial learning for image generation as well as for training better image generative
model . also highlights that the adversarial learning can improve image classiﬁcation in a semi-supervised
setting. However, the experiments in these works are conducted on data which has less complexity than object detection datasets, where image generation results are significantly inferior. Our work is also related to a recent work
on adversarial training in robotics . However, instead
of using an adversary for better supervision, we use the adversary to generate the hard examples.
3. Adversarial Learning for Object Detection
Our goal is to learn an object detector that is robust to
different conditions such as occlusion, deformation and illumination. We hypothesize that even in large-scale datasets,
it is impossible to cover all potential occlusions and deformations. Instead of relying heavily on the dataset or sifting
through data to ﬁnd hard examples, we take an alternative
approach. We actively generate examples which are hard
for the object detector to recognize. However, instead of
generating the data in the pixel space, we focus on a restricted space for generation: occlusion and deformation.
Classification
Mask Selection
according to Loss
Conv Layers
Figure 2: Our network architecture of ASDN and how it combines with Fast RCNN approach. Our ASDN network takes
as input image patches with features extracted using RoI pooling layer. ASDN network than predicts an occlusion/dropout
mask which is then used to drop the feature values and passed onto classiﬁcation tower of Fast-RCNN.
Mathematically, let us assume the original object detector network is represented as F(X) where X is one of the
object proposals. A detector gives two outputs Fc which
represents class output and Fl represent predicted bounding
box location. Let us assume that the ground-truth class for
X is C with spatial location being L. Our original detector
loss can be written down as,
LF = Lsoftmax(Fc(X), C) + [C /∈bg] Lbbox(Fl(X), L),
where the ﬁrst term is the SoftMax loss and the second
term is the loss based on predicted bounding box location
and ground truth box location (foreground classes only).
Let’s assume the adversarial network is represented as
A(X) which given a feature X computed on image I, generates a new adversarial example. The loss function for the
detector remains the same just that the mini-batch now includes fewer original and some adversarial examples.
However, the adversarial network has to learn to predict
the feature on which the detector would fail. We train this
adversarial network via the following loss function,
LA = −Lsoftmax(Fc(A(X)), C).
Therefore, if the feature generated by the adversarial network is easy for the detector to classify, we get a high loss
for the adversarial network. On the other hand, if after adversarial feature generation it is difﬁcult for the detector, we
get a high loss for the detector and a low loss for the adversarial network.
4. A-Fast-RCNN: Approach Details
We now describe the details of our framework. We ﬁrst
give a brief overview of our base detector Fast-RCNN. This
is followed by describing the space of adversarial generation. In particular, we focus on generating different types
of occlusions and deformations in this paper. Finally, in
Section 5, we describe our experimental setup and show the
results which indicate signiﬁcant improvements over baselines.
4.1. Overview of Fast-RCNN
We build upon the Fast-RCNN framework for object detection . Fast-RCNN is composed of two parts: (i) a convolutional network for feature extraction; (ii) an RoI network with an RoI-pooling layer and a few fully connected
layers that output object classes and bounding boxes.
Given an input image, the convolutional network of the
Fast-RCNN takes the whole image as an input and produces
convolutional feature maps as the output. Since the operations are mainly convolutions and max-pooling, the spatial
dimensions of the output feature map will change according to the input image size. Given the feature map, the RoIpooling layer is used to project the object proposals 
onto the feature space. The RoI-pooling layer crops and
resizes to generate a ﬁxed size feature vector for each object proposal. These feature vectors are then passed through
fully connected layers. The outputs of the fully connected
layers are: (i) probabilities for each object class including
the background class; and (ii) bounding box coordinates.
For training, the SoftMax loss and regression loss are
applied on these two outputs respectively, and the gradients
are back propagated though all the layers to perform endto-end learning.
4.2. Adversarial Networks Design
We consider two types of feature generations by adversarial networks competing against the Fast-RCNN (FRCN)
detector. The ﬁrst type of generation is occlusion. Here,
we propose Adversarial Spatial Dropout Network (ASDN)
(b) Generated Masks
(a) Pre-training via Searching
Figure 3: (a) Model pre-training: Examples of occlusions that are sifted to select the hard occlusions and used as ground-truth
to train the ASDN network (b) Examples of occlusion masks generated by ASDN network. The black regions are occluded
when passed on to FRCN pipeline.
which learns how to occlude a given object such that it becomes hard for FRCN to classify. The second type of generation we consider in this paper is deformation. In this
case, we propose Adversarial Spatial Transformer Network
(ASTN) which learns how to rotate “parts” of the objects
and make them hard to recognize by the detector. By competing against these networks and overcoming the obstacles,
the FRCN learns to handle object occlusions and deformations in a robust manner. Note that both the proposed networks ASDN and ASTN are learned simultaneously in conjunction with the FRCN during training. Joint training prevents the detector from overﬁtting to the obstacles created
by the ﬁxed policies of generation.
Instead of creating occlusions and deformations on the
input images, we ﬁnd that operating on the feature space
is more efﬁcient and effective. Thus, we design our adversarial networks to modify the features to make the object
harder to recognize. Note that these two networks are only
applied during training to improve the detector. We will
ﬁrst introduce the ASDN and ASTN individually and then
combine them together in an uniﬁed framework.
Adversarial Spatial Dropout for Occlusion
We propose an Adversarial Spatial Dropout Network
(ASDN) to create occlusions on the deep features for foreground objects.
Recall that in the standard Fast-RCNN
pipeline, we can obtain the convolutional features for each
foreground object proposal after the RoI-pooling layer. We
use these region-based features as the inputs for our adversarial network. Given the feature of an object, the ASDN
will try to generate a mask indicating which parts of the feature to dropout (assigning zeros) so that the detector cannot
recognize the object.
More speciﬁcally, given an object we extract the feature
X with size d × d × c, where d is the spatial dimension and
c represents the number of channels (e.g., c = 256, d = 6 in
AlexNet). Given this feature, our ASDN will predict a mask
M with d × d values which are either 0 or 1 after thresholding. We visualize some of the masks before thresholding in
Fig. 3(b). We denote Mij as the value for the ith row and jth
column of the mask. Similarly, Xijk represents the value in
channel k at location i, j of the feature. If Mij = 1, we
drop out the values of all the channels in the corresponding
spatial location of the feature map X, i.e., Xijk = 0, ∀k.
Network Architecture.
We use the standard Fast-
RCNN (FRCN) architecture. We initialize the network using pre-training from ImageNet . The adversarial network shares the convolutional layers and RoI-pooling layer
with FRCN and then uses its own separate fully connected
layers. Note that we do not share the parameters in our
ASDN with Fast-RCNN since we are optimizing two networks to do the exact opposite tasks.
Model Pre-training. In our experiment, we ﬁnd it important to pre-train the ASDN for creating occlusions before
using it to improve Fast-RCNN. Motivated by the Faster
RCNN detector , we apply stage-wise training here. We
ﬁrst train our Fast-RCNN detector without ASDN for 10K
iterations. As the detector now has a sense of the objects
in the dataset, we train the ASDN model for creating the
occlusions by ﬁxing all the layers in the detector.
Initializing ASDN Network. To initialize the ASDN
network, given a feature map X with spatial layout d × d,
we apply a sliding window with size d
3 on it. We represent the sliding window process by projecting the window
back to the image as 3(a). For each sliding window, we drop
out the values in all channels whose spatial locations are
covered by the window and generate a new feature vector
for the region proposal. This feature vector is then passed
through classiﬁcation layers to compute the loss. Based on
the loss of all the d
3 windows, we select the one with
the highest loss. This window is then used to create a single
d × d mask (with 1 for the window location and 0 for the
other pixels). We generate these spatial masks for n positive region proposals and obtain n pairs of training examples {(X1, ˜
M 1), ..., (Xn, ˜
M n)} for our adversarial dropout
network. The idea is that the ASDN should learn to generate the masks which can give the detector network high
losses. We apply the binary cross entropy loss in training
the ASDN and it can be formulated as,
ijAij(Xp) + (1 −˜
ij)(1 −Aij(Xp))],
Classification
Localisation
RoI-Pooling
Figure 4: Network architecture for combining ASDN and ASTN network. First occlusion masks are created and then the
channels are rotated to generate hard examples for training.
where Aij(Xp) represents the outputs of the ASDN in
location (i, j) given input feature map Xp. We train the
ASDN with this loss for 10K iterations. We show that the
network starts to recognize which part of the objects are signiﬁcant for classiﬁcation as shown in Fig. 3(b). Also note
that our output masks are different from the Attention Mask
proposed in , where they use the attention mechanism
to facilitate classiﬁcation. In our case, we use the masks to
occlude parts to make the classiﬁcation harder.
Thresholding by Sampling. The output generated by
ASDN network is not a binary mask but rather a continuous heatmap. Instead of using direct thresholding, we use
importance sampling to select the top 1
3 pixels to mask out.
Note that the sampling procedure incorporates stochasticity
and diversity in samples during training. More speciﬁcally,
given a heatmap, we ﬁrst select the top 1
2 pixels with top
probabilities and randomly select 1
3 pixels out of them to
assign the value 1 and the rest of 2
3 pixels are set to 0.
Joint Learning. Given the pre-trained ASDN and Fast-
RCNN model, we jointly optimize these two networks in
each iteration of training. For training the Fast-RCNN detector, we ﬁrst use the ASDN to generate the masks on
the features after the RoI-pooling during forward propagation. We perform sampling to generate binary masks and
use them to drop out the values in the features after the RoIpooling layer. We then forward the modiﬁed features to
calculate the loss and train the detector end-to-end. Note
that although our features are modiﬁed, the labels remain
the same. In this way, we create “harder” and more diverse
examples for training the detector.
For training the ASDN, since we apply the sampling
strategy to convert the heatmap into a binary mask, which
is not differentiable, we cannot directly back-prop the gradients from the classiﬁcation loss. Alternatively, we take
the inspirations from the REINFORCE approach. We
compute which binary masks lead to signiﬁcant drops in
Fast-RCNN classiﬁcation scores. We use only those hard
example masks as ground-truth to train the adversarial network directly using the same loss as described in Eq. 1.
Adversarial Spatial Transformer Network
We now introduce the Adversarial Spatial Transformer Network (ASTN). The key idea is to create deformations on the
object features and make object recognition by the detector
difﬁcult. Our network is built upon the Spatial Transformer
Network (STN) proposed in . In their work, the STN is
proposed to deform the features to make classiﬁcation easier. Our network, on the other hand, is doing the exact opposite task. By competing against our ASTN, we can train
a better detector which is robust to deformations.
STN Overview. The Spatial Transformer Network 
has three components: localisation network, grid generator
and sampler. Given the feature map as input, the localisation network will estimate the variables for deformations
(e.g., rotation degree, translation distance and scaling factor). These variables will be used as inputs for the grid generator and sampler to operate on the feature map. The output is a deformed feature map. Note that we only need to
learn the parameters in the localisation network. One of the
key contribution of STN is making the whole process differentiable, so that the localisation network can be directly
optimized for the classiﬁcation objective via back propagation. Please refer to for more technical details.
Adversarial STN. In our Adversarial Spatial Transformer Network, we focus on feature map rotations. That is,
given a feature map after the RoI-pooling layer as input, our
ASTN will learn to rotate the feature map to make it harder
to recognize. Our localisation network is composed with
3 fully connected layers where the ﬁrst two layers are initialized with fc6 and fc7 layers from ImageNet pre-trained
network as in our Adversarial Spatial Dropout Network.
We train the ASTN and the Fast-RCNN detector jointly.
For training the detector, similar to the process in the
ASDN, the features after RoI-pooling are ﬁrst transformed
by our ASTN and forwarded to the higher layers to compute
the SoftMax loss. For training the ASTN, we optimize it so
that the detector will classify the foreground objects as the
background class. Different from training ASDN, since the
spatial transformation is differentiable, we can directly use
the classiﬁcation loss to back-prop and ﬁnetune the parameters in the localisation network of ASTN.
Implementation Details. In our experiments, we ﬁnd
it very important to limit the rotation degrees produced by
the ASTN. Otherwise it is very easy to rotate the object upside down which is the hardest to recognize in most cases.
We constrain the rotation degree within 10◦clockwise and
anti-clockwise. Instead of rotating all the feature map in the
same direction, we divide the feature maps on the channel
dimension into 4 blocks and estimate 4 different rotation
angles for different blocks. Since each of the channel corresponds to activations of one type of feature, rotating channels separately corresponds to rotating parts of the object in
different directions which leads to deformations. We also
ﬁnd that if we use one rotation angle for all feature maps,
the ASTN will often predict the largest angle. By using 4
different angles instead of one, we increase the complexity of the task which prevents the network from predicting
trivial deformations.
Adversarial Fusion
The two adversarial networks ASDN and ASTN can also be
combined and trained together in the same detection framework. Since these two networks offer different types of information. By competing against these two networks simultaneously, our detector become more robust.
We combine these two networks into the Fast-RCNN
framework in a sequential manner. As shown in Fig. 4, the
feature maps extracted after the RoI-pooling are ﬁrst forwarded to our ASDN which drop out some activations. The
modiﬁed features are further deformed by the ASTN.
5. Experiments
We conduct our experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007,
PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO datasets. As
is standard practice, we perform most of the ablative studies on the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset. We also report our
numbers on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and COCO dataset.
Finally, we perform a comparison between our method and
the Online Hard Example Mining (OHEM) approach.
5.1. Experimental settings
PASCAL VOC. For the VOC datasets, we use the ‘trainval’ set for training and ‘test’ set for testing. We follow
most of the setup in standard Fast-RCNN for training.
We apply SGD for 80K to train our models. The learning
rate starts with 0.001 and decreases to 0.0001 after 60K iterations. We use the selective search proposals during
MS COCO. For the COCO dataset, we use the ‘trainval35k’ set for training and the ‘minival’ set for testing.
During training the Fast-RCNN , we apply SGD with
320K iterations. The learning rate starts with 0.001 and decreases to 0.0001 after 280K iterations. For object proposals, we use the DeepMask proposals .
In all the experiments, our minibatch size for training
is 256 proposals with 2 images. We follow the Torch implementation of Fast-RCNN. With these settings, our
baseline numbers for are slightly better than the reported
number in . To prevent the Fast-RCNN from overﬁtting
to the modiﬁed data, we provide one image in the batch
without any adversarial occlusions/deformations and apply
our approach on another image in the batch.
5.2. PASCAL VOC 2007 Results
We report our results for using ASTN and ASDN during training Fast-RCNN in Table 1. For the AlexNet architecture , our implemented baseline is 57.0% mAP.
Based on this setting, joint learning with our ASTN model
reaches 58.1% and joint learning with the ASDN model
gives higher performance of 58.5%. As both methods are
complementary to each other, combining ASDN and ASTN
into our full model gives another boost to 58.9% mAP.
For the VGG16 architecture , we conduct the same
set of experiments.
Firstly, our baseline model reaches
69.1% mAP, much higher than the reported number 66.9%
in . Based on this implementation, joint learning with
our ASTN model gives an improvement to 69.9% mAP and
the ASDN model reaches 71.0% mAP. Our full model with
both ASTN and ASDN improves the performance to 71.4%.
Our ﬁnal result gives 2.3% boost upon the baseline.
To show that our method also works with very deep
CNNs, we apply the ResNet-101 architecture in training Fast-RCNN. As the last two lines in Table.1 illustrate,
the performance of Fast-RCNN with ResNet-101 is 71.8%
mAP. By applying the adversarial training, the result is
73.6% mAP. We can see that our approach consistently improves performances on different types of architectures.
Ablative Analysis
ASDN Analysis.
We compare our Advesarial Spatial
Dropout Network with various dropout/occlusion strategy
in training using the AlexNet architecture. The ﬁrst simple baseline we try is random spatial dropout on the feature
after RoI-Pooling. For a fair comparison, we mask the activations of the same number of neurons as we do in the
ASDN network. As Table 2 shows, the performance of random dropout is 57.3% mAP which is slightly better than
the baseline. Another dropout strategy we compare to is a
Table 1: VOC 2007 test detection average precision (%). FRCN⋆refers to FRCN with our training schedule.
mAP aero bike
boat bottle
horse mbike persn plant sheep
AlexNet 55.4
67.2 71.8 51.2 38.7
65.8 67.7 71.0
AlexNet 57.0
67.3 72.1 54.0 38.3
65.7 70.7 66.9
Ours (ASTN)
AlexNet 58.1
68.7 73.4 53.9 36.9
69.4 71.8 68.7
Ours (ASDN)
AlexNet 58.5
67.1 72.0 53.4 36.4
68.5 71.8 70.0
Ours (full)
AlexNet 58.9
67.6 74.8 53.8 38.2
69.1 72.4 68.8
74.5 78.3 69.2 53.2
77.3 78.2 82.0
75.4 80.8 67.3 59.9
81.9 80.0 84.5
Ours (ASTN)
73.7 81.5 66.0 53.1
82.2 79.3 82.7
Ours (ASDN)
74.4 81.3 67.6 57.0
81.0 79.3 86.0
Ours (full)
75.7 83.6 68.4 58.0
81.9 80.4 86.3
78.7 82.2 71.8 55.1
79.5 80.8 88.5
Ours (full)
75.4 83.8 75.1 61.3
81.9 81.1 87.9
Table 2: VOC 2007 test detection average precision (%). Ablative analysis on the Adversarial Spatial Dropout Network.FRCN⋆refers to
FRCN with our training schedule.
mAP aero bike
boat bottle
horse mbike persn plant sheep
AlexNet 57.0
67.3 72.1 54.0 38.3
65.7 70.7 66.9
60.6 64.0 61.5
Ours (random dropout)
AlexNet 57.3
68.6 72.6 52.0 34.7
64.1 71.3 67.1
58.8 68.6 60.9
Ours (hard dropout)
AlexNet 57.7
66.3 72.1 52.8 32.8
66.8 71.7 69.4
59.1 68.5 62.0
Ours (ﬁxed ASDN)
AlexNet 57.5
66.3 72.7 50.4 36.6
66.4 71.1 68.8
57.2 68.6 60.1
Ours (joint learning)
AlexNet 58.5
67.1 72.0 53.4 36.4
68.5 71.8 70.0
58.2 70.5 60.5
similar strategy we apply in pre-training the ASDN (Fig. 3).
We exhaustively enumerate different kinds of occlusion and
select the best ones for training in each iteration. The performance is 57.7% mAP (Ours (hard dropout)), which is
slightly better than random dropout.
As we ﬁnd the exhaustive strategy can only explore very
limited space of occlusion policies, we use the pre-trained
ASDN network to replace it. However, when we ﬁx the parameters of the ASDN, we ﬁnd the performance is 57.5%
mAP (Ours (ﬁxed ASDN) ) , which is not as good as the
exhaustive strategy. The reason is the ﬁxed ASDN has not
received any feedback from the updating Fast-RCNN while
the exhaustive search has. If we jointly learn the ASDN
and the Fast-RCNN together, we can get 58.5% mAP, 1.5%
improvement compared to the baseline without dropout.
This evidence shows that joint learning of ASDN and Fast-
RCNN is where it makes a difference.
ASTN Analysis. We compared our Adversarial Spatial
Transformer Network with random jittering on the object
proposals. The augmentations include random changes of
scale, aspect ratio and rotation on the proposals during training the Fast-RCNN. With AlexNet, the performance of using random jittering is 57.3% mAP while our ASTN results
is 58.1%. With VGG16, we have 68.6% for random jittering and 69.9% for the ASTN. For both architectures, the
model with ASTN works better than random jittering.
Category-based Analysis
Figure 5 shows the graph of how performance of each category changes with the occlusions and deformations. In-
(a) Ours (ASTN)
(b) Ours (ASDN)
(c) Ours (Full)
Figure 5: Changes of APs compared to baseline FRCN.
terestingly the categories that seemed to be helped by both
ASTN and ASDN seem to be quire similar. It seems that
both plant and bottle performance improves with adversarial training. However, combining the two transformations together seems to improve performance on some categories which were hurt by using occlusion or deformations
alone. Speciﬁcally, categories like car and aeroplane
are helped by combining the two adversarial processes.
Table 3: VOC 2012 test detection average precision (%). FRCN⋆refers to FRCN with our training schedule.
mAP aero bike
boat bottle
horse mbike persn plant sheep
80.3 74.7 66.9 46.9
73.9 68.6 87.7
81.8 74.4 66.5 47.8
75.9 69.1 87.4
Ours (full)
82.2 75.6 69.2 52.0
76.3 71.2 88.5
bicycle (oth): ov=0.00 1−r=0.30
bird (sim): ov=0.00 1−r=0.54
boat (bg): ov=0.00 1−r=0.65
sheep (sim): ov=0.00 1−r=0.46
Figure 6: Some of the false positives for our approach.
These are top false positives for adversarial training but not
the original Fast-RCNN.
Qualitative Results
Figure 6 shows some of the false positives of our approach
with the diagnosing code . These examples are handpicked such that they only appeared in the list of false
positives for adversarial learning but not the original Fast-
RCNN. These results indicate some of the shortcomings of
adversarial learning. In some cases, the adversary creates
deformations or occlusions which are similar to other object
categories and leading to over-generalization. For example,
our approach hides the wheels of the bicycle which leads to
a wheel chair being classiﬁed as a bike.
5.3. Results on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO
We show our results with VGG16 on the PASCAL VOC
2012 dataset in Table 3, where our baseline performance
is 66.4% .Our full approach with joint learning of ASDN
and ASTN gives 2.6% boost to 69.0% mAP. This again
shows that the performance improvement using VGG on
VOC2012 is signiﬁcant. We also observe that our method
improves performance of all the categories except sofa in
VOC 2012. We believe this is probably because of larger
diversity in VOC 2012.
We ﬁnally report the results in MS COCO dataset. The
baseline method with VGG16 architecture is 42.7% AP50
on the VOC metric and 25.7% AP on the standard COCO
metric. By applying our method, we achieve 46.2% AP50
and 27.1% AP on the VOC and COCO metric respectively.
5.4. Comparisons with OHEM
Our method is also related to the Online Hard Example Mining (OHEM) approach . Our method allows us
to sample data-points which might not exist in the dataset,
whereas OHEM is bound by the dataset. However, OHEM
has more realistic features since they are extracted from real
images. For comparisons, our approach (71.4%) is better
than OHEM (69.9%) in VOC2007. However, our result
(69.0%) is not as good as OHEM (69.8%) in VOC2012.
Since these two approaches are generating or selecting different types of features in training, we believe they should
be complementary. To demonstrate this, we use an ensemble of these two approaches and compare it with separate
ensembles of OHEM and Ours alone on VOC 2012. As a
result, the ensemble of two methods achieves 71.7% mAP,
while the ensemble of two OHEM models (71.2%) or two
of our models (70.2%) are not as good, indicating the complementary nature of two approaches.
6. Conclusion
One of the long-term goals of object detection is to learn
object models that are invariant to occlusions and deformations. Current approaches focus on learning these invariances by using large-scale datasets. In this paper, we argue that like categories, occlusions and deformations also
follow a long-tail distribution: some of them are so rare
that they might be hard to sample even in a large-scale
dataset. We propose to learn these invariances using adversarial learning strategy. The key idea is to learn an adversary
in conjunction with original object detector. This adversary
creates examples on the ﬂy with different occlusions and deformations, such that these occlusions/deformations make
it difﬁcult for original object detector to classify. Instead of
generating examples in pixel space, our adversarial network
modiﬁes the features to mimic occlusion and deformations.
We show in our experiments that such an adversarial learning strategy provides signiﬁcant boost in detection performance on VOC and COCO dataset.
Acknowledgement:This work is supported by the Intelligence Advanced
Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/ Interior
Business Center (DoI/IBC) contract number D16PC00007. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial
policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DoI/IBC,
or the U.S. Government. AG was also supported by Sloan Fellowship.