Open Access
Beef quality parameters estimation using
ultrasound and color images
Jose Luis Nunes1†, Martín Piquerez1†, Leonardo Pujadas1†, Eileen Armstrong2, Alicia Fernández1,
Federico Lecumberry1*
From The 9th IAPR conference on Pattern Recognition in Bioinformatics
Stockholm, Sweden. 21-23 August 2014
Background: Beef quality measurement is a complex task with high economic impact. There is high interest in
obtaining an automatic quality parameters estimation in live cattle or post mortem. In this paper we set out to
obtain beef quality estimates from the analysis of ultrasound (in vivo) and color images (post mortem), with the
measurement of various parameters related to tenderness and amount of meat: rib eye area, percentage of
intramuscular fat and backfat thickness or subcutaneous fat.
Proposal: An algorithm based on curve evolution is implemented to calculate the rib eye area. The backfat
thickness is estimated from the profile of distances between two curves that limit the steak and the rib eye,
previously detected. A model base in Support Vector Regression (SVR) is trained to estimate the intramuscular fat
percentage. A series of features extracted on a region of interest, previously detected in both ultrasound and color
images, were proposed. In all cases, a complete evaluation was performed with different databases including: color
and ultrasound images acquired by a beef industry expert, intramuscular fat estimation obtained by an expert
using a commercial software, and chemical analysis.
Conclusions: The proposed algorithms show good results to calculate the rib eye area and the backfat thickness
measure and profile. They are also promising in predicting the percentage of intramuscular fat.
Background
In meat industry it is critical to have objective indicators
that measure beef quantity and quality. It is also desirable
that these indicators are non-destructive and fast to compute. Uruguay produces about 550,000 tons of beef a year,
30% for domestic consumption and the rest for export.
One reason for the high production levels and acceptance
in the world is the implementation of a good traceability
and information systems. In this context, it is very important to have efficient methods to estimate parameters
related with meat quality and amount of beef: rib eye area,
percentage of intramuscular fat (IMF%) in the rib eye and
subcutaneous backfat and rumb fat thickness. Obtaining
predictors from ultrasound or color images (Figure 1) fulfill all these goals.
The rib eye area (Figure 2) is an important parameter
since it allows to estimate the degree of carcass yield, as it
is linked to the amount of meat or muscle with high
impact in its price . Also, having a well distributed, and
in a narrow ratio, fat coverage is considered a desirable
attribute. Traditionally, these indicators are obtained
through manual procedures performed by experts at the
meat processing plants . For example, an usual way to
measure subcutaneous fat thickness (Figure 3) is performed manually, using a ruler.
Such procedures are done in inhospitable environments and consist of repetitive tasks that are tedious for
the expert, with high error rates linked to fatigue and
inspector’s mood. In , methods for automatic segmentation of the rib eye in color images are proposed.
These methods separate meat from “non-meat” :S6
 
© 2015 Nunes et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://
creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
bones). However, this method treats equally all the meat
in the image, since the rib eye is not always surrounded
by “non-meat” and includes other adjacent muscles in
detection. Some works , avoid this problem removing
other regions of the steak leaving only the rib eye beef;
clearly this method is not suited for evaluating carcass at
the slaughterhouse. In this work we propose a method
based on curve evolution both for rib eye area and subcutaneous fat thickness measurements.
The intramuscular fat percentage (IMF%) is the proportion of intramuscular fat in the rib eye (Figure 4).
IMF% is highly correlated with organoleptic characteristics such as juiciness and flavour , and above all it is
a determining factor in perception of tenderness, this
being the indicator with the highest impact on meat
quality. It is for this reason that its estimation is essential in order to contribute to the carcass categorization.
This quality indicator is usually performed in slaughtered animals, however, the indicator would also be of
value if it could be measured in living animals for purposes of selective feeding, breeding and rearing . For
that reason it is becoming important to develop automatic measurements and analysis algorithms both on
color images (post mortem) and ultrasound images
(ante morten) in livestock.
There are several previous work in this kind of applications, such as addressing the estimation of the
IMF% in ultrasound images for livestock. In the rib
area was used as a determinant factor in the estimation
of beef quality.
The production method used in Latin America usually
includes a high component of extensive farming
(although feedlot is used too) impacting in the amount
of IMF%, while in other regions the feedlot production
is preferred . Therefore, IMF% in animals analysed in previous works such as might be
Figure 1 Sample RGB image. Sample image acquired at the
slaughterhouse using a special hardware controlling distance and
Figure 2 Sample RGB image. Backfat region selected.
Figure 4 Sample RGB image. Intramuscular fat.
Figure 3 Sample RGB image. Backfat region selected.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
different from the animals analysed in the present work
and predictors should be adjusted in this case.
In this work we present new methods to automatically
measure three beef quality parameters, IMF% in ultrasound images, rib eye area and backfat thickness in
color images in slaughtered steers.
Automatic measurement methods
This section describes the proposed methods for ribeye
detection and area estimation, then we present the
method for subcutaneous fat detection which allows to
estimate the thickness and to extract the fat profile.
Finally the proposed strategy for IMF% is presented.
Rib eye detection and area estimation
The rib eye area estimation is used as a quality indicator
and is also used for carcass categorizing the animal.
Database images show a cross-sectional area of the longissimus dorsi muscle (dorsal length) at the level of the
12th intercostal space. The objective is to estimate the
area of the muscle, commonly measured manually by an
expert .
This works proposes a curve evolution algorithm, more
precisely an adaptation of the algorithm Distance Regularized Level Set Evolution (DRLSE) . This method is
a recent improvement of the level set techniques .
The DRLSE method adds an intrinsic capability to the
level set framework for maintaining regularity of the level
set function, particularly maintaining the property of
signed distance function around the zero level set. This
method is used in an edge-based active contour segmentation that modifies the geodesic active contour proposed
by Caselles . Therefore, edge information computed
from the image is used to create the energy functional
that govern the level set evolution.
In our framework, this information is provided using
two different energy terms computing information from
the image’s edges, one uses “high contrasted” edge information and the other uses “emphasized” edge information. “High contrasted” edges are computed using the
Caselles equation (1) on the binary image result of the
“non-meat” detection. “Emphasized” edges are computed
using Caselles equation but now in the u color channel,
after an anisotropic diffusion on the image.
1 + |∇Gσ ∗I|2
where Gs is the Gaussian kernel with the standard
deviation s.
Preprocessing
A preprocessing stage which includes background elimination and detection of the “meat” and “non-meat” regions is
done before the curve evolution stage. The background
elimination is performed starting with an Otsu’s
binarization on the red channel of color (Figure 5
shows the red channel). This procedure assumes there are
two classes of pixels’ intensities and looks for the optimal
threshold that minimizes the intra-class variance. Regions
in the steak (meat, bones and fat) contains enough information in the red channel to separate it from the background, which is majority black (Figure 6). Small gaps in
the background are filled and the background is removed
as shown in Figure 7 and 8.
For the detection of the “meat” and “non-meat” regions
the information on the u (uniformity) (Figure 9) and L
(luminance) channels in the Luv color space, and the G
(green) channels inthe RGB color space are binarized, unsing Otsu’s method, and their results combined. These
color channels exhibit a good discrimination between
Figure 5 Background elimination. Red channel from de RGB
Figure 6 Background elimination. Histogram from the red
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
“meat” and “non-meat” regions. Figures 10 and 11 show
the result of this step.
Curve evolution
Curve evolution is performed in three stages, starting
from an initial curve determination. Image erosion is
applied on the image result of the meat segmentation
and with the consequent elimination of small regions of
meat. This results in an internal region into the muscle
of interest, Figure 12. Since the rib eye is the biggest
meat region present in the steak, the erosion is performed iteratively until only one connected component
is present in the image that should belong to the interior of the rib eye. The edges of this region defines the
initial curve, that in the first stage of the curve evolution
algorithm is evolved by considering only the role of the
“high-contrasted” edges (Figure 13, 14, 15). This evolution seeks to achieve an initial approach to the contour
of the rib eye. This evolution is fast, looking for
Figure 7 Background elimination. Final step.
Figure 8 Background elimination. Result of the background
elimination.
Figure 9 “Meat” and “non meat” detection. U channel from de
Luv space.
Figure 10 “Meat” and “non meat” detection. Meat regions.
Figure 11 “Meat” and “non meat” detection. Non-meat regions.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
reducing the segmentation time, specially in cases in
which the initial contour is far from the rib eye contour.
In the second stage, the algorithm continues from the
previous evolution adding the “emphasized” edges
energy term. This evolution is slower and stops when
the growth area between successive evolutions does not
exceed certain learned threshold.
In general, the adjustment of the curve to the rib eye
edges achieved in these two steps is quite accurate.
However, a third stage of evolution adjustment is
applied, performing ten more iterations in order to
achieve finer adjustment.
Backfat measurement
Measurement of the backfat thickness in color images is
made on the cross section at the level of twelfth intercostal space, perpendicular to the outer edge of the fat
and up to a quarter of the end of the muscle longissimus
dorsi respect to the backbone. Fat provides desirable
attributes, a well distributed coverage associated with a
creamy-white color, are considered ideal; however excessive amounts of fat must be removed (industrial process
called “conditioning”), which significantly decreases
meat yield.
Nowadays most of the measures are performed manually by an expert using a ruler. Backfat measures are
taken in two points, corresponding to the projection of
1/2 and 3/4 lenghts of the axis of the rib eye’s first
moment (See Figure 16) .
The proposed method automatically determines the
axis of the rib eye’s first moment and measures the thickness in the corresponding points. Moreover, the method
computes a full profile of thickness for all the backfat,
allowing to measure the thickness along it. The algorithm
is based in a curve evolution from an initial curve to a
Figure 12 Curve evolution steps. Initial curve.
Figure 13 Curve evolution steps. Steps curve evolution.
Figure 14 Curve evolution steps. High contrasted edges.
Figure 15 Curve evolution steps. Emphasized edges.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
target curve, assigning a thickness proportional to the
iterations needed in each point to reach the target curve.
It needs two closed curves whose intersection is empty
and the backfat is between. These curves will be the
input of the curve evolution algorithm. To provide good
detection, the initial curve should match the inner
boundary of the backfat and a section of the target
curve must match the outer limit of the backfat.
Backfat is characterized by not containing meat and to
be part of the edge of the steak. Therefore, the initial
curve is the convex hull of the beef meat. The target
curve will be the edge of the union of the region defined
after the background elimination and the region defined
by the initial curve (see Figure 17). On the contact
points a dilatation is performed over the target curve to
avoid contact between both curves.
As said before, backfat should be measured in two
points given by the perpendicular projection of half and
3/4 lengths of rib eyes’s main axis. This point are
geometrically located from the rib eye segmentation,
computing its main axis.
Curve evolution
The evolution is based on the normal evolution of the
interior curve (the initial curve) and considers the other
curve as target. The evolution includes some mechanisms for creating and combining points to ensure a correct sampling at all steps . The thickness is
measured as the length of the path in the evolution.
This algorithm finds an intuitive correspondence
between points of the different curves and leads to an
appropriate thickness definition. Since in this case there
is no need of lot of points, the initial curves are
resampled every 50 points. This has a big impact on the
execution time generating a fast evolution. Figure 18
shows the evolution in an intermediate step.
Finally the region of interest between the measures
1/2 and 3/4 is taken as shown in Figure 19.
Figure 16 Backfat segmentation. Backfat marks 1/2 and 3/4.
Figure 17 Backfat segmentation. Initial and target curves.
Figure 18 Backfat segmentation. Backfat curves evolution.
Figure 19 Backfat segmentation. Backfat result of segmentation.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
Intramuscular fat percentage estimation
Intramuscular fat percentage (IMF%) is the proportion of
fat between the muscle fibers of the rib eye. This quality
measure can be performed in color images in slaughtered
animals, and in ultrasound images in live animals. It has
been shown that intramuscular fat percentage is highly
correlated with tenderness , which is highlighted
for consumers as one of the most determinant factors in
beef quality. Therefore an automatic system for its measurement results fundamental.
In this work we propose its measure through two
types of images, color images and ultrasound images.
The algorithm proposed includes three stages: region
of interest detection, features extraction and selection
and modelling for the estimation.
Region of interest detection
Only the muscle between the 12th and 13th rib under the
subcutaneous backfat is taken to determine the IMF% value.
Therefore, the region of interest (ROI) is defined given these
structural components present in the ultrasound images,
see Figure 20. The ultrasound image acquisition guarantees
that all these three components are present.
For the subcutaneous fat location a thresholding using
Otsu’s method is applied for binarizing the image (see
Figure 21) and a labelling algorithm was run on the
image in order to determine the different regions. Thus,
the subcutaneous backfat region is defined as the
labelled region with a shape like the subcutaneous fat,
i.e., a thin, long horizontal region in the upper third
part of the image. Therefore, the labeled object with the
highest ratio between the horizontal and vertical length
was set as the subcutaneous fat.
For defining the location of the ribs, first, an anisotropic
diffusion is applied to the image in order to smooth it
without losing the edge information and restricting small
variations of intensity in a same region. Then, a correlation
between the image and a synthetic template emulating a
generic rib (see Figure 22) was performed. The two local
maxima in magnitude found in the correlation result
represent the location of the ribs.
Finally, the ROI is defined as a 80 × 80 pixels square
set on the center zone delimited by the subcutaneous
fat and the ribs. Figure 23 shows an example of the output from the ROI detection procedure.
Features extraction and selection
A set of forty two features were extracted from each
ROI. These features are based on several statistics and
transformation on the ROI, for example, texture
descriptors, local binary pattern, co-occurrence matrix,
histograms, Fourier Transform, etc. Table 1 summarizes
the computed features.
As a result of the feature acquisition stage we obtain a
42-dimension feature space. To reduce the space dimension in order to improve computational performance a
feature selection stage based on Principal Components
Analysis (PCA) was done, finding that 99% of the variance is accumulated in the first ten components. As a
result of the PCA a new space of ten new features, linear combinations of the original ones, was used to do
the IMF% estimation model.
Figure 20 IMF% estimation on ultrasound images. Sample US image.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
Modeling for the estimation
Support Vector Regression (SVR) is a variant of the
classic Support Vector Machine algorithm. The basic
idea of SVR consist in mapping the training data, x ∈X,
into a larger dimensional space F via a nonlinear mapping F: X →F, where a linear regression can be performed. For more details on SVR see .
In this work, a radial basis function (g(u, v) = e−γ |u−v|2))
was used as kernel. Parameters g and tolerance of termination criterion were optimized based on the data
train set.
The same strategy was applied for the post mortem
color images, using the rib eye area as the ROI. Similar
performance was obtained using specific descriptors for
color data (intensity mean in different color channels,
Fourier coefficients, number of pixels in each channel).
Experiments and results
We worked with a database of 153 steers acquired at the
slaughter using a special hardware controlling distance
and lighting. Only for 71 of them having ultrasound
images. Ultrasound images were collected at a cattle
ranch in Uruguay.
A measure of the rib eye area performed by an expert
for all the database was used for the validation process,
as well as a measure of backfat 1/2 and 3/4 for 51
IMF% was measured by chemical gas chromatography
analysis and used as ground truth to validate the
regression results. The lipid extraction protocols used are
described in ; its margin of error in the measurement
is less than 0.3%. An estimation of the IMF% from ultrasound images was performed by an expert from the meat
industry using a commercial software. 283 ultrasound
images were acquired, four images were taken per animal. The ultrasound hardware used was the Aquila Pro
Vet, an industry standard equipment.
Rib eye area
The database was divided into two sets randomly drawn,
one to train the algorithm and the parameters optimization (103 images, 2/3 of the dataset) and the other to
test it (50 images, 1/3 of the dataset).
Two performance indicators were used,
• Relative area error:
∈1 = |Aauto −Amanual|
• Concordance:
∈2 = 1 −Ainter
where Aunion = Rauto ∪Rmanual y Ainter = Rauto ∩Rmanual. With Rauto rib eye area automatically detected by the
implement algorithm and Rmanual rib eye area measured
by an expert manually.
The results obtained for images rib eye segmentation
are showed in Tables 2 and 3,
Figure 21 IMF% estimation on ultrasound images. Otsu’s processed image.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
For the Backfat measure an estimation of the 1/2 and 3/4
is automatic done using a database of 51 steer and then
contrasted with the expert measure. Table 4 compares the
result of the algorithm developed and the expert measure.
The results were RMSE = 8.7 and 7.6 (in pixels)
respectively for 1/2 and 3/4 and R2 = 0.87 and 0.88,
where RMSE is the root mean square and R2 is the
Pearson coefficient of correlation. Figure 24 shows the
51 animals in a scatter plot of the Backfat measure vs.
the expert measure.
Intramuscular fat percentage
The database of ultrasoud images was divided into two
sets randomly drawn, one to train the algorithm and
compute the linear regression coefficients (184 images,
2/3 of the dataset) and the other to test it (92 images, 1/
3 of the dataset).
This procedure was repeated 100 times, varying the
test and training set. The results were: RMSE = 1.31 and
R2 = 0.37. Figure 25 shows the 71 animals in a scatter
plot of the IMF% estimation vs. the ground truth. To
contrast, the estimation of the IMF% made by the
expert, which has an RMSE of 1.58 and a correlation
coefficient of 0.23. Table 5 compares the result of the
algorithm developed and the expert estimation.
Conclusions and future work
New automatic methods to measure different beef quality parameters from the analysis of ultrasound (in vivo)
and color images (post mortem) are presented. The
parameters estimated are related to meat quality, meat
yield and consumer’s health: eye area steak, percentage
of intramuscular fat and backfat thickness or subcutaneous fat.
First of all, we propose to measure the rib eye area,
using an algorithm based on curve evolution. The
results are satisfactory in over 77% of the processed
images (seven different data sets with different acquisition conditions). The method is very robust and general,
making it suitable for the segmentation of other muscle
regions. In controlled conditions results are even better
(more than 89%). Second, we propose to measure backfat thickness from the profile of distances between a
curve that limits the steak and one that limits the rib
eye previously detected. The automatic distance measurement achieves a very precise estimate using a novel
evolution strategy. Beside this results, the algorithm
gives the backfat thickness profiles, which provides
information on the uniformity of the subcutaneous fat
which is an important carcass quality information.
Last, we propose a procedure for estimating the intramuscular fat percentage based in Support Vector
Regression in a region of interest automatically determined for ultrasound images (rectangle) and for the
color images (rib eye). The performance of the automatic selection of the ROI for ultrasound was highly
satisfactory, more than 96% of the database were well
detected, in the remaining 4% where the ROI was
Figure 22 IMF% estimation on ultrasound images. Rib template.
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
wrongly detected, the software gives an alert and allows
for a manual definition. The prediction of intramuscular
fat showed a better adjustment only in the middle range
of fat percentages (3%-5%). However this error in our
approach is lower than the error in the expert’s estimation. The overall performance is promising, clearly a
deeper analysis of the features considered is needed. In
the color images the main difference is in ROI determination and the set of features used, but we obtain similar performance results.
In future work we propose to analyse new strategies in
the feature extraction and selection stages, both for
ultrasound and color images, for intramuscular fat percentage estimation. We also want to explore the impact
of different parameters in the estimation, such as the
ROI’s area and location.
Figure 23 IMF% estimation on ultrasound images. Output image.
Table 1 Features extracted from the US images
- std deviation s*
Co-occurrence matrix
- correlation*
- homogeneity*
- contrast*
Gray Level
- contrast ratio
- percentile (each 20%)
- skewness
Fourier transform
- variance coefficient
- power percentile (× 5)
Local Binary Pattern (LBP)
- correlation
- homogeneity
- contrast
Features marked with * were computed in four directions given by angles
(45°,90°,135°,180°)
Table 2 Results for the rib eye area estimation for
images with errors less than 10%
Table 3 Results for the rib eye area estimation for
images with errors less than 15%
Table 4 Results for the backfat thickness estimation
Nunes et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16(Suppl 4):S6
 
 
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
J.L.N., M.P. and L.P. carried out the implementation of the algorithms,
performed the experiments, developed the analytical tools and wrote the
first version of the manuscript. J.L.N. also participated in all the stages of the
preparation and edition of the manuscript. E.A. created the database and
participated in the review of the manuscript. A.F. and F.L. proposed
algorithm, designed experiments, analysed data and wrote the paper. All
authors discussed the results on the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by ANII grant FMV 2_2011_1_7376 and
Project ANII PR_FSA_2009_1_1383. The authors would like to thanks, Gessy
Druillet, Marcela Eugster for their contribution on the database acquisition
and analysis, Alvaro Gómez, Giovanni Gnemmi, Gregory Randall for their
expertise support and Matías Tailanián for poviding the code of the curve
evolution algorithm used in the backfat measurement.
Declarations
Publication costs for this article were funded by the Department of Signal
Processing, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad de la República, Montevideo,
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 16
Supplement 4, 2015: Selected articles from the 9th IAPR conference on
Pattern Recognition in Bioinformatics. The full contents of the supplement
are available online at 
supplements/16/S4.
Authors’ details
1Departamento de Procesamiento de Señales, Instituto de Ingeniería
Eléctrica, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad de la República, Montevideo,
Uruguay. 2Departamento de Genética y Mejora Animal, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Published: 23 February 2015