Challenges of Developing Robust AI
for Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate
Monitoring
M. E. O’Sullivan 1*, E. C. Considine 1, M. O’Riordan 1,2, W. P. Marnane 1,3, J. M. Rennie 4 and
G. B. Boylan 1,5
1INFANT Research Centre, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 2Department Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University College
Cork, Cork, Ireland, 3School of Engineering, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 4Institute for Women’s Health, University
College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
Background: CTG remains the only non-invasive tool available to the maternity team for
continuous monitoring of fetal well-being during labour. Despite widespread use and
investment in staff training, difﬁculty with CTG interpretation continues to be identiﬁed as a
problem in cases of fetal hypoxia, which often results in permanent brain injury. Given the
recent advances in AI, it is hoped that its application to CTG will offer a better, less
subjective and more reliable method of CTG interpretation.
Objectives: This mini-review examines the literature and discusses the impediments to
the success of AI application to CTG thus far. Prior randomised control trials (RCTs) of CTG
decision support systems are reviewed from technical and clinical perspectives. A
selection of novel engineering approaches, not yet validated in RCTs, are also
reviewed. The review presents the key challenges that need to be addressed in order
to develop a robust AI tool to identify fetal distress in a timely manner so that appropriate
intervention can be made.
Results: The decision support systems used in three RCTs were reviewed, summarising
the algorithms, the outcomes of the trials and the limitations. Preliminary work suggests
that the inclusion of clinical data can improve the performance of AI-assisted CTG.
Combined with newer approaches to the classiﬁcation of traces, this offers promise for
rewarding future development.
Keywords: cardiotocography (CTG), fetal heart rate (FHR), hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE), labour,
pregnancy, fetal hypoxia, artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning
1 INTRODUCTION
Ensuring the safe passage of a baby through the birth canal remains a major challenge globally.
Despite improvements in stillbirth and neonatal mortality rates, intrapartum-related hypoxia (“birth
asphyxia”) is estimated to contribute to almost a quarter of the world’s annual 3 million neonatal
deaths and almost a half of the 2.6 million third trimester stillbirths . The WHO
estimated in 2005 that as many as 1 million survivors of birth asphyxia may develop cerebral palsy,
learning difﬁculties or other disabilities each year. In England, the 2019/20 annual report of NHS
Resolution (NHSR), the body that oversees clinical negligence claims, stated that £2.3 billion was
spent on clinical negligence payments, of which 50% went on settling obstetric claims Challenges of
Developing Robust AI for Intrapartum
Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring.
Front. Artif. Intell. 4:765210.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.765210
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
October 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 765210
MINI REVIEW
published: 26 October 2021
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.765210
represented just 9% of the total claims made). NHSR estimated
that for every baby born in England £1100 was paid in indemnity
costs .
Currently, the only non-invasive way of assessing the fetus in
labour is by monitoring fetal heartrate. Cardiotocography (CTG)
is a technique that measures changes in fetal heart rate (FHR) and
relates it to uterine contractions (UC) in order to identify babies
who are becoming short of oxygen (hypoxic). CTG monitoring
was introduced in the 1960s despite the absence of RCTs. Since
then, a Cochrane review of 13 trials involving 37,000 women has
continuous
monitoring
intermittent auscultation was associated with a 50% reduction
in neonatal seizures . The review was
dominated by the large Dublin trial which enrolled 12,964
women in 1981–1983 . This trial
showed no difference in neonatal mortality or cerebral palsy
rates. Many guidelines and textbooks on CTG interpretation have
been published over the years, the most recent being the NICE
intrapartum care guideline of 2014, updated in 2017 (National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 2017). CTG
interpretation is heavily dependent on pattern recognition, in
particular the FHR response to UCs. Abnormal patterns, such as
“late” decelerations, can indicate fetal hypoxia, but the CTG is an
overly sensitive test; 60% of babies born after their CTG showed
such changes were not acidotic . CTG
interpretation has low inter- and intra-observer agreement rates,
and even experts can differ in their interpretation of the
The potential of CTG monitoring has not been realised in
spite of major efforts aimed at training staff. NHSR has
conducted several reviews and 5 years of cerebral palsy claims
 . Errors with the interpretation of FHR
monitoring was the most common theme and were often
related to systemic and human factors. Uninterpretable
CTGs were also common, with a wait and see approach
being taken when there was possible loss of contact. The
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (RCOG)
“Each Baby Counts” report reached the same conclusion
 .
recommended
interpretation should not occur in isolation, but as part of a
holistic assessment.
With artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), we can now take a fresh,
unbiased look at the CTG. Previous attempts at using AI analysis
of CTG have not proved successful. Most aimed to mimic human
methods of analysis (e.g. recognition of FHR baseline, FHR
variability and decelerations). However, modern computer
systems using more advanced machine learning methods can
include wide ranging analysis. AI systems are available 24/7, and
are not affected by human factors such as fatigue, distraction,
bias, poor communication, cognitive overload, or fear of doing
harm. All of these were identiﬁed as limiting factors by the RCOG
“Each Baby Counts” reports. Better ways of using and
interpreting the CTG have the potential to reduce death and
disability, and to prevent signiﬁcant litigation costs.
2 REVIEW OF PRIOR ART IN AI FOR CTG
2.1 Algorithms Used in Randomised Control
Recent systematic reviews of AI for CTG concluded that prior
studies did not manage to improve rates of neonatal acidosis,
seizures, death, unnecessary interventions or ICU admissions
 . One study found that inter-rater
reliability between humans and AI was moderate but that AI
models that mimic human interpretation is akin to adding a
“second evaluator with similar instructions” . This suggests that for decision support to be effective, it
should add value through features that are not obvious to the
human. The three RCTs included in the review paper, which are
the only trials that compare human and AI CTG interpretation,
are revisited below. The three systems used hand-crafted features
that generally aimed to replicate the International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) guidelines .
The INFANT (Intelligent Fetal AssessmeNT) system was
developed over 20 years ago to extract and quantiﬁes the
following FHR features: signal quality, baseline, variability,
accelerations, decelerations and their timing in relation to
contractions.
interpreted by the human in current clinical practice. The
algorithms and artiﬁcial neural networks (Keith and Greene,
information,
dilation, analgesia, fetal blood sampling and risk factors (intrauterine growth restriction, placenta abruption and meconium)
are also considered in the AI model. The system uses over 400
rules to interpret the data and provide decision support. It does
not provide any recommendations for actions that should be
taken in response to detected FHR abnormalities .
A multicentre RCT of this system on 47,000 patients was
completed in 2017, which found that the decision-support
effectiveness
abnormalities
 . The hypotheses that substandard
care was due to failure to identify non-reassuring CTG and
that a decision-support system would reduce unnecessary
interventions were not supported. The study suggests that
substandard care was due to management decisions after
identifying CTG abnormalities. The decision-support system
information
pertaining to the labour (i.e. labour duration and progress).
Including this information in the decision support system may
have improved decisions to escalate.
Omniview-SisPorto 3.5 provides alerts based on computer
analysis of CTG. It classiﬁes CTG into four classes (reassuring,
non-reassuring, very non-reassuring and pre-terminal) based on
FIGO guidelines , including
deﬁnitions of late/prolonged/repetitive decelerations, reduced
variability and baseline variation . Their preliminary results showed that the agreement
percentage between human and computer classiﬁcation of
contractions, accelerations and decelerations was 87, 71 and
68%, respectively . An RCT of the system
on 7,320 patients was recently conducted .
The study concluded that while very low rates of acidosis were
observed, the reduction in the rates of acidosis and obstetric
interventions between the two arms of the study were not
statistically signiﬁcant.
quantitative
cardiotocography
decision-support
enrolled 720 patients . The
qCTG system computes features based on three domains:
FHR, FHR micro-ﬂuctuations, and decelerations. The features
derived from FHR micro-ﬂuctuations are the extrema per minute,
the mean beat-to-beat variability per minute, and the oscillation
amplitudes. A score of 0–6 is calculated for each domain and
summed, giving an overall score of 0–18. The primary outcomes
of the trial were hypoxia, acidemia, caesarean section and forceps
extraction. Secondary outcomes were 5-minute Apgar, neonatal
seizures and NICU admission. Reduced risks were observed for
all outcomes in the interventional arm compared to the control
arm. However, due to the small sample size of this study, a larger
RCT is required to validate these ﬁndings.
2.2 Alternative Approaches
The aforementioned RCTs used computer-based algorithms that
were largely based on features deﬁned by the thresholds for
baseline, variability and decelerations in the FIGO guidelines.
Alternative approaches have been investigated which provide AIbased CTG interpretation in a manner that applies feature
engineering theory from other domains that may complement
existing human interpretation. While such systems have not yet
been validated in RCTs, preliminary results are promising.
A control theory approach has been proposed to model the
dynamic relationship between FHR and UC as an impulse response
function (IRF) . Pairing FHR and UC as an
input-output system is clinically relevant, as decelerations are
classiﬁed in response to the contractions. Early decelerations
coincide with contractions, and do not indicate fetal hypoxia or
acidosis. Late decelerations occur more than 20 s after a contraction
and are indicative of hypoxia. Prolonged decelerations span multiple
contractions and are indicative of hypoxia . This method showed that IRFs in pathological cases resulted
contractions
corresponding
decelerations. IRF, FHR baseline and FHR variability were used
as input features to a support vector machine (SVM) to classify
normal and pathological CTGs. The training dataset consisted of 189
normal outcome cases and 31 pathological outcome cases. Their
deﬁnition of a pathological case was death, or evidence of hypoxic
ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), or a base deﬁcit of more than
12 mmol per litre (mmol/L) meaning an acidic pH. The SVM
correctly detected 50% of pathological cases with a false positive
rate of 7.5% .
A method using phase-rectiﬁed signal averaging to compute
the mean decelerative capacity (DC) of FHR has been proposed
 . DC was compared to short-term
variability (STV), which is considered a strong indicator of pH
and has been used in previous studies. The results showed that
DC predicted acidemia with 0.665 Area under the Curve (AUC).
By comparison, STV achieved 0.606 AUC. Correlation between
DC and STV was low, indicating that both may be used in
multivariate analysis for improved prediction.
The FHR frequency content can be segmented in to lowfrequency (0.04–0.15 Hz), mid-frequency (0.15–0.5 Hz) and
high-frequency (0.5–1.0 Hz) bands. These bands correspond to
sympathetic activity, fetal movement, and fetal breathing,
respectively. The spectral densities and ratios between bands
have been previously used to classify normal and pathological
CTGs .
Fractal analysis and the Hurst parameter have been shown to be a
robust alternative to using arbitrarily deﬁned frequency bands,
and predicted fetal acidosis with an AUC of 0.87 segments the full CTG record into much shorter
segments, extracts features and thus represents each full CTG
record as a sequence of feature values, which are used as input to a
Bayesian classiﬁer. This method achieved a true negative rate
(TNR) and true positive rate (TPR) of 0.817 and 0.609,
respectively, outperforming SVM models trained on the same
aforementioned
traditional
learning, which requires a feature extraction and selection
stage before classiﬁcation. Deep learning is a subset of
calculations known as neural networks on unstructured data,
whereby feature extraction and classiﬁcation is performed in an
optimised end-to-end routine, as depicted in Figure 1 . While deep learning approaches require a
relatively larger dataset, it offers the ability to learn complex
features from the raw data, which may not be obvious to human
experts. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) were shown to
outperform conventional machine learning algorithms, such as
SVM and K-Means Clustering, for CTG classiﬁcation on a
database containing 162 normal cases and 162 abnormal cases
(deﬁned as pH < 7.20 and/or Apgar at 1 min <7) . A multi-modal convolutional neural network
(MCNN) architecture trained on over 35,000 patients was
recently published . The MCNN takes
input from the UC, FHR and signal quality measures. Its
performance was assessed by measuring the percentage of
interventions that were false positives and true positives. A
retrospective analysis showed that current clinical practice
resulted in a 15% false positive rate (FPR) and a 31% true
positive rate (TPR), while the MCNN achieved a 14% FPR
and a 50% TPR.
The RCT of the INFANT system concluded that including
additional clinical information pertaining to labour could
 . Similarly, results have shown that
data-driven systems that use clinical risk factors result in
improved classiﬁer performance .
Table 1 summarises the above studies based on method,
inputs, target, dataset size, and ﬁndings.
3 CHALLENGES IN AI FOR CTG
3.1 Case Deﬁnition and Class Imbalance
CTG provides information on how the fetus is coping during
labour, with the aim of allowing clinicians to detect nonreassuring fetal status so that adverse outcomes can be avoided
through intervention. However, non-reassuring fetal status can
result in a spectrum of outcomes, from a wholly unaffected fetus
(due to a false positive CTG) to death .
Therefore, the question arises as to how a “control” patient versus
a “pathological case” patient should be labelled in a machine
learning architecture.
The incidence rate of HIE is 1-3 per 1,000 in high income
countries . HIE is the primary condition
that a CTG classiﬁer should be trying to predict so that clinicians
can intervene and prevent adverse outcome. However, this results
in a signiﬁcant class imbalance between normal and HIE classes,
which leads to challenges from a machine learning perspective. At
the higher range of 3 per 1,000, it would require over 30,000
deliveries to obtain a database with 100 HIE cases. Minority class
oversampling
techniques,
Oversampling Technique (SMOTE), have been successfully
used in CTG classiﬁcation studies to introduce synthetic
examples in the feature space . However, a sufﬁcient number of genuine cases are
still required to use such techniques to synthesize examples.
Similarly, weighted errors for misclassifying an example from
the minority class has been used to rectify the class imbalance
problem .
comprehensive
NICU records and
HIE diagnoses,
metrics are often used to label classes. There are many proxies
for HIE, both objective (pH, base deﬁcit, lactate, and transfer to
NICU) and subjective (Apgar scores), with varying degrees of
correlation to HIE. Metrics such as pH are generally used as
indicators of poor outcome . However, there is
literature that shows ambiguity in the correlation between pH and
outcome . Quite often, only the umbilical venous
pH is measured or recorded, whereas the arterial pH can be
signiﬁcantly lower than the venous pH in babies exposed to a
period of acute cord compression shortly before delivery
 . As highlighted in Table 1, there is no
consistency in the prior art as to what outcome, metric or
combination of metrics are used to deﬁne a pathological case.
A recent systematic review of intrapartum uterine activity and
neonatal outcomes found that, of the 12 studies that met the
inclusion criteria, 7 used pH as an individual outcome, Apgar
scores and base excess were reported as individual outcomes in 4
studies and only 1 study reported neonatal encephalopathy as an
outcome. No study examined long-term neurodevelopment as an
outcome . The Apgar score was not
FIGURE 1 | Pipeline of machine learning steps for CTG.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
October 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 765210
O’Sullivan et al.
Challenges in AI for CTG
designed as a measure of birth asphyxia, and a recent cohort study
including 85,076 infants concluded that although there is a close
association between Apgar score and acidosis, Apgar score should
not be used as a measure of birth asphyxia (Cnattingius et al.,
3.2 Weak Labels Versus Expert Annotated
As previously discussed, proxy metrics, such as pH, are often used
as individual metrics to distinguish between normal and
pathological outcome. CTU-UHB CTG database is a publicly
available database hosted on Physionet, which is commonly used
for research purposes (cited by over 150 papers) . The database includes 552 CTG recordings from 9,164
recordings acquired from one hospital over a three-year period.
Of the 552 patients, 44 had a pH value less than 7.05, which is the
threshold commonly used in literature to deﬁne pathological
cases . Annotation by three experts on the
same database labelled 149 as normal CTG, 115 as pathological
CTG and 275 as suspect CTG. This highlights the disparity
between low pH and abnormal CTG .
developing
architectures based on proxies and neonatal outcomes is the
fact that these labels are “weak.” The raw CTG in these cases are
not labelled by event or by epoch. Instead, there is one overall
label for the patient based on clinical metrics (i.e. pH < 7.05),
regardless of the duration of the CTG abnormality, or the type of
TABLE 1 | Prior art comparison.
Author, year
ML methods
Input features
Target/labels
Key ﬁnding
Brocklehurst
et al. 
algorithms and
artiﬁcial neural
Signal quality, baseline,
variability, accels, decels and
clinical data (dilation, analgesia,
fetal blood sampling, growth
restriction, placenta abruption
and meconium)
Manually labelled CTG
Effective in identifying abnormal
CTG, however clinical
outcomes not improved
Nunes et al.
Contractions, accels, decels
Manually labelled CTG
Low rates of acidosis observed,
however reduction in acidosis
between the control arm and
the interventional arm were not
statistically signiﬁcant
Ignatov and
Lutomski 
FHR, decels, FHR micro-
ﬂuctuations (extrema per minute,
mean beat-to-beat variability,
oscillation amplitudes)
Hypoxia (cord-artery blood ph <
7.20), acidemia (umbilical-artery
blood pH < 7.05), intervention
(caesarean or forceps)
Reduced risks observed for all
targets in interventional arm
Warrick et al.
Support vector
Baseline, variability, impulse
response function for decels and
contractions
Base deﬁcit (>12 mmol/L), death
50% of pathological cases
correctly detected with a false
positive rate of 7.5%
Georgieva et al.
Decelerative capacity
Acidemia (pH < 7.05)
AUC of 0.665 as a single feature
in predicting acidemia
Doret et al.
Hurst parameter
Acidemia (pH < 7.05)
AUC of 0.87 in predicting
Dash et al.
Generative
models and
Bayesian theory
FHR baseline, variability,
accelerations, decelerations,
FHR response to contractions in
4.5–30 mHz, variability in
30–1000 mHz band
Acidemia (ph < 7.15)
0.817 TNR and 0.609 TPR
et al. 
Acidemia (umbilical artery pH <
7.20) or Apgar at 1 min <7
AUC of 0.73 with CNN, which
was higher than traditional ML
Petroziello et al.
Multi-modal CNN
Signal quality, FHR, UC
Acidemia (pH < 7.05) and severe
compromise (stillbirth, neonatal
death, neonatal encephalopathy,
NICU admission)
Improved prediction of
acidemia/compromise
compared with clinical practice
(14% FPR & 50% TPR versus
15% FPR & 31% TPR)
Georgieva et al.
Decelerative capacity and clinical
data (presence of thick
meconium or preeclampsia)
Acidemia (pH < 7.05) and severe
compromise (stillbirth, neonatal
death, neonatal encephalopathy,
NICU admission)
Improved sensitivity and falsepositive rate in detecting
acidemia/compromise
compared to clinical practice
Hoodbhoy et al.
21 features including basic
quantitative values (max, min,
median), STV, and number of
fetal movements, decelerations
and contractions
Manually labelled CTG
Overall accuracy of 93%
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
October 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 765210
O’Sullivan et al.
Challenges in AI for CTG
hypoxia. Different types of fetal hypoxia (acute, subacute,
evolving, chronic) generally manifest in different forms in the
CTG, and are associated with widely differing clinical events
 . This introduces problems, as in an acute
event (such as cord prolapse, uterine rupture, or acute cord
compression) the CTG may only change during the event.
Therefore, labelling an entire CTG record as fetal hypoxia may
introduce noisy labels and misclassiﬁcations. This is particularly
problematic if weak labels are being applied to short epochs (i.e.
overlapping windows of 15–30 min segments), as there is a
signiﬁcant risk of introducing predominantly noisy labels,
unless the fetal hypoxia is chronic and prevalent throughout
the duration of the recording. Furthermore, studies have shown
that not all infants diagnosed postnatally with HIE have evidence
of intrapartum hypoxia in the CTG (using current human
interpretation) .
Machine learning architectures that use hand-labelled CTG
at an event/epoch level by an expert annotator would result in
stronger labels and, in theory, achieve improved performance.
In light of this, an expert obstetrician has manually labelled the
aforementioned CTB-UHB database, which has also been
made publicly available to supplement the original database
 . Several studies have obtained
signiﬁcantly high percentage agreements between algorithm
introducing human labels may result in similar clinical
outcomes to those observed in the prior RCTs, whereby
high algorithm-human agreement is achieved but it is akin
to adding a second evaluator with similar instructions.
Similarly,
inter-observer
agreement for human CTG interpretation in the range of
30–50% . Therefore, there is a risk that human annotations
may introduce human bias into the classiﬁcation, given that
expert use of CTG in general is still widely debated .
Classiﬁcation of CTG at an event level alone, without context
of the labour progress and duration is not ideal, as features and
patterns that may be considered non-reassuring in 1st stage of
labour can be considered normal during the active 2nd stage of
labour where contractions become more intense. As the end of
the CTG often coincides with the time of birth, it is likely that
relevant data pertaining to outcome would be most evident in the
later stages of CTG. However, there is considerably more noise
and motion artifacts in the later stage. Therefore, classiﬁer
performance can vary depending on the stage of labour.
Studies have shown that the performance of features for
classiﬁcation of fetal compromise vary signiﬁcantly as labour
progresses . As such, many studies in the
literature omit 2nd stage data, which may reduce the clinical
usefulness of a decision support tool in practice (Spilka et al.,
Having access to large databases, capable of training a deep
learning model may help resolve this issue, as the feature
extraction and classiﬁcation process could be completed in an
optimized routine. The variation in model performance based
on the stage of labour was demonstrated in (Petroziello et al.,
performance of the MCNN trained on the last 60 min of
1st stage was 0.65 AUC, while the same MCNN model
trained on the last 30 min of 2nd stage was 0.71 AUC. The
best performance of 0.77 AUC was achieved by training on the
last 60 min of CTG, regardless of stage (Petroziello et al.,
4 DISCUSSION
feature-based
approaches
interpretation that closely follow established CTG clinical
guidelines achieve high inter-observer agreement with human
interpretation. However, they do not result in improvements in
clinical outcomes. The ﬁndings of these studies suggest that
developing systems to mimic existing guidelines and human
interpretation
methods, facilitated by more computing power, comprehensive
electronic health records, and access to larger datasets have
developments.
approaches are yet to be validated in a RCT.
The major challenges identiﬁed in developing robust AI
for CTG interpretation are centred around case deﬁnition,
labelling and class imbalance, which are inherently linked.
The table demonstrates the variability in case deﬁnition
across the prior art, with many using proxy metrics, such
as pH, to label cases as healthy versus HIE. At an incidence
rate of 1-3 per 1,000 births, class imbalance is a major
concern, and perhaps an anomaly detection approach may
be best suited.
While accurately detecting non-reassuring CTG patterns is
important, it is not the primary challenge. The primary
determining
non-reassuring
intervention
progression of labour and on the risk proﬁle of the mother.
Our previous work has demonstrated that improvements in
classiﬁcation performance are achievable by adding both
gestation,
hypertension),
 . The clinical team need to consider
the risk proﬁle of a pregnancy to aid their assessment of a fetus’
tolerance to labour and need to be vigilant for any nonreassuring patterns in high-risk pregnancies. Providing a
consideration of these personalised risk factors and their
relationship to neonatal outcomes may result in an increase
in unnecessary C-sections and operative delivery rates.
To conclude, there is signiﬁcant scope and promise for
decision support tools in the area of CTG, as demonstrated by
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
October 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 765210
O’Sullivan et al.
Challenges in AI for CTG
segmentation of the data, combined with the inclusion of preexisting clinical variables and labour progression data will
facilitate
development
explainable
intelligence decision support tool.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MS, GB, JR, and EC contributed to writing the manuscript. WM
and MR provided critical review and subject-matter expertise. All
authors reviewed the ﬁnal draft prior to submission.
This work was supported by Science Foundation Ireland (19/FIP/
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Joye McKernan and Prof. Richard Greene of the
National Perinatal Epidemiology Centre, University College
Cork for their assistance in data collection throughout the project.