An eﬃcient scheme for numerical simulations of the spin-bath decoherence
V. V. Dobrovitski1 and H. A. De Raedt2
1Ames Laboratory, Iowa State University, Ames IA 50011, USA
2Department of Applied Physics/Computational Physics,
Materials Science Centre, University of Groningen,
Nijenborgh 4, NL-9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands
 
We demonstrate that the Chebyshev expansion method is a very eﬃcient numerical tool for
studying spin-bath decoherence of quantum systems.
We consider two typical problems arising
in studying decoherence of quantum systems consisting of few coupled spins: (i) determining the
pointer states of the system, and (ii) determining the temporal decay of quantum oscillations. As
our results demonstrate, for determining the pointer states, the Chebyshev-based schemeis at least
a factor of 8 faster than existing algorithms based on the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition. For the
problems of second type, the Chebyshev-based approach has been 3–4 times faster than the Suzuki-
Trotter-based schemes. This conclusion holds qualitatively for a wide spectrum of systems, with
diﬀerent spin baths and diﬀerent Hamiltonians.
PACS numbers: 75.10.Jm, 02.60.Cb, 75.10.Nr, 03.65.Yz
INTRODUCTION
Recently, a great deal of attention has been devoted to
the study of quantum computation . For many physical systems, basic quantum operations needed for implementation of quantum gates have been demonstrated. To
be practical, a quantum computer should contain a large
number of qubits (some estimates give up to 106 qubits
 ), and be able to perform many hundreds of quantum
gate operations.
However, these requirements are not
easy to satisfy in experiments. A real two-state quantum
system is diﬀerent from the ideal qubit. The system interacts with its environment, and this leads to a loss of
phase relations between diﬀerent states of the quantum
computer (decoherence) , causing rapid accumulation of errors. Detailed theoretical understanding of
the decoherence process is needed to prevent this.
More generally, decoherence is an interesting manybody quantum phenomenon which is fundamental for
many areas of quantum mechanics, quantum measurement theory, etc . It also plays an important role in
solid state systems, and might suppress quantum tunneling of defects in crystals , spin tunneling in magnetic
molecules and nanoparticles , or destroy Kondo effect in a dissipationless manner . I.e., decoherence
in many physical systems can have experimentally detectable (and sometimes considerable) consequences, and
extensive theoretical studies of decoherence are needed to
understand behavior of these systems.
Formally speaking, decoherence is a dynamical development of quantum correlations (entanglement) between
the central system and its environment. Let us assume
that initially the central system is in the state |ψ0⟩and
the environment is in the state |χ0⟩, so that the state
of the compound system (central system plus bath) is
|Ψ(t = 0)⟩= |ψ0⟩⊗|χ0⟩. In the course of dynamical evolution, the direct product structure of the state |Ψ(t)⟩
is no longer conserved.
If we need to study only the
properties of the central system, we can consider the reduced density matrix of the central system, i.e. the matrix ρS(t) = TrB |Ψ(t)⟩⟨Ψ(t)|, where TrB means tracing over the environmental degrees of freedom. Initially,
ρS(0) = |ψ0⟩⟨ψ0|, the system is in pure state, and its
density matrix is a projector, i.e. ρ2
S(0) = ρS(0).
t > 0, this property is lost, and the system appears in a
mixed state. It has been shown that, even for relatively
small integrable and non-integrable systems, the mixing
is suﬃcient for the time-averaged, quantum dynamical
properties of the subsystem to agree with their statistical
mechanics values . Diagonalizing the density matrix
ρS, we can ﬁnd the (instantaneous) states of the system
|qi(t)⟩and (instantaneous) occupation numbers of these
states wi(t). It is generally assumed (and is true for all
cases we know) that in “regular” situations, the states
|qi(t)⟩quickly relax to some limiting states |pi⟩, called
“pointer states”. This process (decoherence) is, in most
cases, much faster than the relaxation of the occupation
numbers wi(t) to their limiting values (which correspond
to thermal equilibrium of the system with the bath).
The theoretical description of decoherence, i.e. a description of the evolution of the central system from its
initial pure state ψ0 to the ﬁnal mixed state, and ﬁnding
the ﬁnal pointer states |pi⟩, is a very diﬃcult problem
of quantum many-body theory. Some simple models can
be solved analytically, for some more complex models
diﬀerent approximations can be employed, such as the
Markov approximation for the bath, which assumes that
the memory eﬀects in the bath dynamics are negligible.
A special case of environment consisting of uncoupled
oscillators, so-called “boson bath”, is also rather well understood theoretically. But, although the model of boson
bath is applicable for description of a large number of
possible types of environments (phonons, photons, conduction electrons, etc.) , it is not universal.
A particularly important case where the boson bath
description is inapplicable is the decoherence caused by
an enviroment made of spins, e.g. nuclear spins, or impurity spins (so called “spin bath” environment). Similarly,
decoherence caused by some other types of quantum twolevel systems can be described in terms of the spin bath.
Analytical studies of the spin-bath decoherence are dif-
ﬁcult, and the spin-bath decoherence of many-body systems is practically unexplored yet. In this situation, numerical modeling of spin-bath decoherence becomes an
invaluable research tool.
The most direct approach to study spin-bath decoherence is to compute the dynamical evolution of the whole
compound system by directly solving the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation of the model system. Even for a
modest amount of spins, say 20, such calculations require considerable computational resources, in particular
because to study decoherence we have to follow the dynamical evolution of the system over substantial periods
of time. Therefore it is worthwhile to explore ways to
signiﬁcantly improve the eﬃciency of these simulations.
In this paper, we apply the Chebyshev’s expansion
method to simulate models for the spin-bath decoherence.
This method has been widely applied before
 to study dynamics of large
quantum systems, but, to our knowledge, has never been
used for simulations of systems made of large number
of coupled quantum spins.
We show that for realistic
problems and typical values of parameters this method
is a very eﬃcient tool, giving signiﬁcant increase in the
simulations speed, sometimes up to a factor of eight, in
comparison with the algorithms based on Suzuki-
Trotter decompositions . We illustrate this point by
test examples that we have encountered in our previous studies of the dynamics of the spin-bath decoherence. We also brieﬂy discuss two other approaches, the
short iterative Lanczos (SIL) method and the
multi-conﬁgurational time-dependent Hartree (MCTDH)
 method, which are known to demonstrate
very good performance in many problems of quantum
chemistry.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we describe the model and the approaches
used for the decoherence simulations. In Section III, we
describe the speciﬁc details of application of the Chebyshev’s expansion method to the spin-bath decoherence
simulations. In Section IV, we present the results of our
test simulations. A brief summary is given in the Section
SIMULATIONS OF THE SPIN-BATH
DECOHERENCE: THE MODEL AND
NUMERICAL APPROACHES
We focus on decoherence in quantum systems of several
coupled spins. This type of quantum systems is of particular interest for quantum computations, since a qubit can
be represented as a quantum spin 1/2, and qubit-based
quantum computation is, in fact, a controlled dynamics
of the system made of many spins 1/2.
Such systems
are also of primary interest for studying many solid state
problems, since an electron is a particle with the spin
1/2, and its orbital degrees of freedom are often irrelevant. Thus, a system made of several coupled spins 1/2
is a good model for investigating a large class of important problems both in quantum computing, and in solid
state theory. The approach described below can be easily extended to arbitrary spin values, but discussion of
simulations with arbitrary spins is beyond the scope of
this paper.
We consider the following class of models. There is a
central system made of M coupled spins Sm (Sm = 1/2,
m = 1 . . . M). The spins Sm interact with a bath consisting of N environmental spins In (In = 1/2, n = 1 . . . N).
The Hamiltonian governing behavior of the whole “compound” system (central spins Sm plus the bath spins In)
H = H0 + V = HS + HB + V,
where HS and HB are the “bare” Hamiltonians of the
central system and the bath, correspondingly, and V is
the system-bath interaction. Below, we present simulation results for the following general form the Hamiltonians:
We assume that the Hamiltonian H does not explicitly
depend on time, i.e. all exchange interaction constants
J, Γ, and A, and all external magnetic ﬁelds H are constant in time. Although this makes impossible to model
the time-dependent quantum-gate operation, the investigation of the fundamental properties of spin-bath decoherence is not seriously aﬀected by this requirement.
The dynamics of the model (1) is already too complex
to be studied analytically, and for general H, when no a
priori knowledge is available, the only option is to solve
the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation of the whole
compound system numerically. I.e., we choose some basis states for the Hilbert space of the compound system
(the simplest choice is the direct product of the states | ↑⟩
and | ↓⟩for each spin Sm, In). We represent an initial
state of the compound system Ψ0 as a vector in this basis
set, and the Hamiltonian H is represented as a matrix,
so that the Schr¨odinger equation
i dΨ(t)/dt = HΨ(t)
is a system of ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations
with the initial condition Ψ(t = 0) = Ψ0.
The length of the vector Ψ is 2M+N; for typical values
M = 2 and N = 20, an exact solution of about 2 · 106
diﬀerential equations becomes a serious task. Moreover,
the interaction between the central spins is often much
bigger than the coupling with environment or coupling
between the bath spins, so that the system (3) is often
stiﬀ. Simple methods, e.g. predictor-corrector schemes,
perform rather poorly in this case, and very small integration steps are needed to obtain a reliable solution.
Algorithms based on the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition
 can solve (3) for suﬃciently long times (essential
to determine the pointer states of the central system).
They can handle Hamiltonians with explicit dependence
on time, are unconditionally stable, exactly preserve the
unitarity of quantum evolution, and the time step can
be made more than an order of magnitude bigger than
in the typical predictor-corrector method. Moreover, as
our experience shows, for the scheme based on Suzuki-
Trotter decomposition, a large part of the total numerical
error is accumulated in the total phase of the wavefunction |Ψ(t)⟩, and does not aﬀect any measurable physical
quantities (observables). However, for reasonably large
systems, this scheme is still slow, and simulations of decoherence lasted for up to 200 CPU hours on a SGI 3800 supercomputer. The problem of long simulation times becomes especially prominent if we need to ﬁnd the pointer
states, or if the dynamics of the central system is much
faster than the decoherence rate. We found that in these
cicumstances, the method based on Chebyshev’s expansion becomes a very eﬃcient tool to study problems of
decoherence.
Along with the Chebyshev’s expansion method, the
short iterative Lanczos (SIL) approach , which
is also based on the power-series expansion of the evolution operator, was found to be eﬃcient for many similar problems of quantum chemistry.
We have tested
this method, but our results are negative.
SIL method (with small number of Lanczos iterations
per step, usually, less than 25) gives an unacceptable error, even for very short time steps. On the other hand,
high-order SIL method (with more than 25 Lanczos iterations per step) is noticeably slower the approach based
on Chebyshev’s expansion.
We believe that low performance of SIL method originates from the fact that for a small number of Lanczos iterations (i.e., for low-order SIL), only a very limited part of the spectrum is described correctly. For a
typical problem where SIL is known to be very eﬀective
(e.g., a wavepacket propagation), most of relevant basis
states have energy close to the energy of a wavepacket.
Only these relevant states should be accurately described,
while accurate description of the whole energy spectrum
is excessive. In contrast, in a typical spin-bath decoherence problem, a large number of bath states with very
diﬀerent energies are involved in the decoherence process. Correspondingly, a large part of spectrum should
be taken into account, and the high-order SIL integrator
should be employed, reducing the performance of the SIL
We also note that signiﬁcant speed-up can be achieved
by using an approximate form of the wave function of
the total system (central system plus bath). In particular, the multi-conﬁgurational time-dependent Hartree
(MCTDH) method is known to be very eﬃcient, e.g. for modeling of boson-bath decoherence. The
MCTDH approach uses an approximate representation of
the wave function, based on the assumption that the wave
function of the total system can be written as a superposition of a relatively small number of ”conﬁgurations”,
i.e. products of time-varying single-spin wavefunctions.
MCTDH is a method of choice when the dimensionality of a single-particle Hilbert space is large, and the
multi-particle quantum correlations are associated with
a superposition of a small number of products of singleparticle wavefunctions. The problems considered in our
paper present an opposite situation. The bath consists of
many spins 1/2, i.e. we have only 2 orbitals per particle
(spin), and the single-particle evolution is very simple,
while the complex many-particle quantum correlations
are responsible for most of the physical eﬀects (i.e., the
number of important single-spin-wavefunctions products
is very large). It is probable that many problems of spinbath decoherence can be eﬃciently treated by MCTDH,
but corresponding study requires a separate extensive research eﬀort, which is beyond the framework of our paper.
CHEBYSHEV’S METHOD FOR SPIN-BATH
DECOHERENCE
For a time-independent Hamiltonian, the solution of
Eq. (3) can be formally written as
Ψ(t) = exp (−itH)Ψ0 = U(t)Ψ0
where U(t) = exp (−itH) is the evolution operator. An
eﬀective way of calculation
of the exponent of a large matrix H is to expand it in
a series of the Chebyshev polynomials of the operator
H. Below, we describe the speciﬁc details of application
of the Chebyshev method to the spin-bath decoherence
simulations.
The Chebyshev’s polynomials Tk(x) = cos (k arccosx)
are deﬁned for x ∈[−1, 1]. Thus, the Hamiltonian H
ﬁrst should be rescaled by the factor E0 (the range of the
values of the system’s energy) and shifted by Ec (median
value of the systems’ energy):
2(Emax + Emin),
E0 = Emax −Emin
Emin = min⟨H⟩=
⟨Φ|Φ⟩=1⟨Φ|H|Φ⟩,
Emax = max⟨H⟩=
⟨Φ|Φ⟩=1⟨Φ|H|Φ⟩.
In this way, the rescaled operator G = 2(H −Ec)/E0
is also bounded by −1 and 1: −1 ≤⟨G⟩≤1, i.e. −1 ≤
⟨Φ|G|Φ⟩≤1 for any state vector |Φ⟩such that ⟨Φ|Φ⟩= 1.
For spin systems, the Hamiltonian is bounded both from
above and from below, and the operator G can be found.
In the speciﬁc case considered in this paper, when
the Hamiltonian H is deﬁned by Eq. (2), we take E0 =
2 max (|Emin|, |Emax|). For this choice, −E0/2 ≤⟨H⟩≤
E0/2. Correspondingly, we can take Ec = 0; this choice
is legitimate, and, although might be not optimal for
some problems, still results in very good performance of
Chebyshev’s method (see below). Since max⟨H⟩= ∥H∥
is the norm of the Hamiltonian, the value of E0 can
be estimated using the Cauchy’s inequality:
∥HS∥+ ∥HB∥+ ∥V∥. Similarly,
mm′| · ∥Sα
and ∥HB∥and ∥V∥can be estimated in the same manner.
As a result, we have an estimate E0 ≤E1, where
and the operator G can be deﬁned as G = 2H/E1, which
satisﬁes the inequality −1 ≤⟨G⟩≤1.
The Chebyshev’s expansion of the evolution operator
U(t) (see Eq. 4) now looks like
U(t) = exp (−iτG) =
where τ = E1t/2. The expansion coeﬃcients ck can be
calculated using the orthogonal property of the polynomials Tk(x):
Tk(x) exp (−ixτ)
dx = ak(−i)kJk(τ),
where Jk(τ) is the Bessel function of k-th order, and ak =
2 for k = 0 and ak = 1 for k ≥1. The successive terms
in the Chebyshev’s series can be eﬃciently determined
using the recursion
Tk+1(G) = 2GTk(G) + Tk−1(G)
with the conditions T0(G) = 1, T1(G) = G.
ﬁnd the vector Ψ(t), we just need to sum successively
the terms of the series (8), using Eq. (10) for calculation
of the subsequent terms, until we reach some pre-deﬁned
value K of k, which is determined by the required precision.
K, order of expansion
τ = E1t /2
FIG. 1: Dependence of the order of the Chebyshev’s expansion K on the value of τ = E1t/2.
The solid circles corresponds to the minimum value ǫ = 10−5 of the expansion
coeﬃcient ck; the open circles corresponds to ǫ = 10−6.
The high precision of this scheme originates from the
fact that, for k ≫τ, the value of a Bessel function decreases super-exponentially Jk(τ) ∼(τ/k)k, so that termination of the series (8) at k = K leads to an error
which decreases super-exponentially with K.
In practice, K = 1.5τ already gives precision of 10−7 or better in most cases. Due to the same reason, this scheme
is asymptotically more eﬃcient than any time-marching
For given suﬃciently small error ǫ, the number of operations Nop needed for ﬁnding the wavefunction at time T , i.e.
Ψ(T ), grows linearly with T for
the Chebyshev-based scheme.
For a marching scheme
of order r with the time step ∆t, the numerical error
is ǫ ∼(∆t)rT , so that for given ǫ and T , the number
of operations needed is Nop = T/∆t ∼T 1+1/r, growing super-linearly with increasing T . For very long-time
simulations, and when very high precision is necessary,
the Chebyshev method is more eﬃcient than any timemarching scheme known to us.
However, in practice,
a precision better than 0.5%–1% is very rarely needed.
Similarly, very long-time simulations are rarely of interest: in most cases, the simulations are interesting only
until the dynamics of the system exhibits some nontrivial behavior.
Therefore, in spite of its asymptotic
eﬃciency, the Chebyshev method is not always the best
choice for real research, and its eﬃciency should be studied in every separate case.
SIMULATION RESULTS
We assess the usefulness of the Chebyshev’s method for
a wide spectrum of decoherence problems, by consideriong two central problems of decoherence, description of
damping of quantum oscillations in a system, and deter-
mination of the pointer states. In fact, there is no strict
boundary: studying both problems, we track evolution of
the system checking its state at regular intervals of length
T , but in studying the oscillations decay the interval T
is much smaller than the characteristic decoherence time
Tdec, while in studying the pointer states, T is larger than
asymptotic
advantages
Chebyshev-based scheme, it is not a priori clear if it is
eﬃcient for realistic problems, when the required numerical error δ is modest (say, δ = 10−2–10−3). Also, if we
track the dynamics of the decoherence process, we make
many steps of modest length T , and the overhead associated with the use of the Chebyshev’s expansion might
be signiﬁcant, see Fig. 1.
To study this issue, we have performed several types
of numerical tests. The timing information reported in
this paper has been obtained from calculations on a SGI
Origin 3800 (500 MHz) system, using sequential, single
processor code. The order of Chebyshev’s expansion K
have been deﬁned by the pre-speciﬁed precision ǫ. We
determined the minimum value of K such that |ck| < ǫ
for k ≥K, starting from the value K0 = [1.1τ] ([x] is
the integer part of x), and adjusting it as needed. Each
simulation has been performed three times: (i) using the
Chebyshev’s method with ǫ = 10−12, the reference run,
(ii) using Chebyshev’s method with ǫ = 10−5–10−6, and
(iii) using the scheme based on Suzuki-Trotter decomposition . Previously we have used the latter to
study spin-bath decoherence . In this paper, we
have chosen to consider the same problems as in our previous works on this subject, in order to avoid the impression that the tests have been constructed to favor one
particular method.
First, we consider the problem of oscillations damping
in the central system of two spins coupled by Heisenberg
exchange, interacting with the bath.
We studied this
problem using the Suzuki-Trotter scheme in Ref. 27. The
Hamiltonians describing the bath and the system are:
HS = JS1S2,
An(S1 + S2)In,
with N = 16 bath spins.
The exchange parameter
J = 16.0 (antiferromagnetic coupling between the central spins), while An are uniformly distributed between
0 and −0.5. The initial state of the compound system
|Ψ0⟩= |ψ0⟩⊗|χ0⟩is the product of the initial state |ψ0⟩
of the central system, and |χ0⟩of the bath. In this case,
|ψ0⟩= | ↑↓⟩, i.e. the ﬁrst central spin is in the state
1(t = 0) = +1/2, and the second spin is in the state
2(t = 0) = −1/2. The initial state of the bath |χ0⟩is
the linear superposition of all basis states with random
coeﬃcients. Physically, this situation corresponds to the
case of the temperature θ which is high in comparison
with the bath energies An, but is much lower than the
system’s energy J (note that J ≫An in this case).
The initial state of the central system is a superposition of two eigenstates of H: the state with the total
FIG. 2: Time dependence of the oscillations of the expectation
value of Sz
1(t) in the two-spin system decohered by a spin
spin S = 1 and Sz = 0, and the state with the total
spin S = 0. These states have diﬀerent energies, and, for
example, the dynamics of Sz
1(t) is represented by oscillations with the frequency J. Due to interaction with the
spin bath, these oscillations are damped, see Fig. 2. To
study this damping in detail, we take the Suzuki-Trotter
time step ∆t = 0.035, T = 2∆t, and watch the system
since t = 0 till tmax = 800T . If we do not need such a
high resolution, we increase T . In Table I, we present
the CPU time needed to perform the simulations using
the Suzuki-Trotter and Chebyshev’s methods, along with
the resulting error δ (which should not be confused with
the “nominal” precision of the Chebyshev’s scheme ǫ).
The error δ has been obtained from comparison with the
“reference” Chebyshev’s run (ǫ = 10−12), and is equal to
the maximum of absolute errors of the quantities (all normalized to unity) 2Sα
1 (α, β = x, y, z), and
the so-called “quadratic entropy” S(2) = 1 −Tr ρ2
These quantities have been calculated and compared at
regular intervals of length T . Their calculation increases
the number of computations, so that the tests 1, 2, and
3, which are otherwise equivalent for the Suzuki-Trotter
method, require more and more CPU time.
TABLE I: Comparison of the Suzuki-Trotter scheme (abbreviated as ST) with the Chebyshev’s scheme (abbreviated as
Ch) for the problem of oscillations decay.
0.44 · 10−2
0.3 · 10−4
0.48 · 10−2
0.55 · 10−3
0.48 · 10−2
TABLE II: Comparison of the Suzuki-Trotter scheme (abbreviated as ST) with the Chebyshev’s scheme (abbreviated as
Ch) for the problem of oscillations decay, employing the twoleap approach with diﬀerent T1 and T2.
0.4 · 10−4
0.2 · 10−2
0.4 · 10−4
0.3 · 10−2
As one can see from Table I, for realistic values of
maximum error δ ∼0.5 · 10−2, and even for not very
long runs, the Chebyshev’s scheme can be faster than
the Suzuki-Trotter method by a factor of up to four, and
the eﬃciency of the Chebyshev’s scheme grows fast with
increasing T . However, this straightforward comparison
is too crude, and Table I is only an illustration of basic
features of the Chebyshev’s method. To model fast oscillations which decay slowly (often, with the decay time of
order of decoherence time Tdec), we should make T significantly smaller than the oscillation period tosc = 2π/J, in
order to correctly determine the amplitude of oscillations
at given time.
Therefore, to track the damping of oscillations, we use
the two-leap approach: ﬁrst, we make a large time leap
of length T1 (T1 ≫tosc, but T1 ≪Tdec), and then we
make a number n2 (usually, 15–20) of smaller steps T2
such that T2 ≪tosc but n2T2 ≥tosc, resolving in detail
one period of oscillations and extracting the amplitude.
By repeating this two-stage sequence ntot times, we can
reliably track the change of the oscillations amplitude
with time. The test example of this approach have been
taken from our recent work . We have performed the
same kind of simulations as described above, with N =
16 bath spins, repeating the two-leap sequence ntot = 8
times, each time making one long leap T1 followed by
n2 = 21 short leaps T2. The results of these tests are
presented in Table II. Again, Chebyshev-based method
can be up to three times faster than the Suzuki-Trotter
algorithm .
Finally, we have tested the Chebyshev scheme in the
problem of determining the pointer states, employing an
example from our work . This example is interesting
also because it deals with a physically important case of
a spin bath possessing chaotic internal dynamics, which
is relevant for majority of realistic spin baths (such as
nuclear spins or impurity spins baths). The Hamiltonian
describing the system is
HS = JS1S2,
i.e., the bath spins are coupled only with the ﬁrst central
spin, and the bath Hamiltonian is now
Elements of ρS
FIG. 3: Temporal evolution of diﬀerent elements of the density matrix ρ: diagonal elements corresponding to the states
| ↑↑⟩, | ↑↓⟩, | ↓↑⟩, and | ↓↓⟩(the four upper curves), and the
non-diagonal element ρ12
S (the lowest curve). Very slow relaxation is better seen for the uppermost curve (the diagonal
element corresponding to the state | ↑↑⟩) which has a small
negative slope.
Note that the two lines in the middle (the
second and the third lines from above, the diagonal elements
corresponding to the states | ↑↓⟩and | ↓↑⟩, correspondingly)
are very close to each other at t ≥200, as expected for a nearequilibrium (although not completely relaxed) situation.
In our simulations we used h = 0.1 and Unn′ randomly
distributed in the interval [−0.013, 0.013]. This Hamiltonian is known to result in stochastic behavior ; we
have checked the level statistics independently, and found
that it closely follows the Wigner-Dyson distribution.
To determine the pointer states, we need to ﬁnd the
elements of the reduced density matrix ρS(t) in the longtime limit t →∞.
We start at t = 0 from the state
of the compound system which is the product of the
states of the bath and the central system (as above),
but the initial state of the central spins now is the singlet |ψ0⟩= (1/
2)[| ↑↓⟩−| ↓↑⟩]. Because of decoherence, the ﬁnal state of the central system is mixed, and
ρS = w1|p1⟩⟨p1| + w2|p2⟩⟨p2|, where |p1⟩and |p2⟩are
the pointer states, which are superpositions of the states
| ↑↑⟩, | ↓↓⟩| ↑↓⟩, and | ↓↑⟩. As we have found in our
work , the form of this superposition is determined
by the ratio J/b, where b = P
n. For J/b ∼1, the
pointer states are very close to the singlet S = 0 and
triplet S = 1, Sz = 0 states, and for J ≪b, the pointer
states are close to | ↑↓⟩and | ↓↑⟩. Thus, the quantities
characterizing the type of the pointer state are the values
of the non-diagonal elements of the density matrix ρS in
the basis | ↑↑⟩, | ↓↓⟩| ↑↓⟩, and | ↓↑⟩. In particular, the
element ρ12
= ⟨↑↓|ρS| ↓↑⟩is a very suitable quantity
to characterize the pointer state. This non-diagonal element is close to zero for J ≪b, and gradually increases
in absolute value with increasing J.
Typical results for temporal evolution of the elements
of the density matrix ρS are shown in Fig. 3. One can
TABLE III: Comparison of the Suzuki-Trotter scheme (abbreviated as ST) with the Chebyshev’s scheme (abbreviated
as Ch) for the problem of determining the pointer states.
0.2 · 10−3
0.7 · 10−2
0.1 · 10−2
0.8 · 10−2
0.3 · 10−6
0.8 · 10−2
see that in this situation, we do not need to use the twoleap approach with diﬀerent T1 and T2. The relaxation
(after some initial period) is slow, and no fast oscillations of considerable amplitude exist at long times, so
that the one-leap approach is suﬃcient.
Thus, the ef-
ﬁciency of the Chebyshev-based scheme is expected to
be very good.
This is indeed the case, as Table III
demonstrates.
The results presented there correspond
to J = 0.1. The Chebyshev-based scheme is faster than
the Suzuki-Trotter method up to a factor of 8.
We have checked our conclusions on many other cases,
with the central systems made of up to M = 4 spins, and
with the baths made of up to N = 22 spins, with diﬀerent
Hamiltonians and diﬀerent values of the Hamiltonian parameters. We found that Chebyshev-based method gives
a signiﬁcant increase in the simulations speed for all problems where the value of T can be made suﬃciently large.
Theoretical studies of the spin-bath decoherence are
important for many areas of physics, including quantum
mechanics and quantum measurement theory, quantum
computing, solid state physics etc. Decoherence is a complex many-body phenomenon, and numerical simulation
is an important tool for its investigation. In this paper,
we have studied eﬃciency of the numerical scheme based
on the Chebyshev expansion. We have presented speciﬁc
details of the application of this method to the spin-bath
decoherence modeling.
To assess the eﬃciency of the
simulation method, we have used model problems which
we have encountered in our previous studies of the spinbath decoherence. We compared the Chebyshev-based
scheme with a fast method based on the Suzuki-Trotter
decomposition. We have found that in many cases, the
former gives a considerable increase in the speed of simulations, sometimes up to a factor of eight (for the problem
of ﬁnding the system’s pointer states), while in studying
the decoherence dynamics, the increase in speed is less
drastic (a factor of 2–3), but still considerable. This conclusion holds for many types of central systems and spin
baths, with diﬀerent Hamiltonians.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially carried out at the Ames Laboratory, which is operated for the U. S. Department of
Energy by Iowa State University under Contract No. W-
7405-82 and was supported by the Director of the Oﬃce
of Science, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Research of the U. S.
Department of Energy. Support from the Dutch “Stichting Nationale Computer Faciliteiten (NCF)” is gratefully
acknowledged.
 M. A. Nielsen, I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation
and quantum information .
 D. P. DiVincenzo, “The physical implementation of quantum computation”, quant-ph/0002077.
 J. Preskill, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 454, 385 .
 Decoherence: Theoretical, Experimental and Conceptual
Problems, eds. Ph. Blanchard, D. Giulini, E. Joos, C.
Kiefer, I.-O. Stamatescu, 
 D. Giulini, E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, I.-O. Stamatescu, H. D. Zeh, Decoherence and the Appearance of
a Classical World in Quantum Theory .
 W. H. Zurek, Phys. Rev. D 24, 1516 , Phys. Rev.
D 26, 1862 ; E. Joos and H. D. Zeh, Z. Phys. B
59, 223 .
 A. J. Leggett, S. Chakravarty, A. T. Dorsey, M. P. A.
Fisher, A. Garg, and W. Zwerger, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59,
 Quantum Tunneling of Magnetization — QTM’94, eds.
L. Gunther and B. Barbara, NATO ASI Ser. E, Vol. 301
 
 K. Saito, S. Miyashita, and H. De Raedt, Phys. Rev. B
60, 14553 
 M. I. Katsnelson, V. V. Dobrovitski, H. A. De Raedt,
and B. N. Harmon, “Destruction of the Kondo eﬀect by
a local measurement”, cond-mat/0205540.
 K. Saito, S. Takesue, and S. Miyashita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
65, 1243 
 H. Tal-Ezer, SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 23, 11 ; ibid.
SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 26, 1 .
 H. Tal-Ezer and R. Kosloﬀ, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 3967
 C. Leforestier, R.H. Bisseling, C. Cerjan, M.D. Feit, R.
Friesner, A. Guldberg, A. Hammerich, G. Jolicard, W.
Karrlein, H.-D. Meyer, N. Lipkin, O. Roncero, and R.
Kosloﬀ, J. Comp. Phys. 94, 59 .
 R. Kosloﬀ, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45, 145 .
 T. Iitaka, S. Nomura, H. Hirayama, X. Zhao, Y. Aoyagi,
and T. Sugano, Phys. Rev. E 56, 1222 .
 R.N. Silver and H. R¨oder, Phys. Rev. E 56, 4822 .
 Y.L. Loh, S.N. Taraskin, and S.R. Elliott, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 2290 ; ibid. 84, 5028 .
 P. de Vries and H. De Raedt, Phys. Rev. B47, 7929
 H. De Raedt, A.H. Hams, K. Michielsen, and K. De
Raedt, Comp. Phys. Comm. 132, 1 
 M. Suzuki, S. Miyashita, and A. Kuroda, Prog. Theor.
Phys. 58, 1377 
 U. Manthe, H. K¨oppel, and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem.
Phys. 95, 1708 .
 J. Jakliˇc, and P. Prelovˇsek, Adv. Phys. 49, 1 .
 M. H. Beck, A. J¨ackle, G. A. Worth, and H.-D. Meyer,
Phys. Rep. 324, 1 .
 H. Wang, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9948 .
 M. Thoss, H. Wang, and W. H. Miller, J. Chem. Phys.
115, 2991 .
 V. V. Dobrovitski, H. A. De Raedt, M. I. Katsnelson, and
B. N. Harmon, “Quantum oscillations without quantum
coherence”, quant-ph/0112053.
 Quadratic entropy S(2) = 1 −Tr ρ2
S characterizes, how
mixed is the state of the central system; for pure states
 A. Melikidze, V. V. Dobrovitski, H. A. De Raedt, M. I.
Katsnelson, and B. N. Harmon, “Parity eﬀects in spin
decoherence”, (to be published); quant-ph/0212097.
 B. Georgeot and D. L. Shepelyansky, Phys. Rev. E 62,
6366 .