Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/
Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32
INTRODUCTION
Cancer and many other major diseases are often
caused by varieties of subtle modifications in biological
sequences, typically by various types of post-translational
modification (PTM or PTLM) in protein , postreplication modification (PTRM) in DNA and posttranscription modification (PTCM) in RNA . In order
to reveal the pathological mechanisms of these diseases
and find new and revolutionary strategies to treat them,
many efforts have been made with the aim to identify the
possible modified sites in protein (see, e.g., , DNA
 , and RNA sequences ).
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most-studied
post-translational modification (PTM or PTLM) that can
alter the structural conformation of a protein, causing it to
become activated, deactivated, or modifying its function.
The most commonly phosphorylated amino acids are
serine (S-type), threonine (T-type), and tyrosine (Y-type).
In human cells, phosphorylation also plays a critical
role in the transmission of signals controlling a diverse
array of cellular functions, such as cell growth, survival
differentiation, and metabolism; while its dysregulation
is implicated in many diseases. Therefore, information
of phosphorylation sites in proteins is significant for both
basic research and drug development.
iPhos-PseEn: Identifying phosphorylation sites in proteins by
fusing different pseudo components into an ensemble classifier
Wang-Ren Qiu1,2, Xuan Xiao1,3, Zhao-Chun Xu1, Kuo-Chen Chou3,4,5
1Computer Department, Jingdezhen Ceramic Institute, Jingdezhen, China
2Department of Computer Science and Bond Life Science Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
3Gordon Life Science Institute, Boston, MA, USA
4Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
5Center of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China
Correspondence to: Wang-Ren Qiu, email: 
Xuan Xiao, email: 
Kuo-Chen Chou, email: 
Keywords: protein phosphorylation, pseudo components, random forests, ensemble classifier
Received: April 05, 2016        Accepted: May 23, 2016        Published: June 13, 2016
Protein phosphorylation is a posttranslational modification (PTM or PTLM),
where a phosphoryl group is added to the residue(s) of a protein molecule. The
most commonly phosphorylated amino acids occur at serine (S), threonine (T), and
tyrosine (Y). Protein phosphorylation plays a significant role in a wide range of
cellular processes; meanwhile its dysregulation is also involved with many diseases.
Therefore, from the angles of both basic research and drug development, we are
facing a challenging problem: for an uncharacterized protein sequence containing
many residues of S, T, or Y, which ones can be phosphorylated, and which ones
cannot? To address this problem, we have developed a predictor called iPhos-PseEn
by fusing four different pseudo component approaches (amino acids’ disorder scores,
nearest neighbor scores, occurrence frequencies, and position weights) into an
ensemble classifier via a voting system. Rigorous cross-validations indicated that
the proposed predictor remarkably outperformed its existing counterparts. For the
convenience of most experimental scientists, a user-friendly web-server for iPhos-
PseEn has been established at by which
users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the
complicated mathematical equations involved.
Research Paper
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Many efforts have been made to identify the
protein phosphorylation. These methods include mass
spectroscopy , phosphor-specific antibody ,
etc. Unfortunately, these experimental techniques are
both time-consuming and expensive. Facing the explosive
growth of protein sequences merging in post genomic age,
it is highly desired to develop computational methods
for effectively identifying the phosphorylation sites in
Actually, by using computational approaches such
as artificial neural networks, hidden Markov models, and
support vector machines, some prediction method were
developed based on various different features including
disorder scores, KNN scores, amino acid frequency
 , and attribute grouping and position weight amino
acid composition .
In view of its importance and urgency, it is certainly
worthwhile to further improve the prediction quality by
introducing some novel approaches as elaborated below.
According to the Chou’s 5-step rule and
demonstrated in a series of recent publications , to develop a really useful sequence-based
predictor for a biological system, we should stick to the
following five guidelines and make them crystal clear:
(1) how to construct or select a valid benchmark dataset
to train and test the predictor; (2) how to formulate
the biological sequence samples with an effective
mathematical expression that can truly reflect their
essential correlation with the target concerned; (3) how
to introduce or develop a powerful algorithm (or engine)
to run the prediction; (4) how to properly conduct crossvalidation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated
accuracy; (5) how to provide a web-server and user guide
to make people very easily to get their desired results.
Below, we are to address the five procedures one-by-one.
However, their order may be changed in order to match the
rubric style of Oncotarget.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A new ensemble web-server predictor
By fusing four different pseudo component
approaches, a new ensemble classifier, named iPhos-
PseEn, has been established for predicting phosphorylation
sites in proteins.
Success rates and comparison with the existing
The success rates achieved by the iPhos-PseEn
predictor via the 5-fold cross validation for S-, T- and
Y-type phosphorylation are given in Table 1, where for
facilitating comparison the corresponding rates by Musite
 and PWAAC are also listed. As we can see from
the table, compared with its counterparts, iPhos-PseEn is
remarkably better than its counterparts in predicting all the
three phosphorylation types as measured with all the four
metrics, clearly indicating that the proposed predictor not
only can achieve higher sensitivity, specificity, and overall
accuracy but is also much more stable. As shown from
the table, compared with Sp, the improvement in Sn is
relatively less significant. This is quite normal because
the metrics Sn and Sp are used to measure a predictor
from two different angles and hence they are actually
constrained with each other .
Graphical approach is a useful vehicle for analyzing
complicated biological systems as demonstrated by a
series of previous studies (see, e.g., ). Here, to
provide an intuitive comparison, the graph of Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) was utilized to
show the advantage of iPhos-PseEn over the Musite 
and PWAAC . In Figure 1 the green and red graphic
lines are the ROC curves for the Musite and PWAAC,
respectively; while the blue graphic line for the proposed
predictor iPhos-PseEn. The area under the ROC curve is
called AUC (area under the curve). The greater the AUC
value is, the better the predictor will be . As we
can see from Figure 1, the area under the blue curve
is remarkably greater than that under the red or green
line, once again indicating that the proposed predictor is
indeed much better than Musite and PWAAC predictors.
Therefore, it is anticipated that iPhos-PseEn will become
a useful high throughput tool in this important area, or at
the very least, play a complementary role to the existing
Why could the proposed method enhance the
prediction quality so significantly? The key is the
following. Many important features, which have been
proved being closely correlated with phosphorylation
sites by previous investigators, such as disorder, nearest
neighbor scores, amino acid occurrence frequency, and
amino acid position weight, are fused into an ensemble
classifier via the general PseAAC approach, as will be
elaborated in the Materials and Methods section.
Web server and user guide
As pointed out in two recent review papers ,
a prediction method with its web-server available would
practically much more useful. The web-server for iPhos-
PseEn has been established. Moreover, to maximize the
convenience for users, a step-by-step guide is provided
Opening the web-server at 
cn/iPhos-PseEn, you will see the top page of
iPhos-PseEn on your computer screen, as shown
in Figure 2. Click on the Read Me button to see a
brief introduction about this predictor.
Either type or copy/paste your query protein
sequences into the input box at the center of Figure
2. The input sequences should be in the FASTA
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Table 1: A comparison of the proposed predictor with the existing methods based on the 5-fold
cross-validation on exactly the same benchmark dataset
Prediction method
Type of phosphorylation
iPhos-PseEnc
iPhos-PseEnc
iPhos-PseEnc
iPhos-PseEnc
aThe method developed by Gao et al. .
bThe method developed by Huang et al. .
cThe method proposed in this paper.
dSee Eq.14 for the definition of metrics.
Figure 1: The intuitive graphs of ROC curves to show the performance of Musite, PWAAC, iPhos-PseEn, respectively,
for the case of the center residue  is (A) S, (B) T, and (C) Y. See the main text for further explanation.
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
format. For the examples of sequences in FASTA
format, click the Example button right above the
input box.
Select the phosphorylation type concerned: check
on the S, T, or Y button to predict phosphoserine,
phosphothreonine, or phosphotyrosine, respectively.
Click on the Submit button to see the predicted
result. For example, if you use the Sequence_S in
the Example window as the input and check on the
S button, after 20 seconds or so since your
submitting, you will see the following on your
screen: Sequence_S contains 11 S residues, of
which 2 are predicted to be of phosphorylation site
and they are at the sequence positions 2 and 37. If
you use the Sequence_T as the input and check on
the T button, you will see: Sequence_T contains 11
T residues, of which 5 are of phosphorylation site
and at positions 12, 113, 118, 123, and 136. If you
use the Sequence_Y as the input and check on the
Y button, you will see: Sequence_Y contains 12 Y
residues, of which 3 are of phosphorylation site and
at the positions 4, 119 and 199. Compared with
experimental
observations,
Predicted results contain 1 false
negative result (
that is located at 9th S
residues in sequence_S, and 4 false positive results
that are located at the 11th, 123th, 136th
residues in Sequence_T as well as the 119th Y
residue in Sequence_Y. In other words, the total
number of phosphorylation sites involved in the
above predictions is
total number of non-phosphorylation sites
investigated is
Substituting
these data into Eq.14, we have Sn
Sp = 85.19% Acc
and Mcc = 0.6292
quite consistent with the rates in Table 1 obtained
by iPhos-PseEn on the benchmark dataset via the
5-fold cross validation test.
As shown on the lower panel of Figure 2, you may
also choose the batch prediction by entering your
e-mail address and your desired batch input file (in
FASTA format of course) via the Browse button.
To see the sample of batch input file, click on the
button Batch-example.
Click the Supporting Information button to
download the benchmark dataset used in this study.
Click the Citation button to find the relevant
papers that document the detailed development and
algorithm for iPhos-PseEn.
Figure 2: A semi-screenshot to show the top-page of the iPhos-PseEn web-server at 
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Benchmark dataset
To ensure a high quality, the benchmark dataset used
in this study was constructed based on UniProtKB/Swiss-
Prot database at 
ebi.ac.uk/uniprot/ according to following the procedures:
(1) Open the web site at followed
by clicking the button “Advanced”. (2) Select “PTM/
Processing” and “Modified residue [FT]” for “Fields”. (3)
Select “Any experimental assertion” for “Evidence”. (4)
Type “human” for “Term” to do search. (5) Collected were
only those proteins that consist of 50 and more amino acid
residues to exclude fragments. (6) The proteins thus
obtained were subject to a screening operation to remove
those sequences that had
pairwise sequence
identity to any other.
After strictly following the aforementioned procedures,
we finally obtained 1,770 proteins, of which 638 are nonphosphorylated proteins and 1,132 are phosphorylated
proteins. The latter contain 845 phosphoserine proteins, 386
phosphothreonine proteins, and 249 phosphotyrosine proteins.
Note that some of phosphorylated proteins may be with multilabel, meaning they may belong to more than one type.
For facilitating description later, the Chou’s peptide
formulation was adopted. The formulation was used
to investigate the signal peptide cleavage sites ,
nitrotyrosine sites , methylation sites , enzyme
specificity , protein-protein interactions ,
hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine sites , and proteinprotein binding sites . According to Chou’s scheme, a
potential phosphorylation site-containing peptide sample
can be generally expressed by
where the symbol  denotes the single amino acid code
S, T, or Y, the subscript ξ is an integer, R −ξ represents the
ξ -th upstream amino acid residue from the center, the
R +ξ the ξ -th downstream amino acid residue, and so forth
( Figure 3). The (2
-tuple peptide sample
be further classified into the following two categories:
, if its center is a phosphorylation site
other wise
 denotes a true phosphorylation segment
with S, T, or Y at its center,
 denotes a
corresponding false phosphorylation segment, and the
symbol ∈ means “a member of” in the set theory.
Figure 3: A schematic drawing to show the peptide model
 when (A)
Eq.3 as well as the relevant text for further explanation.
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
In literature the benchmark dataset usually consists
of a training dataset and a testing dataset: the former is
used for training a model; while the latter, testing the
model. But as pointed out in a comprehensive review ,
there is no need to artificially separate a benchmark dataset
into the two parts if the prediction model is analyzed with
the jackknife test or subsampling (K-fold) cross-validation
because the outcome thus obtained is actually from a
combination of many different independent dataset tests.
Therefore, the benchmark dataset
 for the current
study can be formulated as
where the positive subset
 only contains the
samples of true phosphorylation segments
, and the
negative subset
 only contains the samples of false
phosphorylation segments
 (see Eq.2); while 
represents the symbol for “union” in the set theory.
The detailed procedures to construct the benchmark
dataset are as follows. (1) As done in , slide the
-tuple peptide window along each of the
aforementioned 1,770 protein sequences, and collected
were only those peptide segments that have S, T, and Y at
the center. (2) If the upstream or downstream in a protein
sequence was less than ξ or greater than L −ξ where L is
the length of the protein sequence concerned, the lacking
residue was filled with the same residue of its closest
neighbor. (3) The peptide segment samples thus obtained
were put into the positive subset
if their centers
have been experimentally annotated as the phosphorylation
sites; otherwise, into the negative subset
reduce redundancy, all those peptide samples were
removed if they had pairwise sequence identity with any
Note that the length of peptide samples and their
number thus generated would depend on the ξ value.
Many tests by previous investigators , however,
had indicated that it would be most promising when
or the sample’s length was 2
Accordingly,
hereafter we only consider the case of
; i.e., the
samples with 13 amino acid residues. Thus, the benchmark
datasets thus obtained for
are given in Supporting Information S1, S2, and
S3, respectively. Listed in Table 2 is a summary of their
Incorporate extracted features into general
pseudo amino acid composition
With the avalanche of biological sequence generated
in the post-genomic age, one of the most important
problems in computational biology is how to formulate
a biological sequence with a discrete model or a vector,
yet still considerably keep its sequence order information
or essential feature. This is because all the existing
machine-learning algorithms can only handle vector but
not sequence samples, as elaborated in .
To address this problem, the pseudo amino acid
composition or PseAAC was proposed. Ever since
the concept of pseudo amino acid composition or Chou’s
PseAAC was proposed, it has rapidly penetrated into
many biomedicine and drug development areas and
nearly all the areas of computational proteomics (see, e.g.,
 as well as a long list of references cited in ).
Because it has been widely and increasingly used,
recently three powerful open access soft-wares, called
‘PseAAC-Builder’ , ‘propy’ , and ‘PseAAC-
General’ , were established: the former two are for
generating various modes of Chou’s special PseAAC;
while the 3rd one for those of Chou’s general PseAAC
 , including not only all the special modes of feature
vectors for proteins but also the higher level feature
vectors such as “Functional Domain” mode (see Eqs.9-10
of ), “Gene Ontology” mode (see Eqs.11-12 of ),
and “Sequential Evolution” or “PSSM” mode (see Eqs.13-
14 of ). Inspired by the successes of using PseAAC
to deal with protein/peptide sequences, three web-servers
 were developed for generating various feature
vectors for DNA/RNA sequences. Particularly, recently
a powerful web-server called Pse-in-One has been
developed that can be used to generate any desired feature
vectors for protein/peptide and DNA/RNA sequences
according to the need of users’ studies.
According to the general PseAAC , the peptide
sequence of Eq.1 or Eq.4 can be formulated as
where the components
will be defined
by how to extract useful features from the relevant protein/
peptide sequence, and T is the transpose operator.
Disorder Score (DS)
Disorder score is a feature to measure the stability
of the local structure. Although disordered region does
not have fixed three-dimensional structure in proteins, its
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
functional importance has been increasingly recognized
 . It was recently used for identifying protein
methylation sites . Particularly, it has been observed
that the phosphorylation sites have a strong tendency to
be located in disordered regions . Using the VSL2
program , the disorder score of each amino acid
residues in a protein can be calculated and expressed by
is the DS score of the k-th amino acid residue
when its type is (
1, 2, , 20)
. Thus, to
reflect the disorder information, the PseAAC of Eq.4 was
defined by
where the components are taken from the disorder score
matrix of Eq.5 according to the constituent amino acids in
Eq.1 as well as their positions in the relevant protein.
K Nearest Neighbor Score (KNNS)
Local sequence clusters often exist around
phosphorylation sites because the PTM samples in a same
family usually share similar patterns. To reflect this kind of
patterns, the PseAAC of Eq.4 was defined by
as done in via the BLOSUM62 matrix .
Amino Acid Occurrence Frequency (AAOF)
To reflect the amino acid occurrence frequency, the
component in Eq.4 are defined by a 20-D vector; i.e.,
where f1 is the occurrence frequency of amino acid A in
the relevant 13-tuple peptide sample, f2 is the occurrence
frequency of amino acid C, and so forth (according to the
alphabetical order of the single-letter codes for 20 native
amino acids).
Position Weight Amino Acid Composition
Position weight amino acid composition can reveal
the sequence-order information around some PTM
sites, and it had been used in identifying viral protein
phosphorylation sites as well as methylation sites
 . To reflect this kind of information, the PseAAC of
Eq.4 was defined by
where ξ is the same as in Eq.1, and
Table 2: Summary of phosphorylation site samples in the benchmark dataseta
Phosphorylation type and number of samples
aSee Eqs.1-3 and the relevant text for further explanation.
bOf the negative samples, 21,564 from the 845 phosphoserine proteins and the 21,968 from the 638 non-phosphorylated
cOf the negative samples, 4,307 from the 386 phosphothreonine proteins and the 5,432 from the 638 non-phosphorylated
dOf the negative samples, 3,968 from the 249 phosphotyrosine proteins and the 4,362 from the 638 non-phosphorylated
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Operation engine
Random forests algorithm
Widely used in various areas of computational
biology (see, e.g. ), the random
forests (RF) algorithm is a powerful algorithm. Its detailed
formulation has been clearly described in , and hence
there is no need to repeat here.
As shown above, by using DS, KNNS, AAOF,
and PWAAC, the sample of Eq.1 can be defined by four
different PseAAC vectors, as indicated in Eqs.6, 7, 8, and
9, respectively. Accordingly, we have four different basic
RF predictors; i.e.,
RF(1), when the sample is based on DS or Eq.6
when the sample is based on KNNS or Eq.7
when the sample is based on AAOF or Eq.8
when the sample is based on PWAAC or Eq.9
Ensemble random forests
As demonstrated by a series of previous studies, such
as signal peptide prediction , membrane protein
type classification , protein subcellular location
prediction , protein fold pattern recognition ,
enzyme functional classification , protein-proteins
interaction prediction , and protein-protein binding
site identification , the ensemble predictor formed by
fusing an array of individual predictors via a voting system
can generate much better prediction quality.
Here, the ensemble predictor is formed by fusing
the aforementioned four different individual RF predictor
of Eq.12; i.e.,
 denotes the ensemble predictor, and the
symbol ∀ denotes the fusing operator . In the current
study, the concrete fusion process can be described as
follows. For a query sample of Eq.1, it would be in turn
predicted by RF(1), RF(2), RF(3) and RF(4), respectively.
If most outcomes indicated that it belonged to
phosphorylation segment, its central residue  was
predicted to be phosphorylation site; otherwise, non-
phosphorylation site. If there was a tie, the result could be
randomly picked between the two. But this kind of tie case
rarely happened. For more detailed about this, see a
comprehensive review where a crystal clear
elucidation with a set of elegant equations are given and
hence there is no need to repeat here.
The predictor established via the above procedures
is called “iPhos-PseEn”, where “i” stands for identify”,
“Phos” for “phosphorylation site”, and “Pse” for “pseudo
components”, and “En” for “ensemble”. Depicted in Figure 4
is a flowchart to show how the ensemble predictor is working.
As mentioned in Introduction, among the five
guidelines in developing a useful predictor, one of them
is how to objectively evaluate its anticipated success
rates . To fulfil this, the following two things need to
consider: one is what metrics should be used to measure
the predictor’s quality; the other is what kind of test
method should be taken to derive the metrics rates. Below,
let us to address such two problems.
Metrics used to reflect the success rates
A set of four metrics are usually used in literature
to measure the quality of a predictor: (1) overall accuracy
or Acc; (2) Mathew’s correlation coefficient or MCC; (3)
sensitivity or Sn; and (4) specificity or Sp . But the
conventional formulations for the four metrics are not
intuitive, and most experimental scientists feel hard to
understand them, particularly for the MCC. Fortunately,
if using the symbols introduced by Chou in studying
the signal peptides, the set of four metrics can be written
as the following forms :
N + represents the total number of truephosphorylation samples investigated, whereas N +
number of phosphorylation samples incorrectly predicted
to be of false- phosphorylation sample; N − the total
number of false-phosphorylation samples, whereas N −
the number of false-phosphorylation samples incorrectly
predicted to be of true- phosphorylation sample.
According to Eq.14, the following are crystal clear.
meaning none of the truephosphorylation samples is incorrectly predicted to be of
false-phosphorylation sample, we have the sensitivity
; whereas N
meaning that all the truephosphorylation samples are incorrectly predicted to be of
false-phosphorylation sample, we have the sensitivity
. (2) When
meaning none of the falsephosphorylation samples is incorrectly predicted to be of
true-phosphorylation sample, we have the specificity
; whereas N
meaning that all the falsephosphorylation samples are incorrectly predicted to be of
true-phosphorylation sample, we have the specificity
meaning that none of the
true-phosphorylation samples in the positive dataset and
none of the false-phosphorylation samples in the negative
dataset is incorrectly predicted, we have the overall
accuracy Acc
= and; MCC
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Figure 4: A flow chart to show how the four individual random forest predictors are fused into an ensemble classifier
via a voting system. See Eqs.12-13 as well as the relevant text for further explanation.
meaning that all the true-phosphorylation
samples in the positive dataset and all the falsephosphorylation samples in the negative dataset are
incorrectly predicted, we have the overall accuracy
= −. (4) When
we have Acc
no better than random guessing.
As we can see from the above discussion, the set
of metrics formulated in Eq.14 has made the meanings
of sensitivity, specificity, overall accuracy, and Mathew’s
correlation coefficient much more intuitive and easierto-understand, particularly for the meaning of MCC, as
unanimously concurred and practically applied by many
authors in a series of recent publications (see, e.g., ).
Note that, of the four metrics in Eq.14, the most
important are the Acc and MCC: the former reflects the
overall accuracy of a predictor; while the latter, its stability
in practical applications. The metrics Sn and Sp are used
to measure a predictor from two opposite angles. When,
and only when, both Sn and Sp of a tested predictor are
higher than those of the other tested predictor, we can say
the former predictor is better than the latter one.
Also, it is instructive to point out that the set of
equations given in Eq.14 is valid for the single-label
systems only. As for the multi-label systems whose
emergence has become increasingly often in the system
biology and system medicine , a completely
different set of metrics is needed as elucidated in .
Cross-validation
With a set of intuitive evaluation metrics clearly
defined, the next step is what kind of validation method
should be used to derive the metrics values.
The following three cross-validation methods are
often used in literature: (1) independent dataset test, (2)
subsampling (or K-fold cross-validation) test, and (3)
jackknife test . Of these three, however, the jackknife
test is deemed the least arbitrary that can always yield a
unique outcome for a given benchmark dataset as elucidated
in . Accordingly, the jackknife test has been widely
recognized and increasingly used by investigators to
examine the quality of various predictors (see, e.g., ).
In this study, however, to reduce the computational
time, we adopted the 5-fold cross-validation method, as
done by many investigators with SVM as the prediction
engine. Given below is a more rigorous description of
5-fold cross-validation on a benchmark dataset .
First, randomly divided the benchmark dataset 
into five groups
, with each
having approximately the same number of samples not
only for the main-set level but also for all the sub-set
levels considered, as can be formulated by
where the symbol  means that the divided datasets are
about the same in size, and so are their subsets . Next,
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
each of the five sub-benchmark datasets was singled out
one-by-one and tested by the model trained with the
remaining four sub-benchmark datasets. The crossvalidation process was repeated for five times, with their
average as the final outcome. In other words, during the
process of 5-fold cross-validation, both the training
dataset and testing dataset were actually open, and each
sub-benchmark datasets was in turn moved between the
two. The 5-fold cross-validation test can exclude the
“memory” effect, just like conducting 5 different
independent dataset tests.
As we can see from Table 2 or Supporting
Information S1, S2, and S3, the negative subset
is much larger than the positive subset
 The ratio
is about 10:1 for all the three types of phosphorylation.
Although this might reflect the real world in which the
non-phosphorylation sites are always the majority
compared with the phosphorylation ones, a predictor
trained by such a highly skewed benchmark dataset
would inevitably have the bias consequence that many
phosphorylation sites might be mispredicted as non-
phosphorylation ones. To deal with this kind of situation,
we randomly divide the negative subset into ten groups
with each having about the same size. Thus, for each of
the three types of phosphorylation, we have ten
benchmark datasets in which the positive and negative
samples are about the same. It was based on each of such
ten datasets that the 5-fold cross-validation was
performed, followed by taking an average for the
final score.
CONCLUSIONS
The iPhos-PseEn predictor is a new bioinformatics
tool for identifying the phosphorylation sites in proteins.
Compared with the existing predictors in this area, its
prediction quality is much better, with remarkably higher
sensitivity, specificity, overall accuracy, and Mathew’s
correlation coefficient. For the convenience of most
experimental scientists, we have provided its web-server
and a step-by-step guide, by which users can easily obtain
their desired results without the need to go through the
detailed mathematics.
We anticipate that iPhos-PseEn will become a
very useful high throughput tool, or at the very least, a
complementary tool to the existing methods for predicting
the protein phosphorylation sites.
Online Supporting Information
Please refer to "Supporting information S1,
Supporting information S2, Supporting information S3"
in Supplementary Materials
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
The authors wish to thank the six anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments, which were
very useful for strengthening the presentation of this paper.
This work was partially supported by the National Nature
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 61261027, 31260273,
61300139, 31560316), the Natural Science Foundation
of Jiangxi Province, China (No. 20142BAB207013), the
Scientific Research plan of the Department of Education
of JiangXi Province(GJJ14640), the Visiting Scholars
Program of State Scholarship Fund (201508360047).
The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.