BioMed Central
BMC Neuroscience
BMC Neuroscience
Research article
Assessing the heritability of attentional networks
Jin Fan*1, Yanhong Wu2, John A Fossella1 and Michael I Posner1
Address: 1Sackler Institute, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New York, USA and 2Department of Psychology, Peking University,
Beijing, China
E-mail: Jin Fan* - ; Yanhong Wu - ; John A Fossella - ;
Michael I Posner - 
*Corresponding author
Background: Current efforts to study the genetics of higher functions have been lacking
appropriate phenotypes to describe cognition. One of the problems is that many cognitive
concepts for which there is a single word (e.g. attention) have been shown to be related to several
anatomical networks. Recently we have developed an Attention Network Test (ANT) that
provides a separate measure for each of three anatomically defined attention networks. In this small
scale study, we ran 26 pairs of MZ and DZ twins in an effort to determine if any of these networks
show sufficient evidence of heritability to warrant further exploration of their genetic basis.
Results: The efficiency of the executive attention network, that mediates stimulus and response
conflict, shows sufficient heritability to warrant further study. Alerting and overall reaction time
show some evidence for heritability and in our study the orienting network shows no evidence of
heritability.
Conclusions: These results suggest that genetic variation contributes to normal individual
differences in higher order executive attention involving dopamine rich frontal areas including the
anterior cingulate. At least the executive portion of the ANT may serve as a valid endophenotype
for larger twin studies and subsequent molecular genetic analysis in normal subject populations.
Background
In order to foster genetic studies there has been increased emphasis on the development of appropriate
phenotypes to describe cognitive functions such as attention (see, for example, ). In general these efforts have
used tasks that do not distinguish between different
functions of attention. However, imaging studies have
revealed quite specific anatomical networks for functions of attention such as orienting to sensory events, developing and maintaining the alert state and executive
control used in resolving conflict between stimuli and responses (for a review of these networks see ). We seek
to use this anatomical information to define appropriate
endophenotypes for genetic studies of attention.
Imaging studies show that the alerting network depends
largely on frontal and parietal areas of the right hemisphere . The orienting network has important involvement of superior and inferior parts of the parietal
lobe in conjunction with frontal and subcortical structures related to eye movements . The executive control network involves frontal areas including the anterior
cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex .
Each of the networks is also differentially dependent on
a particular neuromodulator. Studies of alert monkeys
suggest that the effectiveness of alerting produced by a
warning signal can be eliminated by drugs that block noradrenaline . Lesions of the cholinergic system and
Published: 14 September 2001
BMC Neuroscience 2001, 2:14
Received: 9 July 2001
Accepted: 14 September 2001
This article is available from: 
© 2001 Fan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. Verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in any medium for any non-commercial
purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL. For commercial use, contact 
BMC Neuroscience 2001, 2:14
 
of drugs blocking ACh transmission have effects on orienting of visual attention in monkeys . The executive
network involves dopamine rich areas of the prefrontal
cortex and anterior cingulate. Lesions in the cell bodies
of dopamine (DA) neurons as well as in the terminals located in prefrontal cortex result in cognitive
deficits in executive function tasks.
There is considerable evidence that insults to parts of the
brain containing these networks or to the neuromodulators involved can produce specific neurological or psychiatric deficits. For example, strokes to the posterior
parietal lobe involved in orienting produce neglect of the
contralesional space and specific deficits in tasks involved the orienting network . Reductions in striatal
dopamine seen in Parkinson's disease result in an inability to shift sets from one instruction to another, possibly
reflecting a difficulty in control of conflict . Many
psychiatric disorders whose anatomical origins may not
be well understood also show deficits in attention. For
example, patients with schizophrenia exhibit difficulties
in sensorimotor gating , smooth pursuit eye-tracking
 , set-shifting , and working memory tasks .
Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) exhibit abnormal performance in sustained attention tasks and studies on autism reveal slowed
covert orienting of visual spatial attention . Patients
with Alzheimer's disease show covert orienting deficits
in visual attention tasks . Interestingly, many of
these disorders show familial patterns of inheritance and
increased concordance in monozygotic (MZ) vs. dizygotic (DZ) twins suggesting genetic origins .
There is evidence that some kinds of variation in attention in normal subject and patient populations involves
genetic variation. Studies using the Continuous Performance Task (CPT) have shown that the d' signal detection
component of CPT performance has a heritability among
normal subjects of 0.49 . The Span of Apprehension
task (SPAN), a visual search task, has been shown to
have an heritability among normal subjects of 0.65 
and the P/N ratio of the Spontaneous Selective Attention
Task (SSAT) was shown to have an heritability among
normal subjects of 0.41 . Twin studies using discordant twins affected with schizophrenia show that spatial
working memory, divided attention, choice reaction time
and selective attention and attentional set-shifting
 are underlain by inherited factors. Studies on infants suggest that effortful control and duration of orienting are heritable as well .
Recent studies have proceeded to associate genetic variation with performance variation in attentional function.
For example, persons homozygous for the ε4 allele apoe
gene, who are asymptomatic, but at risk for Alzheimer's
disease have been shown to have a specific deficit in orienting of attention that is in the same direction as the
Alzheimer's patients . Other studies using endophenotypic measures of attention have linked variation in
the chrna7 gene with sensorimotor gating performance
 and variation in the drd4 gene with attention deficits . However, the tasks used in these studies have
not generally involved either the orienting network
alone, or the task involves an undefined combination of
different networks.
In previous work we have provided an Attention Network Test (ANT) for measuring the efficiency of the
alerting, orienting and conflict networks . The advantage of this measure over other neuropsychological
measures of attention is that it provides a rapid measure
of the efficiency of each of the attention networks which
have been linked to a specific anatomy and specific
chemical modulators. The ANT task is a combination of
the cued reaction time and the flanker task . Its
simple design permits use with adults, children, non-human primates, and patients with various abnormalities
of attention. Our previous paper and other studies
using the flanker task suggest that performance on this
task follows a roughly normal distribution. Performance
is also stable within normal adult subjects across a wide
age range and not detectably different in males and females. It has also been shown that practice or previous
experience has little impact on the attentional measures
although the overall reaction time is reduced. In this
small scale preliminary study we take a step toward the
use of the ANT as an endophenotype in genetic studies by
exploring the heritability of each of the networks studied
by the test.
The mean efficiency scores for each of the three attention
networks were calculated according to the operational
definitions described below (see Materials and Methods). Table 1 shows means and standard deviations (SD)
for each of the attention networks and overall reaction
times (RT) separately for MZ and DZ twins.
The values obtained for the three attentional networks
were similar to those found previously . To determine if these values or the overall RT differed between
members of a twin pair or between twin type (MZ or DZ),
we carried out a 4 (three effects and mean RT) × 2 (2
twins in each pair) × 2 (MZ and DZ) analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with twin type as between subject factor. There
were no significant differences between twins in the pair,
[F(1, 50) = 2.74, MSe = 912.98, p > .10], and twin type
(MZ and DZ), [F (1, 50) = 2.79, MSe = 3553.27, p > .10].
BMC Neuroscience 2001, 2:14
 
The study consisted of two sessions which permitted
analysis of reliability in the present sample. The testretest reliability for alerting, orienting, and conflict were
.36, .41, and .81 respectively. They were significant (p <
.01). Since the means of the two test sessions were used,
the expected reliability composite of two measures were
.53, .58, and .90 for alerting, orienting, and conflict respectively.
The alerting, orienting, and conflict scores may be influenced directly or indirectly by the overall mean RT. Generally one expects larger subtractions when the RTs are
longer. In order to reduce these effects, ratio scores (effect divided by overall RT) were used in the correlation
analysis and the estimations of the heritability of the
three networks. Table 2 shows the correlation values between twin pairs of MZ and DZ twins for each network.
Heritability is generally thought to be the proportion of
variance that can be attributed to genetic rather than
strictly environmental factors. Most often it is estimated
by comparing monozygotic and dizygotic twins . Although there remains controversy in how purely genetic
these calculation are and the best way compute heritability we chose to calculate heritability in two
ways. First, using the classical approach, the proportion
of variance attributed to additive genetic factors (narrow
sense heritability) was estimated by doubling the difference in correlation between MZ and DZ twins. This approach provides a simple and reliable index for twin
studies which vary across time and culture . This
method however, is ineffective at disentangling non-additive genetic factors and epistatic components as well
and unique and shared environmental components. Table 3 shows the efficiency of the conflict network is heritable (h F 2 = 0.89, h H 2 = .62) while low heritabilities
were observed for alerting and median reaction time (h F
2 = 0.18 and 0.16 respectively, and h H 2 = 0.14 and 0.24
respectively). The orienting response shows no evidence
of heritability. The orienting response shows a higher
correlation in DZ twins than MZ twins
Table 1: Means and standard deviations (SD) for each of the attention network and mean RT.
MZ twins (n = 52)
Mean (msec)
DZ twins (n = 52)
Mean (msec)
Combined (n = 104)
Mean (msec)
Table 2: Correlation values between twin pairs of MZ and DZ
twins for each network.
Note: * p < .05; ** p < .01
Table 3: Heritability estimates for three attentional networks and mean RT
Heritability measure
h2 F = 2 (rMZ - rDZ)
.18 (-.73, 1.10)
-.59 (-1.56, .41)
.89 (.09, 1.70)
.16(-.42, .75)
h2 H = (r MZ - rDZ)/ (1 - r DZ)
.43 (-.85, .85)
.00 (-.69, .69)
.85 (.29, .93)
.40(-.90, .90)
.53 (-.79, .79)
.50 (-.70, .70)
.00 (-.72, .72)
.76(-.90, .90)
.73 (.53, .91)
.86 (.70, 1.00)
-.53 (-.73, -.38)
-.51(-1.00,-.36)
Note: Confidence intervals of h 2 F were estimated based on Appendix 6 (reference ;) h 2 H was cited in (reference ;) ML, Maximum Likelihood
fit, (reference ;) h: path coefficient for additive genetic; c: path coefficient for shared environment; and e: path coefficient for specific environment.
BMC Neuroscience 2001, 2:14
 
In addition to the classical estimation of h 2, we applied
the structural equation modeling package Mx which
allows the explicit representation of observed and latent
variables. The advantage of this method lies in the ability
to best fit the observed data according to path models
that hypothesize varying degrees of additive and non-additive contributions as well as shared and unique environmental contributions. We chose a conservative
approach, setting, the expected genetic correlation
among DZ twins, to 0.5 and used the standard twin analysis path. Table 3 shows the heritability estimates for
three attentional networks and mean RT (and 95% confidence limits). The contributions to the additive genetic
variance (h 2), common environmental variance (c 2) and
unique environmental variance (e 2) values are given. Interestingly, the h 2s were in agreement with those calculated using the classical approach. The effect of conflict
was highly heritable (h 2 = 0.72) while low heritabilities
were observed for alerting and reaction time and (h 2 =
0.18 and 0.16 respectively).
Discussion
Because of the small Ns involved in this study, only the
effect of conflict is significantly different than 0 and this
is due to the very small correlation found in the DZ twins.
The correlation among DZ twins in conflict is suspiciously low because it is a smaller number than for any of the
other networks this, of course, would inflate the overall
heritability of the conflict network. To compare the heritability of the various networks would take a much larger study. For example, a power calculation suggests that
with the current size of the effect it would take more than
600 pairs to reach significance for the alerting network.
Nonetheless there is some indication favoring the heritability of the executive network. The heritability of the
executive network has been observed in other conflict
tasks such as the Stroop color-word task which also
activates the cingulate and other frontal areas . However, the flanker task has an advantage over the Stroop in
that it does not involve language and our results show
considerably higher heritability.
The heritability of reaction time has also been observed
in other twin studies on normal subjects . In genetic
studies where cognitive assays for executive control or
general intelligence depend on reaction time measures,
the heritability of lower levels of processing involved in
RT may thus influence the performance scores. To avoid
this we normalized all efficiency scores as a function of
median RT.
There have been no reported twin studies on the alerting
response per se, but this function, namely the maintenance of the alert state is inherently a part of many neuropsychological
Interestingly,
depression and mood have shown deficits in simple reaction time tasks in patients that report sadness or depression . These RT deficits are specific to left visual
field (right hemisphere) and are consistent with the right
frontal and parietal networks involved in alerting.
Changes in the efficiency of the alerting network as a
consequence of mood and depression are further supported by the findings of Liotti and Tucker where
subjects induced into sadness showed no improvement
in RT when given alerting cues before target stimuli were
presented. The mean probandwise MZ concordance rate
for unipolar depression (40%) is more than twice that for
DZ twins (17%) as well as for narrowly defined depression (50%:29%) suggesting the presence of genetic determinants.
In our study there is no evidence of heritability for the
orienting network. This may be because of low power of
this small study. There is evidence that genes can influence orienting in a task similar to ours. Alzheimer's Disease is a heritable condition with a well described visual
orienting deficit and where associations have been found
in unaffected relatives between visual orienting and the
apoe gene . In order to keep the ANT simple the peripheral orienting cues are 100% valid. This differs from
similar tasks of visual orienting where usually only 80%
of the orienting cues are valid. In the visual orienting
studies of Greenwood et al., the association with the
apoe gene was observed only when this validity manipulation was utilized. It is possible that the use of 100% validity and the lack of any specific instruction may have
made use of the cues a matter of individual strategy and
thus both relatively unreliable and less subject to genetic
influences. Future genetic studies may be more fruitful
when the validity manipulation is included in the ANT.
While it is likely that our failure to find any evidence of
heritability of the orienting network is due to either the
small scale of our study or weaknesses in our assay, it is
certainly possible that low correlations among MZ twins
reflects differential experiences that these twin pairs undergo .
The advantage of using an endophenotypic measure can
be extended when information about the neuroanatomy
physiology and development underlying performance on
the task is available. Knowledge of brain structures involved in performance will serve to constrain candidate
gene identity and function and thus facilitate the integration of genetic information. In the case of the executive
attention network, multiple imaging studies have shown
activation of midline and lateral frontal areas. These areas are strongly modulated by dopamine and suggest the
importance
BMC Neuroscience 2001, 2:14
 
dopamine. One of these genes the dopamine D4 receptor
gene has been repeatedly associated with attentional disorders (see for a review). While one allele of this
gene (the 7 repeat) has been found not to be associated
with abnormalities in interference in the Stroop effect, it
is reasonable to examine other variants of this gene and
other genes related to the dopamine system.
Studies of human development have shown that the executive attention network is related to effortful control as
measured from caregiver reports of their child's behavior
 . Effortful control has also been shown to be heritable in twin studies using larger numbers of subjects
and has been linked by behavioral studies to the ability to
delay gratification, development of conscience and other
aspects of self regulation .
Conclusions
We have developed phenotypic measures for the three
aspects of attention: alerting, orienting and executive
control that have been the best described anatomically.
Our small scale preliminary study of twins suggests that
at least the dopamine rich executive network is appropriate for use in molecular genetic studies.
Materials and Methods
Twenty six MZ twin pairs and 26 DZ same sex pairs participated in the study. Twins were recruited in the vicinity of Peking University via newspaper advertisement.
Paid volunteer pairs traveled to the Department of Psychology to undergo a pre-test interview by a resident psychologist. Subjects with a history of psychopathology
and/or taking medication were excluded. A total of 60
twin pairs interviewed, 52 aged matched pairs from ages
14–42 years old met inclusion criteria. All participants
reported normal or corrected to normal vision. Zygosity
status was determined by close inspection of physical
features, birth records, parental interview and genotyping of buccal swab DNA at 6 polymorphic genetic loci:
maoa, drd3, dbh, maoa, b1adr and gsalpha .
The ANT was performed as previously described .
Briefly, participants viewed the stimuli and responses
were collected via two response buttons. Stimuli consisted of a row of 5 visually presented horizontal black lines,
with arrowheads pointing leftward or rightward, against
a gray background where the target was a leftward or
rightward arrowhead at the center. This target was
flanked on either side by two arrows in the same direction (congruent condition), or in the opposite direction
(incongruent condition), or by lines (neutral condition).
The participants' task was to identify the direction of the
centrally presented arrow by pressing one button for the
left direction and a second button for the right direction.
Cues consisted of a 100 msec asterisk presented 400
msec before the target. There were four cue conditions:
(1) no-cue, participants were shown a cross which was
the same as the first fixation for 100 ms; (2) central-cue,
which was at the central fixation point; (3) double-cue, in
which cues were presented on the two possible target locations simultaneously (both above and below the fixation point); and (4) spatial-cue, cue was presented right
on the target location (either above, below the central fixation point).
A session consisted of a 24-trial practice block and three
experimental blocks of trials. Each experimental block
consisted of 96 trials (48 conditions: 4 warning levels x 2
target locations x 2 target directions x 3 congruency conditions, with 2 repetitions). The presentation of trials
was in a random order. Participants were instructed to
focus on a centrally located fixation cross throughout the
task, and to response as fast, also as accurately as possible. Twin pair participants performed 2 sessions of the
ANT allowing a break in between sessions while the other member of the pair performed the task.
Calculation of attention network efficiencies
Values for attention network efficiency were calculated
from the raw reaction time data as previously described
 . Medians were calculated for each test conditions (12
conditions in total: 4 cue levels by 3 target levels, combined target locations and target directions) to avoid the
influence of the outliers. The alerting effect was calculated by subtracting the mean RT of the conditions with
double cue from the mean RT of the conditions with no
cue. Since neither of these conditions provides information on the spatial location of the target, the subtraction
gives a pure measure of alerting. The orienting effect was
calculated by subtracting the mean RT of the conditions
with spatial cue from the mean RT of the conditions with
center cue. In both conditions the subject is alert but only
the spatial cue provided spatial information on where to
orient. The conflict (executive) effect was calculated by
subtracting the mean RT of congruent conditions from
the mean RT of incongruent conditions.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by NSF grant BCS 9907831 and by
grants from the J.S. McDonnell foundation to the Sackler Institute. The participation of the first author was supported by a grant from the Dewit Wallace Reader's Digest fund to the Department of Psychiatry at Weill Medical