DualGAN: Unsupervised Dual Learning for Image-to-Image Translation
Zili Yi1,2, Hao Zhang2, Ping Tan2, and Minglun Gong1
1Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada
2Simon Fraser University, Canada
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
for cross-domain image-to-image translation have made
much progress recently . Depending
on the task complexity, thousands to millions of labeled image pairs are needed to train a conditional GAN. However,
human labeling is expensive, even impractical, and large
quantities of data may not always be available. Inspired
by dual learning from natural language translation ,
we develop a novel dual-GAN mechanism, which enables
image translators to be trained from two sets of unlabeled
images from two domains. In our architecture, the primal
GAN learns to translate images from domain U to those in
domain V , while the dual GAN learns to invert the task.
The closed loop made by the primal and dual tasks allows
images from either domain to be translated and then reconstructed. Hence a loss function that accounts for the reconstruction error of images can be used to train the translators. Experiments on multiple image translation tasks with
unlabeled data show considerable performance gain of DualGAN over a single GAN. For some tasks, DualGAN can
even achieve comparable or slightly better results than conditional GAN trained on fully labeled data.
1. Introduction
Many image processing and computer vision tasks, e.g.,
image segmentation, stylization, and abstraction, can be
posed as image-to-image translation problems , which
convert one visual representation of an object or scene into
another. Conventionally, these tasks have been tackled separately due to their intrinsic disparities .
It is not until the past two years that general-purpose and
end-to-end deep learning frameworks, most notably those
utilizing fully convolutional networks (FCNs) and conditional generative adversarial nets (cGANs) , have been
developed to enable a uniﬁed treatment of these tasks.
Up to date, these general-purpose methods have all been
supervised and trained with a large number of labeled and
matching image pairs. In practice however, acquiring such
training data can be time-consuming (e.g., with pixelwise
or patchwise labeling) and even unrealistic.
For example, while there are plenty of photos or sketches available,
photo-sketch image pairs depicting the same people under
the same pose are scarce. In other image translation settings, e.g., converting daylight scenes to night scenes, even
though labeled and matching image pairs can be obtained
with stationary cameras, moving objects in the scene often
cause varying degrees of content discrepancies.
In this paper, we aim to develop an unsupervised learning framework for general-purpose image-to-image translation, which only relies on unlabeled image data, such as two
sets of photos and sketches for the photo-to-sketch conversion task. The obvious technical challenge is how to train
a translator without any data characterizing correct translations. Our approach is inspired by dual learning from natural language processing . Dual learning trains two “opposite” language translators (e.g., English-to-French and
French-to-English) simultaneously by minimizing the reconstruction loss resulting from a nested application of the
two translators. The two translators represent a primal-dual
pair and the nested application forms a closed loop, allowing the application of reinforcement learning. Speciﬁcally,
the reconstruction loss measured over monolingual data (either English or French) would generate informative feedback to train a bilingual translation model.
Our work develops a dual learning framework for imageto-image translation for the ﬁrst time and differs from the
original NLP dual learning method of Xia et al. in two
main aspects. First, the NLP method relied on pre-trained
(English and French) language models to indicate how con-
ﬁdent the the translator outputs are natural sentences in their
respective target languages. With general-purpose processing in mind and the realization that such pre-trained models
are difﬁcult to obtain for many image translation tasks, our
work develops GAN discriminators that are trained ad-
 
versarially with the translators to capture domain distributions. Hence, we call our learning architecture DualGAN.
Furthermore, we employ FCNs as translators which naturally accommodate the 2D structure of images, rather than
sequence-to-sequence translation models such as LSTM or
Gated Recurrent Unit (GUT).
Taking two sets of unlabeled images as input, each
characterizing an image domain, DualGAN simultaneously
learns two reliable image translators from one domain to
the other and hence can operate on a wide variety of imageto-image translation tasks. The effectiveness of DuanGAN
is validated through comparison with both GAN (with an
image-conditional generator and the original discriminator)
and conditional GAN . The comparison results demonstrate that, for some applications, DualGAN can outperform
supervised methods trained on labeled data.
2. Related work
Since the seminal work by Goodfellow et al. in 2014,
a series of GAN-family methods have been proposed for
a wide variety of problems. The original GAN can learn a
generator to capture the distribution of real data by introducing an adversarial discriminator that evolves to discriminate
between the real data and the fake . Soon after, various
conditional GANs (cGAN) have been proposed to condition
the image generation on class labels , attributes ,
texts , and images .
Most image-conditional models were developed for speciﬁc applications such as super-resolution , texture synthesis , style transfer from normal maps to images ,
and video prediction , whereas few others were aiming for general-purpose processing . The generalpurpose solution for image-to-image translation proposed
by Isola et al. requires signiﬁcant number of labeled image pairs. The unsupervised mechanism for cross-domain
image conversion presented by Taigman et al. can train
an image-conditional generator without paired images, but
relies on a sophisticated pre-trained function that maps images from either domain to an intermediate representation,
which requires labeled data in other formats.
Dual learning was ﬁrst proposed by Xia et al. to
reduce the requirement on labeled data in training Englishto-French and French-to-English translators. The Frenchto-English translation is the dual task to English-to-French
translation, and they can be trained side-by-side. The key
idea of dual learning is to set up a dual-learning game which
involves two agents, each of whom only understands one
language, and can evaluate how likely the translated are
natural sentences in targeted language and to what extent
the reconstructed are consistent with the original. Such a
mechanism is played alternatively on both sides, allowing
translators to be trained from monolingual data only.
Despite of a lack of parallel bilingual data, two types of
feedback signals can be generated: the membership score
which evaluates the likelihood of the translated texts belonging to the targeted language, and the reconstruction error that measures the disparity between the reconstructed
sentences and the original. Both signals are assessed with
the assistance of application-speciﬁc domain knowledge,
i.e., the pre-trained English and French language models.
In our work, we aim for a general-purpose solution for
image-to-image conversion and hence do not utilize any
domain-speciﬁc knowledge or pre-trained domain representations. Instead, we use a domain-adaptive GAN discriminator to evaluate the membership score of translated samples, whereas the reconstruction error is measured as the
mean of absolute difference between the reconstructed and
original images within each image domain.
In CycleGAN, a concurrent work by Zhu et al. , the
same idea for unpaired image-to-image translation is proposed, where the primal-dual relation in DualGAN is referred to as a cyclic mapping and their cycle consistency
loss is essentially the same as our reconstruction loss. Superiority of CycleGAN has been demonstrated on several
tasks where paired training data hardly exist, e.g., in object
transﬁguration and painting style and season transfer.
Recent work by Liu and Tuzel , which we refer to
as coupled GAN or CoGAN, also trains two GANs together to solve image translation problems without paired
training data.
Unlike DualGAN or CycleGAN, the two
GANs in CoGAN are not linked to enforce cycle consistency.
Instead, CoGAN learns a joint distribution over
images from two domains.
By sharing weight parameters corresponding to high level semantics in both generative and discriminative networks, CoGAN can enforce the
two GANs to interpret these image semantics in the same
way. However, the weight-sharing assumption in CoGAN
and similar approaches, e.g., , does not lead to effective general-purpose solutions as its applicability is taskdependent, leading to unnatural image translation results,
as shown in comparative studies by CycleGAN .
DualGAN and CycleGAN both aim for general-purpose
image-to-image translations without requiring a joint representation to bridge the two image domains. In addition, DualGAN trains both primal and dual GANs at the same time,
allowing a reconstruction error term to be used to generate
informative feedback signals.
Given two sets of unlabeled and unpaired images sampled from domains U and V , respectively, the primal task
of DualGAN is to learn a generator GA : U →V that maps
an image u ∈U to an image v ∈V , while the dual task is
to train an inverse generator GB : V →U. To realize this,
we employ two GANs, the primal GAN and the dual GAN.
The primal GAN learns the generator GA and a discrimi-
Figure 1: Network architecture and data ﬂow chart of DualGAN for image-to-image translation.
nator DA that discriminates between GA’s fake outputs and
real members of domain V . Analogously, the dual GAN
learns the generator GB and a discriminator DB. The overall architecture and data ﬂow are illustrated in Fig. 1.
As shown in Fig. 1, image u ∈U is translated to domain
V using GA. How well the translation GA(u, z) ﬁts in V is
evaluated by DA, where z is random noise, and so is z′ that
appears below. GA(u, z) is then translated back to domain
U using GB, which outputs GB(GA(u, z), z′) as the reconstructed version of u. Similarly, v ∈V is translated to U
as GB(v, z′) and then reconstructed as GA(GB(v, z′), z).
The discriminator DA is trained with v as positive samples
and GA(u, z) as negative examples, whereas DB takes u as
positive and GB(v, z′) as negative. Generators GA and GB
are optimized to emulate “fake” outputs to blind the corresponding discriminators DA and DB, as well as to minimize the two reconstruction losses ∥GA(GB(v, z′), z)−v∥
and ∥GB(GA(u, z), z′) −u∥.
3.1. Objective
As in the traditional GAN, the objective of discriminators is to discriminate the generated fake samples from the
real ones. Nevertheless, here we use the loss format advocated by Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) rather than the
sigmoid cross-entropy loss used in the original GAN . It
is proven that the former performs better in terms of generator convergence and sample quality, as well as in improving
the stability of the optimization . The corresponding loss
functions used in DA and DB are deﬁned as:
A(u, v) = DA(GA(u, z)) −DA(v),
B(u, v) = DB(GB(v, z′)) −DB(u),
where u ∈U and v ∈V .
The same loss function is used for both generators GA
and GB as they share the same objective. Previous works
on conditional image synthesis found it beneﬁcial to replace
L2 distance with L1, since the former often leads to blurriness . Hence, we adopt L1 distance to measure the
recovery error, which is added to the GAN objective to force
the translated samples to obey the domain distribution:
lg(u, v) = λU∥u −GB(GA(u, z), z′)∥+
λV ∥v −GA(GB(v, z′), z)∥
−DB(GB(v, z′)) −DA(GA(u, z)),
where u ∈U, v ∈V , and λU, λV are two constant parameters. Depending on the application, λU and λV are typically
set to a value within [100.0, 1, 000.0]. If U contains natural
images and V does not (e.g., aerial photo-maps), we ﬁnd it
more effective to use smaller λU than λV .
3.2. Network conﬁguration
DualGAN is constructed with identical network architecture for GA and GB. The generator is conﬁgured with
equal number of downsampling (pooling) and upsampling
layers. In addition, we conﬁgure the generator with skip
connections between mirrored downsampling and upsampling layers as in , making it a U-shaped net. Such a
design enables low-level information to be shared between
input and output, which is beneﬁcial since many image
translation problems implicitly assume alignment between
image structures in the input and output (e.g., object shapes,
textures, clutter, etc.). Without the skip layers, information
from all levels has to pass through the bottleneck, typically
causing signiﬁcant loss of high-frequency information. Furthermore, similar to , we did not explicitly provide the
noise vectors z, z′. Instead, they are provided only in the
form of dropout and applied to several layers of our generators at both training and test phases.
For discriminators, we employ the Markovian Patch-
GAN architecture as explored in , which assumes independence between pixels distanced beyond a speciﬁc patch
size and models images only at the patch level rather than
over the full image. Such a conﬁguration is effective in
capturing local high-frequency features such as texture and
style, but less so in modeling global distributions. It fulﬁlls
our needs well, since the recovery loss encourages preservation of global and low-frequency information and the discriminators are designated to capture local high-frequency
information.
The effectiveness of this conﬁguration has
been veriﬁed on various translation tasks .
to , we run this discriminator convolutionally across the
image, averaging all responses to provide the ultimate output. An extra advantage of such a scheme is that it requires
fewer parameters, runs faster, and has no constraints over
the size of the input image. The patch size at which the
discriminator operates is ﬁxed at 70 × 70, and the image
resolutions were mostly 256 × 256, same as pix2pix .
3.3. Training procedure
To optimize the DualGAN networks, we follow the training procedure proposed in WGAN ; see Alg. 1. We train
the discriminators ncritic steps, then one step on generators. We employ mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent
and apply the RMSProp solver, as momentum based methods such as Adam would occasionally cause instability ,
and RMSProp is known to perform well even on highly nonstationary problems . We typically set the number
of critic iterations per generator iteration ncritic to 2-4 and
assign batch size to 1-4, without noticeable differences on
effectiveness in the experiments. The clipping parameter c
is normally set in [0.01, 0.1], varying by application.
Algorithm 1 DualGAN training procedure
Require: Image set U, image set V , GAN A with generator parameters θA and discriminator parameters ωA,
GAN B with generator parameters θB and discriminator parameters ωB, clipping parameter c, batch size m,
and ncritic
1: Randomly initialize ωi, θi, i ∈{A, B}
for t = 1, . . . , ncritic do
sample images {u(k)}m
k=1 ⊆U, {v(k)}m
update ωA to minimize 1
A(u(k), v(k))
update ωB to minimize 1
B(u(k), v(k))
clip(ωA, −c, c), clip(ωB, −c, c)
sample images {u(k)}m
k=1 ⊆U, {v(k)}m
update θA, θB to minimize 1
k=1 lg(u(k), v(k))
11: until convergence
Training for traditional GANs needs to carefully balance
between the generator and the discriminator, since, as the
discriminator improves, the sigmoid cross-entropy loss is
Figure 2: Results of day→night translation. cGAN is
trained with labeled data, whereas DualGAN and GAN are
trained in an unsupervised manner. DualGAN successfully
emulates the night scenes while preserving textures in the
inputs, e.g., see differences over the cloud regions between
our results and the ground truth (GT). In comparison, results
of cGAN and GAN contain much less details.
locally saturated and may lead to vanishing gradients. Unlike in traditional GANs, the Wasserstein loss is differentiable almost everywhere, resulting in a better discriminator. At each iteration, the generators are not trained until
the discriminators have been trained for ncritic steps. Such
a procedure enables the discriminators to provide more reliable gradient information .
4. Experimental results and evaluation
To assess the capability of DualGAN in general-purpose
image-to-image translation, we conduct experiments on a
variety of tasks, including photo-sketch conversion, labelimage translation, and artistic stylization.
To compare DualGAN with GAN and cGAN , four
labeled datasets are used:
PHOTO-SKETCH ,
DAY-NIGHT , LABEL-FACADES , and AERIAL-
MAPS, which was directly captured from Google Map .
These datasets consist of corresponding images between
two domains; they serve as ground truth (GT) and can also
be used for supervised learning. However, none of these
datasets could guarantee accurate feature alignment at the
pixel level. For example, the sketches in SKETCH-PHOTO
dataset were drawn by artists and do not accurately align
with the corresponding photos, moving objects and cloud
pattern changes often show up in the DAY-NIGHT dataset,
and the labels in LABEL-FACADES dataset are not always
Figure 3: Results of label→facade translation. DualGAN
faithfully preserves the structures in the label images, even
though some labels do not match well with the corresponding photos in ﬁner details. In contrast, results from GAN
and cGAN contain many artifacts. Over regions with labelphoto misalignment, cGAN often yields blurry output (e.g.,
the roof in second row and the entrance in third row).
precise. This highlights, in part, the difﬁculty in obtaining
high quality matching image pairs.
DualGAN enables us to utilize abundant unlabeled image sources from the Web. Two unlabeled and unpaired
datasets are also tested in our experiments. The MATE-
RIAL dataset includes images of objects made of different materials, e.g., stone, metal, plastic, fabric, and wood.
These images were manually selected from Flickr and cover
a variety of illumination conditions, compositions, color,
texture, and material sub-types . This dataset was initially used for material recognition, but is applied here for
material transfer. The OIL-CHINESE painting dataset includes artistic paintings of two disparate styles: oil and Chinese. All images were crawled from search engines and
they contain images with varying quality, format, and size.
We reformat, crop, and resize the images for training and
evaluation. In both of these datasets, no correspondence is
available between images from different domains.
5. Qualitative evaluation
Using the four labeled datasets, we ﬁrst compare DualGAN with GAN and cGAN on the following translation tasks: day→night (Figure 2), labels↔facade (Figures 3 and 10), face photo↔sketch (Figures 4 and 5), and
map↔aerial photo (Figures 8 and 9). In all these tasks,
cGAN was trained with labeled (i.e., paired) data, where we
ran the model and code provided in and chose the optimal loss function for each task: L1 loss for facade→label
and L1 + cGAN loss for the other tasks (see for more
details). In contrast, DualGAN and GAN were trained in
an unsupervised way, i.e., we decouple the image pairs and
then reshufﬂe the data. The results of GAN were generated
using our approach by setting λU = λV = 0.0 in eq. (3),
noting that this GAN is different from the original GAN
model as it employs a conditional generator.
All three models were trained on the same training
datasets and tested on novel data that does not overlap those
for training. All the training were carried out on a single
GeForce GTX Titan X GPU. At test time, all models ran in
well under a second on this GPU.
Compared to GAN, in almost all cases, DualGAN produces results that are less blurry, contain fewer artifacts, and
better preserve content structures in the inputs and capture
features (e.g., texture, color, and/or style) of the target domain. We attribute the improvements to the reconstruction
loss, which forces the inputs to be reconstructable from outputs through the dual generator and strengthens feedback
signals that encodes the targeted distribution.
In many cases, DualGAN also compares favorably over
the supervised cGAN in terms of sharpness of the outputs
and faithfulness to the input images; see Figures 2, 3, 4, 5,
This is encouraging since the supervision in
cGAN does utilize additional image and pixel correspondences. On the other hand, when translating between photos and semantic-based labels, such as map↔aerial and
label↔facades, it is often impossible to infer the correspondences between pixel colors and labels based on targeted
distribution alone. As a result, DualGAN may map pixels
to wrong labels (see Figures 9 and 10) or labels to wrong
colors/textures (see Figures 3 and 8).
Figures 6 and 7 show image translation results obtained
using the two unlabeled datasets, including oil↔Chinese,
plastic→metal, metal→stone, leather→fabric, as well as
wood↔plastic. The results demonstrate that visually convincing images can be generated by DualGAN when no corresponding images can be found in the target domains. As
well, the DualGAN results generally contain less artifacts
than those from GAN.
5.1. Quantitative evaluation
To quantitatively evaluate DualGAN, we set up two
user studies through Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). The
“material perceptual” test evaluates the material transfer results, in which we mix the outputs from all material transfer tasks and let the Turkers choose the best match based
on which material they believe the objects in the image are
made of. For a total of 176 output images, each was evaluated by ten Turkers. An output image is rated as a success if
at least three Turkers selected the target material type. Suc-
Figure 4: Photo→sketch translation for faces. Results of
DualGAN are generally sharper than those from cGAN,
even though the former was trained using unpaired data,
whereas the latter makes use of image correspondence.
Figure 5: Results for sketch→photo translation of faces.
More artifacts and blurriness are showing up in results generated by GAN and cGAN than DualGAN.
cess rates of various material transfer results using different
approaches are summarized in Table 1, showing that Dual-
GAN outperforms GAN by a large margin.
In addition, we run the AMT “realness score” evaluation for sketch→photo, label map→facades, maps→aerial
photo, and day→night translations. To eliminate potential
bias, for each of the four evaluations, we randomly shuf-
Experimental results for translating Chinese
paintings to oil paintings (without GT available). The background grids shown in the GAN results imply that the outputs of GAN are not as stable as those of DualGAN.
ﬂe real photos and outputs from all three approaches before
showing them to Turkers. Each image is shown to 20 Turkers, who were asked to score the image based on to what extent the synthesized photo looks real. The “realness” score
ranges from 0 (totally missing), 1 (bad), 2 (acceptable), 3
(good), to 4 (compelling). The average score of different approaches on various tasks are then computed and shown in
Table. 2. The AMT study results show that DualGAN outperforms GAN on all tasks and outperforms cGAN on two
tasks as well. This indicates that cGAN has little tolerance
to misalignment and inconsistency between image pairs, but
the additional pixel-level correspondence does help cGAN
correctly map labels to colors and textures.
Finally, we compute the segmentation accuracies for
facades→label and aerial→map tasks, as reported in Tables 3 and 4. The comparison shows that DualGAN is outperformed by cGAN, which is expected as it is difﬁcult to
infer proper labeling without image correspondence information from the training data.
plastic (input)
metal (DualGAN)
metal (GAN)
plastic (input)
metal (DualGAN)
metal (GAN)
metal (input)
stone (DualGAN)
stone (GAN)
metal (input)
stone (DualGAN)
stone (GAN)
leather (input)
fabric (DualGAN)
fabric (GAN)
leather (input)
fabric (DualGAN)
fabric (GAN)
wood (input)
plastic (DualGAN)
plastic (GAN)
plastic (input)
wood (DualGAN)
wood (GAN)
Figure 7: Experimental results for various material transfer tasks.
From top to bottom, plastic→metal, metal→stone,
leather→fabric, and plastic↔wood.
plastic→wood
wood→plastic
metal→stone
stone→metal
leather→fabric
fabric→leather
plastic→metal
metal→plastic
Table 1: Success rates of various material transfer tasks
based on the AMT “material perceptual” test. There are
11 images in each set of transfer result, with noticeable improvements of DualGAN over GAN.
6. Conclusion
We propose DualGAN, a novel unsupervised dual learning framework for general-purpose image-to-image trans-
Avg. “realness” score
DualGAN cGAN GAN
sketch→photo
label→facades
map→aerial
Table 2: Average AMT “realness” scores of outputs from
various tasks.
The results show that DualGAN outperforms GAN in all tasks.
It also outperforms cGAN for
sketch→photo and day→night tasks, but still lag behind for
label→facade and map→aerial tasks. In the latter two tasks,
the additional image correspondence in training data would
help cGAN map labels to the proper colors/textures.
lation. The unsupervised characteristic of DualGAN enables many real world applications, as demonstrated in this
work, as well as in the concurrent work CycleGAN .
Map→aerial photo translation.
Without image correspondences for training, DualGAN may map the
orange-colored interstate highways to building roofs with
bright colors.
Nevertheless, the DualGAN results are
sharper than those from GAN and cGAN.
Figure 9: Results for aerial photo→map translation. Dual-
GAN performs better than GAN, but not as good as cGAN.
With additional pixel correspondence information, cGAN
performs well in terms of labeling local roads, but still cannot detect interstate highways.
Experimental results suggest that the DualGAN mechanism
can signiﬁcantly improve the outputs of GAN for various
image-to-image translation tasks. With unlabeled data only,
DualGAN can generate comparable or even better outputs
than conditional GAN which is trained with labeled data
providing image and pixel-level correspondences.
On the other hand, our method is outperformed by conditional GAN or cGAN for certain tasks which involve
semantics-based labels. This is due to the lack of pixel and
label correspondence information, which cannot be inferred
from the target distribution alone. In the future, we intend
Figure 10: Facades→label translation. While cGAN correctly labels various bulding components such as windows,
doors, and balconies, the overall label images are not as detailed and structured as DualGAN’s outputs.
Per-pixel acc. Per-class acc. Class IOU
Segmentation accuracy for the facades→label
task. DualGAN outperforms GAN, but is not as accurate as
cGAN. Without image correspondence (for cGAN), even if
DualGAN segments a region properly, it may not assign the
region with a correct label.
Per-pixel acc. Per-class acc. Class IOU
Table 4: Segmentation accuracy for the aerial→map task,
for which DualGAN performs less than satisfactorily.
to investigate whether this limitation can be lifted with the
use of a small number of labeled data as a warm start.
Acknowledgment.
We thank all the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. The ﬁrst
author is a PhD student from the Memorial University of
Newfoundland and has been visiting SFU since 2016. This
work was supported in part by grants from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of
Canada .