Less is more: sampling chemical space with active
Justin S. Smith1, Ben Nebgen3, Nicholas Lubbers3, Olexandr Isayev2,*, Adrian E. Roitberg1,*
1Department of Chemistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
2UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
NC 27599, USA
3Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
* Corresponding authors; email: OI ( ) and AER ( )
The development of accurate and transferable machine learning (ML) potentials for predicting
molecular energetics is a challenging task. The process of data generation to train such ML
potentials is a task neither well understood nor researched in detail. In this work, we present a fully
automated approach for the generation of datasets with the intent of training universal ML
potentials. It is based on the concept of active learning (AL) via Query by Committee (QBC),
which uses the disagreement between an ensemble of ML potentials to infer the reliability of the
ensemble’s prediction. QBC allows the presented AL algorithm to automatically sample regions
of chemical space where the ML potential fails to accurately predict the potential energy. AL
improves the overall fitness of ANAKIN-ME (ANI) deep learning potentials in rigorous test cases
by mitigating human biases in deciding what new training data to use. AL also reduces the training
set size to a fraction of the data required when using naive random sampling techniques. To provide
validation of our AL approach we develop the COMP6 benchmark (publicly available on GitHub),
which contains a diverse set of organic molecules. Through the AL process, it is shown that the
AL-based potentials perform as well as the ANI-1 potential on COMP6 with only 10% of the data,
and vastly outperforms ANI-1 with 25% the amount of data. Finally, we show that our proposed
AL technique develops a universal ANI potential (ANI-1x) that provides accurate energy and force
predictions on the entire COMP6 benchmark. This universal ML potential achieves a level of
accuracy on par with the best ML potentials for single molecule or materials, while remaining
applicable to the general class of organic molecules comprised of the elements CHNO.
KEYWORDS. active learning, machine learning, molecular potentials, force field, neural network
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of accurate force fields1–3 for the efficient simulation of large and small
molecular systems has been a cornerstone of modern computational chemistry. The popularity of
force fields is driven by low computational cost relative to more accurate and transferable quantum
mechanical (QM) methods, such as density function theory4 (DFT) or post-Hartree-Fock5–7
methods. However, parametrizing universal force fields--applicable to any chemical system in any
chemical environment--has remained an elusive goal due to the restrictive functional form and
tedious atom typing of classical force fields. For this reason, a “zoo” of force fields has been
developed over the last 30 years with applications in various regions of chemistry and physics,
such as materials, proteins, carbohydrates, and small drug-like molecules.8–11 Drawing a line
between where these system-specific force fields work and where they fail is a challenging task.
In recent years, machine learning (ML) methods have been successfully applied in many areas of
chemistry and physics research.12–19 Specifically, ML approaches for the prediction of interatomic
potential energy surfaces (referred to as ML potentials) have exhibited chemical accuracy
compared to QM models at roughly the computational cost of classical force fields.20–31 ML
potentials promise to bridge the speed vs. accuracy gap between force fields and QM methods.
Many recent studies rely on a philosophy of parametrization to one chemical system at a time22,25,
single component bulk systems27,28 or many equilibrium structures, i.e. QM7 and QM9
datasets32,33. While parametrization to one system at a time can achieve high accuracy with
relatively small amounts of QM, it has the downside that one must generate additional QM data
and train a new ML model for every new chemical system. Using this approach in any study
requires extra parametrization time due to the non-universality of the potentials. Additionally,
parametrization to only equilibrium geometries does not attempt to describe the range of
conformations visited in atomistic simulation. For these reasons, single system and equilibrium
dataset ML potentials do not aim to build an extensible and transferable (universal) ML potential.
Our work on the ANAKIN-ME (ANI) method for developing the ANI-1 potential34 is one example
of a universal ML atomistic potential for organic molecules. The methodology is built upon the
concept of an atomic environment descriptor first developed by Behler and Parrinello35 and refined
to perform significantly better on large and diverse datasets of organic molecules. A key aspect of
the ANI methodology was the focus on dataset diversity, which promotes the learning of low level
interactions (by utilizing localized descriptors) for better transferability. For training the ANI-1
model, we calculated over 22 million structural conformations from 57,000 distinct small organic
molecules using DFT.36 The ANI-1 dataset was built through an exhaustive sampling of molecules
containing between one and eight C, N, and O atoms from the GDB-11 database, with H atoms
added to saturate the configurations. The ANI-1 dataset is built on a philosophy of dataset
construction that samples small molecule conformational and configurational space at the same
time. The ANI-1 potential was shown to be chemically accurate for systems of 50 atoms and more,
demonstrating extensibility and transferability to much larger molecules than those in the training
set. This phenomenon, whereby an ML model is trained on small systems (which could be thought
of as fragments of large systems), then demonstrated to be extensible to large systems has also
been confirmed in other recent studies.29,37,38 Other recent work had success in developing
universal ML property predictors for organic based chemical systems away from their local
When it comes to developing or optimizing ML model training datasets, human intuition currently
drives the experiment design. The resulting datasets tend to be clustered, sparse, and incomplete;
recent work finds that people tend to favor inclusion of “successful” experiments and tend to forget
“failed” experiments.39 The comprehensive incorporation of all data is the strength of ML
approaches to artificial intelligence (AI). With sufficient data, an AI-driven machine can more
effectively choose the next step in experiments or simulations than humans, speeding up the
optimization of a given dataset, while also reducing the overall amount of data required. As
robotics transforms chemical synthesis40, manufacturing, and transportation, constituting a modern
industrial revolution,41,42 achieving the analogous revolution in computational methods will
require AI and in particular the emulation of scientific intuition, reasoning and decision making.
Such an ambitious program will not be accomplished all at once and will instead require
incremental progress as AI algorithms are developed.
In this work we present a fully automated approach of dataset generation for training universal ML
potentials. It is based on the concept of active learning (AL), which has been successfully applied
to develop single system ML potentials37,43–46 and in other areas47,48 of chemical sciences. We
develop a two-component technique for training universal ML potentials. The first component is
a dataset reduction algorithm for eliminating redundancy in an existing training set. The second is
an active learning algorithm based on the query by committee49 (QBC) approach for selecting new
training data. For a complete and rigorous validation of universal potentials, we also develop the
COmprehensive Machine-learning Potential (COMP6) benchmark suite for organic and biomolecules. The COMP6 benchmark samples the chemical space (for molecules containing C, H,
N, and O) of molecules larger than those included in the training set, as well as non-covalent
interactions via the S66x8 benchmark50. The COMP6 benchmark is publicly available on GitHub
[ Using the active learning scheme, a potential can be trained
to the accuracy of ANI-1 using 90% less data, even while sampling from smaller molecules. After
further exploration of chemical space, our potential (dubbed ANI-1x) strongly out-performs ANI-
1, while being trained on a dataset that is only 25% of the size.
II. METHODS
In the context of this work, the goal of active learning is to infer an accurate predictor from labeled
training data. These labeled data are input-output pairs (X, y), where the output y represents the
correct answer to a question associated with the input X. In the problem of ML potential training,
the label y may be the “yes” / “no” answer to whether the potential correctly describes a molecule
X. As part of the active learning process, this question may be answered empirically for a given
substance. The Query by Committee (QBC) approach uses the disagreement between models
trained to similar data to experimentally infer the correctness of an ensemble’s prediction. This is
by the following reasoning: if an ensemble of predictors has a high variance, then some models in
the ensemble must have a relatively high
error from the ground truth. Therefore,
selection of compounds that have a high
variance of ensemble predictions in search
of new molecules and conformation can be
employed to sample high error regions
chemical space automatically, minimizing
the need for redundant QM calculations.
evidence that this method of sampling
indeed improves the overall fitness of ML
potentials for single systems.37,51 In this
work, we apply this concept in a massive
search of chemical space to develop a
superior training set for universal ML
ANI34 potentials. These ANI potentials are
applicable to organic molecules containing
modification, the same approach could be
used for other areas of chemical sciences,
e.g. materials.
A. Sample selection via Query by
We show how, in a rigorous statistical way,
one can obtain a priori information about
what new samples should be included in subsequent generations of an ML potential training set.
The a priori information is obtained by the QBC49 algorithm. QBC measures the disagreement
between students (models) of a committee (ensemble), then the algorithm selects new examples
where the students disagree by a preset inclusion criterion. Finally, new reference data for selected
examples are obtained and included in the next committee training iteration. As a test of agreement,
we choose to include new data point 𝑖 only for test cases which generate a value 𝜌𝑖 greater than an
inclusion criterion 𝜌̂, where 𝜌𝑖 is defined as,
In equation 1, 𝜎𝑖 is the standard deviation of predictions from an ensemble (see Section IIE for
details) of ANI potentials and 𝑁𝑖 is the number of atoms in the given test system. The square root
is applied to 𝑁𝑖 since the potentials are atomistic, and the total energy error is assumed to be a
random distribution, centered around zero, per atom. That is, cancellation of error on a per atom
basis can lead to artificially low per atom errors (and standard deviations in this case) on larger
molecules when a square root is not applied. This is necessary when using a single value of 𝜌̂ to
test across molecules with varying numbers of atoms as is done in this work.
Figure 1: Example of choosing a value 𝜌̂ which
captures 98% of all errors (𝜀) over 1.5 kcal/mol on the
GDB07to09 benchmark set using the initial (before
using active learning) ANI model ensemble. The value
which accomplished this is found to be 𝜌̂ = 0.23. This
value of 𝜌̂ used in query by committee results in the
selection of 58% of all test data. Initially 26% of all 𝜀
are greater than 1.5. 44% of 𝜀 corresponding to ρ > 𝜌̂
are greater than 1.5. Splitting the dataset along ρ = 𝜌̂
results in a total energy RMSE of the ANI ensemble
prediction vs. reference DFT of 7.4 kcal/mol for all
values ρ > 𝜌̂ and 1.5 kcal/mol for all values ρ ≤ 𝜌̂.
Figure 1 provides an example of how the inclusion criterion 𝜌̂ is determined. In this 2-dimensional
density plot, 𝜀𝑖= |𝑀𝐴𝑋({𝐸𝑇
𝑅𝐸𝐹)|/√𝑁𝑖 where 𝑁𝑖 is the number of atoms in the ith
molecule. Therefore, 𝜀𝑖 is the largest per atom prediction error of any model in the ensemble of
ANI models for test molecule i. The test data used in this example is the GDB07to09 test set,
which is described in Section IIC. The ANI model used to determine 𝜌̂ in this example is the ANI
model which initialized the AL process (Section IIB). The value 𝜌̂ is determined from the choice
of what value of 𝜀 is considered too large, and what percentage of epsilon over that should be
considered as fail cases. Therefore, 𝜌̂ = 0.23 was empirically selected as it is the value which
allows selection of 98% of all 𝜀𝑖> 1.5 kcal/mol.
The example from Figure 1 determines 𝜌̂ = 0.23 kcal/mol leads to the selection of 58% of all test
data as molecules that fail the agreement test. As evidence that the choice of 𝜀𝑖 allows for the
statistical determination of poorly fit data, it is shown that before selecting any data (i.e. for all 𝜌𝑖),
26% of the complete test set 𝜀𝑖 are greater than 1.5. However, this is 44% when considering all
𝜀𝑖> 1.5 kcal/mol which correspond to 𝜌𝑖> 𝜌̂ . This shows that the determined 𝜌̂ leads to a
selection of data with a greater number of 𝜀𝑖> 1.5 kcal/mol within its population. As further
validation of the approach, the application of the concept is shown to choose “bad” data by
calculating the RMSE of the potential energy (𝐸) for the mean prediction of the ensemble of ANI
models vs. reference DFT calculations. For all 𝑖 molecular structures corresponding to 𝜌𝑖> 𝜌̂, the
𝐸 RMSE is 7.4 kcal/mol. On the other hand, for all 𝑖 molecular structures corresponding to 𝜌𝑖≤
𝜌̂ the 𝐸 RMSE is 1.5 kcal/mol. Therefore, in a statistical way, the method chooses new data which
is significantly higher in error compared to GDB07to09, which is randomly generated data.
With enough processing time on HPC resources, the rate-limiting step of a QBC data selection
cycle using ANI potentials is the training of a new ensemble of ANI models. Complete training of
a single network takes 40 minutes per one million data points on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100
GPU. To reduce the number of models trained, QBC is used in batches, searching configurational
and conformational (chemical) space for tens of thousands of new reference data points that fail
the agreement test. Finally, labels (reference potential energies, 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝐹) are computed for all
molecules in the selected batch. This process may lead to some redundant data. However, the
alternative, retraining a new model ensemble after the addition of every new data point, will be
impractically slow.
B. Automatic chemical space sampling via active learning
Figure 2 shows the overall workflow of the iterative AL algorithm. The algorithm is initialized
from an existing random sampling generated dataset, which may contain some amount of
redundant data. This initial dataset (ANI-1 in this work) is then reduced through an iterative
approach with the goal of minimizing the overall dataset size while not impacting predictive
performance. The reduction algorithm is provided in detail in Figure 2a. Figure 2a is initialized
with a random subsampled 2% of the original ANI-1 dataset. Then, iteratively, the remaining data
are tested, and 2% subsets of the fail cases are added to the training set. Here, a fail case is defined
as |𝐸𝐴𝑁𝐼−𝐸𝐷𝐹𝑇|/√𝑁 > 0.04 𝑘𝑐𝑎𝑙/𝑚𝑜𝑙, where N is the number of atoms in the molecule. The
algorithm is terminated when less than 5% of the data not yet added to the training set are
considered as fail cases. The remaining < 5% high error data are added to the final dataset. Hyperparameters for the reduction algorithm can be tuned to further reduce redundancies in the data, at
the cost of more cycles, and therefore, longer run time. The final reduced dataset is used to
bootstrap the remaining cycles of the active learning algorithm. If a dataset such as ANI-1 is not
available, this step can be replaced with the generation of a small amount randomly sampled data
across many small, one to five C, N, O atoms, molecules. However, this will lead to more active
learning cycles before achieving the desired result.
With the reduced dataset, the configurational search (Figure 2b) is initialized. The configurational
search is carried out by randomly sampling an external database of small molecules (e.g. GDB-
1152,53, ChEMBL54–56, algorithmically generated dipeptides using RDKit [www.rdkit.org],
automatically generated dimers), embedding the molecule in 3D space with RDKit, then
optimizing initial structure with the UFF57 force field. See supplemental information Section
S1.2.3 for details on dimer generation. Next, ANI energies are computed using an ensemble of five
Figure 2. Fully automated AL workflow for data generation. The algorithm contains 3 steps: a) an
existing dataset reduction, b) a configurational search, and c) a conformational search.
ANI models trained to the current AL dataset (see Section IID for details on ensemble prediction
and training). Finally, 𝜌𝑖= 𝜎𝑖/√𝑁 is computed. Here, 𝜎𝑖 is the standard deviation of the
ensemble’s energy predictions for molecule i and 𝑁 is the number of atoms in the molecule. The
test of whether to include the molecule corresponding to a given 𝜌𝑖 is 𝜌𝑖> 𝜌̂. The selection of 𝜌̂
is explained in Section IIA. All molecules that fail this test are included in the new conformer
sampling set. Any molecules added to the conformer sampling set are geometry optimized with
the correct reference QM level of theory using tight SCF and optimization convergence criteria.
With the configurational search complete, a conformational search cycle (Figure 2c) is initialized,
whereby the conformer sampling set (a set of equilibrium molecules generated in the configuration
sampling step) is used to generate a set of new non-equilibrium molecules (𝑋̂). The conformers in
𝑋̂ are generated via one of three techniques, which are designed to sample various regions of
chemical space. These sampling techniques are listed below.
 Diverse normal mode sampling (DNMS). A version of normal mode sampling (NMS) as
presented in our previous work36, but with diversity selection used to reduce redundant data
and a bias towards near equilibrium structures. A detailed description of DNMS is provided
in supplemental information (SI) section S1.2.1.
 K random trajectory sampling (RTS). We run short (4 ps) molecular dynamics simulations,
with an ensemble of ANI networks, starting with random velocities equal to 300K and
heated slowly to 1000K over the simulation time. During the simulation, each step QBC is
used to check whether the current structure fails the agreement test. Once a structure is
reached that fails the test the simulation is terminated, and new QM data is generated for
inclusion in the training set. This is repeated to generate multiple new samples. A detailed
description of RTS is provided in SI section S1.2.2.
 Molecular dynamics generated dimer sampling. Dimers are generated by randomly placing
and orienting molecules from the conformer sampling set into a box with periodic boundary
conditions. A molecular dynamics simulation for 5ps is then carried out on the box. Every
50 steps the box is fragmented into only dimer pairs within the desired cutoff radius. Each
new dimer pair is tested using the QBC approach, failed tests are kept as new data, and QM
properties are generated for inclusion in the training set. A detailed description of the dimer
sampling approach used here is provided in SI section S1.2.3.
After new data is selected, labels are computed and included in the training set, a new ensemble
of ANI potentials is trained. The conformational search cycles are repeated until the model stops
improving within the COMP6 benchmarks (see details in Section IIC). Finally, the entire cycle is
restarted from the configurational sampling step. This process is carried out to produce a total of
37 cycles including many configurational and conformational searching cycles. Throughout this
work we will refer to various intermediate active learned ANI models as AL1 through AL6. The
AL6 potential is the final potential reached in this work and is referred to as the ANI-1x potential,
which is provided for free in a python package integrated with the atomic simulation environment
(ASE) package58 [ The first row in Table 1 provides
information about the final dataset from this work, labeled as ANI-1x. Notably, the size of the
ANI-1x dataset, at 5.5 million structures, is 25% the size of the dataset used in training the original
ANI-1 potential (22M).
C. Development of the COMP6 benchmark suite
To validate that the active learning process generates an ANI potential which outperforms the
original ANI-1 potential, and that each cycle’s resulting AL ANI potentials consistently
outperforms previous versions of AL ANI potentials, we develop the comprehensive machine
learned potential (COMP6) benchmark. COMP6 is a benchmark suite composed five rigorous
benchmarks that cover broad regions of organic and bio-chemical space (for molecules containing
C, N, O, and H atoms) and a sixth built from the existing S66x850 noncovalent interaction
benchmark. The five new benchmark sets are referred to as GDB7to9, GDB10to13, Tripeptides,
DrugBank, and ANI-MD. See Table 1 for a detailed description. The benchmarks range from a
mean molecule size of 17 atoms to 75 atoms, with the largest molecule being 312 atoms. Below is
a description of the methods used to develop each benchmark. Energies and forces for all nonequilibrium molecular conformations presented have been calculated using the ωB97x59 density
functional with the 6-31G(d) basis set60 as implemented in the Gaussian 0961 electronic structure
software. Hirshfeld charges and molecular dipoles are also included in the benchmark. An analysis
of these properties will be carried out in future work.
 S66x8 Benchmark. This dataset is built from the original S66x850 benchmark for
comparing accuracy between different methods in describing noncovalent interactions
common in biological molecules. S66x8 is developed from 66 dimeric systems involving
hydrogen bonding, pi-pi stacking, London interactions, and mixed influence interactions.
While the keen reader might question the use of this benchmark without dispersion
corrections, since dispersion corrections such as the D362 correction by Grimme et al. are
a posteriori additions to the produced energy, then a comparison without the correction is
equivalent to a comparison with the same dispersion corrections applied to both models.
 ANI Molecular Dynamics (ANI-MD) Benchmark. Forces from the ANI-1x potential are
applied to run 1ns of vacuum molecular dynamics with a 0.25fs time step at 300K using
the Langevin thermostat on 14 well-known drug molecules and two small proteins. System
sizes range from 20 to 312 atoms. A random subsample of 128 frames from each 1ns
trajectory is selected, and reference DFT single point calculations are performed to obtain
QM energies and forces.
Table 1: Description of the final active learning generated training dataset (ANI-1x) and all six COMP6
benchmark datasets. Mean relative energy range is the average range of relative energies for each set of
conformers. Energy prediction range is the real prediction range in the benchmark; this is the range which
the ANI model predicts energies in. [energy units: kcal/mol]
Configurations
(Conformations)
Atoms/Molecule
mean (std. dev.)
Mean Relative
Energy Range
Energy Prediction
ANI-1 + AL
63,865 (5,496,771)
14 (1,791)
1,500 (36,000)
2,996 (47,670)
Tripeptides
248 (1,984)
837 (13,379)
 GDB7to9 Benchmark. The GDB-11 subsets containing 7 to 9 heavy atoms (C, N, and O)
are subsampled and randomly embedded in 3D space using RDKit [www.rdkit.org]. A total
of 1500 molecule SMILES [opensmiles.org] strings are selected: 500 per 7, 8, and 9 heavyatom set. The resulting structures are optimized with tight convergence criteria, and normal
modes/force constants are computed using the reference DFT model. Finally, diverse
normal mode sampling (DNMS) is carried out to generate non-equilibrium conformations.
 GDB10to13 Benchmark. Subsamples of 500 SMILES strings each from the 10 and 11
heavy-atom subsets of GDB-1152,53 and 1000 SMILES strings from the 12 and 13 heavyatom subsets of the GDB-1363 database are randomly selected. DNMS is utilized to
generate random non-equilibrium conformations.
 Tripeptide Benchmark. 248 random tripeptides containing H, C, N, and O are generated
using FASTA strings and randomly embedded in 3D space using RDKit. As with
GDB7to9, the molecules are optimized, and normal modes are computed. DNMS is utilized
to generate random non-equilibrium conformations.
 DrugBank Benchmark. This benchmark is developed through a subsampling of the
DrugBank64 database of real drug molecules. 837 SMILES strings containing C, N, and O
are randomly selected. Like the GDB7to9 benchmark, the molecules are embedded in 3D
space, structurally optimized, and normal modes are computed. DNMS is utilized to
generate random non-equilibrium conformations.
D. Error metrics for validation on the COMP6 benchmark suite
This work uses three error metrics for comparing different versions of ANI potentials: potential
energy (𝐸), conformer energy difference (∆𝐸), and atomic force component errors (𝐹).
 Potential energy (𝐸) error is a comparison of 𝐸𝑖
𝑀1, potential energies produced by model
M1 for molecule i, to 𝐸𝑖
𝑀2, the potential energies produced by model M2 for molecule i.
 The conformer energy difference (∆𝐸) error is calculated per set of conformers. In the
benchmark dataset K sets of conformers are supplied, one per molecular configuration. For
a given set of conformers k, the conformer energy difference between conformers 𝑖 and 𝑗
where for a given model M is obtained by computing ∆𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑀,𝑘. Finally,
error is calculated between ∆𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑀1,𝑘 and ∆𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑀2,𝑘 for all k, 𝑖, and 𝑗> 𝑖+ 1 for models M1
 The atomic force (𝐹) error metric is a comparison between the individual components (x,
y, z) of each atom’s force vector for all conformations included in the given benchmark.
Comparisons are given in mean absolute error (MAE), and root mean squared error (RMSE)
throughout this article. The comparison of MAE along with RMSE can give information about
outliers in a model’s predictions. For example, two models can have the same MAE for a prediction
on a given benchmark while the RMSE can be much higher for one than the another. For this
reason, it is good practice to provide both MAE and RMSE when comparing two methods on some
benchmark.
E. Property prediction with an ensemble of ANI models
For energy and force predictions we use the mean prediction of an ensemble of ANI potentials.
The concept of using an ensemble mean for ML model prediction is common practice in the ML
community. Recently, it has been adopted in the area of ML molecular property prediction.31,37,65
All potentials used to generate results in this work utilize the mean prediction for an ensemble of
𝐿= 5 ANI potentials trained to a 5-fold cross validation split of the training dataset. The potential
energy (𝐸) is represented by,
where 𝐸𝑖 is the potential energy prediction from each of an ensemble’s 𝐿 ANI models. Since the
models are independent, atomic forces for the ensemble can be derived as the component wise
mean of the forces from the 𝐿 individual ANI models. The use of an ensemble as described above
decreases ANI vs. DFT 𝐸 RMSE by 0.67 kcal/mol, ∆𝐸 RMSE by 0.68 kcal/mol, and 𝐹 RMSE
by 2.1 kcal/mol ×  Å−1 over the entire COMP6 benchmark, an error reduction of 17%, 19% and
28%, respectively.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The supplemental information (SI) provided with this work contains various tables detailing the
results obtained on the COMP6 benchmark by the ANI potentials discussed in this work. SI tables
S1 through S7 provide an analysis of the ∆𝐸, 𝐸, and 𝐹 errors obtained for six subsequent active
learned ANI potentials, AL1 through AL6, and the original ANI-1 potential. Note that the publicly
released ANI-1x potential is the AL6 ANI potential. SI Tables S8 through S10 supply an analysis
of the individual ANI-MD trajectory results for the ANI-1x potential. Table S9 provides per atom
energy errors for the ANI-1x potential vs. DFT and shows that the mean energy prediction RMSE
per atom for all trajectories is 0.05 kcal/mol per atom. This level of accuracy is on par with single
molecule or bulk metal ML potentials as described in recent work by J. Behler.25 SI Table S11
Figure 3. Force correlation plots comparing ANI-1x, DFTB (3ob-3-1 parameter set for bio-molecules), and PM6
to DFT reference calculations are provided from left to right, respectively, for the complete ANI-MD benchmark.
Molecules in the ANI-MD benchmark are composed of a mean of 75 atoms with the largest being Trp-cage
(1L2Y), a 20-residue (312-atom) protein. DFTB and PM6 are provided as a baseline of comparison. Mean absolute
errors (MAE) and root mean squared errors (RMSE) are provided in the bottom right of each figure. The color bar
scale is the same for all figures allowing a proper density comparison.
provides details on the ANI models introduced in this work. Finally, SI Tables S12 through S17
give errors for COMP6 considering conformers within select energy ranges for the ANI-1x
potential. These tables show much lower errors for conformations which are thermally accessible
to room temperature molecular dynamics simulations. As shown in Table S17, thermally
accessible conformations (within 50kcal/mol) have a 𝐸 MAE/RMSE of 0.064/0.105 kcal/mol per
atom and ∆𝐸 MAE/RMSE of 0.049/0.070 kcal/mol per atom over the complete COMP6
benchmark.
Figure 3 provides evidence of the ANI-1x force prediction capabilities. Also, most tables in the
supplemental information further establish the accuracy of ANI potential force prediction on the
COMP6 benchmark suite. By construction, ANI potentials provide analytic and energyconservative forces, a requirement for molecular dynamics simulations. It is noteworthy that force
training, which can be computationally expensive, is not required to achieve these force
prediction results. The forces compared in the DFT correlation density plots in Figure 3 are from
all trajectories combined in the COMP6 ANI-MD benchmark. We compare the same figures for
ANI-1x (left), DFTB (center), and PM6 (right). DFTB and PM6 are included as a baseline for the
comparison. The ANI-MD benchmark is a rigorous test case for any ML potential’s force
prediction because the molecules supplied in the dataset range from 20 to 312 atoms, with an
average size of 75 atoms. A breakdown of the errors for each trajectory in the ANI-MD benchmark
is supplied in the supplemental information, Tables S8 through S10.
The closest comparison in literature can be
found in recent work on a system specific
ML potential for an alanine tripeptide where
a force RMSE of 3.4 kcal/mol × Å−1 was
achieved with test data from a 350K MD
trajectory.37 The force error from this work
was obtained by training directly to energies
and analytic forces from fragments of the
molecule being tested. In the case of the
ANI-1x potential, which was used to predict
the forces for the creation of the ANI-MD
benchmark, a MAE/RMSE of 2.7/4.2 kcal/
mol × Å−1 is obtained vs. a posteriori DFT
calculations on 128 random frames from
each of the 14 molecule’s 1ns molecular
dynamics trajectories. More impressive, 𝐹
MAE/RMSE for the neutralized 20-residue
Trp-cage (1L2Y) and 10-residue Chignolin
(1UAO) proteins are 3.1/4.6 kcal/mol ×
kcal/mol × Å−1,
respectively. ANI-1x also exhibits a force
MAE/RMSE of 2.3/3.3 kcal/mol × Å−1
within the energy range of 50 kcal/mol on
Figure 4. Comparison of potential energy (E) RMSE
obtained on the entire COMP6 benchmark vs. training set
size (total molecular conformation included in the training
set). The x-axis represents the progression of the active
learning process. Plot points are obtained by ANI
potentials (blue) trained to various versions of the active
learned dataset and an ANI potential (red) trained on the
original ANI-1 dataset.
the tripeptide benchmark (non-equilibrium conformations from 248 randomly generated
tripeptides) from COMP6 (see supplemental information Table S14), which is roughly the
accessible energy range of 350K molecular dynamics simulations. Finally, considering the ANI-
1x potential was utilized to generate 1 ns of 300K molecular dynamics simulations, from which
the ANI-MD benchmark geometries were sampled, speaks to the applicability of the forces in
molecular dynamics for general molecular systems. All the previously mentioned results from the
ANI-1x potential were obtained without the need of direct force training.
Figure 4 provides a plot of 𝐸 RMSE achieved on COMP6 vs. dataset size for various active learned
datasets and the original ANI-1 dataset. With only 2 million data points, the active learned ANI
potentials already outperform the original ANI-1 potential across the entire COMP6 benchmark.
Once the active learned ANI potential reaches 5.5 million data points it five times outperforms
ANI-1 and is approaching chemical accuracy from the reference DFT calculations. In the new
COMP6 benchmark, diversity selection in the normal mode sampling helps ensure a more uniform
sampling of energy states within the energy range being fit to and tested within. Therefore, general
errors on COMP6 vs. the ANI-1 potential’s original results are expected to be much higher on this
complex benchmark than the results published on the less rigorous test sets from the original ANI-
1 work. Table 1 provides the average energy ranges for each benchmark in COMP6 and the final
training set (ANI-1x), as well as the energy prediction (atomization energy) range.
Most benchmarks in COMP6 (all but the ANI-MD benchmark) were used during the active
learning process to validate the improvement in accuracy and universality of new active learned
ANI models. Figure 5 provides the learning curves for six intermediate active learned ANI
potentials on each benchmark in COMP6. Supplemental information Table S11 provides
Figure 5. Individual COMP6 benchmark learning curves for successive versions of the active learned potentials.
RMSE is provided for three properties: potential energy (𝐸), conformer energy differences (∆𝐸), and force
components (𝐹). The error bars on the solid lines represent one standard deviation of each of the five ANI models
in the ensemble used to make the mean prediction. The horizontal lines represent the mean prediction of ANI-1.
information of the chemical space sampled in each of these datasets. The horizontal dashed lines
in Figure 5 represent the original ANI-1 ensemble predictions on each of the benchmarks for the
property corresponding to its color. AL1 is the ANI potential used to initialize the active learning
process. It was trained to a reduced (Figure 2a) version of the one through six heavy atom subsets
of the ANI-1 dataset. AL2 through AL6 are successive versions of the active learned ANI
potentials. More details for each active learning cycle shown in Figure 5 is provided in SI Table
S11. During the active learning process, small molecules (one to six C, N, and O atoms) were
initially sampled, with the size of the molecules sampled gradually increased as the active learning
process continued. AL3 is where the AL models begin to statistically match or outperform the
original ANI-1 model in most metrics. It is notable that AL3 accomplished this feat while only
having sampled 1.8 million conformations from molecules with up to 7-heavy atoms from GDB-
11. This shows that the active learning techniques employed in this work sample chemical space
far better than random sampling techniques. Especially considering the ANI-1 dataset includes 22
million conformations from larger, up to 8-heavy atom, molecules.
Eventually, between the AL4 and AL5 steps, amino acids, generated dipeptides, generated small
molecule dimers and small ChEMBL molecules were added to the sampling set. This is apparent
from the large drop in error between AL4 and AL5 for the DrugBank, Tripeptides, and S66x8
benchmarks. Active learning sampling was also driven into the GDB-11’s 9-heavy atom subset for
sampling during the production of AL6. Supplemental information Tables S2 through S7 provide
the full tables used to make Figure 5 along with Table S1 which describes all benchmarks at once.
The latest ANI potential, ANI-1x (shown as AL6), achieves remarkable property prediction on the
complete benchmark with errors (MAE/RMSE) of 1.9/3.4 kcal/mol (𝐸), 1.8/3.0 kcal/mol (∆𝐸),
and 3.1/5.3 kcal/mol × Å−1 (F) within the full energy range of the benchmark.
In general, as each ANI potential’s fitness improves in Figure 5, the standard deviation (shown as
vertical error bars) of each property prediction for a given ensemble decreases as well. This is a
sign that each model in the ensemble is obtaining enough chemical interaction information through
active learning that the models begin agreeing on their predictions for these larger systems. By the
final iteration of the active learning cycles, an active learned dataset of 5.5M data points is used in
training the ANI-1x potential. The ANI-1x potential outperforms the ANI-1 potential on all
properties across all benchmarks. Further, the ANI-1x dataset is 25% the size of the original ANI-
1 dataset, which contains a total of 22M data points.
There has been recent discussion in literature (Herr et al.66) questioning the validity of using data
generated from a single sampling technique to successfully extrapolate to out-of-sample data. We
believe such critique is well placed and has particular impact when defining system-specific
potentials or other models of limited scope. In the present work, we combined several sampling
techniques, attempting to cover all relevant regions of conformational and configurational
(chemical) space. We test model performance on a separate and very diverse set of systems,
showing not only accuracy, but extensibility to molecules and conformations much larger than the
training set. Accuracies on benchmarks generated with different sampling techniques are
comparably accurate: On the ANI-MD benchmark (mean energy range of 35 kcal/mol), we
achieve force MAE of 2.49 kcal/mol × Å−1 (SI Table S10). On the overall COMP6 benchmark
restricted to the energy range of 50 kcal/mol, we achieve force MAE of 2.48 kcal/mol × Å−1
(SI Table S12). The fact that MD-sampled test points show quite similar error to the mostly DNMsampled benchmark is evidence that the active learning procedure with hybrid sampling methods
produces a model that is robust.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In pursuit of automated dataset generation for the development of universal machine learned
potentials, we introduce automatic active learning techniques for sampling sparsely explored
regions of chemical space. The algorithm begins with the reduction of an existing dataset to remove
redundant data without loss of accuracy. New conformations of molecules are generated through
normal mode sampling, molecular dynamics sampling, and random dimer sampling. Periodically
the algorithm samples new molecular configurations from a variety of sources to diversify its
exploration of chemical space. The result is a new potential (ANI-1x) developed though successive
generations of the active learning process. The ANI-1x potential is packaged in a user-friendly
Python library, which is publicly available on GitHub [ We
also introduce the COMP6 benchmark for monitoring the progress of active learning cycles and
for comparison to future universal potentials. The ANI-1x potential achieves errors (MAE/RMSE)
of 1.6/3.0 kcal/mol (𝐸), 1.4/2.3 kcal/mol (∆𝐸), and 2.7/4.5 kcal/mol × Å−1 (F) when testing on
points within 100 kcal/mol of the energy minima for the complete COMP6 benchmark.
The COMP6 benchmark suite consists of six diverse benchmark test sets. The COMP6 benchmark
potentials
[ As provided, properties are calculated using the ωB97x
density functional with the 6-31G(d) basis set, however, it could be recomputed using the desired
quantum level of theory. For complete transparency, we provide the exact error metrics used to
measure accuracy on the COMP6 benchmark suite. It is our hope that the COMP6 benchmark will
provide the universal ML potential development community with a rigorous benchmark for
comparison of ML potential methods on organic molecules in the extrapolative regime. The
COMP6 benchmark suite constitutes a first benchmark of its kind for the comparison of universal
ML potentials in this rapidly changing and ever-growing field.
The ANI-1x potential was trained to less than 100 conformations per molecular configuration in
its training set, compared to 400 for the ANI-1 dataset. The accuracy of the ANI-1x potential is on
par with the best single molecule or material ML potentials, while most single molecule
parametrized ML potentials require many hundreds to thousands of conformations to parametrize
a single system. This further validates the configurational and conformational big data sampling
philosophy introduced in the original ANI-1 work. Since the mean molecule size in the ANI-1x
active learning training set is only 15 total atoms (8 heavy atoms), the generation of more accurate
post-Hartree-Fock datasets is now feasibles.
The high-level of universal accuracy achieved by the ANI-1x potential can be attributed to the
capacity of neural networks to learn low level interactions from properly developed descriptors.
We hypothesize the use of spatially localized descriptors (i.e., the atomic environment vector34
with modified angular symmetry function) within the cutoff to contribute greatly to this ability.
This contrasts with descriptor sets that represent the entire chemical environment at once, and thus
interactions must be inferred through the entire set of non-local descriptors by the ML model.
Given the prospects of high-throughput experiments, robotic synthesis, and intelligent software,
we are currently witnessing a transformation of science into a more data-driven automated
discovery. The envisioned chemical AI imitates human decision making by transferring
responsibility to an objective machine learning system. If successful overall, the approach will
revolutionize the way computational methods are developed. As one possible building block to
construct such AI, we introduced a fully automated workflow to select and calculate QM training
data for accurate, transferable, and extensible ML potentials. These techniques can aid in the
generation of universal potentials for a wide variety of current and future ML models.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
See supplementary material for complete technical details about training of ensemble of neural
networks (S1.1) and sampling methods (S1.2). Tables S1-S10 list individual and complete COMP6
benchmarks. Table S11 lists details about ANI potential at various AL cycles. Tables S12-S17 list
COMP6 benchmarks for ANI-1x within select energy ranges.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
J.S.S thanks the University of Florida for the graduate student fellowship and the Los Alamos
National Laboratory Center for Non-linear Studies for resources and hospitality. This work was
performed, in part, at the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User
Facility operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Los Alamos
National Laboratory, an affirmative action equal opportunity employer, is operated by Los Alamos
National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department
of Energy under contract DE-AC52-06NA25396. O.I. acknowledges support from DOD-ONR
(N00014-16-1-2311) and Eshelman Institute for Innovation award. The authors acknowledge
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) award DMR110088, which
is supported by National Science Foundation grant number ACI-1053575. This research in part
was done using resources provided by the Open Science Grid67,68 which is supported by the
National Science Foundation award 1148698, and the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of
Science. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the U.S. Department of Energy through the
LANL/LDRD Program for this work. The authors thank Roman Zubatyuk and Kipton Barros for
invaluable discussions on the topics presented in this work.