Shape perception reduces activity in human primary
visual cortex
Scott O. Murray*†, Daniel Kersten‡, Bruno A. Olshausen*§, Paul Schrater‡¶, and David L. Woods**
*Center for Neuroscience, §Department of Psychology, and Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616; Departments of
‡Psychology and ¶Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455; and **Neurology Service (127E),
Department of Veterans Affairs Northern California Health Care System, 150 Muir Road, Martinez, CA 94553
Communicated by David Mumford, Brown University, Providence, RI, September 24, 2002 
Visual perception involves the grouping of individual elements into
coherent patterns that reduce the descriptive complexity of a
visual scene. The physiological basis of this perceptual simpliﬁcation remains poorly understood. We used functional MRI to measure activity in a higher object processing area, the lateral occipital
complex, and in primary visual cortex in response to visual elements that were either grouped into objects or randomly arranged.
We observed signiﬁcant activity increases in the lateral occipital
complex and concurrent reductions of activity in primary visual
cortex when elements formed coherent shapes, suggesting that
activity in early visual areas is reduced as a result of grouping
processes performed in higher areas. These ﬁndings are consistent
with predictive coding models of vision that postulate that inferences of high-level areas are subtracted from incoming sensory
information in lower areas through cortical feedback.
ne of the extraordinary capabilities of the human visual
system is its ability to rapidly group elements in a complex
visual scene, a process that can greatly simplify the description
of an image. For example, a collection of parallel lines can be
described as a single texture pattern without specifying the
location, length, and orientation of each element within the
pattern. Such grouping processes are reflected in the activities of
neurons at various stages of the visual system. For example, the
response of a neuron in primary visual cortex (V1) to a single
visual element can be suppressed if the element in its receptive
field shares the same orientation as surrounding elements, or
enhanced if orientations differ (1). These pattern context effects
in V1 are thought to be mediated by both local connections (2)
and interactions with higher areas (3).
In natural scenes, elements are often grouped when they are
perceived as belonging to the same object. This case is particularly interesting from a physiological perspective because object
shape is a feature that is represented only in higher stages of the
visual system, so any influence of perceived shape on lower areas
would require feedback processes. Although feedback is generally thought of as a process where activity in lower areas is
enhanced by activity occurring in higher areas, recent work on
probabilistic models has pointed to the importance of a phenomenon termed ‘‘explaining away’’: a competition that occurs
between alternative hypotheses when attempting to infer the
probable cause of an event (4). When applied to models of visual
perception, perceptual hypotheses are thought to compete via
feedback connections from higher visual areas projecting their
predictions about the stimulus to lower stages, where they are
then subtracted from incoming data. According to such predictive coding models, the activity of neurons in lower stages will
decrease when neurons in higher stages can ‘‘explain’’ a visual
stimulus (5, 6). These models can be contrasted with traditional
feature-detection models, which posit that visual features are
extracted in a largely sequential, feed-forward manner with little
influence from higher areas on lower areas (e.g., refs. 7 and 8).
Recent neuroimaging studies have shown that the lateral
occipital complex (LOC) is a higher visual area critical for object
shape perception. The LOC was first identified by its increased
response to images of objects versus scrambled versions of the
same images and textures (9, 10). More recent studies have
shown that this area increases in activity whenever individual
features are grouped into an object or a coherent scene (11).
Thus, the LOC may subserve high-level grouping of low-level
image features. In the present study, we examined the effect of
perceived shape on activity in V1 and in the LOC in a series of
functional MRI experiments where visual elements were either
perceived as coherent shapes or as random elements. We
observed reduced activity in V1 and increased activity in the
LOC when elements were grouped into coherent shapes, consistent with the view that higher visual areas ‘‘explain away’’
activity in lower areas through feedback processes.††
Materials and Methods
Experiment 1. Drawings were presented of (i) random lines, (ii)
lines that formed 2D shapes, and (iii) lines that formed 3D
shapes (Fig. 1A). The stimuli were white lines on a black
background. The 2D shapes were generated by randomly selecting 4–7 vertices at a minimum distance from fixation and
connecting the vertices. The random lines were created by
breaking the 2D shapes at their intersections and shifting the
lines in the display. The 3D shapes were the same as the 2D
shapes, with the addition of small extensions that added perceived depth. The lines in all three conditions were equated for
their retinotopic distribution, with each stimulus condition having equivalent mean distance and variance from fixation (random, mean  4.05° from fixation, SD  0.93°; 2D, mean  4.06,
SD  0.94; 3D, mean  3.94, SD  0.97; see Fig. 4, which is
published as supporting information on the PNAS web site,
www.pnas.org).
There were 40 different shapes in each condition. Each shape
was presented for 750 ms in blocks lasting 30 s. Subjects viewed
each condition a total of eight times over two imaging runs. To
independently define the area of V1 processing the line drawings, a flickering (8 Hz) counterphase checkerboard ring with the
same mean eccentricity as the line stimuli was presented seven
times in 20-s blocks alternating with a gray screen. The area we
designated as the LOC was defined as active voxels in a
comparison between the 3D lines and random lines condition,
and located immediately posterior to motion-sensitive visual
area (MT).
The number of line segments, line orientation, retinotopic
distribution, and overall luminance were equated across stimulus
classes. Nevertheless, two minor differences in stimulus properties remained: there were line terminations in the random line
stimuli and more parallel lines in the 3D shapes. To evaluate the
Abbreviations: BOLD, blood oxygen level-dependent; LOC, lateral occipital complex; MT,
motion-sensitive visual area; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; ROI, region of interest;
SFM, structure-from-motion; V1, primary visual cortex.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
††This work was presented in part at Human Brain Mapping , Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology , and Society for Neuroscience 
conferences.
15164–15169 
November 12, 2002 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.192579399
possible contributions of these stimulus differences to V1 activations, a control experiment was performed. Portions of the line
segments in the 3D shapes were eliminated (introducing line
terminations), but in two different ways: (i) in the nonshape
condition, the corners were deleted and the remaining line
segments were shifted andor rotated slightly (usually less than
15°) to remove perceived shape, and (ii) in the shape condition
only the middle portions of lines were deleted introducing line
terminations without significantly disrupting shape perception
(see Fig. 5, which is published as supporting information on the
PNAS web site). As in the initial experiment, the shape and
nonshape stimuli were controlled to have the same mean distance and variance from fixation.
Experiment 2. A second experiment was performed using structurefrom-motion (SFM) stimuli. Random-dot displays were presented
under three conditions: (i) stationary dots, (ii) projections of
random-dot patterns onto moving 3D geometric shapes (SFM),
and (iii) velocity-scrambled moving dots (Fig. 2A).
The stimuli contained 450 dots and subtended 10°. The dots
in the SFM stimuli were projected onto rigid geometric shapes
including cube, cylinder, and ‘‘house-shaped’’ figures. Dots were
randomly selected from a uniform distribution on the object
surface and kept fixed relative to the rotating object surface and
orthographically projected onto the image plane. The dots were
rotated on a randomly chosen 3D axis for 40° in 1.5° increments.
Each stimulus presentation lasted 890 ms, followed by a 110-ms
blank-screen delay before the next stimulus presentation. The
velocity-scrambled stimuli were created by using the same
starting positions as the SFM stimuli, then randomly assigning
each dot’s SFM velocity (speed and direction) to that of another
dot. Thus, the velocity-scrambled stimuli had identical velocities
as the SFM stimuli, but lacked any perceived 3D structure. The
stationary dot condition presented randomly chosen frames
from the SFM stimuli.
Experiment 1. (A) Examples of the three different stimulus conditions. (B Left) Areas of increased (redyellow) and decreased (blue) activity comparing
3D ﬁgures to random lines for a representative subject on a ﬂattened representation of occipital cortex. (B Right) A ﬂickering ring stimulus matching the mean
eccentricity of the line drawings was used to independently locate the portion of V1 where the line drawing stimuli occurred. The reduced activity for the 3D
ﬁgures in V1 is restricted to the cortical area representing the stimuli. The solid line indicates the representation of the vertical meridian, marking the boundary
of V1. The location of MT deﬁned by random dot motion is included as a reference. Fig. 6 shows the relative location of the ROIs and the location of the ‘‘cuts’’
to ﬂatten the cortex. (C) The average percent signal change from the mean for the three conditions averaged over six subjects. All pair-wise comparisons are
signiﬁcant, P  0.001. Error bars are SEM. (D) The average time course of the MRI signal in the LOC (solid line) and V1 (dashed line). Percent signal change is from
the mean activation across all three conditions. Periods corresponding to the three conditions, random (R, white), 3D (dark gray), and 2D (light gray), are shown.
The dissociation between the LOC and V1 is clearly evident: as activity increases in the LOC, activity in V1 declines.
Murray et al.
November 12, 2002 
NEUROSCIENCE
As with the line drawing stimuli, conditions were presented in
30-s blocks and subjects viewed each condition a total of eight
times. In addition to V1 and the LOC, responses of motionsensitive area MT were examined. To independently define V1
and MT, a separate scan was performed that alternated a
stationary random dot field (450 dots) with a randomly moving
dot field six times in 20-s blocks presented in the same locations
as the SFM stimuli.
Experiment 3. A final experiment was performed using a constant
image sequence that formed a changing bi-stable percept with
either grouped or ungrouped line segments. The stimulus was a
line drawing of a diamond whose four corners were occluded by
three vertical bars of the same color as the background (Fig. 3A).
In two separate conditions, either the bars (‘‘bars move’’) or the
diamond moved (‘‘diamond moves’’) back and forth in the
horizontal direction. Regardless of condition, the stimulus was
perceived as either a single diamond behind occluders (diamond), or as separately moving line segments (nondiamond)
(refs. 12–14, and see Movies 1 and 2, which are published as
supporting information on the PNAS web site). The two percepts
alternated after stable intervals of several to tens of seconds, and
subjects indicated their perceptual state with a button press. The
stimulus subtended 7° of visual angle. The diamond (and bars, in
the bars move condition) moved at a constant horizontal speed
of 0.8°ss and reversed direction every 1.3 s. A total of four
300-s imaging scans were performed (two for each condition).
Subjects and Procedure. In all experiments, stimuli were presented
using a liquid crystal display projector onto a rear projection
screen at the feet of the subjects. Subjects viewed the screen with
an angled mirror positioned on the head-coil. In experiments 1
and 2, data were collected from a total of six subjects. Three of
the six subjects were scanned in a control experiment using the
stimuli in which portions of the line segments in the 3D shapes
were eliminated (see Fig. 5). In experiments 1 and 2, subjects
were asked to maintain fixation and were required to detect a
brief, 100-ms, 40% dimming of the entire stimulus. The task was
designed to equally engage attention in all conditions. An
additional two subjects participated in experiment 3. In experiment 3, subjects were allowed to freely view the stimulus, and
eye movement patterns were measured in response to the same
visual stimuli outside of the magnet.
MRI Scans and Analysis. For experiments 1 and 2, subjects were
scanned on a 1.5-T Marconi magnet, using a standard head coil.
A spin-echo sequence [field of view (FOV)  240 mm, matrix 
128  128, repetition time (TR)  2,000 ms, echo time (TE) 
40 ms, flip angle  90°] was used to visualize the BOLD (blood
oxygen level-dependent) contrast changes that accompany brain
activity. Images were acquired in 20 contiguous 5-mm horizontal
Experiment 2. (A) The three types of random dot stimuli used in experiment 2. (B Left) Areas of increased (redyellow) and decreased (blue) activity
comparing SFM and the velocity-scrambled control stimuli. (B Right) V1 and MT were deﬁned in a separate scan by using a randomly moving dot ﬁeld compared
with stationary dots. The area of decreased activity in V1 to the SFM stimuli was restricted to the region independently deﬁned by the random motion stimulus.
(C) The percent signal change averaged over six subjects in the LOC, V1, and MT. Activity increased in all three areas in motion conditions relative to the
stationary condition. The critical comparison in this experiment is between the velocity-scrambled and SFM conditions. LOC activity increased to the SFM stimulus
compared with the velocity-scrambled stimuli, whereas V1 and MT showed signiﬁcant activity reductions. All pair-wise comparisons are signiﬁcant, P  0.001.
Error bars are SEM.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.192579399
Murray et al.
slices. SPM99 (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.ukspm) was used to generate
statistical maps by using a ‘‘boxcar’’ response model smoothed
with a hemodynamic response function. The functional data
were motion corrected and spatially smoothed with a 4-mm
Gaussian window. For the average percent change data presented (Figs. 1C and 2C), average values of each region-ofinterest for each 30-s epoch were included in paired two-tailed
t tests. Percent change was calculated by first linearly detrending
each voxel’s time course, then subtracting and dividing by the
mean across all conditions. Statistical maps (P values at each
voxel location) were projected onto ‘‘inflated’’ and flattened
cortices by using FREESURFER (15, 16), derived from a highresolution anatomical scan from each subject (FOV  240 mm,
matrix  256  212  256, TE  4.47 ms, TR  15 ms, flip
angle  35°). The boundaries between the retinotopic areas were
defined with counterphase flickering narrow wedges at the
horizontal and vertical meridian. In all of the analyses, a region
of interest (ROI) was defined as a contiguous region of voxels
surpassing a minimum statistical threshold of P  104.
In experiment 3, subjects were scanned using a Siemens
(Iselin, NJ) Vision 1.5-T scanner by using an echo planar imaging
(EPI) sequence, TRTE  1,00060 ms, 64  64 matrix at
FOV  22  22 cm. Seven 1-cm-thick oblique coronal slices were
scanned, covering a region centered to ensure coverage of V1.
The restricted number of slices allowed greater temporal resolution; however, higher visual cortical areas were not imaged.
In experiment 3, task-related BOLD responses were detected
using correlation analysis. The time series for each voxel was first
filtered to remove drift and high-frequency noise, and normalized to the mean of the time series. We represented the button
responses as a series of delta functions indicating the subject’s
report of a transition from diamond to nondiamond percept.
This was then convolved with an ideal BOLD impulse response
function to generate a template to identify pixels whose activity
correlated with the template: h(t)  tet/,   8.6,   0.55
(17). V1 voxels were defined as those with a significant (P 
0.001) cross-correlation value and located in the calcarine sulcus.
The position of V1 was confirmed in one of the two subjects by
using standard retinotopic mapping stimuli (18, 19).
To obtain a quantitative measure of how well V1 activity
predicts the modeled response transient, a simple decision rule
was used to determine a receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve for each scan. The rule tested whether a fixed number of
contiguous time points of BOLD activity were all above a
criterion level. The number of contiguous measurements was
predetermined and equal to the width at the half-height of the
simulated response from the perceptual measurements. A ‘‘hit’’
means the decision rule correctly predicted the perceptual
response, and ‘‘false alarm’’ means that it did not. An ROC curve
shows hit versus false alarm rates for a range of criterion levels.
The Z score of the area under the ROC curve provides a
standard measure of sensitivity called d (20), where chance
performance corresponds to a diagonal ROC curve for which d
 0. For each subject, scan 3 was used to select a subset of V1
voxels that were good predictors of the perceptual transient, and
then compared the time series of activity in these locations to the
reported percept transitions on the three other scans.
Experiment 3. (A) A red diamond was covered by three black bars that hid the four vertices. There were two stimulus conditions in which either the red
diamond moved or the three occluding black bars moved horizontally back and forth, as shown in B (diamond moves) and C (bars move), respectively. Left and
Right in B and C show the ﬁrst and last movie frame. The four remaining line segments could be perceived either as a rigid diamond moving horizontally or as
individual line segments moving vertically. See Movies 1 and 2 for examples of the diamond moves stimulus. (D) Activity time course of voxels in V1 (thin red
lines) and the superimposed simulated response (thick gray lines) for two subjects. Scan 3 for both subjects was used to choose signiﬁcantly correlated voxels
(Upper). (Lower) The ﬁt for one of the other three scans. (E) ROC curves quantifying the predictability of the perceptual transition from diamond to nondiamond
from ﬂuctuations in V1 activity. In all scans for both subjects, V1 activity was an accurate predictor of subjects’ perceptual state.
Murray et al.
November 12, 2002 
NEUROSCIENCE
Experiment 1. Activity in the LOC increased in response to the
shape stimuli, with the 2D shapes activating the LOC significantly more than the random lines, and the 3D shapes activating
the LOC more than the 2D shapes, consistent with previous
findings (9, 10, 21–23). By contrast, activity in V1 showed an
opposite pattern: significant reductions in response to the 2D
shapes compared with the random lines and significantly less
activity for 3D than 2D shapes (Fig. 1). The reduction of activity
was localized on the flattened visual cortices of six subjects (12
hemispheres) by using retinotopic-mapping techniques (18, 19).
(Fig. 6, which is published as supporting information on the
PNAS web site, shows the relative location of the ROIs and the
location of the ‘‘cuts’’ to flatten the cortex.) A region of interest
was independently defined in V1 by using a flickering counterphase ring stimulus with the same mean eccentricity as the line
drawing stimuli. This region showed significantly reduced activity during object perception (Fig. 1B). The area of V1 representing the fovea (where no line stimuli occurred) did not show
processing-related alterations in activity. Possibly because the
stimuli used to map the horizontal and vertical meridian were
very narrow wedges, we could not reliably differentiate intermediate retinotopic areas (V2, V3, V4, etc.) to perform a ROI
analysis. However, inspecting the flattened statistical maps
revealed little reliable activity differences in intermediate retinotopic areas. Several subjects did show reduced activity for 3D
shapes in what is likely V2 and V3 (e.g., see Fig. 1B); however,
only V1 showed reduced activity in all subjects. There was no
significant difference in the luminance-change detection task,
designed to equally engage attention in all conditions (hit rate:
random  90%, 2D  89%, 3D  91%).
Although the number of line segments, line orientation, retinotopic distribution, and overall luminance were equated across
stimulus classes, there were line terminations in the random line
stimuli and more parallel lines in 3D shapes. To evaluate the
possible contributions of these stimulus differences to V1 activations, a control experiment was performed with three subjects by
using the stimuli with the eliminated line segments (see Fig. 5). All
three subjects showed significant (P  0.01) reductions of activity
in V1 and significant (P  0.01) increases in LOC in the shape
versus nonshape control comparisons.
Experiment 2. To evaluate the generality of the findings, a second
experiment was performed using 3D SFM shapes. Activity was
compared with velocity-scrambled and stationary stimuli. The
three ROIs (V1, MT, and LOC) showed significant increases
in activity in response to motion stimuli (velocity-scrambled or
SFM) compared with the stationary stimuli, with MT showing
the largest signal increase. In response to the SFM shapes,
activity increased significantly in the LOC in comparison with
the velocity-scrambled control, consistent with other studies
showing that the LOC integrates multiple shape cues (21, 22). By
contrast, both V1 and MT showed significant reductions in
activity during object perception (Fig. 2C). As before, the
retinotopic position of the stimuli was defined in independent
scans, and the reduction in V1 activity was restricted to the
retinotopic position of the stimuli (Fig. 2B). There was a
significant difference in the luminance-change detection task
between the velocity-scrambled condition compared with the
SFM and stationary conditions (hit rate: velocity-scrambled 
86%, SFM  94%, stationary dots  96%).
Experiment 3. Although many low-level stimulus features were
controlled in the first two experiments, it is still possible that
some stimulus differences could have contributed to the reductions in V1 activity. For example, in experiment 2, the SFM
stimuli had higher motion coherence (percentage of dots locally
moving in the same direction), as well as higher opponent motion
(opposite local motion directions). Although it is not clear that
these differences would cause activity decreases in V1, it was
nevertheless important to use a stimulus with nonchanging
features. A final experiment was therefore performed using a
constant stimulus that formed a changing bi-stable percept with
either grouped or ungrouped line segments. Experiment 3
measured V1 activity while subjects viewed a bi-stable stimulus
that was either perceived as a moving rigid diamond behind
occluders or as individual moving line segments. Importantly,
only the percept, and not the stimulus features, changed during
this experiment.
The percept changed, on average, every 8 s (SD  3.5) for
subject 1, and every 7.7 s (SD  3.3) for subject 2. The stimulus
was perceived as a coherent diamond for 50% of the scan.
Significant changes in activity were observed in V1 in accordance
with the percepts of the subjects. Consistent with the results from
experiments 1 and 2, activity in V1 was significantly reduced
when a coherently moving diamond was perceived, and significantly increased when visual elements were not perceived as
part of a shape. The restricted number of slices acquired in this
experiment allowed greater temporal resolution; however,
higher visual cortical areas were not imaged. No significant
difference in the pattern of eye movements was observed
between the coherent ‘‘diamond’’ percept and the ‘‘no diamond’’
percepts (see Fig. 7, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site).
To compare cortical activity with the perceptual response, the
perceptual transient corresponding to ‘‘no diamond’’ was convolved with a model transient BOLD impulse response function
(17). Fig. 3D shows the time course of V1 activity (thin red lines)
superimposed on the smoothed perceptual transient (thick gray
lines). It can be seen by inspection that V1 activity is correlated
with the perceptual response: when subjects’ perception changed
from a coherent shape to individual line segments, V1 activity
increased. Fig. 3E shows the results from the ROC analysis. For
each scan, d is greater than zero. The average d and standard
errors (excluding scan 3, which was used to select voxels) for the
two subjects were: d  1.9, SE  0.82; d  1.15, SE  0.26.
Thus, decreased activity in V1 is an accurate predictor of
perceived grouping on the time scale of the perceptual behavior.
Discussion
Our results show that grouping individual elements into shapes
increased activity in higher object-processing areas and concurrently reduced activity in V1. Whereas shapes and nonshapes
differed in some low-level stimulus features in experiments 1 and
2, the control experiment showed that minor stimulus differences could not plausibly account for the findings. Moreover, the
results of experiment 3 clearly demonstrate that the effects in V1
are not due to stimulus differences, but to perceptual interpretations of the stimuli.
Our results help to explain differences in V1 activity obtained
incidentally in previous experiments. For example, a recent study
examining the effects of progressive image scrambling on LOC
activity also showed significant changes in V1 activity (24).
Specifically, it was observed that progressive decreases in LOC
activity were accompanied by progressive increases in V1 activity, as images were changed from ordered to scrambled. The
interpretation was that V1 has greater sensitivity to local image
features. However, an alternative explanation, consistent with
the results of our current study, is that the changes in V1 reflect
the level of perceived grouping: as higher visual areas are able
to group local image features into coherent objects, the need for
lower areas to signal their presence is reduced. Our results from
experiment 2 are also consistent with a previous SFM study that
showed reduced activity in V1 for dots that were perceived as
belonging to a spherical surface compared with random dot
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.192579399
Murray et al.
motion (25). However, unlike our study, no reliable differences
in MT activity were observed.
One possible alternative explanation for our finding of reduced V1 activity is that attention is enhanced in V1 for
nongrouped stimulus elements. Any such effect would appear to
be automatic, because in experiments 1 and 2 subjects were
engaged in a demanding luminance detection task in all conditions. Therefore, any attentional differences would have to be
caused by an involuntary mechanism, whereas previous studies
showing attentional modulations required voluntary switches in
attention between different features or spatial locations (e.g.,
refs. 26 and 27). Further, there is no evidence that V1 is
specialized for processing ungrouped versus grouped line segments, so there is no reason to believe it would be specifically
enhanced by attention. Also, to explain the results from experiment 2 as an attentional confound, one would have to argue that
V1 is specialized for processing random motion over structured
motion, for which there is no evidence. And finally, the lack of
any difference in eye movements in experiment 3 also suggests
there are no differences in the focus of overt spatial attention
between grouped and ungrouped elements.
The observed decreases in V1 activity in the current experiments may at first appear inconsistent with the results of
previous contextual modulation studies. For example, in previous studies contextual effects signaling the presence of figurefrom-ground resulted in increased V1 activity (28). However, in
these previous studies figure perception involved the ungrouping
of a line or texture patch from the background or surrounding
elements (1, 28). These observations have led some to suggest
that context effects, in particular increases in activity in V1, are
an index of perceptual saliency (29). Our interpretation of these
results is that when line segments are grouped with the background or combined into a pattern (i.e., have reduced saliency),
V1 activity is reduced (1), as in the current study.
Feedback projections are a prominent anatomical feature of
the primate visual system (30), and recent evidence suggests they
play a critical role in visual perception (31). Feedback from
higher areas appears to be the primary contributor to the context
effects observed in the current experiments. In the present study,
the context (global shape) is a feature that can only be represented in higher stages of the visual system. Hence, our results
are consistent with other evidence pointing to the importance of
feedback as a mechanism for context effects in lower areas (3).
Feedback is frequently thought of as a process where activity
in lower areas is enhanced by activity occurring in higher areas.
However, there are reasons to think that feedback may also
reduce activity in lower areas. First, recent computational models of predictive coding (5, 6) posit a subtractive comparison
between the predictions of hypotheses generated in higher areas
and incoming data in lower areas, with the residual from the
subtraction operation passed along as neural activity. Thus,
reduced activity would occur when the predictions of higherlevel areas match incoming sensory information. Second, higher
areas may serve to disambiguate activity patterns in lower areas,
reducing irrelevant activity and enhancing activity appropriate
for the percept. The net effect of such a process may be reduced
activity. Both accounts suggest that activity will be reduced
proportional to the degree to which higher areas can account for
the stimulus. In fact, the difference in V1 activity in experiment
1 between 2D and 3D shapes suggests that it is not grouping per
se that leads to reduced activity, but the degree to which neurons
in higher visual areas are tuned for the stimulus. Based on the
results of the current study and others (23), it appears that LOC
neurons are tuned for processing 3D surface structure, as
reflected by both the increase observed in LOC and the decrease
observed in V1 for 3D versus 2D shapes.
Reduced activity may afford several behavioral advantages.
For example, by selectively decreasing activity in V1 for grouped
elements, ungrouped or novel elements may be more readily
detected. Importantly, our results demonstrate that neuronal
activity, even in V1, does not simply represent the signaling of
features in a visual scene but is strongly influenced by high-level
perceptions of object shape.
We thank K. Ahlo, C. Anderson, S. David, L. Disbrow, J. Gallant, J.
Johnson, J. Mazer, E. Mercado, E. Wojciulik, and E. Yund for discussion
and comments on the manuscript; and K. Ugurbil, L. Shen, E. Yacoub,
X. Hu, and F. Fang for their contributions. This work was supported by
National Institutes of Health Grant P41 RR08079, predoctoral National
Research Service Award MH-12791 (to S.O.M.), National Science
Foundation Grant SBR-9631682 (to D.K.), National Institutes of Health
Grant MH-57921 (to B.A.O.), National Institutes of Health Grant
MH-41544, and Veterans Affairs Research Service (to D.L.W.).
1. Knierim, J. J. & Van Essen, D. C. J. Neurophysiol. 67, 164–181.
2. Das, A. & Gilbert, C. D. Nature 399, 655–661.
3. Hupe, J. M., James, A. C., Payne, B. R., Lomber, S. G., Girard, P. & Bullier,
J. Nature 394, 784–787.
4. Pearl, J. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of
Plausible Inference (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco).
5. Mumford, D. Biol. Cybern. 66, 241–251.
6. Rao, R. P. & Ballard, D. H. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87.
7. Fukushima, K. Biol. Cybern. 36, 193–202.
8. Mel, B. Neural Comp. 9, 777–804.
9. Malach, R., Reppas, J. B., Benson, R. R., Kwong, K. K., Jiang, H., Kennedy,
W. A., Ledden, P. J., Brady, T. J., Rosen, B. R. & Tootell, R. B. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 8135–8139.
10. Kanwisher, N., Chun, M. M., McDermott, J. & Ledden, P. J. Brain Res.
Cognit. Brain Res. 5, 55–67.
11. Grill-Spector, K., Kourtzi, Z. & Kanwisher, N. Vision Res. 41, 1409–
12. Shiffrar, M. & Pavel, M. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 17,
13. Lorenceau, J. & Shiffrar, M. Vision Res. 32, 263–373.
14. McDermott, J., Weiss, Y. & Adelson, E. H. Perception 30, 905–923.
15. Dale, A. M., Fischl, B. & Sereno, M. I. NeuroImage 9, 179–194.
16. Fischl, B., Sereno, M. I. & Dale, A. M. NeuroImage 9, 195–207.
17. Friston, K. J., Jezzard, P. & Turner, R. Hum. Brain Mapp. 1, 153–171.
18. Sereno, M. I., Dale, A. M., Reppas, J. B., Kwong, K. K., Belliveau, J. W., Brady,
T. J., Rosen, B. R. & Tootell, R. B. Science 268, 889–893.
19. Engel, S. A., Glover, G. H. & Wandell, B. A. Cereb. Cortex 2, 181–192.
20. Green, D. & Swets, J. Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics (Wiley,
New York).
21. Grill-Spector, K., Kushnir, T., Edelman, S., Itzchak, Y. & Malach, R. 
Neuron 21, 191–202.
22. Kourtzi, Z. & Kanwisher, N. J. Neurosci. 20, 3310–3318.
23. Moore, C. & Engel, S. A. Neuron 29, 277–286.
24. Lerner, Y., Hendler, T., Ben-Bashat, D., Harel, M. & Malach, R. Cereb.
Cortex 11, 287–297.
25. Paradis, A. L., Cornilleau-Peres, V., Droulez, J., Van de Moortele, P. F., Lobel,
E., Berthoz, A., Le Bihan, D. & Poline, J. B. Cereb. Cortex 10, 772–783.
26. Corbetta, M., Miezin, F. M., Dobmeyer, S., Shulman, G. L. & Petersen, S. E.
 Science 248, 1556–1559.
27. Gandhi, S. P., Heeger, D. J. & Boynton, G. M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
6, 3314–3319.
28. Lamme, V. A. F. J. Neurosci. 15, 1605–1615.
29. Lamme, V. A. F. & Spekreijse, H. The New Cognitive Neurosciences
(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
30. Felleman, D. J. & Van Essen, D. C. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47.
31. Pascual-Leone, A. & Walsh, V. Science 292, 510–512.
Murray et al.
November 12, 2002 
NEUROSCIENCE