Proceedings of the 2006 Winter Simulation Conference
L. F. Perrone, F. P. Wieland, J. Liu, B. G. Lawson, D. M. Nicol, and R. M. Fujimoto, eds.
In this paper, we present the results of a simulation study
for semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities (wafer fabs)
where we multiplied the number of tools per tool group
and the number of operators. We were interested in the effects on the product cycle times when we keep the fab
utilization constant while increasing the size of the tool
groups by constant factors, i.e., forming so-called giga
fabs. It turns out, that the drop in cycle time is considerable.
INTRODUCTION
In semiconductor manufacturing, there is an ongoing effort
to build new fabs in order to increase the capacity to produce even more wafers. There are a number of factors
which play an important role in this decision. Here, we restrict ourselves to multiplication effort, flexibility and
product cycle times. Multiplication effort is the planning,
building, and ramp-up effort for these new fabs. Flexibility
means the freedom to choose another tool if the planned
tool cannot be used, e.g., because of a breakdown or maintenance work.
The first approach which is used to increase capacity,
is the “copy exactly” paradigm. In this case, the blueprints
of an existing fab are used to build a clone of this factory
both with respect to hardware and software. As a consequence, the multiplication effort is small, the capacity doubles but flexibility and cycle time stay the same.
The next opportunity is to build a number of new fabs
with similar capacities from scratch. Then, the multiplication effort is large, the cycle times will be similar, and the
flexibility will also stay on about the same level. The flexibility in the first two cases does not improve because we
will have to move blocked lots to another fab to continue
processing. This will only work if this fab is close to the
original fab like in so-called “borderless” fabs .
The third way to plan capacity extension, is to build
huge fabs, sometimes called giga fabs, which have multiples of the capacity of traditional fabs just by multiplying
the number of tools in a tool group and the number of operators. The multiplication effort is similar to building a
new fab of traditional size but there will be a boost in
flexibility. For instance, if the factory has 4 tools where the
traditional fab had just 1, it will happen rarely that all tools
break down at the same time. As a consequence there is
almost always a tool available for processing. In addition
to flexibility improvements, we expect considerable reductions in product cycle times. This assumption is based on
the queuing theory findings for parallel tools . For the same utilization a system with more parallel
servers leads to smaller cycle times. Due to the fact that a
wafer fab is a network of parallel tools, we expect the same
cycle time reduction effects as for the simple one stage
case. In addition, we expect effects on batch tools and tools
with sequence-dependent setups.
To quantify the amount of these multiplication effects
on a giga fab, we performed a simulation study with several factory models under a number of scenarios.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
we give an overview of the wafer fab models used and the
simulation environment. Then we discuss the cycle time
effects for a variety of scenarios. The paper concludes with
an outlook on future studies.
SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
As test models we used the MIMAC (Measurement and
Improvement of MAnufacturing Capacities) test bed datasets 1 and 6 . These date sets
were chosen based on the experiences from prior studies
 . Table 1 shows the basic properties of the model fabs.
Table 1: Considered MIMAC Datasets
Tools Products
ECONOMY OF SCALE EFFECTS FOR LARGE WAFER FABS
Oliver Rose
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Dresden University of Technology
Dresden, 01062, Germany
1-4244-0501-7/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE
For further details on the datasets and their download:
see < >.
The simulation runs were carried out with Factory Explorer 2.9 from WWK. We simulated 6 years of fab operation. The first two years were considered as warm-up phase
and not taken into account for the statistics. We checked
the length of the initial transient both by the cycle time
over lot exit time charts and the Schruben test.
The default dispatching rule for all tools was FIFO
(First In First Out) to avoid side effects due dispatch rule
parameters such as due dates. We simulated fab (bottleneck) utilizations of 75%, 85%, and 95%. For both fab
models, we increased the number of tools and operators by
factors of 1, 2, 4, and 8.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
First, we show some global results for the complete fabs.
Then, we outline the effects on specific tool groups like
batching equipment and tools with setups.
3.1 Overviews
Table 2 and 3 show typical fab performance measures for
fab model 1 and 6 at a utilization of 85%.
Table 2: Overview Fab 1
Normalized
12936.7 3234.2
25873.4 3234.2
By multiplying the size of the fab, the cycle time averages and the upper percentiles decrease considerably, even
for moderately loaded fabs.
Table 3: Overview Fab 6
Normalized
In fab 1, the variability of the cycle time is also reduced. For the original fab (Size Factor of 1), the 95%
quantile is 28% larger than the average whereas for a Size
Factor of 8 the quantile is 14% larger. This is not the case
for fab 6.
3.2 Cycle Times
In this section, we examine the top cycle time contributors
in more detail. Figure 1 shows that multiplying the factory
size leads to enormous queue time reductions.
20540_CAN_0.43_MII
13024_AME_4+5+7+8
12553_POSI_GP
16221_IMP-MC_1+2
11026_ASM_B2
Figure 1: Total Queue Time for Top Contributors (Fab 6)
The improvements are larger for the top contributors
than for the tool groups that have less influence on the cycle time (not shown here). The largest total amount of
queue time reductions is achieved when doubling the
original size (Factor=1). It becomes smaller and smaller
when the size is further increased.
3.3 Batch Tools
In semiconductor manufacturing, most batch operations are
very time consuming oxidation processes. To achieve low
cycle times, i.e., to avoid long queue times at these tools, a
variety of dispatching approaches is used, e.g., starting the
batch processing with incomplete batches . In a giga fab, with the same load and product mix as the default (Factor=1) fab, we expect considerable queue delay reductions because the volume of lots that
are available for batch building is larger. Therefore the
probability to form full batches becomes larger, too. In addition, it is more likely to find a free batch tool.
Table 4 shows a ranking of the average per operation
queue delay (QD) of fab 6. The first five tool groups are
batch tools. Only the last tool group (in brackets) is a single tool.
If we double the tool and operator counts the queue
delays at the first 5 batch tools in the list is reduced by half.
For the first single tool in the list, however, the queue delay is about a quarter of the default case (Factor=1).
Table 4: Per Operation Queue Delay (Fab 6)
Tool Group
11026_ASM_B2
12553_POSI_GP
17421_HOTIN
11024_ASM_A4_G3_G4
11027_ASM_B3_B4_D4
(17221_K-SMU236)
Due to the prominent position of the batch tools in the
queue delay ranking, we were interested whether how the
batch tool improvement for larger fab sizes relates to the
improvements of the other tools. Table 5 shows this comparison.
Table 5: Average Queue Delays (Fab 6)
Factor=1 Factor=2 Factor=4
Avg. QD Single Tools [h]
Avg. QD Batch Tools [h]
Avg. QD All [h]
It turns out that for fab 6 the relative queue time reduction is approximately the same for single and for batch
3.4 Setup Tools
Another important source for delay and capacity losses are
tools with setups. In semiconductor manufacturing, the
dispatching systems try to avoid setups with a variety of
approaches, e.g., by dedicating tools to a certain product or
sorting the waiting lots according to their setup requirements . As a consequence,
we expect less setups in larger fabs because it is more
likely that the required setup state is already available and
processing of the lot can continue without spending time
for setups. Figure 2 shows the setup percentages for the top
setup tools of fab 6.
Again, the giga fab approach leads to reductions in
setup times. The effect, however is much smaller than we
expected. For instance, for the left tool group, doubling the
number of tools reduces the setup time percentage only by
3.4%. One reason for that is that we already used a setup
avoidance rule for the default fab. As a consequence, the
setup percentage was already rather low.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper, we presented the results of a small pilot study
on the effects of multiplying the number of tools and operators in semiconductor manufacturing. It turns out that
there is a considerable potential to reduce cycle times in
such huge fabs, sometimes called giga fabs.
13024_AME_4+5+7+8
16121_IMP-HC_1+2
66766_IMPL
16221_IMP-MC_1+2
13021_AME_1+3_AlSiCu
66765_DRYETCH
17041_KEITH450_+_425
66752_PROBE
Percentage
Figure 2: Setup Percentages (Fab 6)
We show results which indicate that some tools play a
more prominent role in this reduction than others. In our
case, batch tools were more important than setups.
The promising results motivate us to perform further
studies with giga fab models that will include the following
Effects on different products,
Comparison of effects on high mix / low volume
foundry type fabs vs. low mix / high volume
memory or processor fabs,
Effect of different factors for different tool sets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Uwe Gosda for his valuable
simulation and data analysis efforts.