Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/
Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 40
HGIMDA: Heterogeneous graph inference for miRNA-disease
association prediction
Xing Chen1,*, Chenggang Clarence Yan2,*, Xu Zhang3, Zhu-Hong You4, Yu-An Huang5,
Gui-Ying Yan6
1School of Information and Electrical Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China
2Institute of Information and Control, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
3School of Mechanical, Electrical & Information Engineering, Shandong University, Weihai, China
4School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China
5Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
6Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
*The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
Correspondence to: Xing Chen, email: 
Gui-Ying Yan, email: 
Keywords: microRNA, disease, microRNA-disease association, heterogeneous network, similarity
Received: May 12, 2016        Accepted: July 28, 2016        Published: August 12, 2016
Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have drawn more and more attentions because
accumulating experimental studies have indicated miRNA could play critical roles in
multiple biological processes as well as the development and progression of human
complex diseases. Using the huge number of known heterogeneous biological datasets to
predict potential associations between miRNAs and diseases is an important topic in the
field of biology, medicine, and bioinformatics. In this study, considering the limitations
in the previous computational methods, we developed the computational model of
Heterogeneous Graph Inference for MiRNA-Disease Association prediction (HGIMDA)
to uncover potential miRNA-disease associations by integrating miRNA functional
similarity, disease semantic similarity, Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity,
and experimentally verified miRNA-disease associations into a heterogeneous graph.
HGIMDA obtained AUCs of 0.8781 and 0.8077 based on global and local leave-one-out
cross validation, respectively. Furthermore, HGIMDA was applied to three important
human cancers for performance evaluation. As a result, 90% (Colon Neoplasms), 88%
(Esophageal Neoplasms) and 88% (Kidney Neoplasms) of top 50 predicted miRNAs
are confirmed by recent experiment reports. Furthermore, HGIMDA could be effectively
applied to new diseases and new miRNAs without any known associations, which
overcome the important limitations of many previous computational models.
INTRODUCTION
MiRNAs are one category of short non-coding RNAs
(~22nt) which could inhibit the protein production and gene
expression through binding to the 3’-UTRs of the target
mRNAs at the post-transcriptional and translational level . However, miRNAs could also serve as positive regulators
according to some studies . In the recent several years,
thousands of miRNAs have been detected based on various
experimental methods and computational models since the
first two miRNAs (Caenorhabditis elegans lin-4 and let-7)
were discovered more than twenty years ago . There
are 26845 entries in the latest version of miRBase, including
more than 1000 human miRNAs . Furthermore,
accumulating evidences indicated that miRNAs are
important components in cells, which could play critical
roles in multiple important biological processes, including
cell proliferation , development , differentiation
 , and apoptosis , metabolism , aging ,
signal transduction , and viral infection . Therefore,
it is no surprise that miRNAs have close associations with
the development, progression, and prognosis of many human
Research Paper
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
diseases . For example, the miRNA deregulation is
closely related to the development of various cancers . Calin et al. firstly clarified that miR-15 and miR-16 are
deleted in more than half cases of B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (B-CLL), and this discovery also become the first
evidence for the fact that miRNAs are involved in cancer
formation . He et al. firstly reported that there are
links between the enhanced expression of miR-17 cluster
in B-cell lymphomas and the development of c-Mycinduced tumorigenesis . Besides, miR-122 suppresses
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis by targeting IGF1R in
some breast cancer cases . Experiments further showed
that the regulation of Ad6 by miR-122 could significantly
improves the safety profile of the whole body after systemic
administration, which allows increasing therapeutic doses
and therefore improves anticancer efficacy of prostate
cancer . Therefore, identifying disease-related miRNAs
could effectively promote disease biomarker detection for
the treatment, diagnosis and prevention of human complex
diseases . Considering vast amount of miRNA-related
biological datasets has been generated, it is urgent to develop
powerful computational models to predict novel human
disease-miRNA associations .
Many computational methods have been proposed
to predict potential miRNA-disease associations based
on the assumption that miRNAs with similar functions
tend to be related to phenotypically similar diseases . Jiang et al. presented a hypergeometric
distribution-based computational model to predict novel
miRNA-disease associations. This model is mainly based
on the integration of disease phenotype similarity network,
miRNA functional similarity network, and the known human
disease-miRNA association network. Only adopting miRNA
neighbor information seriously influences the prediction
performance of this model. Shi et al. further proposed
a computational model to exploit the functional associations
between miRNA and disease by implementing the algorithm
of random walk on protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network. Considering the assumption that disease tends to
be associated with miRNAs whose target genes also have
associations with this disease, they paid attentions to the
functional links between disease genes and miRNA targets
in PPI network by integrating the information of miRNA–
target interactions, disease–gene associations, and PPIs.
In addition, Mork et al. proposed the computational
model of miRPD by integrating protein–disease associations
and miRNA–protein interactions to further predict novel
miRNA-disease associations. Xu et al. presented an
integrated disease-specific miRNA prioritization approach
without the rely on known disease-miRNA associations.
This method integrates known disease–gene associations
and context-dependent miRNA-target interactions. They
converted the association probability of a miRNA-disease
pair into the functional similarity calculation between the
targets of this miRNA and known associated genes of this
diseases. However, the predict performances of above
several methods were seriously limited by miRNA-target
interactions with high false-positive and false-negative
results or the incomplete disease-gene association network.
Under the basic assumption that functionally similar
miRNAs are regarded to be involved in similar diseases and
vice versa, Xuan et al. proposed reliable computational
model of HDMP by combining the distribution of miRNAs
related with the disease in the k neighbors and miRNA
functional similarity to predict the potential disease-related
miRNAs. The miRNA functional similarity used in HDMP
was integrated by disease phenotype similarity, disease
semantic similarity based on the disease terms information
content, and known miRNA-disease associations. The
important improvement of HDMP over previous studies lies
in that it assigned higher weights to members in the same
miRNA cluster or family when miRNA functional similarity
was calculated. However, HDMP cannot be applied to
the new diseases which do not have any known related
miRNAs. In addition, HDMP is local network similaritybased computational model, which does not make full
use of global network similarity information, which could
effectively benefit the prediction performance improvement
as demonstrated by many previous studies. Chen et al.
 proposed the first global network similarity-based
computational model, RWRMDA, to predict novel human
miRNA–disease associations by considering the information
of human miRNA–miRNA functional similarity and known
human miRNA–disease associations. The new associations
were predicted by adopting the method of random walk
on miRNA functional similarity network. RWRMDA has
obtained excellent prediction performance based on cross
validation and case studies of several important human
cancers. However, it also has the important limitation that
it could not work for new diseases which do not have
any known related miRNAs. Recently, Chen et al. 
developed a novel computational method of WBSMDA by
integrating known miRNA-disease associations, miRNA
functional similarity, disease semantic similarity, and
Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for diseases
and miRNAs. WBSMDA could be implemented for the
prediction of potential related miRNAs for the diseases
which do not have any known related miRNAs and new
miRNAs which do not have any known associated diseases.
However, the performance of WBSMDA is still not very
satisfactory.
Some studies developed machine learning-based
computational models to predict novel miRNA-disease
associations. For example, Xu et al. constructed
a heterogeneous miRNA-target dysregulated network
(MTDN) which combines miRNA-target interactions
and the expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs in
tumor and non-tumor tissues. In addition, they performed
feature extraction based network topology information
and constructed support vector machine (SVM) classifier
to identify positive miRNA–disease associations from
negative associations. It is well-known that collecting known
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
negative associations is a very difficult and even impossible
task. Therefore, inaccurate selection of negative samples
would seriously decrease the prediction performance of
supervised classifier such as SVM. By integrating disease
semantic similarity, miRNA functional similarity, and
known miRNA-disease associations, Chenet al. 
proposed a novel computational model of RLSMDA in the
framework of semi-supervised learning to predict potential
disease-related miRNAs. RLSMDA could be applied to the
diseases without any known related miRNAs. Furthermore,
RLSMDA did not need the information of negative miRNAdisease associations. The limitation of RLSMDA lies in the
selection of parameter values and the combination of two
classifiers in the different spaces.
In this study, we developed a novel computational
model of HGIMDA for potential miRNA-disease association
prediction. HGIMDA showed superior performance to four
classical miRNA-disease association prediction methods
(WBSMDA , RLSMDA , RWRMDA , and
HDMP ). In the case studies of several important human
cancers, 45, 44, and 44 out top 50 predicted miRNAs for
Colon Neoplasms, Esophageal Neoplasms, and Kidney
Neoplasms were verified by recent experimental reports.
Performance evaluation
We implemented Local and global LOOCV based
on the recorded miRNA-disease associations in the
HMDD database to evaluate the prediction accuracy
of HGIMDA (See Figure 1) and four state-of-the-art
computational models for miRNA-disease association
prediction: WBSMDA , RLSMDA , RWRMDA
 , and HDMP . In the validation framework of
LOOCV, each known association was treated as test sample
Figure 1: Flowchart of potential disease-miRNA association prediction based on the computational model of HGIMDA.
a. Constructing the heterogeneous graph by integrating miRNA functional similarity, disease semantic similarity, Gaussian interaction
profile kernel similarity, and experimentally verified miRNA-disease associations; b. Predicting potential miRNA-disease associations
based on an iterative equation and obtaining the stable association probability.
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
in turn and other known associations were used for model
training. The difference between local and global LOOCV
lies in whether we simultaneously investigated all the
diseases. In the local LOOCV, test sample was ranked
with the candidate samples composed of all the miRNAs
without any known associations with the investigated
disease. However, in the global LOOCV, test sample was
ranked with all the miRNA-disease pairs without any known
confirmed associations. The test samples which obtained
ranks higher than the given threshold were considered as
successful predictions. Furthermore, we drew Receiver
operating characteristics (ROC) curve by plotting the true
positive rate (TPR, sensitivity) against the false positive
rate (FPR, 1-specificity) at different thresholds. Sensitivity
denotes the percentage of the test samples which obtained
ranks higher than the given threshold. Meanwhile, specificity
denotes the percentage of negative miRNA-disease pairs
with ranks lower than the threshold. Area under the ROC
curve (AUC) is calculated to demonstrate the prediction
ability of HGIMDA. AUC=1 indicates the model has perfect
prediction performance; AUC=0.5 indicates the model only
has random prediction performance.
The performance comparisons in the framework of
local and global LOOCV have been shown in Figure 2.
As a result, HGIMDA, WBSMDA, RLSMDA, HDMP
obtained AUCs of 0.8781, 0.8030, 0.8426, and 0.8366 in the
global LOOCV, respectively. For local LOOCV, HGIMDA,
WBSMDA, RLSMDA, HDMP, RWRMDA obtained AUCs
of 0.8077, 0.8031, 0.6953, 0.7702, and 0.7891, respectively.
Global LOOCV cannot be implemented for RWRMDA
model, for the reason that this model cannot uncover the
missing associations for all the diseases simultaneously.
In conclusion, HGIMDA has shown reliable and effective
prediction performance and potential application value for
potential miRNA–disease association prediction.
Case studies
Here, we further implement case studies of several
important human complex diseases to further validate the
prediction ability of HGIMDA. Predictive results were
verified by checking recent experimental reports from
another two databases about miRNA-disease associations,
miR2Disease and dbDEMC .
Figure 2: Performance comparisons between HGIMDA and four state-of-the-art disease-miRNA association prediction
models (BSMDA, RLSMDA, HDMP, and RWRMDA) in terms of ROC curve and AUC based on local and global
LOOCV, respectively. As a result, HGIMDA achieved AUCs of 0.8781 and 0.8031 in the global and local LOOCV, significantly
outperforming all the previous classical models.
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Colon Neoplasms is one of the biggest threatens to
human life worldwide . Studies show that about
half of the Colon Neoplasms patients die of metastatic
disease within 5 years from diagnosis . With
the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing
technologies, researchers have identified several miRNAs
associated with Colon Neoplasms. For example, miR-
126, which is usually lost in Colon Neoplasms, takes
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling as a target and
suppresses neoplastic cells growth . It is also found
that miR-145 could inhibit Colon Neoplasms cells growth
by targeting the insulin receptor substrate-1 . By
implementing HGIMDA to identify potential miRNAs
associated with Colon Neoplasms, 10 out of the top 10
and 45 out of the top 50 predicted Colon Neoplasms
related miRNAs were confirmed based on miR2Disease
and dbDEMC (See Table 1). For example, miR-20a and
miR-155 were confirmed to be up-regulated in Colon
Neoplasms . MiR-20a and miR-19b shown differential
expression between neoplastic conditions and nontumoral colon tissues . MiR-18a was confirmed to be
upregulated in colon cancer tissues which suggested that
miR-18a is correlated with Colon Neoplasms . An
inverse correlation of miR-21 was found in 10 colorectal
cell lines which suggested it is a useful diagnostic
biomarker for Colon Neoplasms prognosis .
Esophageal Neoplasms is reported as the sixthleading cause of deaths related with cancers and the eighth
Table 1: Here, we implemented HGIMDA to predict potential Colon Neoplasms-related miRNAs
hsa-mir-20a
hsa-mir-106b
hsa-mir-155
hsa-mir-143
hsa-mir-18a
hsa-mir-200a
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-21
hsa-mir-19b
hsa-mir-34a
hsa-mir-15a
hsa-mir-19a
hsa-mir-34c
miR2Disease
hsa-let-7a
hsa-let-7g
hsa-mir-125b
hsa-mir-146b
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-221
hsa-mir-141
hsa-mir-92a
hsa-mir-125a
hsa-let-7b
hsa-mir-200c
hsa-mir-146a
hsa-mir-214
hsa-mir-29b
hsa-mir-34b
hsa-let-7c
hsa-mir-29c
hsa-mir-200b
hsa-mir-101
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-16
hsa-mir-181b
hsa-let-7d
hsa-mir-210
hsa-mir-199a
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-205
hsa-mir-29a
hsa-mir-24
miR2Disease
hsa-let-7e
hsa-mir-133a
hsa-mir-223
hsa-mir-25
hsa-let-7f
hsa-mir-132
miR2Disease
hsa-mir-222
hsa-mir-181a
hsa-let-7i
hsa-mir-429
unconfirmed
As a result, 10 out of the top 10 and 45 out of the top 50 predicted Colon Neoplasms related miRNAs were confirmed based
on miR2Disease and dbDEMC (1st column: top 1–25; 2nd column: top 26–50).
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
most common cancer worldwide based on the pathological
characteristics . The number of male patients is three
to four times higher than the number of the female patients
 . The overall 5-year survival ranges from 15% to 25%
 . It is suggested that the survival rate could increase
to 90% if the tumors could be diagnosed at an early
stage . Therefore, the early detection of Esophageal
Neoplasms is vital to cancer treatment . There
are a lot of miRNAs which have been confirmed to be
connected with Esophageal Neoplasms. For example,
miR-98 and miR-214 could suppress migration and
invasion in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
by post-transcriptionally regulating enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 . HGIMDA was implemented to identify
potential related miRNAs for Esophageal Neoplasms
based on known associations in the HMDD database.
As a result, 9 out of the top 10 and 44 out of the top 50
predicted Esophageal Neoplasms related miRNAs were
experimentally confirmed by reports from dbDEMC (See
Kidney Neoplasm is a nonhomogeneous cancer
which accounts for 3% of adult malignancies .
There has been an increasing trend for the incidence
and mortality rates of Kidney Neoplasm over the past
few years. Specifically, more than 250,000 new cases
of kidney cancer are diagnosed every year . As the
Table 2: We implemented HGIMDA to prioritize candidate miRNAs for Esophageal Neoplasms based on known
associations in the HMDD database
hsa-mir-17
hsa-mir-30c
hsa-mir-18a
hsa-mir-127
hsa-mir-19b
hsa-mir-24
hsa-mir-200b
hsa-mir-10b
hsa-mir-125b
hsa-mir-181a
hsa-let-7d
hsa-mir-106a
hsa-mir-221
hsa-let-7e
hsa-mir-191
hsa-mir-29b
hsa-mir-142
hsa-let-7f
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-20b
unconfirmed
hsa-let-7i
hsa-mir-18b
hsa-mir-16
hsa-mir-195
hsa-mir-29a
hsa-mir-30d
hsa-mir-222
hsa-mir-182
hsa-mir-106b
hsa-mir-199b
hsa-mir-30a
hsa-mir-194
hsa-let-7g
hsa-mir-302b
hsa-mir-125a
hsa-mir-15b
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-146b
hsa-mir-92b
hsa-mir-218
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-302c
hsa-mir-429
hsa-mir-107
hsa-mir-181b
hsa-mir-30e
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-132
hsa-mir-373
hsa-mir-93
hsa-mir-219
unconfirmed
As a result, 9 out of the top 10 and 44 out of the top 50 predicted Esophageal Neoplasms related miRNAs were confirmed by
experimental reports from dbDEMC (1st column: top 1–25; 2nd column: top 26–50)
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
most common form of adult Kidney Neoplasm , renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) is comprised of several different
types of cancer , including chromophobe RCC
(chRCC), collecting duct carcinoma (CDC), clear cell
RCC (ccRCC), and papillary RCC (PRCC) .
Experiments indicated that the histopathology of Kidney
Neoplasm has been connected with different genetic
changes . Recently, accumulating studies have
shown that many miRNAs are associated with Kidney
Neoplasms. For example, miR-215, miR-200c, miR-192,
miR-194 and miR-141 were downregulated in Kidney
Neoplasms . What’s more, their common target
ACVR2B was found to have strong expression in renal
childhood neoplasms . Furthermore, miR-21 was
up-regulated in Kidney Neoplasms which corresponds
to lower Kidney Neoplasms survival . Finally,
we implemented HGIMDA on Kidney Neoplasms for
potential disease-related miRNA prediction. As a result,
9 out of the top-10 candidates and 44 out of the top-50
candidates of Kidney Neoplasm related miRNAs were
verified by dbDEMC (See Table 3). As for the top 5
confirmed Kidney Neoplasms related miRNAs, miR-17
was found differentially expressed in Kidney Neoplasms
compared to normal cell tissues . MiR-20a, miR-
155, and miR-18a were found up-regulated in Kidney
Neoplasms while miR-145 was found down-regulated.
The results in cross validation and independent
case studies exploring on three important human complex
Table 3: We implemented HGIMDA on Kidney Neoplasms for potential disease-related miRNA prediction
hsa-mir-17
hsa-mir-222
hsa-mir-20a
hsa-let-7i
hsa-mir-155
hsa-mir-200a
hsa-mir-18a
hsa-mir-106b
hsa-mir-145
hsa-mir-143
hsa-mir-19b
hsa-mir-34a
hsa-mir-19a
hsa-mir-34c
hsa-let-7a
hsa-mir-146b
hsa-mir-125b
unconfirmed
hsa-let-7g
hsa-mir-126
hsa-mir-125a
hsa-mir-221
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-34b
hsa-mir-92a
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-214
hsa-mir-146a
hsa-mir-29c
hsa-mir-200b
hsa-mir-101
hsa-let-7b
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-181b
hsa-mir-29b
hsa-mir-205
unconfirmed
hsa-mir-199a
hsa-mir-210
hsa-let-7c
hsa-mir-133a
unconfirmed
hsa-let-7d
hsa-mir-429
hsa-mir-16
hsa-mir-25
hsa-mir-29a
hsa-mir-93
hsa-let-7e
hsa-mir-181a
hsa-mir-223
hsa-mir-24
hsa-let-7f
hsa-mir-218
As a result, 9 out of the top 10 and 44 out of the top 50 predicted Kidney Neoplasms related miRNAs were confirmed by
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
diseases have fully indicated the outstanding prediction
ability of HGIMDA. Therefore, we further used HGIMDA
to prioritize candidate miRNAs for all the diseases
investigated in HMDD (See Supplementary Table 1). We
anticipate that these prediction results could be confirmed
by experimental research in the future.
DISCUSSION
Recently, more and more researchers start to
propose new computational models to search novel
miRNA-disease associations. In this paper, considering the
hypothesis that functional similar miRNAs are likely to be
involved in similar diseases and vice versa, we presented
the computational model of HGIMDA to predict new
human complex diseases related miRNAs by integrating
Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity, disease
semantic similarity, miRNA functional similarity, and
known miRNA-disease associations into a heterogeneous
graph. The excellent performance of HGIMDA has been
demonstrated by the reliable results from both case studies
and cross validation of Colon Neoplasms, Esophageal
Neoplasms and Kidney Neoplasms. It could be anticipated
that HGIMDA can serve as an effective tool for predicting
potential miRNA-disease associations, and will be helpful
in human disease prevention, treatment, diagnosis, and
prognosis.
The reasons of reliable performance of HGIMDA
may come from the following several factors. Firstly,
the success of HGIMDA is mainly dependent on the
integration of several reliable biological datasets into
a heterogeneous graph. Especially, the number of
known miRNA-disease associations used in this method
significantly increases compared with known associations
used for previous methods. Secondly, similar to the
process of random work, HGIMDA is an iterative process
to find the optimal solutions based on global network
similarity information, whose improvement over local
network-similarity-based models has been fully indicated
by the previous studies. However, there are essential
differences between HGIMDA and traditional random
walk. Traditional random walk set the initial probability
vector only based on known related miRNAs with the
investigated disease. Therefore, when this disease has
no known related miRNAs, random walk can’t work.
Here, various disease similarity measures, various
miRNA similarity measures, and known miRNA-disease
association were combined to implement prediction, which
ensures that HGIMDA could be used to predict related
miRNAs for new diseases which have no known related
miRNAs and miRNAs without any known associated
diseases. Therefore, the application scope of classical
random walk has been significantly broadened. This
distinct advantage overcomes the important limitations
of many previous computational models. Furthermore,
HGIMDA could effectively uncover the missing miRNAdisease associations for all the diseases simultaneously.
Limitations also exist in this method. Firstly, the known
miRNA-disease associations with experimental evidences
are still insufficient. By integrating more available
biological information in the future, the prediction
performance of HGIMDA could be further improved
 . Secondly, HGIMDA may cause bias to miRNAs
which have more associated disease records. Finally, the
selection of the parameter value in formula (11) is still not
well solved.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human miRNA-disease associations
Accumulating
biological
experiments
produced plenty of miRNA–disease associations. The
human miRNA-disease association dataset used in this
study was downloaded from HMDD database 
 , including 5430 distinct experimentally confirmed
human miRNA-diseases associations about 383 diseases
and 495 miRNAs. Adjacency matrix A is defined to
represent known miRNAs-disease associations. If miRNA
m(i) is related to disease d(j), the entity A(m(i), d(j)) is 1,
otherwise 0. Furthermore, variables nm and nd are denoted
as the number of miRNAs and diseases in the known
association dataset, respectively.
MiRNA functional similarity
Based on the assumption that miRNAs with
similar functions tend to be associated with similar
diseases and vice versa , Wang et al. 
proposed the method of miRNA functional similarity
calculation. We obtained miRNA functional similarity
from 
and established miRNA functional similarity matrix FS
to represent the miRNA functional similarity network, in
which FS(i,j) is the functional similarity score between
miRNA m(i) and m(j).
Disease semantic similarity
The relationships among different diseases can be
described as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Disease
D can be represented as DAG(D)=(D,T(D),E(D)), where
T(D) represents all ancestor nodes of D and D itself, E(D)
represents all direct edges from parent nodes to child
nodes. Disease MeSH descriptors were downloaded from
the National Library of Medicine ( 
 , including Category A for anatomic terms, Category
B for organisms, Category C for diseases, Category D for
drugs and chemicals and so on. Here, we selected the MeSH
descriptor of Category C to construct disease DAGs. The
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
location of each disease term in the DAG could be decided
by the tree number of each MeSH descriptor.
The contribution of disease d in DAG(D) to the
semantic value of disease D is defined as follows:
children of d
Here, D is the semantic contribution factor. The
contribution score for disease d is inversely proportional
to the distance between disease d and D. The semantic
value of disease D could be defined as follows:
It is obviously that two diseases with larger shared part of
their DAGs may have greater similarity score. Therefore,
the semantic similarity score between disease d(i) and d(j)
is defined as follows:
Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity
Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for
diseases are constructed based on the assumption that
similar diseases tend to be associated with miRNAs with
similar functions and vice versa . Binary vector
IP(d(u)) is defined to represent the interaction profiles
of disease d(u) by observing whether there are known
associations between disease d(u) and each miRNA or not.
Therefore, Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity of
diseases d(u) and d(v) is defined as follows.
Here, g d is used for kernel bandwidth control, which is
obtained by normalizing a new bandwidth parameter g 'd
by the average number of associated miRNAs per disease.
Similarly, Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity
between miRNA m(i) and m(j) is constructed as follows:
Integrated similarity for miRNAs and diseases
Considering that miRNA functional similarity
scores do not cover all the miRNAs, we integrate miRNA
functional similarity scores and Gaussian interaction
profile kernel similarity scores for miRNAs to calculate
the new integrated similarity scores. That is to say, for the
miRNA pair without known functional similarity score,
we use Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity score
as integrated similarity; for the miRNA pair with known
functional similarity score, we use the average value
of Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity score
and functional similarity score as integrated similarity.
Therefore, the integrated similarity between miRNA m(i)
and m(j) is defined as follows:
SM m i m j
m i and m j has functional similarity
Similarly, the integrated similarity between diseases d(u)
and d(v) is defined as follows:
d u and d v hassemanticsimilarity
We developed the computational model of HGIMDA
by integrating miRNA functional similarity, disease semantic
similarity, Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity,
and experimentally verified miRNA-disease associations
to predict potential miRNA-disease associations. Based on
the similar nature of miRNA-disease associations, miRNA
similarity, disease similarity, and known miRNA-disease
associations could be combined together to predict potential
associations. For example, for disease d and miRNA m,
we could define their potential association probability as
follows if they have no known associations.
( ), ( ) *
This equation means that we can infer potential association
between disease d and miRNA m by summarizing all paths
with the length equal to three. We consider the iteration
of above procedure and represent the equation as matrix
multiplications. Therefore, the iterative equation could be
obtained as follows:
Here, a is a decay factor similar to the restart probability
in the random walk with restart. According to previous
literature , association probability matrix P will
converge when SM and SD are properly normalized
utilizing equation (12) and (13), respectively.
Oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
After some steps, the iteration is stable (the change
between P(i) and P(i + 1) measured by L1 norm is less
than a given cutoff, here we adopt the cutoff as 10−6).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
XC was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 11301517. ZHY was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61572506. GYY was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant No. 11371355 and National Center for Mathematics
and Interdisciplinary Sciences, CAS.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.