Pattern inference theory: A probabilistic approach to human vision∗
Daniel Kersten and Paul Schrater†
October 30, 1999
∗To be published: Kersten, D., & Schrater, P. W. Pattern inference theory: A probabilistic approach to human vision.
In Mausfeld, R., Heyer, D. (Eds.), Perception Theory: Conceptual Issues (pp. Chichester: John Wiley Sons, Ltd.
†Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. Email: .
Supported by NSF SBR-9631682 and NIH RO1 EY11507-001.
The function of vision is to get correct and useful answers about the state of the world. However,
given that the state of the world is not uniquely speciﬁed by the visual input, the visual system must
make good guesses or inferences. Thus, theories of visual system functions will be theories of inference,
and we need a language in which theories of inference can be described. Analogous to calculus having
a minimum expressiveness required to formulate theories in physics, we argue that the language of
Bayesian inference is necessary to quantitatively describe how reliable answers about the world can be
obtained from image patterns. Bayes provides a minimal formalism that can deal with the sophistication
and versatility of perception missing from some other approaches. Key missing components include the
ability to model uncertainty, probabilistic modeling of pattern synthesis as a necessary prerequisite
to understanding pattern inference, the means to handle the complexity of natural images, and the
diversity of visual tasks.
Most of the formal elements that we describe are not new and have their roots in signal detection theory
and ideal observer analysis. We start from there to review and codify principles drawn from recent
applications of Bayesian decision theory, Bayes nets and pattern theory to vision. To emphasize the
importance of dealing with the complexity of natural image and scene patterns, we call the conjunction
of principles drawn from these contributions pattern inference theory. Because of its generality, we do
not see pattern inference theory as an experimentally testable theory of vision; however, it does provide
a set of concepts and principles to formulate testable models. The test for a good theoretical framework
is utility and completeness for deriving predictive theories. To illustrate the utility of the approach,
we propose Bayesian principles of least commitment and modularity, each of which leads to testable
hypotheses. Several recent examples of pattern inference theories are reviewed.
Perception is pattern decoding
Few would dispute the view that visual perception is the brain’s process for arriving at useful information
about the world from images. Divergent opinions, however, have been expressed over how to describe
the computations (or lack thereof) underlying visual behavior. Visual perception has been described as
unconscious inference , reconstruction , resonance , problem solving , computation ,
and more recently as Bayesian inference .
In part, the debate gets muddled due to lack of a
well-speciﬁed explanatory goal and level of abstraction. To clarify, we see the grand challenge to be
the development of testable, quantitative theories of visual performance that take into account the
complexities of natural images and the richness of visual behavior. But here the level of explanation is
crucial: if our theories are too abstract, we lose the speciﬁcity of quantitative predictions; if the theories
are too ﬁne-grained, the model mechanisms for natural pattern processing will be too complex to test.
Our proposed strategy follows that of statistical mechanics. Few physicists doubt that the large-scale
properties of physical systems rest on the lawful function of individual molecules, just as few brain
scientists doubt that an organism’s behavior depends on the lawful function of neurons. Physicists
would agree that the modeling level has to be appropriate to the measurements and phenomena of
large-scale systems; thus statistical mechanics links molecular kinetics to thermodynamics. Although
the bridge between neurons and system behavior has yet to be built, the language of Bayesian statistics
provides the level of description analogous to thermodynamics 1. For vision, theories at this level are
testable at the level of visual information and perceptual constraints 2, and are less committal about
representations, algorithms, or mechanisms.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the fundamental principles of value in addressing the grand
challenge.
These principles constitute what we will refer to as pattern inference theory.
elements of pattern inference theory are not new and have their mathematical roots in communication
and information theory , Bayesian decision theory , pattern theory , and Bayes nets .
The reﬁnement of the principles are derived from a history of applications to human vision in the
domains of signal detection theory , ideal observer analysis , Bayesian inference and decision
theory , and pattern theory . “Pattern theory” was developed by Ulf Grenander to
describe the mathematical study of complex natural patterns .
Central features of
pattern theory are the importance of modeling pattern generation, and that natural pattern variation
is characterized by four fundamental classes of deformations 3. Further, the generative model is seen as
an essential feedback component (e.g. via ﬂexible templates to ﬁt incoming data) to deal with certain
types of deformation, such as occlusion . Our particular emphasis is based on the synthesis and
application of pattern theory and Bayesian decision theory to human vision . As an elaboration of
signal detection theory, we choose the words pattern and inference to stress the importance of modeling
complex natural signals, and of considering tasks in addition to detection, respectively.
that pattern inference theory provides the best language for formulating quantitative theories of visual
perception and action at the level of the naturally behaving (human) visual system.
Our goal is to derive probabilistic models of the observer’s world and sensory input, restricted by task.
Such models have two components: the objects of the theory, and the operations of the theory. The
objects of the theory are the set of possible image measurements I, the set of possible scene descriptions
S, and the joint probability distribution of S and I: p(S, I). The operations are given by the probability
calculus, with decisions modeled as minimizing expected cost (or risk) given the probabilities. The
richness of the theory lies in exploiting the structure induced in p(S, I) by the regularities of the world
(laws of physics) and by the habits of observers. A fundamental assumption of pattern inference theory
is that Bayesian decision theory provides the best language both to describe complex patterns, and to
model inferences about them. For us, the essence of a Bayesian view is not the emphasis on subjective
prior probabilities, but rather that all variables are random variables. This assumption has ramiﬁcations
for the central role, in perception, of generative (or synthetic) models of image patterns, as well as prior
probability models of scene information. An emphasis on generative models, we believe, is essential
because of the inherent complexity of the causal structure of high-dimensional image patterns. One
must model how the multitude of variables (both the needed and unneeded variables for a task) interact
to produce image data in order to understand how to decode those patterns.
But perhaps equally
importantly, the Bayesian view underscores the importance of conﬁdence-driven visual processes. This
latter idea leads us to the view that perception consists of sequences of computations on probabilities,
rather than a series of estimations or decisions. We illustrate this with recent work on Bayes nets.
1Our level of analysis falls between the computational/function and representation/algorithmic levels in the Marr
hierarchy.
2Because it is rare to ﬁnd a visual cue that is suﬃciently reliable to unambiguously determine a perceived scene
property, perception should be viewed as satisfying multiple constraints simultaneously. Examples are the constraint that
light sources tend to be from above, or that a sharp image edge is more likely a reﬂectance or depth change than a shadow.
3These four classes are intended to apply generally to natural patterns of all sorts, and not just to visual patterns.
For spatial vision, these classes would correspond to: blur and noise, geometric deformations, superposition (e.g. of basis
images), and occlusions .
In the next section, we will show that pattern inference theory is a logical elaboration of ideal observer
analysis in classical signal detection theory. However, it diﬀers by emphasizing the need to take into
account the full range of natural image patterns, and the fact that perception is intimately tied to a
variety of successful behaviors.
Pattern inference theory: A generalization of ideal observers
Signal detection theory (SDT) was developed in the 1950’s to model and analyze human sensory decisions
given internal and external background noise . The theory combined earlier work in statistical
decision theory with communication systems theory . Signal detection theory
made two fundamental contributions to our understanding of human perception.
First, statistical
decision theory showed how to analyze the internal processing of sensory decisions. The application
of statistical decision theory to psychophysics showed that sensory decisions were determined by two
experimentally separable factors: sensitivity (related to an inferred internal signal-to-noise ratio) and the
decision criterion. Second, communication theory showed that there were inherent physical limits to the
reliability of information transmission, and thus detection, independent of the speciﬁc implementation of
the detector, i.e. whether it be physical or biological. These limits can be modeled by a mathematically
deﬁned ideal observer, which provides a quantitative computational theory for the information in a
task. For the ideal observer, the signal-to-noise ratio can be obtained from direct measurements of
the variations in the transmitted signal. The ideal observer presaged Marr’s ideas of a computational
theory for an information processing task, as distinct from the algorithm and implementation to carry
it out . The top panel of ﬁgure (1) illustrates the basic causal structure for the “signal plus noise”
problem in classical signal detection theory.
Experimental studies of human perceptual behavior are often left with a crucial, but unanswered question: To what extent is the measured performance limited by the information in the task rather than by
the perceptual system itself? Answers to this question are critical for understanding the relationship between perceptual behavior and its underlying biological mechanisms. Signal detection theory provided
an answer through ideal observer analysis. One of the ﬁrst applications of the ideal observer in vision
was the determination of the quantum eﬃciency of human light discrimination . By considering both
the external and internal sources of variability, Barlow showed that an ideal photon detector could get
by with about one tenth the number of photons as a human for the same combination of hit and correct
rejection rates. This success of classical signal detection theory demonstrated the need for probability in theories of visual performance, because light signals are fundamentally stochastic (emission and
absorption are Poisson processes) and any real light measurement device introduces further noise.
The example of ideal observer analysis of light detection further illustrates a fundamental strategy for
studying perception, consisting of three modeling domains. First, how does the signal (i.e. light switch
set to “bright” or “dim”) get encoded into intensity changes in the image? For light discrimination, the
answer must deal with variations due to quantal ﬂuctuations. Second, what are the limits to optimal
theories for decoding the light changes in the received image to infer which signal was transmitted?
Answers to this question rely on theories of ideal observers, or more generally of optimal inference.
Third, how does one compare human and ideal performance?
This requires common performance
measures on the same task.
n ~ N [0,σ ]
x=φ(Se,Sg)
Figure 1: The top panel shows an example of generative graph structure for an ideal observer problem in
classical signal detection theory (SDT). The data are determined by the signal hypotheses plus (usually
additive gaussian) noise. Knowledge is represented by the joint probability p(x, u, n). The lower panel
shows a simpliﬁed example of the generative structure for perceptual inference from a pattern inference
theory perspective. The image measurements (x) are determined by a typically non-linear function (φ) of
primary signal variables (Se) and confounding secondary variables (Sg). Knowledge is represented by the
joint probability p(x, Se, Sg). Both scene and image variables can be high dimensional vectors. In general,
the causal structure of natural image patterns is more complex and consequently requires elaboration of
its graphical representation (see Section 3.4). For SDT and pattern inference theory, the task is to make a
decision about the signal hypotheses or primary signal variables, while discounting the noise or secondary
variables. Thus optimal perceptual decisions are determined by p(x, Se), which is derived by summing over
the secondary variables (i.e. marginalizing with respect to the secondary variables):
Sg p(x, Se, Sg)dSg.
Limitations of Signal Detection Theory for the Grand Challenge
Despite its successes, classical signal detection theory as typically applied in vision falls short when
faced with our grand challenge. Deﬁne perceptual signals to be the useful underlying causes of image
data. These signals include the shapes, positions, and material of objects. The ﬁrst problem is that
natural perceptual signals are not simple functions image intensities. In typical applications of SDT and
classical ideal observer analysis to visual psychophysics, the input data, the noise, and the signal, are
treated as the same “stuﬀ”. For example, in contrast detection, the input data is signal plus noise .
The signal is based on a physical quantity (luminance) as a function of time and/or space), the noise
is either physical contrast noise, or internal noise which can be treated as equivalent to the physical
noise . Perceptual decisions are typically limited to information which is explicit in the decoded
signal–e.g. does the signal image have more light intensity than another? The decoder which answers
this question is simple–it merely measures whether the image intensity is bigger.
We need a theoretical framework for which the signals can be any properties of the world useful for the
visual behavior; for example, estimates of object shape and surface motion are crucial for actions such as
recognition and navigation, but they are not simple functions of light intensity. Natural images are highdimensional functions of useful signals, and arriving at decoding functions relating image measurements
to these signals is a major theoretical challenge. Both of these problems are expressible in terms of
pattern inference theory.
In signal detection theory, the non-signal causes of the input pattern are called noise.
For natural
perception, useful information is confounded by more than added external or internal image noise.
Uncertainty is caused by both variations in unneeded scene variables as well as by the fact that multiple
scene descriptions can produce the same image data. In contrast to the above example of contrast
detection, consider the problem of 3D shape discrimination in everyday vision. The signal is shape, but
the counterpart to the “noise” is very diﬀerent stuﬀ, and includes variation in viewpoint, illumination,
other occluding objects, and material . Further, although the discrimination decision may be able
to rely on a primary image measurement that is explicit in the image (e.g. a contour description), this
is rare. Because of projection and the confounding variables, the true 3D shape is not explicit in any
simple image measurement.
Pattern inference theory deals directly with the problem of multiple and diverse causes of image variation by modeling the generative process of image formation. Below, we distinguish between the needed
primary and unneeded secondary variables.4 The primary variables are those which the system’s function is designed to estimate. By contrast, the secondary variables are not estimated but neither are
they ignored, and there are principled methods for getting rid of unwanted variables. It should be
emphasized that the distinction between primary and secondary depends on the speciﬁc task the system is designed to solve. Variables which are secondary for one task may be primary for another. For
example, estimating the illumination is unimportant for many visual tasks and so illumination variables
are treated as secondary. The theory of generic views treats viewpoint as a secondary variable, enabling
resolution of ambiguities in shape perception . Light direction as a secondary variable can be
used to obtain a unique estimate of depth from cast shadows . There is a close connection between
the task (discussed in Section 4 below) and the statistical structure of the estimation problem .
A third limitation is that natural images are not linear combinations of their signals. Much of the
success of signal detection theory has rested on an assumption of linearity: the input is the sum of the
signal and the noise. Except in rare instances (e.g. contrast detection limited by photon ﬂuctuations at
high light levels), natural perceptual tasks involve inputs which are non-linear functions of the signals
and the noise (or secondary variables). For example, light intensity is a non-linear function of object
shape, reﬂectance, and illumination.
There is a close relationship between linearity and the assumption that the random variables of interest are Gaussian 5. Although classical signal detection explored the implications of non-Gaussian
processes , most applications of signal detection theory to vision have typically approximated noise
variations as Gaussian processes. A Gaussian approximation works very well in certain domains (as an
approximation to Poisson light emission), but is extremely limited as a model of scene variability. Both
the linear and Gaussian assumptions have had a striking success in the general problem of modeling
human perceptual and cognitive decisions, where the variability is inside the observer . But
the Gaussian assumption generally fails when modeling external variability. For example, whenever
a probability density involves more than second-order correlations, a multi-variate Gaussian model is
no longer adequate. Image samples from Gaussian models of natural images fail to capture the rich
structure of natural textures . Simple image measurements, such as those made by simple cells of
the visual cortex are highly non-Gaussian . A goal of pattern inference theory is to let the vision
problem determine the distributions.
Fourthly, perception involves more tasks than classiﬁcation. Not surprisingly, for signal detection theory,
the primary focus is on signal detection–was the signal sent or not? Perception involves a larger class of
tasks: classiﬁcation at several levels of abstraction, estimation, learning, and control. Past applications
of signal detection theory have successively handled certain kinds of abstraction (e.g. “is any one of 100
4Primary and secondary variables have also been referred to as explicit and generic (or nuisance) variables, respectively.
5Because the log of a multi-variate Gaussian is quadratic, extrema can be found using linear estimators.
signals there or not?” or “which of 100 known signals was sent?”) as well as estimation ; but we also
require a framework that can handle diverse tasks from continuous estimations (e.g. of distance, shape,
and their associations) to more complex categorical decisions: e.g. is the input pattern due to a cat, a
dog, or “my cat”? Tools for the former build on classical estimation theory, but include recent work on
hidden markov models. The latter requires additional tools, such as ﬂexible template theories to model
shape abstraction. A mathematical framework for perception requires tools for the generalization of
ideal observers for the functional complex tasks of natural perception. By incorporating decision theory,
pattern inference theory allows for a broad range of perceptual tasks through the speciﬁcation of a risk
function (Section 4).
Finally, we note that most of the interesting perceptual knowledge on priors and utility is implicit. Signal
detection theory grew out of earlier work on decision theory. Two important components of decision
theory are the speciﬁcation of prior probabilities of scene properties or signals and the costs and beneﬁts
of actions, through a cost function. In most applications of SDT, it has been the experimenter that
manipulates the priors and the cost functions. The human observer is often aware of the changes, and
can adopt a conscious strategy to take these into account. We argue that the most important perceptual
priors are largely determined by the structure of the environment and can, in principle, be modeled
independently of perceptual inference (i.e. in the synthesis phase of study)6. Modeling priors (e.g.
through density estimation) is a hard theoretical problem in and of itself, especially because of the large
dimensional interactions. In classical SDT, probabilities are typically speciﬁed over small dimensional
spaces. The costs and beneﬁts are inherent to the type of perceptual task, and determine the primary
and secondary variables.
Thus, to elaborate on Helmholtz’s deﬁnition of perception: perception is
(largely) unconscious inference involving unconscious priors, and unconscious cost functions.
Thanks to the successes of signal detection theory, we know that perception is limited by two factors:
1) the available information for reliable learning, inference, and action; 2) brain mechanisms to process
that information. But one of the principal diﬀerences between classical SDT and pattern inference
theory is the greater emphasis on modeling the external limits to inference, including both synthesis
and optimal decoding. Both problems are clearly challenging, and computer vision has shown that the
second problem is surprisingly hard. We agree with Marr when he wrote in 1982: “...the nature of the
computations that underlie perception depends more upon the computational problems that have to be
solved than upon the particular hardware in which their solutions are implemented.” Theories of human
perceptual inference require an understanding of the limits of perceptual inference through optimal
decoding theories .
These theories, in turn, require an understanding of the transformations
and variations introduced in pattern formation. We will argue here that the structure of the visual
information for function is best modeled in terms of its probabilistic structure, and that as a consequence
any successful system must reﬂect the constraints in that structure, and further that its computations
should be in terms of probability operations.
So, in the next section, we focus on the ﬁrst problem: How can we model the information required
for a task? This modeling problem can be broken down into: a) synthesis, modeling the structure of
pattern information in natural images; and b) analysis, modeling the task and extracting useful pattern
structures.
6We emphasize an empirical Bayesian approach in which, as is discussed in Section 6, one can test an hypotheses of
subject prior with respect to an objective prior.
Encoding of scenes in images: Modeling image patterns
Computer vision has emphasized the diﬃculty of image understanding, which involves decoding images
to ﬁnd the scene variables causing the image measurements. Although, a great deal of progress has
been made in computer vision, the best systems are typically quite constrained in their domain of
applicability (e.g. letter recognition, tracking, structure from rigid body motions, etc.). The problem has
been to assume that inference only requires a solution to the inverse optics problem (usually employing
some ﬁxed constraints). However, inverse optics does not adequately model the information images
carry about scenes. The success of image decoding depends crucially on understanding the encoding.
Although the computational challenge of image understanding is widely appreciated, the diﬃculty and
issues of image pattern synthesis are less so.
How do we model the information images contain about scene properties? Following Shannon ,
the answer is through probability distributions. Treating perception as a communication problem, we
identify certain scene variables S as the messages, and the image formation and measurement mapping
as the channel p(I|S), by which we receive the encoded messages I. Given this identiﬁcation, we can
use information theoretic ideas to quantify the information that I gives about S as the transinformation
I(S; I) = H(I) −H(I|S) = Ep(I)[−log p(I)] −Ep(S,I)[−log p(I|S)].
These entropies are determined by p(I) =
S p(S)p(I|S)dS, the likelihood p(I|S), and the prior p(S).7
Thus, the physics of materials, optics, light, and image measurement, which determine the likelihood,
just scratch the surface of what is required to model image encoding. In addition, we need to understand
the types of patterns and transformations that result from the fact that images are caused by a structured
world of events and potentialities for an agent, which is captured in p(S).
While probability and
information theory provide the tools for understanding image encoding, constructing theories with
these tools requires work. Let’s look at the framework, tools, and principles for theory construction.
Essence of Bayes: Everything is a random variable
A key starting assumption is that all variables are random variables, and that the knowledge required for
visual function is speciﬁed by the joint probability p(Se, Sg, I). The basic ingredients are variable classes:
image measurement data (I), variables specifying relevant scene attributes (Se), and the confounding
variables (Sg). All these variables are random variables, and thus subject to the laws of the probability
calculus, including Bayes theorem.
So for pattern inference theory, a Bayesian view is more than
acknowledging the role of priors, but also emphasizes the redundancy structure of images, and the
importance of the inﬂuence model of visual pattern formation, expressible as a graphical model. Thus
the essence of a Bayesian theory of perception is more than applying Bayes’ rule to infer scene properties
from images, or that likelihoods are tweaked by prior and labile subjective “biases”. This interpretation
7For simplicity, we’ve restricted our expressions to probability densities on continuous random, rather than discrete,
random variables. There are well-known subtleties in translating results between discrete probabilities and continuous
densities. Examples: 1) A change of representation (e.g. changing distance to vergence angle) will in general change the
form of the density–e.g. change a uniform density into a non-uniform one. 2) Entropy for continuous variables is inherently
relative, and thus transinformation is more useful . 3) If the range of a random variable is unknown, then the principle
of insuﬃcient reason leads to “improper” priors .
(Myth 1: Bayes is distinct only by virtue of emphasis on modeling priors8) would miss the point of our
view of pattern inference theory approach to perception. By starting with a model space completely
determined by the joint probability, p(Se, Sg, I), we have the foundation to understand:
1) input image redundancy, through:
p(Se, Sg, I) dSe dSg
2) scene structure, through:
p(Se, Sg) =
p(Se, Sg, I)dI
3) inference, through:
p(Se, I) =
p(Se, Sg, I)dSg
Of course, modeling p(Se, Sg, I) in general may pose an insurmountable challenge. But there is reason for
optimism, and recent work in density estimation and image statistics suggest that rich high-dimensional
models may be possible .
The key point is that necessary knowledge to characterize the perceptual problem is speciﬁed by a joint
probability over the given data (usually image measurements, but could include contextual conclusions
drawn earlier or elsewhere), what the visual system needs (primary), and the variables that confound
(secondary variables).
Basic operations on probabilities: Conditioning and Marginalizing
We really have only two basic computations on probabilities, which follow from the two basic rules of
probability–the sum and product rules. Each of the rules has speciﬁc roles in an inference computation,
related to the kind of variable in the inference. When inferring the values of a set of variables Se, the
remaining variables come in two types, those which are known either by sensory measurement or a
priori, and those which we don’t know and don’t care to know.
1) Marginalization: Presuming the utility of only a subset of the scene variables (which we treat in
Section 4), the values of some variables Sg are not known, and we don’t care to know them. Marginalization is the proper way to remove the eﬀect of these secondary, unknown, unwanted variables:
P(Se, I) =
P(Se, Sg, I)dSg
8At several points in this chapter, we address what we see as misconceptions of the Bayesian framework for vision. We
identify these as “myths”.
The reason we marginalize is that being unneeded doesn’t mean these variables should be ignored!
Most of the time, the unwanted variables (e.g. viewpoint) crucially contribute to the generation of the
possible images, and hence cannot be ignored. The marginalization approach contrasts with traditional
modular studies of vision, in which most of the unneeded variables for a given module are left out of
the discussion entirely (e.g. independent estimation of reﬂectance, shape, and illumination). Often,
the modularity is adopted based on general practical and theoretical arguments. Our position is not
that we forgo modularity, but rather that modularity be grounded in the statistical structure of the
problem, rather than by what the theorist ﬁnds convenient . It is important to emphasize that this
approach does not necessitate that marginalizations are executed on-line by the brain. The eﬀects of
marginalization could be built directly into the inference algorithm avoiding the need for perception to
have an explicit representation of the unneeded variables.
2) Conditioning: Some of our variables are known, through data measurements, or a priori assumptions.
In either case, once we know something about the variables, we base our inferences on this
knowledge by conditioning the joint distribution on the known information:
P(S|I) = P(S, I)/P(I)
The way Bayes’ rule comes into the picture is that it is often easier to separately model image formation
and the prior model for the causal factors. Bayes’ rule is a straightforward application of the product
rule to P(S, I) = P(I|S)P(S):
P(S|I) = P(I|S)P(S)/P(I)
The likelihood P(I|S) is determined by the generative image formation model which produces image
measurements from a scene description. The generative model produces the image patterns, and consists
of the scene prior, and the image formation model. The likelihood is easier to model because we are
conditioning on the scene, and the image is a well-deﬁned function of the scene–forward optics plus
measurement noise.
Although the likelihood and prior terms are logically separable, the division has
little bearing on the algorithmic implementation. When it comes to inference, Bayes is neutral with
respect to whether a priori knowledge is used in a bottom-up or top-down fashion (Myth 2: Priors
are top-down.). The regularizers in computer vision can be expressed as priors, and these are typically
instantiated as bottom-up constraints (e.g. weights in feedforward networks ).
Why should scene variables be treated probabilistically? In contrast to subjective Bayesian applications
(Myth 3: Priors only refer to subjective, and perhaps conscious biases.), prior probabilities on scene
variables are objectively quantiﬁable. They result from physical processes (e.g. material properties
such as albedo and plasticity covary due to common dependence on the substance, such as metal), and
from the relative frequencies of the scene variables in the observer’s environment. Thus, vision modelers
have a big advantage over stock market analysts: they have a better idea of what the functionally
important scene causes are, and can hypothesize and test probability density models of scene variables,
independent of visual inference. They can also test the extent to which vision respects the constraints
in the prior model (see Section 6). Why is probability essential for modeling pattern synthesis? Because
an inﬁnite set of scenes can produce a given image. Thus, in the decoding problem it is essential to
have a model of the generative structure of images, given by p(S|I) and p(S). Below we discuss how
several kinds of generative processes produce characteristic image patterns.
Generative models in vision
Functional vision depends on the kind of abstraction required for the task at hand. But psychological
abstractions such as scene categories, object concepts, and aﬀordances rest on the existence of objective
world structure. Without such structure, there would be no support for reliable inferences–in fact,
there would be no basis for consistent action in a world in which each image is independent of any
previous ones. From this perspective, it is not unreasonable for an otherwise functional visual system to
hallucinate in response to visual noise, because the best world interpretations will be structured. Thus,
understanding the objective generative structure is necessary although not suﬃcient for an account of
human visual perception9. However, a central theme of this chapter is the importance of understanding
the objective generative processes of the images received.
It is an intriguing scientiﬁc question as
to the degree with which perceptual inference mechanisms mirror or recapitulate the generative image
structure. Theories of back-projections in visual cortex rest on internal generative processes to deal with
“explaining away” , the related idea of model validation through residual calculation ,
and predictive coding . As we discuss later, the task itself reﬁnes our model of the relevant statistical
structure through Bayesian modularity.
Visual perception deals with two broad classes of generative processes that produce photometric and
geometric image variation.
Further, it is useful to distinguish scene variations (knowledge in p(S))
from those of image formation (knowledge in p(I|S)). We postpone the discussion of the experimental
implications of these variations until Section 6.
Object and scene variations
A logical prerequisite for a full understanding of image variation is a study of the nature of illumination,
surface reﬂectivities, object geometry, and scene structure quite independently of the properties of the
sense organs.
Consider geometrical object variations that occur for a single object.
An individual
object, such as a pair of scissors, or a particular human body consists of parts with a range of possible
articulations. The modeling problem is of signiﬁcant interest in computer graphic synthesis because
it provides the means to model the transformations, and ultimately characterize the probabilities of
particular articulations and actions.
Objects (and scenes) can be categorized at more abstract levels, such as “dogs” or “books” .
Examples of such within-class scatter include geometric sources such as variations that occur between
diﬀerent members of the same species, vehicles, or computer keyboards. Certain types of within-class
geometric variation (e.g. “cats”) can be modeled in terms of prototypes together with a description
of geometric deformations which admit a probability measure p(S).
For this sort of
within-class variation, it may be possible to ﬁnd p(S) through probability density estimation on scene
descriptions.
Estimating prior densities (e.g.
via Principal Components Analysis or PCA) for the
distribution of facial surfaces (variations across human face shapes) is now possible due to advances
in technology for measuring depth maps . Material or albedo variation also occurs across an
object set–e.g. the set of books, with diﬀerent covers. And of course there are mixtures of geometrical
and photometrical eﬀects, such as within-species variation among dogs. There is a considerable body of
work on biological morphometrics whose goal is to understand the transformations connecting objects
9This is one way of distinguishing the Bayesian perspective from a strict Gibsonian view which could be interpreted as
assuming that objective structure is also suﬃcient to explain functional vision.
Figure 2: Illustrations of variations in scene variables. Top left: Group of dogs shows variations in
geometric (size, shape), albedo (shading patterns), and articulation. Top right: Twin dogs show the eﬀect
of pose/articulation. Bottom left: A ﬂat-tailed Gecko hides on a tree, showing how variation in skin
pigment (albedo) can match the pattern caused by fungus growing on the tree. Bottom Right: A rocky
stream illustrates the complexities of spatial layout. Rocks come in two size types, large very near the
stream, and smaller away from the stream bed. The presence and directionality of the water is encoded
in the complex array of specularities, determined by the interaction between light source, water surface
ﬂuctuation, and viewpoint.
transparency
Figure 3: Variations in illumination and viewing. Top Left: A women’s face shows a shading variation
due to extrinsic shadows. Top Right: Reﬂection of a house on a window creates a transparent image on a
curtain. Bottom Left: Two views of the entrance to Notre Dame Cathedral. Bottom right: A frog hides
underneath some pond growth, illustrating occlusion/background clutter.
within groups . Origin of concepts at certain levels may lie in the generative structure of
objects, and debate has occurred as to whether an entry-level object concept is based on a prototype
with (possibly) a metric model of variation, or a description of the structural relationships between
parts. We touch on this point later in the context of object recognition models. “Schemas” are an
example of an even higher level of organization involving spatial layout, which recognizes the spatial
relationships between objects, and their contextual contingencies. The fact that perceptual judgments
are strongly inﬂuenced by scene context, (e.g. forest, oﬃce, or grocery store scene), suggests that p(S) is
not at all uniform across spatial layout, but rather is highly ‘spiked’ which allows scene type recognition
and its exploitation for scene analysis. See ﬁgure 2 for examples of scene variable variations.
Eﬀects in the image
At the most proximal stage, the images projected into the eyes are transformed by the optics, sampled
by the retina, and have noise added to them. These operations produce the well-studied photometric
variations of luminance noise and blurring in the images, which form the standard domain of classical
Due to the additivity of light and the approximate linearity of reﬂection, photometric variations due to
illumination change are approximately linear so that under ﬁxed view, an arbitrary lighting condition
can be approximated by the weighted sum of relatively few basis images . Further, it has been shown
that the images of an object fall on or near a cone in image space . Cast shadows are another form
of illumination variation resulting from the occlusion of a light source from a surface. Specularity in an
image is an interaction between material, shape, and viewpoint. Surface transparency is another source
of photometric variation. Its eﬀect in the image can be either additive or multiplicative . One form
of additive transparency results from the combination of reﬂections in a store-front window.
Variations in observer viewpoint (i.e. viewing distance and direction) produce geometric deformations
in the image. The utility of multiple-scale analysis in human and machine vision is a consequence of the
distribution of translations in depth of the eye (or camera) viewpoint. Over small changes in viewing
variables, the image variations are fairly smooth, although rotations around the viewing sphere can
cause large changes in the images due to signiﬁcant self-occlusions. If we were only concerned with
geometry, viewpoint variations and variation in object position and orientation would produce the same
set of images. However, illumination interacts with viewpoint so that view rotation is only equivalent to
object rotation if the lighting is rigidly attached to the viewer’s frame of reference. Rotations in depth
cause particularly challenging image variations for object recognition that we brieﬂy discuss later.
The distribution of multiple objects in a scene aﬀects the images of objects through occlusion and
Because of the nature of imaging, the local correlations in surface features typically carry
over to local image features. However, occlusion of one object by another breaks up the image into
disconnected patches. Further, patches widely separated in the image can be statistically related, and
the challenge is to link the appropriate image measurements likely to belong to the same objects. Like
occlusion, background is a signiﬁcant confounding source of image variation that thwarts segmentation.
The intensity edges at the bounding contours of an object can vary substantially as the background is
changed, even if the view and lighting remain the same. See ﬁgure 3 for examples of illumination and
viewing eﬀects on images.
Occlusion is the result of the distribution of the kinds and spatial arrangements of objects within a
scene relative to the viewpoint. But the spatial layouts of schemas also generate statisical dependence
in images. Temporal variation in images is induced by object motion and observer actions . Thus
the spatio-temporal image distribution is aﬀected by the distribution of observer actions, and object
dynamics (e.g. freeway driving).
Graphical models of statistical structure
Figure 4: Components of the generative structure for image patterns involve converging, diverging,
and intermediate nodes corresponding to: multiple (scene) causes {S1, S2} giving rise to the same image
measurement, I; one cause, S inﬂuencing more than one image measurement, {I1, I2}; a scene (or other)
cause S, inﬂuencing an image measurement through an intermediate variable L.
In general, natural image pattern formation is speciﬁed by a high-dimensional joint probability, requiring
an elaboration of the causal structure that is more complex than the simpliﬁed model in the bottom
panel of ﬁgure 1. The idea is to represent the probabilistic structure of the joint distribution P(S, I) by
a Bayes net , which is simply a graphical model that expresses the conditional independencies
between the variables.
There are just three basic building blocks: multiple (e.g.
scene) variables
causing a given image measurement, a single variable producing multiple image measurements, or a
cause indirectly inﬂuencing an image measurement through an intermediate variable (see ﬁgure 4).
These types of dependencies provide a ﬁrst step towards modeling the joint distribution and, as we
describe in Section 4 below, the means to eﬃciently compute probabilities of the unknown variables
given known values.
Two random variables may only become independent, however, once the value of some third variable is
known. This is called conditional independence.10
Using labels to represent variables and arrows to represent conditioning (with a →b indicating b is
conditioned on a11), independence can be represented by the absence of connections between variables.
For example, if the joint probability p(a, b, c, d, e, f, g) factors by independence into p(a, b, c, d, e, f, g) =
p(a)p(b)p(c|d)p(d)p(e|a, b)p(f|b, c)p(g|d), then the variables can be represented by the graph in ﬁgure 5.
Had the variables factored into two independent groups the graph would have shown two separate nets.
The example graph can represent a Bayes network for computing structure from stereo and texture if
we allow some of the nodes to represent multiple variables. To illustrate, let the node a represent the
geometric and material causes of a particular image texture, and e represent the collection of texture
measurements made by the observer. The node b represents absolute depth from the observer and is the
variable of interest for the task. The horizontal and vertical disparity measurements are bundled into
10Two random variables are independent if and only if their joint probability is equal to the product of their individual
probabilities. Thus, if p(A, B) = p(A)p(B), then A and B are independent. If p(A, B|C) = p(A|C)p(B|C), then A and B
are conditionally independent. When corn prices drop in the summer, hay fever incidence goes up. However, if the joint
on corn price and hay fever is conditioned on “ideal weather for corn and ragweed”, the correlation between corn prices
and hay fever drops. Corn price and hay fever symptoms are conditionally independent.
11In graph theory, a is called the parent of b
b Module 1
b Module 2
Stereo Example
c Module 1
c Module 2
a = texture model
c = fixation distance
d = convergence
e = monocular cue (texture)
f = disparity
g = proprioception
Figure 5: Example Bayes Net. a) Bayes net representing the factored distribution p(a, b, c, d, e, f, g) =
p(a)p(b)p(c|d)p(d)p(e|a, b)p(f|b, c)p(g|d). The graphical model can express the probabilistic structure of
depth from stereo and texture inference. b)
When estimating the depth variable b, the Net can be
decomposed into two separate depth modules (depth from texture and depth from stereo). The dashed
boxes show the modules. c) When estimating the ﬁxation distance c, the net can be decomposed into two
separate distance modules (distance from texture and stereo, and distance from proprioception). Note
that the left hand side of the graph does not decompose as before. This illustrates Bayesian modularity
(see Section 4.3).
f, which depends on both the depth variable b and the direction and distance of the observer’s ﬁxation
point, c, in space. The ﬁxation point distance is determined by the convergence angle, d, between the
eyes. The convergence angle can be inferred from non-visual proprioceptive feedback from the eyes
represented by the data variable g.
Note that the graphical structure captures the structure of the data formation. The top layer of the
graph represents the scene and viewing variables, whose causal eﬀect on the sensory data in the bottom
layer is represented by the directed arrows.
Optimal decoding: Modeling the tasks
The basic tenet is that perception enables successful behavior, and thus any decoding scheme is designed
to extract useful information about the true state of the world. But the essence of decision theory
analysis is the trade-oﬀbetween truth and utility. A complete characterization of optimal behavior
cannot dispense with either dimension. Even the simple problem of deciding whether a ﬂash of light is
bright or dim is only a useful visual function, if the task is to decide whether one or the other determines
a true state of the world. Was the light switch set to high or low? Was the object closer or nearer? The
fundamental computational problem of vision is: given visual data, how can the system determine the
environmental causes of that data, when it is confounded by other variables. If one accepts this, then
we can make the case that visual perception is fundamentally image decoding. But whether to draw
an inference, or the precision with which it must be drawn is determined by the visual function. As
with any decoding system, perception operates with target goals that depend on the task. A complete
theory of vision needs to account for three classes of behavioral tasks:
1) The visual system draws discrete (categorical) conclusions about objective world. These decisions invariably involve taking into account potentially large variations in confounding secondary variables. For
example, to reliably detect a face, a system must allow for variations in view, lighting, background, as
well as the geometrical variations in individual facial shape, expression, and hair. Finer-grain identiﬁcations require more estimates of primary variables, and less marginalization of secondary variables .
Because the causes are objective, decisions have a right or wrong answer. Further, the cost due to
incorrect decisions can be large or small. A mistake in animal identiﬁcation can have serious consequences. Failing to anticipate the change in color of a sweater going from indoor to outdoor lighting may
cause only mild social embarrassment, requiring little investment in perceptual (vs. learned cognitive)
resources.
2) The visual system provides continuously valued estimations for actions. For example, visual information for depth and size determine the kinematics of reach and grasp. Like discrete decisions, estimations
can have degrees of utility.
3) The visual system adapts to environmental contingencies in the images received. This adaptation is
at longer time scales than inference required for perceptual problem solving, occurring over both phylogenetic and ontogenetic scales. One form of adaptation requires implicit probability density estimation.
Can we describe these processes from the point of view of pattern inference theory–i.e.
decoding by means of probability computations? To do so requires a probabilistic model of tasks. We
consider a task as specifying four things, the required or primary set of scene variables Se, the nuisance
or secondary scene variables Sg, the scene variables which are presumed known Sf, and the decision
to be made. Each of the four components of a task plays a role in determining the structure of the
optimal inference computation. First, we review how to model the decision as a risk functional on
the posterior distribution, then we show that Se and Sf can be used to simplify the joint distribution
through independence relations, while Sg and the decision rule can make one choice of Se simpler than
Bayesian decision theory provides a precise language to model the costs of errors determined by the
choice of visual task . The cost or risk R(Σ; I) of guessing Σ when the image measurement is
I is deﬁned as the expected loss:
L(Σ, S)P(S | I)dS,
with respect to the posterior probability, P(S|I). The best interpretation of the image can then be
made by ﬁnding the Σ which minimizes the risk function. The loss function L(Σ, S) speciﬁes the cost
of guessing Σ when the scene variable is S. One possible loss function is −δ(Σ −S). In this case the
risk becomes R(Σ; I) = −P(Σ | I), and then the best strategy is to pick the most likely interpretation.
This is standard maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP). A second kind of loss function assumes that
costs are constant over all guesses of a variable. This is equivalent to marginalization of the posterior
with respect to that variable.
The introduction of a cost function makes Bayesian decision theory an extremely general theoretical tool.
However, this ﬂexibility has drawbacks from a scientiﬁc perspective. We could potentially introduce
a loss function for each scene variable, which makes it impractical to independently test cost function
hypotheses empirically–and we are stuck with an additional set of free parameters. However, we can
achieve modeling economy by assuming the delta function or constant loss functions depending on
whether the variable is needed (primary) or not.
Thus, we advocate initially constructing simpler
Bayesian theories in which we estimate the most probable relevant scene value (MAP estimation), while
marginalizing with respect to the irrelevant generic variables. Bloj and colleagues have a recent example
of this strategy applied to the interaction of color and shape .
We now describe how the statistical structure and task interact in determining the inference computations. While the statistical structure of the joint distribution determines which variables interact, the
choice of decision rule and marginalization variables determine the details of how they interact. In the
next section, we show how the task, in choosing the relevant variables, partitions the scene variables
through statistical independence.
Partitioning the scene causes: Task dependency and conditional independence
One of the important aspects of performing a single task is that it allows us to focus our attention on a
particular set of variables Se. In some cases, we may be justiﬁed in ignoring a number of scene properties
irrelevant to the task.
This idea can be expressed in terms of the distributions through statistical
independence. We may factor p(S, I) into two parts, one of which contains all the variables which are
statistically independent of Se and the other which contains all of the dependent variables, p(S, I) =
p(Iind|Sind)p(Idep|Sdep)p(Sind)p(Sdep)12. In terms of a graphical model, this partitioning corresponds
to unconnected sub-graphs. Part of focusing our attention in a task involves restricting our base of
inference to p(Idep, Sdep).
In addition, the nature of a task or context ﬁxes some of the scene variables Sf. For instance, if an
observer is doing quality checking on an assembly line, then the lighting variables and viewpoint can
be considered ﬁxed. Note that most constraints used to regularize vision problems can be expressed as
ﬁxing a set of scene variables. For instance, in a world of polynomial surfaces, the constraint that the
task only involves ﬂat surfaces can be rephrased as all non-linear polynomial coeﬃcients are ﬁxed at
Since the variables in Sf are presumed known, we can subdivide the dependent variables still further,
dep, Sf and condition p(Idep, Sdep) on Sf, p(Idep, S′
dep|Sf), which increases the statistical independence of the variables. This is true because variables which are not statistically independent because
they are dependent on a common variable become independent when conditioned on the common variable. Thus we expect the conditional distribution to further decompose into relevant and irrelevant
scene variables.
Thus given the task, we can ﬁrst factor p(S, I|Sf) = N
i=1 p(Si, I|Sf). To do inference we need only
consider the factors in which the Si contain the variables in Se. Let Sj denote the minimal set of
statistically dependent variables containing Se. The variables in Sj excluding Se are just the secondary
variables Sg. Then, p(Se, Sg, I|Sf) contains all the information we need to perform the inference task,
and has automatically speciﬁed the task relevant and irrelevant variables, i.e. the primary and secondary
variables. Thus the independence structure determines which variables should be involved in an inference
computation, which has consequences for data fusion.
In terms of graphical models, the set of variables Se and Sg for the task have the property that they are
connected by the image data. In other words, Se and Sg are both involved in generating the image data.
The basic generative structure of the perceptual inference problem is illustrated in the lower panel in
ﬁgure 1 from the point of view of pattern inference theory. Comparing this diagram to the generative
diagram for the standard signal detection theory above it, we can better see how pattern inference
theory is a generalization of SDT. For standard signal detection theory, the image data are generated
12For notational convenience, here we use S to indicate the set of scene variables to be partitioned, {S}.
Object perception
Spatial layout
Object-centered
World-centered
Observer-centered
(object recognition)
(hand action)
Basic-level
Subordinate-level
Articulation
Relative position
Illumination
Table 1: Table illustrating how the visual task partitions the scene variables into primary (E) and
secondary (G) variables. The pattern of image intensities is determined by all of the scene variables, object
shape, material, object articulation (e.g. body limb movements or facial expression), viewpoint, relative
position between objects, and illumination. Basic-level recognition involves more abstract categorization
(e.g. dog vs. cat) than subordinate-level recognition (Doberman vs. Dachshund), and is typically thought
to be shape-based, with material properties such as fur color discounted. Finer-grain subordinate-level
recognition requires estimates of shape and material.
by signals plus noise, which allow us to identify Se as the signal set, and Sg as the noise. Thus, one of
the key ideas of pattern inference theory is that unwanted variables act like noise in the context of a
particular inference task. However, the noise is multivariate, highly structured and in general cannot
be modeled by something simple like a unimodal distribution. While Sg play the role of noise for one
task, they form the “signal” for another task, because the distinction between primary and secondary
depends on the visual function. What is a primary variable for one task may be secondary for another.
Table 1 illustrates how various visual tasks determine the primary vs. secondary variables.
One of the consequences of deciding a task, is that ambiguity can be reduced through marginalization . The basic principle is: perception’s model of the image measurement ((i.e. the generative
consequence of the primary variable’s prediction of the image measurement) should be robust with respect
to variations in the secondary variables. In fact, the general viewpoint principle is a consequence of
viewpoint being a secondary variable .
Partitioning image measurements: Suﬃcient statistics
Once we have determined which scene variables are relevant to the task, we can also determine which
image measurements we should make from the independence structure of p(Se, Sg, I|Sf). Assuming
we have a set of measurements {m1(I), m2(I), m3(I), . . .} which form a good code for p(I), then we
can determine which image measurements to use by partitioning the joint distribution.
distribution,
p(Se, {m1(I), m2(I), m3(I), . . .}|Sf)
will further factor into relevant and irrelevant image measurements, yielding a set M of measurements
required for the task. If we inspect the posterior distribution needed for inference p(Se|M, Sf), we can
interpret the set M as the set of suﬃcient statistics for Se, since p(Se|I, M, Sf) = p(Se|M, Sf) ﬁts the
standard deﬁnition of a suﬃcient statistic . While many diﬀerent sets of measurements can form
suﬃcient statistics, minimal suﬃcient statistics are the smallest set of suﬃcient statistics and have the
property that any other set of suﬃcient statistics are a function of them. This new perspective leads
to the principle: a good image code for a visual system is one that forms a set of minimal suﬃcient
statistics for the tasks the observer performs.
Putting the pieces together: Needed scene estimates, suﬃcient image measurements, and probability computation.
We have shown for optimal inference, how the choice of required variables determines which scene
variables we need to consider through statistical independence, and the set of image measurements
through the notion of suﬃcient statistics.
We now illustrate how the variables interact in optimal
inference, which is determined by the details of the generative model and the choice of loss functions.
The generative model, in specifying how the secondary variables interact with the primary variables to
produce an image, determines to a large extent how the primary and secondary variables interact in
an inference computation. However, the choice of cost function, by specifying diﬀerent costs for errors,
modulates the relevance of errors induced by the ignorance of particular secondary variables.
To be more speciﬁc, we return to the generative model for texture, disparity and proprioceptive data.
(ﬁgure 5), but now from the point of view of decoding–estimating depth from measurements of disparity and texture. In Bayesian inference, the change in certainty of the scene variables causing the
image after receiving image data respects the generative model. Both prior knowledge and image measurements ﬁx values in the network, and the problem is to update the probabilities of the remaining
variables. Updating the probabilities is straightforward for simple networks, but requires more sophisticated techniques such as probability or belief propagation, or the junction-tree algorithm for more
complex networks . The primary eﬀect of receiving image data is to change the certainty
of all the variables which could possibly generate the image data. One eﬀect of having more than one
image measurement is known as “explaining away” in Bayes nets. For example, suppose we observe
that the texture measurements e are compressed in the y direction relative to an isotropic texture. The
compression might be the result of our texture being non-isotropic (i.e. attributing the observation
to the texture model a), it might be due to the surface having a depth gradient (i.e. attributing the
measurement to the surface depth b), or it might be due to a little of both. Given only the texture
measurement, the data supplies evidence for both a and b. However, if we have additional disparity data
f which is consistent with a depth gradient, then our best inference is that both the texture compression
and the disparity gradient are caused by a depth gradient. This second piece of information drives the
additional inference that our texture model should be isotropic–a common depth gradient “explains
away” the coincidence between the disparity gradient and the texture compression. Bayesian inference
does this naturally by updating probabilities of each needed but unknown variable. The process of
updating probabilities in a network is more powerful than estimating a single state. For example, if the
random variables in the network are Gaussian, then updating probabilities requires new estimates of
the mean and variance.
The task also aﬀects the algorithmic structure. To illustrate, consider trying to do inference based on
the total probability distribution. We would need to maintain a probability distribution on more than 7
dimensions (one for each node in the network plus the nodes with multiple variables). Thus, computing
using the entire distribution would be computationally prohibitive. However, the statistical independencies show a kind of modularity we call Bayesian modularity. In Bayesian modularity, the independence
structure allows us to produce separate likelihood functions for the variable of interest, which can be
combined by multiplication. For instance, if we are doing inference on b in the above example, p(e|b) =
a p(e|a, b)da produces one likelihood function and p(f, g|b) =
d p(g|d)p(c|d)p(d)dd] p(f|b, c)dc produces the other. This division creates two ’modules’ illustrated in ﬁgure 5b. The division also creates
enormous computational savings, as we only need to maintain three likelihoods over two variables:
{a, b}, {b, c} & {c, d}. Modularity is modulated by the task. Figure 5c shows how Bayesian modularity
changes as a function of which variables are estimated.
The quantitative inﬂuence of the data on the inference depends critically on both the likelihood and the
knowledge we have about the secondary variables. The value of priors on secondary variables is clear,
however the eﬀect of likelihood is more subtle, as it depends on the number of possible scene causes
for an image and the change in the image given a change in the scene variables. For example, Knill
has shown that texture information is less reliable for frontal parallel surfaces than for strongly slanted
surfaces because large changes in slant for fronto-parallel surfaces cause small changes in image texture
compared to slant changes for strongly slanted surfaces .
Now depending on our cost function, the two likelihood functions p(e|b) and p(f, g|b) for the depth b
will have diﬀerent inﬂuences on the decision. For example, consider a depth task in which the cost of
depth errors is only high when the depth gradient is small (i.e. the surfaces are nearly fronto-parallel).
In this case the depth from texture module will be nearly irrelevant to the decisions, because texture
information is only reliable for large depth gradients , whereas disparity information can be reliable
for small depth gradients.
Learning generative structure
In pattern inference theory, learning is estimating the density p(S, I), and discovering the appropriate
cost function for the task. For example, learning to classify images of faces as male or female requires
knowledge of intragender facial variability (i.e.
p(S)), knowledge about how faces produce images
p(I|S)), and the decision boundary set by the cost of incorrectly identifying the faces.
two components, density estimation and cost function speciﬁcation, have a rough correspondence to
what we might call task-general and task-speciﬁc constraints respectively. Task-general constraints are
those which hold irregardless of the speciﬁc nature of the task, which correspond to the fundamental
constraints on inference set by the structure of the joint density. On the other hand, the choice of cost
function is always task-speciﬁc, since it involves specifying the costs for a particular task. For generality,
we focus on density estimation below.
It is one thing to talk about what one could do given the joint probability for a visual problem, and
it is quite another matter to actually obtain it.
High-dimensional probability density estimation is
notoriously diﬃcult. This observation has lead to radically diﬀerent alternatives to learning, which
place focus on the decision boundaries, largely ignoring the within-class structure (e.g. Support vector
machines ). We discuss here several reasons to be optimistic.
An essential requirement for density estimation is to have a rich vocabulary of possible densities, which
are typically parametric, from which a best ﬁt to the image data can be achieved. The second requirement is having a sensible error metric to assess the best ﬁtting density model. Zhu, Wu & Mumford
 have developed a general method for density estimation based on the Minimax Entropy Principle
which allows the consideration of both the best ﬁtting model and what image measurements should be
used. They assume that the density can be approximated well by a Gibbs distribution. Given a set of
image measurements, they ﬁt the best Gibbs distribution using the maximum entropy principle 13,
which in essence chooses the least structured distribution consistent with the image measurements.
They then use the Kullback-Leibler divergence to select between diﬀerent models and sets of image
measurements. Maximum entropy ﬁts prevent model overﬁtting and choose the Gibbs distributions for
which the set of image measurements are suﬃcient statistics.
Another approach to density estimation works by evaluating the evidence . Let G represent an
index across the set of generative models we are considering. Then we select the best ﬁtting model by
maximizing the evidence p(G|I) = p(I|G)p(G), where p(I|G) =
SG p(I|SG, G)p(SG)dSG. Assuming we
have a lot of image data, the prior across models does not matter much and the decision is based on
p(I|G). Choosing models by maximizing the evidence naturally instantiates Occam’s Razor, i.e. models
with lots of parameters are penalized . Schwarz has found an asymptotic approximation to
log p(I|G) for well behaved priors which makes the penalty for the number of parameters of G explicit:
log p(I|G) ≃log p(I|G, ˆ
SG) −log N
Dim(G), where N is the number of training samples,
maximum likelihood estimate of the scene parameters and Dim(G) is the number of parameters for
the model G. A similar formula arises from the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle, which
through Shannon’s optimal coding theorem, is formally equivalent to MAP. While embodying Occam’s
Razor, evaluating the evidence works by choosing the model which is the best predictor of the data.
There have also been a few studies that try to directly learn a mapping from image measurements to
scene descriptions . However, these approaches are limited in requiring the availability of sample
pairs of scene and image data. While general methods could be used by the visual system for learning,
the visual system may employ quite impoverished models of the joint density. The key point is that
learning algorithms for both objective physical modeling or biological learning can be expressed in the
Bayesian language of pattern inference theory.
Testing models of human perception
In order for the pattern inference theory approach to be useful, we need to be able to construct predictive
theories of visual function which are amenable to experimental testing. While we have discussed the
elements of constructing Bayesian theories throughout the paper, it is important to distinguish the role
of the mathematical language from the elements of a theory of vision.
Pattern Inference Theories of Vision
What are Bayesian theories of vision? Bayesian theories, as opposed to other theories of vision (e.g
Gestalt), gain their particularity by expressing observer principles in terms of probabilities and cost
functions. Thus, these theories will involve explicit statements about the scene variables and image
measurements used, the prior probabilities on scene variables, the image formation and measurement
model assumed by the observer, and the relative costs assigned to potential outcomes in a task. We also
hope however, that a theory of perception will include a set of more fundamental and deep principles
akin to the laws of thermodynamics, also expressible in the same framework. The importance of such
13The Maximum Entropy Principle is a generalization of the symmetry principle in probability, and is also known as the
principle of insuﬃcient reason. For example, it says that one should assume a random variable is uniformly distributed
over a known range unless there is suﬃcient reason to assume otherwise.
principles for scientiﬁc economy cannot be underestimated. From the right ﬁrst principles, an inﬁnite
set of experimentally testable consequences can be derived, not all of which are testable. Instead, it
is enough to focus on testing the surprising consequences, which, when enough are veriﬁed, make it
possible to reliably predict perceptual performance in unstudied domains. Below we investigate some
candidate ﬁrst principles.
Past and recent work has built on the Bayesian perspective to advance a number of what we might call
“deep principles” applicable to human perception.
1) The visual system seeks codes which minimize redundancy in the input . This principle exists in various forms, such as MDL encoding, minimax entropy , principal components analysis 
and independent components analysis .
2) Given equally likely causes of an image, the visual system chooses the model with the least number
of assumptions. In this sense, quantitative versions of the Gestalt principle of simplicity (e.g. via MDL
realization of Occam’s razor) apply as a principle to resolve ambiguity . The pattern inference
theory distinctive is that it has the (yet to be obtained) goal of deriving the rules of simplicity from
density models based on ensembles of natural image (e.g. ).
3) The visual system actively acquires new information by maximizing the expected utility or minimizing
entropy of the information for the task . This principle has been applied to an ideal observer model
of human reading .
4) Perceptual decisions are conﬁdence-driven. This requires that computations take into account both
estimates and the degree of uncertainty in those estimates.
Evidence that human perception does
this comes from studies on cue integration , orientation from texture discussed above , motion
perception, discussed below , and visual motor control .
5) Perception’s model of the image measurement should be robust with respect to variations in the
secondary variables. We noted above that the general viewpoint principle is a consequence of viewpoint
being a secondary variable , and that ambiguity in depth from shadows can be resolved by treating
illumination direction as secondary.
6) The visual system predictively models its behavioral outcomes. Until recently, the Bayesian approach
to perception has been largely static; however, Bayesian techniques can be used to model both learning and time-variant processes .(Myth 4: Bayes lacks dynamics.) For example, the Kalman
ﬁlter provides a good account of kinematics of visual control of human reach . Consistent with
the probability computation theme of this chapter, the Kalman ﬁlter goes beyond estimates of central
tendency, and estimates both the mean and variance of control parameters.
7) The visual system performs ideal inference given its limitations in representing image data, but only
for a limited number of tasks . In the next section, we discuss using this principle to develop models
of ideal performance as a default hypotheses. It is essentially a statement that the visual system should
be optimally adapted to perform certain visual tasks relevant to the observer’s needs.
For Bayesian theory construction to be useful, we must show that the theories admit experimental
In the next section we discuss practical aspects of testing pattern theoretic hypotheses at
several levels of speciﬁcity. In particular, we return to principle (7).
Ideal observers and human scene inference
How do we formulate and test theories of human behavioral function within a pattern inference theory
framework? In psychophysical experiments, one can: a) test at the constraint level–what information
does human vision avail itself of?, or; b) test at the mechanism level–what neural subsystem can account
for performance? Pattern inference theory is of primary relevance to hypotheses testable at the former
level. Tests of human perception can be based on hypotheses regarding constraints contained in: the
two components of the generative model, 1) the prior p(S) and 2) the likelihood p(I|S); 3) the image
model p(I); or 4) the posterior p(S|I). A distinction based on the source of a constraint serves to clarify
the otherwise confusing idea of “cue” which muddles scene and image constraints . For example,
the “occlusion cue” is sometimes deﬁned in terms of “overlapping surfaces”, and sometimes as a “Tjunction” in the image contours. But surface occlusion is the causal source of a “T-junction”. (Myth 5:
Identifying “Bayesian constraints” provides no advantage over identifying traditional “cues”.)
1) The prior. The well-known “light from above” assumption in shape-from-shading is an example of
an hypothesis expressed solely in terms of a prior distribution on a scene variable, light source direction.
Given that primary lighting for most of human history has been the sun, a prior bias on lighting from
above is an example of a prediction which could be generated by a study of the natural distribution of
scene variables, which can be quantitatively documented using density estimation. A fruitful ﬁrst pass
could be a more widespread use of principal components analysis as a way of seeking economical density
models. Indeed, empirical measurements of the distribution of spectral reﬂectance functions of natural
surfaces have shown that the set of naturally occurring spectral reﬂectance functions can be well-modeled
as linear combinations of three basis functions . When restricted to natural illumination conditions,
this result supplies an especially simple interpretation of trichromacy: three spectral measurements are
usually enough to determine spectral reﬂectance. Earlier we noted research on prior models for facial
surfaces .
In a diﬀerent example, an observer’s assessment of the 3-D position of a moving
ball is aﬀected by moving cast shadow information. The observer’s data can be qualitatively described
in terms of a prior “stationary light source” constraint . The subjective biases in the perception
of shape from line contours have been studied by Mamassian and Landy . An interesting
problem for the future will be to relate these subjective priors to ones discovered objectively through
density estimation .
2) The likelihood term. The independent variables in a psychophysical experiment can be speciﬁed in
terms of the scene or image variables, or in the language of perceptual psychology, in terms of the
distal or the proximal stimulus. Even if one doesn’t have an ideal observer model, it is still possible
to manipulate the scene variables in the generative model to test hypotheses at these levels, if one has
some way to account for changes in performance due to changes in image information. For example,
object recognition must deal with variations in both viewpoint and illumination. View-based theories
of object recognition rest on experiments showing that human vision doesn’t compensate for all view
variations with equal facility . Scale changes are handled with less sensitivity to view familiarity
than either rotations in the image or rotations in depth. However, the degree to which the human visual
system is view-dependent will require developing ideal observer models for object recognition, because
part of performance variation due to viewpoint can be due to the informativeness of the viewpoint for
the recognition task. In fact, Liu et al. showed that human observers are more eﬃcient than
simple view-based algorithms at recognizing simple wire objects .
Object recognition must also compensate for illumination variations. The fact, mentioned above, that
under fairly general conditions, the space of images generated by an object under ﬁxed view is a cone in
image space makes predictions regarding how object recognition should generalize under illumination
change, as well as the discriminability of two objects with distinct illumination cones .
3) The image density. Given a model, p(I; Λ), of an image ensemble in a domain (i.e. natural image prior,
or more speciﬁc texture priors, such as “fur”), one can test how well the human visual system is “tuned”
to the statistical structure speciﬁed by the parameters Λ. An example of this approach is the ideal
observer analysis of human discrimination of Gaussian textures with 1/fα spatial frequency spectra .
Current theoretical work on non-Gaussian texture modeling (e.g. Minimax entropy discussed above) is
providing richer models of natural images that provide testable psychophysical hypotheses .
More domain-speciﬁc density models, e.g. using PCA, have been used to model face variation in the
image domain , and have motivated psychological theories .
4) The posterior. A full quantitative model (the grand challenge) requires tests at the level of the
posterior. A statistical theory of visual inference plays two roles, it normalizes and models perception.
An ideal observer model, which bases its performance on P(S|I), provides the benchmark to normalize
human performance relative to the information available for the task . The importance of this normative measure cannot be overstated. Without carefully assessing how the information changes across
experimental conditions, the mechanisms underlying changes in performance become nearly impossible
to determine. In fact, normalizing human performance with respect to the available information can
lead to the opposite conclusions from those based on the unnormalized performance .
But in what sense does an ideal observer serve a modeling function? The fact that perception enables
successful behavior has a non-trivial impact on the principles required to understand perception. In this
regard, pattern inference theory is sympathetic with one aspect of the ecological approach to perception,
namely that theories of visual perception cannot be built in isolation from functional visual tasks. If
this is indeed the case, our grand challenge is unavoidably grand. This raises a dilemma for scientiﬁc
methodology. If we have to worry about the large set of variables involved in normal perception, how
can we manage controlled experimental tests of the theory? We believe the answer is to use the ideal
observer as the default experimental hypothesis–in other words, ﬁrst test whether human vision utilizes
the information available for the task optimally. Of course, in general it won’t. However, because the
ideal starts oﬀ(at least in principle) with no free parameters, a sub-optimal theory can still achieve
economy through modiﬁcation of the ideal theory through the frugal introduction of free parameters.
Further, any parameters introduced should be related to some biologically (or ecologically) relevant
limitation on processing. This idea is very much in the spirit of sequential ideal observer analysis of
photon and biological limits to resolution . In the domain of surface perception, David Knill has
recently shown that human discrimination of surface slant improves with slant–a behavior which can
be predicted from an ideal observer analysis of the information .
As mentioned earlier, the true test of a quantitative framework such as pattern inference theory is its
ability to generate economical and predictive theories. A rather striking recent success story is Weiss
and Adelson’s Bayesian theory of motion perception in which they tackled the problem of combining
local motion measurements. Previously, distinct models (often with distinct hypothesized physiological
realizations) have been proposed for various classes of motion eﬀects. Weiss and Adelson were able
to account for a wide and diverse range of human perceptual results with only one free parameter,
the uncertainty in the local motion measurement .
By assuming that the visual system takes
into account the uncertainties in local motion measurements, rather than just the motion estimates
(i.e. conﬁdence-driven processing), and assuming simple priors for slower speeds and smooth velocity
ﬁelds, the MAP estimate from the resulting posterior modeled: the barber-pole eﬀect, the biases in
the direction and speed of moving plaids due to diﬀerences in component orientation and contrast, the
wagon-wheel eﬀect, non-rigid contour perception, as well as others.
A crucial aspect to the success of such a program is to choose an information processing task for which
the human visual system is well-suited. Our assumption is that if this is done, the ideal performance
will be a good ﬁrst-approximation to a model for human performance. This argument is similar to
those made with regard to adaptability in cognitive tasks . Pattern inference theory provides
the language to express experimentally testable theories in a way analogous to calculus being useful for
expressing quantitative theories in science generally. As such it is a mathematical theory, not a falsiﬁable
experimental theory (Myth 6: Bayesian theories are not falsiﬁable). However, pattern inference theory
provides the means to generate testable scientiﬁc theories of perception with few free parameters; such
theories should be more easily falsiﬁable than, for example connectionist theories with lots of free
parameters.
Does the brain compute probabilities?
Computing probabilities is not probabilistic computing.
Shortly before his death in 1957, John von Neumann wrote “The language of the brain is not the
language of mathematics” . He went on to predict that brain theory would eventually come to
resemble the physics of statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. His argument was based on the
apparent imprecision in neural pulse-train coding, rather than an underlying computational function
for stochastic processing elements. Nevertheless, Von Neumann would no doubt have been intrigued
by the algorithms, developed since, that do in fact rely on stochastic processing. But it is one thing
to say that brain processing is limited by neural noise, or that it uses noise to compute, and quite
another to state that the brain computes probabilities. An information processing system can compute
probabilities quite deterministically (see example below).
The main purpose of this chapter is to argue that the perceptual system must necessarily do statistical
inference, and thus compute probabilities. The degree of sophistication of such processes and the brain
mechanisms are open questions. For example, a standard assumption in vision has been that probability
computations are limited to computing central tendencies of distributions, which produce estimates of
quantities of interest for decisions. But this leads to a premature commitment by discarding the information about the uncertainty in the estimate. In addition to the empirical worked discussed earlier,
it has also been shown from work in Bayes nets that signiﬁcant improvements in computational convergence time are obtained when probabilities are propagated (e.g. ), thus preserving information
about the degree of uncertainty.
How could probability densities be represented in the brain?
Although Bayesian theories require the computation of probabilities, they do not necessarily require
probabilities to be explicitly computed. For example, the knowledge regarding probability densities
could be implicitly encoded in neural non-linearities and neural weights. For example, the form of the
photoreceptor transducer can be interpreted as the result of mapping a non-uniform distribution of
contrasts to a uniformly distributed response variable–i.e. histogram equalization . Knowledge of
∫r(x) s(x,θ1) dx
∫r(x) s(x,θn) dx
Figure 6: Computing probabilities in visual cortex. Probabilities can be computed across ‘labeled line’
maps of neurons. The diagram shows an example of how a set of linear receptive ﬁelds can compute a
posterior distribution. Assume the visual signal r(⃗x) can be decomposed into a sum of basis signals which
vary according to some parameter θ plus some gaussian image noise: r(⃗x) = 
i s(⃗x, θi)+N. For instance,
the image could be decomposed into a sum oriented Gabor patches. The sampled (unnormalized) posterior
probability of the parameter θ can be computed using an array of linear ﬁlters, each corresponding to a
particular value of θ. The inner product of the signal with the receptive ﬁeld produces the log likelihood
for the presence of the component s(⃗x, θi) The log prior probability and needed bias are lumped as the
additive constant B(θ), and the result is mapped from log likelihoods to probabilities by passing the
results through a point-wise accelerating exp() non-linearity.
the image probability density function is implicit in the photoreceptor in the sense that the density is
the derivative of its transducer function.14
At a higher level, for a classiﬁcation task the visual system need only deterministically map the image
data onto an appropriate decision variable space and then choose the category boundaries, neither of
which require probabilities to be explicitly computed.
On the other hand, the visual system may explicitly compute probabilities in terms of population codes
across a variable of interest. The basic idea is straightforward: the ﬁring rate of a labeled line code for
an image or scene variable is proportional to the posterior probability for the variable. Population codes
occur in the coding of motor planning for eye movements in superior colliculus and for reaching 
in motor cortex, and they have been proposed for the representation of sensory information such as a
population code for image velocities . Population codes hold the promise of being able to represent
probabilities for computation. For instance, the uncertainty can be represented as the entropy over the
ensemble or spread of activity across the population, and multiple values can be represented as multimodal distributions of activity. Probability information can be transmitted from one functional group
of neurons to the next by transforming the distributions between parameter spaces using the density
mapping theorem. In contrast, a system that performs “estimation propagation” would summarize the
population ﬁrst (e.g. mean or mode) into an estimate of state, and then only propagate the estimate.
14This is a consequence of the density mapping theorem: py(y) = 
δ(y −f(x))f −1(x)px(x)dx over each monotonic part
Of course, making discrete decisions is one of the main types of task discussed above, and at some point
the probability distribution could be collapsed to one decision variable.
The connection between population codes and probability distributions goes back to early work in
communication engineering, where it was shown that an array of linear ﬁlters could produce a sampled
log likelihood function . As an example, assume the input visual signal r(⃗x), is a sum of components
of interest, s(⃗x, θi), plus Gaussian noise N: r(⃗x) = 
i s(⃗x, θi) + N. The components could be oriented
edge segments, in which case s(⃗x, θi) are prototypical edge images, parametrized by the orientation θi.
Given the input signal r(⃗x), it is straightforward to show that the likelihood function for the signal
given an orientation is given by log p(r(⃗x)|θi) =
⃗x r(⃗x)s(⃗x, θi)d⃗x.
It is straightforward to convert
this likelihood into an unnormalized posterior probability by adding a constant equal to the log prior
probability θi, and running the outputs through an accelerating exponential non-linearity (see ﬁgure 6).
The limitation to sampled likelihood functions can be overcome by using “steerable ﬁlters” , which
allow the likelihood values between the samples to be computed as weighted sums of the samples.
Given the linear receptive ﬁelds in visual area V1, this simple example may have an analog in the
brain. The key idea is that a simple ﬁltering operation yields a neuron whose ﬁring rate can represent a
likelihood. For local image velocity estimation, Simoncelli showed how the posterior distribution
for local image velocity could be computed in terms of simple combinations of the outputs of spatial
and temporal derivatives of Gaussian ﬁlters. More recently, Schrater has shown how the likelihood
for image velocity could be computed by the weighted sum of a set of units similar to V1 complex cells.
Recently, several authors have proposed more general ways in which probability distributions could be
represented by a population of neurons . The basic idea is that a population of neurons
which are tuned to some parameter can act like a kernel density estimate, in which a probability
density is approximated as a combination of simpler densities. To illustrate, assume we have a posterior
distribution p(x|D) of some scene variable x (like position), given a set of image measurements D, and
a set of receptive ﬁelds fi(x). Then the ﬁring rates of the neurons will be given by the projection
x p(x|D)fi(x)dx. Unlike the previous examples, the ﬁring rate computed this way is not explicitly
proportional to a probability or likelihood. Instead, the posterior is coded implicitly by the ﬁring rates.
To explicitly compute the posterior from the ri, a ﬁxed set of interpolation kernels φi(x) is used to
invert the projection. Zemel et al. discuss two similar schemes to do the encoding and decoding
of posterior distributions from ﬁring rates. The number of ways of encoding posterior distributions by
similar methods is limitless, and whether or not the brain uses a particular scheme of this sort is an
intriguing problem for the future.
We have argued that probability computation by the visual system is a necessary consequence of nature’s visual signal patterns being inherently statistical. The origins of this perspective on perception
began with the development of signal detection theory, and in particular, with ideal observer analysis.
The basic operations of probability theory provide the means to model information for a task, and
decision theory provides the tools to model task requirements. The application of these tools to natural
pattern understanding falls in the domain of what we have referred to as pattern inference theory–the
combination of Bayesian decision theory and pattern theory. Pattern inference theory is clearly more
powerful than any speciﬁc experimentally testable theory of human perception. However, it provides a
suﬃciently rich language to develop theories of natural perceptual function. In addition to reviewing a
number of principles that fall out of the Bayesian formalism, we highlighted two relatively new principles: 1) A Bayesian principle of least commitment, in which one propagates probabilities, rather than
estimates, thereby weighting evidence according to reliability; 2) A Bayesian principle of modularity, in
which Bayes nets show how statistical structure and task determine modularity.
Acknowledgments
We thank Larry Maloney for providing exceptionally thoughtful and constructive criticisms on the ﬁrst
draft of this paper. This research was supported by NSF SBR-9631682 and NIH RO1 EY11507-001.