On the performance of diﬀerent
synchronization measures in real data: a case
study on EEG signals
R. Quian Quiroga†∗, A. Kraskov†, T. Kreuz†‡, and P. Grassberger†
†John von Neumann Institute for Computing,
Forschungszentrum J¨ulich GmbH,
D - 52425 J¨ulich, Germany
‡Department of Epileptology, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud Str. 25,
D - 53105 Bonn, Germany
May 28, 2018
PACS numbers: 05.45.Tp; 87.90.+y; 87.19.Nn
∗corresponding author
We study the synchronization between left and right hemisphere
rat EEG channels by using various synchronization measures, namely
non-linear interdependences, phase-synchronizations, mutual information, cross-correlation and the coherence function. In passing we show
a close relation between two recently proposed phase synchronization
measures and we extend the deﬁnition of one of them. In three typical
examples we observe that except mutual information, all these measures give a useful quantiﬁcation that is hard to be guessed beforehand
from the raw data. Despite their diﬀerences, results are qualitatively
the same. Therefore, we claim that the applied measures are valuable
for the study of synchronization in real data. Moreover, in the particular case of EEG signals their use as complementary variables could
be of clinical relevance.
Introduction
The concept of synchronization goes back to the observation of interactions
between two pendulum clocks by Huygens. Synchronization of oscillatory
systems has been widely studied but it was not until recently that synchronization between chaotic motions received attention. A ﬁrst push in this
direction was the observation of identical synchronization of chaotic systems
 . But more interesting has been the idea of a “generalized synchronization” relationship as a mapping between non-identical systems, and
the further proposal by Rulkov et al. of a topological method to quantify
it. The work of Rulkov and coworkers indeed triggered a number of studies
applying the concept of generalized synchronization to real data.
these applications is to the study of electroencephalographic (EEG) signals,
where synchronization phenomena have been increasingly recognized as a key
feature for establishing the communication between diﬀerent regions of the
brain , and pathological synchronization as a main mechanism responsible
of an epileptic seizure . Since many features of EEG signals cannot be
generated by linear models, it is generally argued that non-linear measures
are likely to give more information than the one obtained with conventional
linear approaches.
In a ﬁrst study dealing with EEG signals, Schiﬀand coworkers applied
a synchronization measure similar to the one deﬁned in to the study
of data from motoneurons within a spinal cord pool. More recently, nonlinear synchronization measures were used for the analysis of EEG data from
epileptic patients with the main goal of localizing the epileptogenic zone and
of predicting the seizure onset . These results, of course, have a clear
clinical relevance. Arnhold and coworkers proposed a robust measure (S),
a variant of which (H), already mentioned by these authors, has been studied
in detail in . These last two measures of interdependence, together with
a new measure (N) to be deﬁned, will be further studied in this paper.
The previous papers give convincing arguments in favor of using nonlinear interdependences, which in most cases were illustrated with examples
using chaotic toy models. However, it still remains an open question whether
this also holds true for real data. In this paper we therefore address the point
of whether non-linear measures give a relevant contribution to the study of
synchronization in electroencephalographic (EEG) signals . In particular,
we will show with three typical EEG examples (see Fig. 1) how non-linear
interdependence measures can disclose information diﬃcult to obtain by visual inspection. Although the data are EEG recordings from rats, their main
features are common to human EEG. Moreover, results should not be restricted to EEG data and should also be valuable to study synchronization
of other signals. For comparison purposes, we will also study phase synchronization measures as deﬁned from the Hilbert transform and from the
Wavelet transform , which had been recently applied to the study of EEG
signals . Moreover, we will also compare these results with the
ones obtained with more conventional measures of synchronization, such as
the cross-correlation, the coherence function and the mutual information.
The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we deﬁne the synchronization measures to be used. In particular, in section 2.1 we deﬁne the linear
cross-correlation and the coherence function, while in section 2.2 we describe
three recently proposed measures of non-linear interdependence. The mutual
information is deﬁned in section 2.3, whereas section 2.4 is dedicated to the
description of phase synchronization measures with the phases deﬁned from
a Hilbert transform. Very close to these last measures are the ones described
in section 2.5 but in this case the phases are deﬁned from the Wavelet transform. Finally in section 2.6 we show the relation between these two phase
synchronization approaches. Details of the data sets to be analyzed are disclosed in section 3. In section 4 we describe the results obtained by applying
the diﬀerent synchronization measures to these data sets. Finally in section
5 we present the conclusions.
Synchronization measures
In the following, unless when further speciﬁed, we shall use the notion of
synchronization in a very loose sense. Thus it is more or less synonymous
with interdependence or (strong) correlation.
Linear measures of synchronization
Let us suppose we have two simultaneously measured discrete univariate time
series xn and yn, n = 1, . . . , N. The most commonly used measure of their
synchronization is the cross-correlation function deﬁned as:
) · (yi+τ −¯y
where ¯x and σx denote mean and variance, and τ is a time lag. The crosscorrelation gives a measure of the linear synchronization between x and y.
Its absolute value ranges from zero (no synchronization) to one (maximum
synchronization) and it is symmetric: cxy(τ) = cyx(τ).
The sample cross-spectrum is deﬁned as the Fourier transform of the
cross-correlation or, via the Wiener-Khinchin theorem, as:
Cxy(ω) = (Fx)(ω) · (Fy)∗(ω)
where (Fx) is the Fourier transform of x, ω are the discrete frequencies
( −N/2 < ω < N/2) and ∗means complex conjugation. For details of the
implementation, see sec. 4.1. The cross-spectrum is a complex number whose
normalized amplitude
is called the coherence function and gives a measure of the linear synchronization between x and y as a function of the frequency ω. This measure
is very useful when synchronization is limited to some particular frequency
band, as it is usually the case in EEG signals (see for a review).
Non-linear interdependences
From time series measured in two systems X and Y, let us reconstruct delay
vectors xn = (xn, . . . , xn−(m−1)τ) and yn = (yn, . . . , yn−(m−1)τ), where
n = 1, . . . N, m is the embedding dimension and τ denotes the time lag. Let
rn,j and sn,j, j = 1, . . . , k, denote the time indices of the k nearest neighbors
of xn and yn, respectively.
For each xn, the squared mean Euclidean distance to its k neighbors is
and the Y-conditioned squared mean Euclidean distance is deﬁned by replacing the nearest neighbors by the equal time partners of the closest neighbors
of yn see ﬁg. 2,
n (X|Y) = 1
If the point cloud {xn} has an average squared radius R(X) = 1
n=1 R(N−1)
n (X|Y) ≈R(k)
n (X) ≪R(X) if the systems are strongly correlated,
while R(k)
n (X|Y) ≈R(X) ≫R(k)(X) if they are independent. Accordingly,
we can deﬁne an interdependence measure S(k)(X|Y) as
S(k)(X|Y) = 1
Since R(k)
n (X|Y) ≥R(k)
n (X) by construction, we have
0 < S(k)(X|Y) ≤1.
Low values of S(k)(X|Y) indicate independence between X and Y, while high
values indicate synchronization (reaching maximum when S(k)(X|Y) →1).
Following ref. we deﬁne another non-linear interdependence measure H(k)(X|Y) as
H(k)(X|Y) = 1
This is zero if X and Y are completely independent, while it is positive if
nearness in Y implies also nearness in X for equal time partners. It would be
negative if close pairs in Y would correspond mainly to distant pairs in X.
This is very unlikely but not impossible. Therefore, H(k)(X|Y) = 0 suggests
that X and Y are independent, but does not prove it. This is one main
diﬀerence between H(k)(X|Y) and the mutual information, to be deﬁned in
sec. 2.3. The latter is strictly positive whenever X and Y are not completely
independent. As a consequence, mutual information is quadratic in the correlation P(X, Y) −P(X)P(Y) for weak correlations (P are here probability
distributions), while H(k)(X|Y) is linear. Thus H(k)(X|Y) is more sensitive
to weak dependences which might make it useful in applications. Also, it
should be easier to estimate than mutual informations which are notoriously
hard to estimate reliably as we will see later.
In a previous study with coupled chaotic systems , H was more robust
against noise and easier to interpret than S, but with the drawback that it
is not normalized. Therefore, we propose a new measure N(X|Y) using also
a diﬀerent way of averaging,
N(k)(X|Y) = 1
Rn(X) −R(k)
which is normalized (but as in the case of H, it can be slightly negative) and
in principle more robust than S.
The opposite interdependences S(Y|X), H(Y|X) and N(Y|X) are de-
ﬁned in complete analogy and they are in general not equal to S(X|Y),
H(X|Y) and N(Y|X), respectively.
The asymmetry of S, H and N is
the main advantage over other non-linear measures such as the mutual information and the phase synchronizations deﬁned in sections 2.4 and 2.5.
This asymmetry can give information about driver-response relationships
 , but can also reﬂect the diﬀerent dynamical properties of each
data . To address this point we will compare results with synchronization values obtained from time shifted signals used as surrogates.
Figure 2 illustrates the idea of how the non-linear interdependence measures work. Let us consider a Lorenz and a Roessler system that are independent (upper case, no coupling) and a second case with the Roessler
driving the Lorenz via a strong coupling (lower plot). For a detailed study of
synchronization between these systems refer to . Given a neighborhood
in one of the attractors, we see how this neighborhood maps in the other.
If the point cloud is still a small neighborhood (lower plot), the systems are
synchronized. On the other hand, if the points are spread over the attractor
(upper plot), the systems are independent. The three measures described S,
H and N, are just diﬀerent ways of normalizing these ratio of distances.
Mutual Information
The previous measures of synchronization were based on similarities in the
time and frequency domain (sec. 2.1) or on similarities in a phase space (sec.
2.2). In this section we describe an approach to measure synchronization by
means of information-theoretic concepts. Let us suppose we have a discrete
random variable X with M possible outcomes X1, . . . , XM, obtained e.g. by a
partition of X into M bins. Each outcome has a probability pi, i = 1, . . . , M,
with pi ≥0 ∀i and P pi = 1. A ﬁrst estimate is to consider pi = ni/N,
where ni is the number of occurrences of Xi after N samples. From this set
of probabilities the Shannon entropy is deﬁned as:
The Shannon entropy is positive and measures the information content of
X, in bits, if the logarithm is taken with base 2. When ﬁnite samples N are
considered, the naive deﬁnition pi = ni/N may not be appropriate. Grassberger introduced a series of correction terms, which are asymptotic in
1/N. The ﬁrst and most important term essentially gives
N (log N −Ψ(ni))
with Ψ(x) = d log Γ(x)/dx ≈log x −1/2x for large x.
Let us now suppose we have a second discrete random variable Y , whose
degree of synchronization with X we want to measure. The joint entropy is
deﬁned as:
I(X, Y ) = −
is the joint probability of X = Xi and Y = Yj. If the systems
are independent we have pXY
j and then, I(X, Y ) = I(X) + I(Y ).
Thus, the mutual information between X and Y is deﬁned as
MI(X, Y ) = I(X) + I(Y ) −I(X, Y )
which indicates the amount of information of X we obtain by knowing Y
and vice versa. If X and Y are independent, MI(X, Y ) = 0 and otherwise,
it will take positive values with a maximum of MI(X, X) = I(X) for identical signals. Note also that MI is symmetric, i.e. MI(X, Y ) = MI(Y, X).
Schreiber extended the concept of MI and deﬁned a transfer entropy ,
which has the main advantage of being asymmetric and can in principle distinguish driver-response relationships. Another asymmetric measure based
on the MI has been proposed by Palus .
Mutual information can also be regarded as a Kullback-Leibler entropy
 , which is an entropy measure of the similarity between two probability
distributions. To illustrate this, we rewrite eq.(13) in the form
MI(X, Y ) =
Then, considering a probability distribution qXY
j (which is the
correct probability distribution if the systems are independent), eq. (14) is a
Kullback-Leibler entropy and measures the diﬀerence between the probability
distributions pXY
 . In other words, MI(X, Y ) measures how
diﬀerent is the true joint probability distribution pXY
from another in which
independence between X and Y is assumed.
We previously mentioned that each pi can be obtained by a partition of
X. In our case, X is the space of time-delay vectors xn as in section 2.2. In
principle, we can calculate pi by box counting. But it was shown in 
that the Shannon entropies (eq. (10)) can be calculated from the ﬁrst order
correlation integral C1(X, δ), which gives more accurate results .
Thus, instead of calculating probabilities within boxes of a ﬁxed grid with
sidelength δ, we compute probabilities within neighborhoods of a certain
radius δ/2 around each point . Therefore we have:
I(X; δ) = −1
with pi ≃ni
N , ni = P
j Θ(δ/2 −∥xi −xj∥) and N the number of embedding
vectors. In this case, we can also introduce ﬁnite sample corrections which
I(X; δ) = −1
(Ψ(ni + 1) −log N)
Phase synchronization from the Hilbert Transform
Given a univariate measurement x(t) (with continuous t) we ﬁrst deﬁne the
analytic signal Zx(t) = x(t) + i ˜x(t) = AH
x (t), where ˜x(t) is the Hilbert
Transform of x(t) ,
˜x(t) ≡(Hx)(t) = 1
t −t′ dt′ ,
(P.V. means Cauchy principal value). Analogously, we deﬁne AH
from y(t)1. We say that the x and y are n : m synchronized, if the (n, m)
phase diﬀerence of their analytic signals, φH
xy(t) ≡nφH
x (t) −mφH
y (t), with
1In the actual implementation, where x(t) and y(t) are only known at discrete times,
we calculate ˜xn from the Fourier transform, as described in .
n, m some integers, remains bounded for all t.
Thus, we deﬁne a phase
synchronization index as 
γH ≡|⟨eiφH
xy(t)⟩t| =
t + ⟨sin φH
(brackets denote average over time). By construction, γH will be zero if the
phases are not synchronized at all and will be one when the phase diﬀerence
is constant (perfect synchronization). The key feature of γH is that it is only
sensitive to phases, irrespective of the amplitude of each signal. This feature
has been illustrated in and following papers (see ) with bidirectionally coupled R¨ossler systems. Another important feature of γH is that it is
parameter free. However, if the signals to be analyzed have a broadband or
a multimodal spectrum, then the deﬁnition of the phase can be troublesome
and pre-ﬁltering of the signals might be necessary. Of course, it should be
checked that the ﬁlter to be used does not introduce phase distortions.
Tass and coworkers deﬁned another phase synchronization measure
from the Shannon entropy of the distribution of φH
xy(t). The range of φ′ =
xy(mod, 2π) is ﬁrst divided into M bins. Let pk be the probability that φ′
is in the bin k at any random time. Then,
γH−Sh = Smax −S
pk · ln pk
and Smax = ln M. It ranges from zero for an uniform distribution of φH
one if the distribution is a delta function. The advantage over γH is that γH
can underestimate phase synchronizations when the distribution of φH
more than one peak. This corresponds to the case where the phase diﬀerence
remains fairly stable but occasionally “jumps” between diﬀerent values .
Although the signals are synchronized (except at the times of the jumps),
the phases φH
xy(t) can cancel in the time average of eq.(18), thus giving a
low γH 2. We also calculated another quantiﬁcation proposed in deﬁned
from conditional probabilities between φH
x (t) and φH
y (t), but results were very
similar to those obtained with γH and will be not further reported.
Phase synchronization from the Wavelet Transform
Another phase synchronization measure deﬁned from the Wavelet Transform
(γW) has been recently introduced by Lachaux et al. . It is very similar
to γH, with the only diﬀerence that the phases are calculated by convolving
each signal with a complex wavelet function Ψ(t) 
Ψ(t) = (eiω0t −e−ω2
0σ2/2) · e−t2/2σ2 ,
where w0 is the center frequency of the wavelet and σ determines its rate of
decay (and by the uncertainty principle, its frequency span)3.
The convolution of x(t) and y(t) with Ψ(t) gives two complex time series
of wavelet coeﬃcients
Wx(t) = (Ψ ◦x)(t) =
Ψ(t′) x(t′ −t) dt′ = AW
x (t) · eiφW
2 A multimodal distribution of the phases can also appear if we look e.g. for a 1 : 1
synchronization but the real relationship is 1 : 2.
3Instead of eq.(20), the authors of used a Morlet wavelet i.e. Ψ(t) = eiω0t ·
e−t2/2σ2, which satisﬁes the zero mean admissibility condition of a wavelet only for large
σ. Since in our case we will use a low σ (i.e. a Ψ with few signiﬁcant oscillations, see
sect.2.5), an additional negative term is introduced. When σ is small, disregarding this
term can introduce spurious eﬀects, especially if the signal to be analyzed has non-zero
mean or low frequency components. We do not need a normalization term in eq. (20)
because we will be interested only in phases.
(Wy(t) is deﬁned in the same way from y(t)) from which we can again calculate the phase diﬀerences φW
y (t) and deﬁne a phase synchronization factor (γW) as in eq. (18), or from the Shannon entropy of the
distribution of φW
xy(t) (γW−Sh) as in eq.(19).
The main diﬀerence with the measures deﬁned by using the Hilbert transform is that a central frequency ω0 and a width σ for the wavelet function
should be chosen, and therefore γW and γW−Sh will be sensitive only to phase
synchronizations in a certain frequency band. In particular, DeShazer et.
 recently analyzed phase synchronization in coupled laser systems
deﬁning the phases both from a Gabor (similar to eq.(20)) and a Hilbert
transform. In the ﬁrst case they distinguished a phase synchronization at
140 Hz, something not seen when using the Hilbert transform. The diﬀerence between both approaches, of course, does not imply that one measure
is superior to the other. There are cases in which one would like to restrict
the analysis to a certain frequency band and other cases in which one would
prefer to have a method that is parameter free, as γH. In fact, in section 2.6
we will show that there is a close relation between both methods.
Relation between the phase synchronization measures
In sections 2.4 we already mentioned that in some cases it might be necessary to pre-ﬁlter the signals before applying the Hilbert Transform, while
for the Wavelet Transform a center frequency (and frequency width) should
be chosen beforehand. In fact, the phases deﬁned by the complex wavelet
transform φW
x and by the Hilbert transform φH
x are closely related. Indeed,
the real part of Wx(t) can be considered as a band-pass ﬁltered signal. From
it, we can form the Hilbert transform
˜Wx(t) = (H Re[Wx] )(t) ,
and a phase by
Re[Wx](t) + i ˜Wx(t) = AH
Re[Wx](t) · eiφH
Re[Wx](t).
Let us now recall the deﬁnition of analytic signals. A complex function g(t)
is an analytic signal if it satisﬁes (Fg)(ω) = 0 ∀ω < 0 . If g is analytic,
then Im[g(t)] = ˜g(t) ≡(H Re[g])(t). If a wavelet function Ψ is analytic,
then Wx(t) = (Ψ ◦x)(t) is also analytic4. In this case ˜Wx(t) ≡Im[Wx(t)]
Re[Wx](t) ≡φW
x (t), as deﬁned in eq.(21). Since the corrected Morlet
wavelet of eq.(20) is approximately analytic5 we have φH
Re[Wx](t) ∼= φW
very good approximation. Since as we mentioned, Wx(t) acts as a band pass
ﬁlter of x(t), then φH
x (t) ∼= φW
x (t) as long as for the ﬁrst one the signal is
pre-ﬁltered with the same wavelet function used for calculating the latter.
It is important to remark that the previous result is not limited to complex Morlet wavelets and can be extended to other wavelet functions. In
particular, from a real wavelet function Ψ(t) we can construct an analytic
signal by using the Hilbert transform, i.e. Ψ′(t) ≡Ψ(t) + i (HΨ)(t), which
satisﬁes that Wx(t) = (Ψ′ ◦x)(t) is analytic. Then, from Wx(t) we can de-
ﬁne a phase and e.g. study the phase synchronization with another signal
y(t). The important advantage is that we have the freedom of deﬁning the
phase from a particular wavelet function, chosen from a dictionary of available wavelets according to the signal to be studied. This can be interesting
4 Taking the Fourier Transform we get (F Wx)(ω) = (F (Ψ ◦x)(t))(ω) = (FΨ)(ω) ·
(Fx)(ω) = 0
∀ω < 0, where we used the Fourier convolution theorem and that Ψ is
5 The Morlet wavelet tends to the analytic signal for large ω0 and low σ .
in cases in which deﬁning a phase from the Hilbert transform is troublesome
or if conventional ﬁlters are not well suited.
Details of the data
We will analyze the synchronization between two EEG channels in three
diﬀerent data sets .
The EEG signals were obtained from electrodes
placed on the left and right frontal cortex of male adult WAG/Rij rats (a
genetic model for human absence epilepsy) . Both signals were referenced
to an electrode placed at the cerebellum, they were ﬁltered between 1-100
Hz and digitized at 200 Hz.
In a previous study , the main objective of this set up was to study
changes in synchronization after unilateral lesions with ibothenic acid in the
rostral pole of the reticular thalamic nucleus. To achieve this, synchronization was ﬁrst assessed visually by looking for the simultaneous appearance
of spike discharges6 and then it was further quantiﬁed by calculating both
a linear cross-correlation and the non-linear interdependence measure H de-
ﬁned in the previous section. For the quantitative analysis, for each rat and
condition, 10 data segments pre- and 10 segments post-lesion were analyzed,
ﬁve of these segments corresponding to normal EEGs and the other ﬁve containing spike discharges. The length of each data segment was 5 seconds
(i.e. 1000 data points), this being the largest length in which the signals containing spikes could be visually judged as stationary. In all 7 rats studied,
it was found that synchronization signiﬁcantly decreased after the lesions in
the reticular thalamic nucleus . Moreover, changes shown with the non-
6More properly, “spike-wave discharges” but for simplicity we will call them spikes in
the remaining of the paper.
linear synchronization H were more pronounced than those found with the
cross-correlation. In the following section we will analyze in detail three of
these EEG segments.
Synchronization in the EEG data
In Fig.1 we show the right and left channels of three of the (pre-lesion)
EEG signals described in the previous section. The ﬁrst case (example A)
corresponds to a normal EEG, and in the remaining two cases the signals have
spike discharges (examples B and C). Spikes usually appear due to a local
synchronization of neurons in the neighborhood of the electrode at which
they are recorded. Since epilepsy is related to an abnormal synchronization
in the brain, spikes are usually considered as a landmark of epileptic activity.
A localized appearance of spikes can delimit a zone with abnormal discharges
(but this will not necessarily be the epileptic focus). On the contrary, if spikes
are observed over the whole set of electrodes, abnormal synchronization is
said to be global. This concept seems to be obvious, but it has some subtleties
as we will see in the following. Let us analyze examples B and C. In both
cases we see spikes at the left and right electrodes. As we said, this will point
towards a global synchronization behavior. However, a more detailed analysis
shows that the spikes of example B are well synchronized and in example C
they are not. Indeed, in example C the spikes have slightly diﬀerent time lags
between the right and left channels. This is of course not easily seen in a ﬁrst
sight. For making clear this point, we picked up the spikes of examples B and
C and we noted the times of their maximum for the right and left channels.
We then calculated the lag between the spikes in the two channels and its
standard deviation with time. For the case B, the lag was very small and
stable, mainly between -5 to 5 ms (i.e. of the order of the sampling rate) and
the standard deviation was of 4.7 ms. For the case C, the lag was much more
unstable and covered a larger range (between -20 to 50ms). In this last case
the standard deviation was of 14.9 ms. This shows that in example B the
simultaneous appearance of spikes is correlated with a global synchronization,
while in example C bilateral spikes are not synchronized (i.e. we have local
synchronization for both channels, but no global synchronization). In the
case of example A, due to its random-like appearance it is diﬃcult to estimate
the level of synchronization by visual inspection. However, we can already
observe some patterns appearing simultaneously in both the left and right
channels, thus showing some degree of interdependence.
Summarizing, we may say that example B seems the most “ordered”
and synchronized. Among the other two examples, A looks deﬁnitely more
disordered than C, but a closer look raises doubts and a formal analysis is
asked for.
Linear measures
The second column of Table 1 shows the zero lag cross-correlation values
for the three examples.
As stated in eq.(1), the calculation of the crosscorrelation requires a normalization of the data. We note that the tendency is
in agreement with what we expect from the arguments of the previous section
(i.e. B > A > C). However, the diﬀerence between cases A and B is relatively
small. To get more insight, in Fig.3 we plot the cross-correlation as a function
of time shifts between the two channels. For the shifted versions, we used
periodic boundary conditions. For large enough shifts, the synchronization
will in principle be lost and the values obtained will give an estimation of
the zero synchronization level, which we will call background level, and its
ﬂuctuation (i.e. we use the shifted versions as surrogates). We observe that
the synchronization drops to a background level for shifts larger than 50 data
points (i.e. 250ms). The average of this background level is zero, but the
ﬂuctuations are quite large. Taking these ﬂuctuations as an estimation of
the error, we see that cross-correlation does not distinguish between cases A
We also note that the cross-correlation shows oscillations when shifting,
most clearly in case B. These oscillations have the same period of the spikes
and might put into doubt the idea of considering the shifted signals as surrogates. We therefore re-calculated the cross-correlation but taking the left
channel signals from other data segments of the same rat (for each rat we
had 5 segments with spikes and 5 of normal EEG before the lesions in the
thalamus) and corresponding to the same condition (pre-lesion, normal EEG
for example A and EEG with spikes for examples B and C). In all cases,
the background level and its ﬂuctuations were of the order of those shown in
ﬁg.3. This indicates that shifted signals can be used as surrogates in spite of
the oscillations.
Figure 4 shows the spectral estimates for the three examples. The two
upper plots correspond to the power spectra of the right and left channels and
the lower plot to the corresponding coherence function (3). Each spectrum
(Cxx, Cyy and Cxy) was estimated using the Welch technique7, i.e. the data is
divided into M segments and then Cxx = PM
i=1 Cxx,i. We used half overlapped
segments of 128 data points tapered with a Hamming window.
A has both in the right and left channels a power spectrum resembling a
power law distribution, with its main activity concentrated between 1 −
7without this segmentation technique, the coherence function (eq.(3)) would be always
equal to one.
10Hz. The coherence function shows a signiﬁcant interaction for this range
of frequencies.
Examples B and C show a more localized distribution in
the power spectrum.
In both examples and for both channels there is a
peak between 7 −10Hz and a harmonic at about 15Hz. In agreement with
previously reported results , these peaks correspond to the spikes observed
We can already see from the power spectra that the matching
between right and left channels in example B is much clearer than in example
C. This is correlated with the larger coherence values of example B, showing
a signiﬁcant synchronization for almost the whole frequency range. On the
other hand, the coherence is much lower for example C and it seems to be
signiﬁcant only for low frequencies (up to 6Hz). As in the case of the crosscorrelation, the coherence function for ω ≤11Hz does not distinguish well
between examples A and B. There is only a diﬀerence for frequencies larger
than 11Hz, but this just reﬂects the lack of activity in this frequency range
for example A, whereas in example B it corresponds to the synchronization
between the high frequency harmonics of the spikes. In the third column of
Table 1 we summarize the results obtained with the coherence function. The
values shown correspond to a frequency of 9Hz, the main frequency of the
spikes in examples B and C.
Non-linear interdependences
For calculating the non-linear interdependence measures S, H and N between
left and right electrodes we ﬁrst reconstruct the state spaces of each signal
using a time lag τ = 2 and an embedding dimension m = 10. We chose
this time lag in order to focus on frequencies lower than 50Hz (i.e. half the
Nyquist frequency) and the choice of the embedding dimension was in order
to have the length of the embedding vectors about the length of the spikes.
We further chose k = 10 nearest neighbors and a Theiler correction for temporal correlations of T = 50. These parameters were chosen heuristically
in order to maximize the sensitivity to the underlying synchronizations, but
results were robust against changes of them. Table 1 summarizes the results for the three examples. We will ﬁrst discuss results with the non-linear
measures H and N. For both measures, example B has the highest synchronization due to the presence of phase-locked spike discharges and example
C has a much smaller value. The synchronization of example A is between
these values. Again, it is interesting to remark that the non-linear interdependence measures show the random looking signal of example A to be more
synchronized than the one with spikes of example C but less than the one in
B, something surprising at a ﬁrst sight, and not clearly following from the
cross-correlation or the coherence as shown in section 4.1.
As done for the cross-correlation, in Fig.5 we also plot the two non-linear
synchronizations H(R|L), N(R|L) and H(L|R), N(L|R) as a function of
time shifts between the two channels. Again, the synchronization drops to a
background level for shifts larger than 50 data points (i.e. 250ms) and the
background level is about zero. But in the case of H and N we observe that
the ﬂuctuations are much smaller than those for the cross-correlation. In
fact, with H and N the synchronization levels of the three cases are clearly
separated, while the cross-correlation does not distinguish between cases A
and B. However, even though we expect example B to be the most ordered
and synchronized of all (see sec. 4), we do not have objective means for
claiming that the diﬀerence between examples A and B is signiﬁcant. So, the
fact that non-linear measures are able to separate the three examples might
imply a higher sensitivity of these measures in comparison with the linear
measures, but it does not prove it. We also observe some asymmetries in
H and N, most pronounced in case C. This might suggest that one of the
signals drives the other (i.e. the focus is on one side). However, in all cases
this is of the order of the asymmetries seen with the shifted signals, thus not
signiﬁcant.
The case for the synchronization measure S is quite diﬀerent. As seen in
Fig.5, for examples B and C there is a clear asymmetry between right and
left channels. In contrary to H and N, this asymmetry remains even for large
time shifts between the two channels. Moreover, the background level for the
three examples is between 0.1−0.2 and not zero as with H. Thus, the asymmetries observed in examples B and C reﬂect more the individual properties
of each channel rather than a synchronization phenomenon8. Nevertheless,
H and N were clearly more robust in this respect.
Again, in order to check for the validity of the shifted signals as surrogates,
we re-calculated H, N and S but taking the left channel signals from other
data segments. As in the case of the cross-correlation, the background level
and its ﬂuctuations were of the order of those shown in ﬁg.5.
Hilbert phase synchronization
Prior to the estimation of the phase synchronization measures, each set of
data was de-meaned. No further ﬁltering was applied. Figure 6 shows the
time evolution of the phases (upper plot) and their distribution (middle plots)
for the three examples. From the time evolution of the phases we can already
see that the phase of example B is clearly more stable than the other two
examples (except in the last half second, as we will detail later). Examples
8As pointed out in , precisely such an asymmetry is expected if otherwise equal
systems are coupled asymmetrically. Thus, if we expect both subsystems a priori to have
the same complexity, the asymmetry of S is a hint to an asymmetric coupling.
A and C are not so easily diﬀerentiated, but in the middle plots we see that
the phase distribution of A is more localized than the one of C. The values
of γH, indicated in Table 1, are in agreement with these observations and
with the general tendency observed with the other synchronization measures
(B > A > C). The phase synchronization index deﬁned from the Shannon
entropy (γH−Sh, deﬁned in eq.(19)) shows qualitatively similar results (see
Since by applying the Hilbert Transform we can calculate an ‘instantaneous phase’ of the signals, we expect to achieve a very good time resolution
with the phase synchronization measures derived from them. In the lowest
plot of Fig. 6 we show the time evolution of γH (the plot for γW−Sh was
qualitatively similar).
Each point is calculated for a window of 100 data
points. In the ﬁrst 3 seconds we observe relatively stable synchronization
values for cases A and B. For the example C we observe a larger variability due to a progressive phase desynchronization with a phase reentrainment
at about second 2.5. For all the examples, synchronization levels oscillate
around the average values noted in Table 1. After the third second the situation changes. Example C becomes more synchronized than the other two
examples and example B gets more desynchronized in the last half a second.
This is in agreement with what we see in the original signals in Fig.1, where
it would have been hard to discern at a ﬁrst sight by visual inspection. The
possibility to follow phase synchronization in time is in fact one advantage
over the non-linear interdependences, where a large number of data points is
required for reasonably stable results.
Wavelet phase synchronization
In this case, for calculating the phase of each signal we used a corrected
Morlet wavelet (eq.(20)) with w0 between 1 and 30 Hz and σ = n/6ω0,
where n is the number of signiﬁcant oscillations of the wavelet function at
the 1% level. We tested diﬀerent values of n but in the following results with
n = 1 and n = 3 will be shown. Larger values of n led to a very bad time
resolution as we detail later. We used zero padding border conditions and
varied ω0 at 1 Hz intervals.
The phase diﬀerence plots (at 10Hz) were indeed very similar to those
shown in Fig.6 and will not be discussed further. Figure 7 shows the phase
synchronization values γW (left plots) and γW−Sh (right plots) calculated with
a wavelet function containing 1 signiﬁcant oscillation (n = 1; upper plots)
and 3 signiﬁcant oscillations (n = 3; lower plots). The values reported in
Table 1 correspond to those obtained with n = 1 at a frequency of 10Hz (the
frequency of the spikes in examples B and C, but results are qualitatively the
same between 5 −15Hz). These results are very similar to those obtained
with the Hilbert transform and show the same tendency (i.e. B > A > C).
However, we also note that synchronization values are a bit larger than the
ones of γH and γH−Sh. As already shown in section 2.6, the diﬀerence is due to
the frequency band selectivity of γW and γW−Sh. We therefore expect that a
pre-ﬁltering of the signals will increase the synchronization values calculated
by using the Hilbert Transform.
With n = 1 the three cases are well diﬀerentiated both by γW−Sh and
γW. With n = 3 the diﬀerences between the synchronization levels of examples A and B is less clear for γW and γW−Sh. This is due to the decrease in
time resolution when increasing the number of signiﬁcant oscillations of the
mother function. Clearly, for the examples studied, n = 1 had the best per-
formance (for n > 3 results get worse than for n = 3). Notice the similarity
between the lower plots for n = 3, i.e. the ones with less resolution, with the
coherence plots shown in Fig. 4. This supports the usefulness of the phase
synchronization measures deﬁned from the Wavelet Transform in comparison
with traditional approaches. Finally, we should also remark that, as shown
in section 2.6, we are not limited to use Morlet wavelets, but we can rather
choose between several wavelet functions depending on the application.
Mutual information
Let us ﬁnally analyze the results obtained with mutual information for the
three EEG signals. For its calculation we used eq. (13) with each Shannon
entropy calculated by means of the correlation sum (using maximum norm)
and the ﬁnite samples correction of eq. (16). After each data set was normalized, for embedding the data we used a time lag τ = 2 and embedding
dimensions ranging from m = 1 (no embedding) to m = 50. We further used
a Theiler correction of 10 data points and for calculating the correlation
sum we varied the radius δ from 0.01 to 0.5 in steps of 0.01. In ﬁgure 8
we show the results for m = 1, 2, 3, 4, the results for larger m had a similar
tendency (see below). The diﬃcult point when calculating MI is to have
a good estimation of the joint probabilities pXY
(see eq.(12)). These joint
probabilities involve a search of neighbors in a 2m-dimensional embedding
space, and therefore it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd enough neighbors and get a good
statistic for large m. We expect this restriction to be more relevant in the
signals with spikes, due to their inhomogeneous distribution in state space.
In line with the previous argument, due to the small number of data points
we could not get robust estimates of synchronization in the three examples
As seen in Fig. 8, the answer to the question of which signal
is more and which is less synchronized dramatically depends on the choice
of m and δ. We observe the same tendency as with the previous measures
(B > A > C) only for m = 1 and δ > 0.15.
All previous analysis done in this paper show clear evidence that example
B has the highest synchronization. For m = 1 this is the case for δ > 0.05,
for m = 2 it occurs for δ > 0.2, for m = 3 at δ > 0.45 and for m = 4 it
does not occur for the range of δ shown. In fact, there is a crossing between
the synchronization values of examples A and B, that takes place at larger
δ for larger m. This simply reﬂects the impossibility of ﬁnding neighbors in
the 2m-dimensional state space for small δ and/or large m. As mentioned
before, we expect this eﬀect to be less restrictive for the homogeneous distribution of example A. This explains why example A always shows the highest
synchronization for small δ.
Conclusions
We applied several linear and non-linear measures of synchronization to three
typical EEG signals.
Besides mutual information, which was not robust
due to the low number of data points, all these measures gave a similar
tendency in the synchronization levels. A similar analysis would have been
impossible by visual inspection. Moreover, in one case with bilateral spikes,
synchronization was much lower than expected at a ﬁrst sight. Therefore,
we claim that the quantiﬁcation of synchronization between diﬀerent EEG
signals can complement the conventional visual analysis and can even be of
clinical value. In particular, this is very important for the study of epilepsy
 and for the study of brain processes involving a synchronous
activation of diﬀerent areas or structures in the brain.
In the last years, mainly two types of non-linear synchronization measures were proposed, namely, the ones based on phase relationships (phase
synchronization) and the ones based on non-linear interdependences (generalized synchronization). It is interesting to remark that in our study with
real data these measures gave similar results, despite their diﬀerent deﬁnitions and their sensitivity to diﬀerent characteristics of the signals. We also
show a close similarity between phase synchronization measures based on the
Hilbert and on the Wavelet Transform. In the particular case of the last one,
we generalize its deﬁnition to diﬀerent wavelet functions that will be more
or less suitable according to the problem under investigation.
We validated the results obtained with the new non-linear measures by
comparing them with those obtained with traditional methods. All measures
ranked the synchronization levels of the three examples in the same way.
However the separation between them was more pronounced with non-linear
measures. Although we do not have objective means for claiming that the
diﬀerence between the synchronization of the signals is signiﬁcant, this might
suggest a higher sensitivity of non-linear measures.
Although these results should not be automatically extended to other signals and problems, they also support the value of non-linear synchronization
measures in real data analysis.
Acknowledgments
We are very thankful to Dr. Giles van Luijtelaar and to Joyce Welting from
NICI - University of Nijmegen, for the data used in this paper. We are also
indebt to Dr. Klaus Lehnertz, Florian Mormann and Giles van Luijtelaar for
useful discussions and comments. One of us (A.K.) acknowledges support
from the US civilian research development foundation for the independent
states of the former Soviet Union, Award nr: REC-006.