The Early Development of the Autonomic Nervous System
Provides a Neural Platform for Social Behavior: A Polyvagal
Perspective
Stephen W. Porges1 and Senta A. Furman
Brain-Body Center Department of Psychiatry University of Illinois at Chicago Chicago, IL
We present a biobehavioral model that explains the neurobiological mechanisms through which
measures of vagal regulation of the heart (e.g., respiratory sinus arrhythmia) are related to infant
self-regulatory and social engagement skills. The model describes the sequential development of
the neural structures that provide a newborn infant with the ability to regulate physiological state
in response to a dynamically changing postpartum environment. Initially, the newborn uses
primitive brainstem-visceral circuits via ingestive behaviors as the primary mechanism to regulate
physiological state. However, as cortical regulation of the brainstem improves during the first year
of life, reciprocal social behavior displaces feeding as the primary regulator of physiological state.
The model emphasizes two sequential phases in neurophysiological development as the fetus
transitions to postpartum biological and social challenges: 1) the development of the myelinated
vagal system during the last trimester, and 2) the development of cortical regulation of the
brainstem areas regulating the vagus during the first year postpartum.
social behavior; infancy; polyvagal theory; heart rate variability; respiratory sinus arrhythmia
During the last trimester and continuing through the first year postpartum, the autonomic
nervous system is rapidly changing. These changes insure that the infant can breathe, obtain
food, and maintain body temperature. Coupled with the development of these abilities to
obtain basic biological needs is a progressive change in the infant’s ability to regulate
physiological and behavioral state through interactions with another person (e.g., mother).
We propose that the developmental changes in the neural pathways that regulate autonomic
state provide a neural platform to support the expanding abilities of the infant to engage
objects and people in a dynamically changing environment Thus, the emerging behavioral
repertoire and social-interactive needs of the rapidly developing young infant should be
studied within the context of the maturational changes in the autonomic nervous system.
Contrary to the hypothesized dependence of social behavior on the autonomic nervous
system, the autonomic nervous system has played a limited role within predominant theories
in developmental psychology. Similarly, given the critical role that the autonomic nervous
system plays in the infant’s survival during the transition from prenatal to postnatal
environments, it is surprising that an understanding of the central mechanisms mediating the
autonomic nervous system has been tangential to pediatric medicine. In general, measures of
1 Correspondent Author: Brain-Body Center (MC912) Department of Psychiatry University of Illinois at Chicago 1601 W. Taylor
Street Chicago, IL 60612 312 355-1557 (voice) 312 996-7658 (fax) .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
 
Infant Child Dev. 2011 February ; 20(1): 106–118. doi:10.1002/icd.688.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
autonomic activity have been conceptualized as a correlate of motivated or adaptive
behaviors within psychology and as indices of health risk in medicine.
We propose, from a biobehavioral perspective, that the maturational shifts in neural
regulation of the autonomic nervous system provide a developing resource, which, in part,
mediate much of the dynamic interaction that the infant has with both objects and others.
Within this perspective, we identify sequential, developmental, neurophysiological
processes, which provide the biological basis to explain how and why individual and
developmental differences in vagal control of the heart are related to social behavior and,
when relevant, clinical outcome.
Dependence on others: Parallels with maturation of the autonomic nervous
At birth, mammalian infants are incapable of caring for themselves. The newborn is
vulnerable and dependent on the mother, or a concerned caregiver, to survive. Support from
others is required to obtain basic biological needs such as food, warmth, and protection. This
dependence on other decreases as the infant develops. This decrease in dependence is
paralleled by changes in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system. During
development, as higher brain circuits begin to regulate the brainstem nuclei, which control
the autonomic nervous system, the infant becomes more independent and is increasingly
capable of initiating social interactions with others to regulate physiological state. As these
self-regulatory skills develop, the dependence on the caregiver to elicit ingestive-vagal
reflexes (i.e., feeding) as a primary strategy of regulation, decreases. Behaviorally, the infant
appears to be more socially skilled and better able to spend time alone. This is observed as
the infant’s ability to both rapidly calm after disruptive challenges and to remain calm for
longer periods, even in the absence of others.
Developmentally, as skills of state regulation improve, the central nervous system expands
to promote enhanced cognition and greater control over peripheral motor systems. These
global systems (autonomic, cognitive, and motor) mature in combination and enable the
maturing infant to become more independent and explorative in a complex environment.
Similar to most mammals and distinct from our phylogenetically related reptilian ancestors,
humans maintain a need for social interactions throughout their lifespan. Social separation
and isolation for humans, regardless of age, leads to profound disruption in the ability to
regulate physiological state and compromises both physical and mental health. This
disruption may impact all aspects of development and may be expressed as delays in motor
development, growth, and cognition, as well as global health vulnerabilities and atypical
social and emotional behaviors. Studies reliably report that various degrees of social
abandonment can have disastrous effects on child development. Studies of the Romanian
orphans illustrate that caregiving, defined solely by the physical features of food, warmth,
and protection without consistent and predictable social engagement opportunities, is
insufficient for typical development. For example, in a three-year follow-up study of
Romanian orphans, who had been adopted after living at least eight months in orphanages,
Chrisholm found that the orphans had significantly more behavior problems, insecure
attachment, and lower IQ scores than non-adopted or early-adopted children. Adoptive
parents of these orphans also reported significantly more parenting stress. More recent
anatomical studies have revealed that early social and emotional deprivation in many
Romanian orphans may lead to functional and structural changes in brain regions, including
orbital frontal gyrus, infralimbic prefrontal cortex, medial temporal structures (i.e.,
amygdale and head of hippocampus), and left uncinate fasciculus . Impairment in functions of these brain regions could certainly
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
contribute to lower verbal skills, diminished attention and concentration abilities, impaired
impulsivity, conduct problems, and depression frequently reported in these children.
Unlike reptiles and other phylogenetically more ancient vertebrates, birth for mammals is
not a transition into independence, but an extension of the period of dependence that begins
in utero. For humans, maturation does not lead to a total independence from others, but
leads to ability to function independent of other people for short periods. Moreover, humans,
as they become more independent of their caregivers, search for appropriate others (e.g.,
friends, partners, etc.) with whom they may form dyads capable of symbiotic regulation. In
fact, individuals, who prefer to use interactions with objects instead of people to regulate
physiological state, often receive psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., autism spectrum disorders,
borderline personality disorder).
Evolution of the autonomic nervous system prepares the human infant for
social behavior
It is necessary to understand the phylogenetic origins of mammalian autonomic nervous
systems to understand how autonomic state is linked to social behavior. This
conceptualization has been described as the Polyvagal Theory . The theory was derived from the identification of the two
motor branches of the vagus nerve, the Xth cranial nerve, that provides both motor and
sensory pathways between brainstem structures and visceral organs. The theory emphasizes
not only the phylogenetic shifts in neuroanatomy of the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system, but also proposes specific, adaptive behaviors that co-occur with these transitions.
As evolutionary forces molded the human nervous system, new structures were added and
older structures were modified to allow greater dynamic range and more fine control of
physiological state and to facilitate emergence of new, adaptive social behaviors. The
Polyvagal Theory, by incorporating an evolutionary approach, provides a strategy to
investigate developmental shifts in social behavior from a phylogenetic perspective. The
theory provides insights into how developmental shifts in neural regulation of the autonomic
nervous system are related to the changing repertoire of adaptive behaviors that, depending
on context, either limit or expand expression of social behavior. The theory emphasizes
unique features in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system that distinguish
mammals from reptiles and explains how these features serve as a biobehavioral platform
for the emergence of face-to-face social behaviors. In addition, the theory provides insights
into the biobehavioral mechanisms that are rapidly developing in utero and in the young
infant. As the neural mechanisms facilitating self-regulation improve during normal
development, the infant’s dependence on others to regulate physiological state decreases.
This allows social communication to expand beyond the cueing of basic physical survival
needs (i.e., warmth, safety, food) and into the realm of prosocial engagements.
The Polyvagal Theory articulates how each of three phylogenetic stages in the development
of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system is associated with a distinct autonomic
subsystem that is retained and expressed in mammals. These autonomic subsystems are
phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to social communication (e.g., facial
expression, vocalization, listening), mobilization (e.g., fight-flight behaviors, tantrums or
behavioral meltdowns), and immobilization (e.g., feigning death, vasovagal syncope, and
behavioral and physiological shutdown). The product of this phylogeny is a mammalian
nervous system with three identifiable circuits that regulate adaptive behaviors and
physiological reactions to challenges.
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In this phylogenetically organized hierarchy, the newest circuit associated with social
communication is used first. If that circuit fails to provide safety, then the older survivaloriented circuits are recruited sequentially. From a developmental perspective, the oldest
circuits develop first, and the newest circuit develops last, leaving it the most vulnerable to
neural insult and the most sensitive to postpartum experience. The newest circuit becomes
only partially available during the last trimester and is expressed at term as the brainstem
reflexes that enable the coordination of sucking, swallowing, and breathing. By six months
postpartum, these brainstem reflexes, which become coordinated with cortical processes,
provide a biobehavioral pathway through which reciprocal social engagement behavior can
calm and soothe physiological state in both participants of a social dyad (e.g., mother-infant
interactions).
Development of the “vagal brake:” Consequences for postpartum
adaptation and social behavior
The mammalian nervous system did not develop solely to survive in dangerous and lifethreatening contexts, but also to promote social interactions and social bonds in safe
environments. To accomplish this adaptive flexibility, a new neural strategy requiring safe
environments emerged, while the more primitive neural circuits to regulate defensive
strategies were retained. To accommodate both fight-flight and social engagement
behaviors, the new mammalian vagus evolved to enable rapid, adaptive shifts in autonomic
state. The mammalian myelinated vagus functions as an active vagal brake in which inhibition and recovery of the
vagal tone to the heart can rapidly mobilize or calm an individual. Tonic vagal influences to
the sinoatrial node (i.e., the primary cardiac pacemaker) produce a resting heart rate that is
substantially lower than the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker alone. When vagal tone, through
myelinated vagal pathways, to the pacemaker is high, the vagus acts as a restraint, or brake,
limiting the rate at which the heart can beat and functionally calming the individual. When
vagal tone to the pacemaker is low, there is little or no inhibition of the pacemaker, and the
heart rate increases. The vagal brake construct may be used to describe functional
modulation of heart rate by myelinated vagal efferent pathways.
The state of the vagal brake can be quantified as the amplitude of a periodic component in
the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). RSA is a
naturally occurring rhythm in the heart rate pattern that oscillates at approximately the
frequency of spontaneous breathing. RSA represents only a portion of beat-to-beat heart rate
variability. By quantifying RSA and the relation between RSA and heart rate during various
challenges, it is possible to measure the dynamic regulation of the myelinated vagal brake to
study the responses of infants and young children to people and to objects .
The human infant is not born with a completely functioning myelinated vagal system. The
mammalian vagus is only partially myelinated at birth and continues to develop during the
first few months postpartum. Morphological studies demonstrate a rapid developmental
increase in total number of myelinated vagal fibers from 24 weeks through adolescence with
the greatest increases observed from approximately 30-32 weeks of gestational age to
approximately 6 months postpartum . More
recent neuroanatomical research suggests that the increase in myelinated fibers may be
occurring in the absence of an increase in unmyelinated vagal fibers, since the increase in
the number of myelinated vagal fibers is paralleled by a decrease in the ratio of
unmyelinated to myelinated vagal fibers . A
relative increase in myelinated vagal fibers would functionally improve visceral regulation
and enable the infant to express better behavioral regulation, which would support
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
spontaneous social engagement behaviors. Based on these studies, preterm infants born
before approximately 30 weeks gestational age are likely compromised due to lack of an
appropriately functioning mammalian vagus, or vagal brake. Without a functioning
mammalian vagus, the preterm has a limited ability to regulate visceral state and is
dependent solely on the sympathetic nervous system and on the phylogenetically older
unmyelinated vagus to meet physiological needs. This compromised profile of autonomic
regulation obligates the preterm infant to rely on the sympathetic nervous system to increase
heart rate in response to distress, in order to support tantrums and mobilization behaviors.
Preterm infants are also more vulnerable to clinically dangerous hypotensive states and
lowered oxygen saturation caused by episodes of bradycardia and apnea (i.e., massive
slowing of the heart and cessation of breathing), which may be triggered by ingestive
behaviors (e.g., sucking and swallowing) through activity in the more primitive
unmyelinated vagus that has already developed.
RSA in the preterm infant follows a maturational trajectory that parallels the reported
changes in both number and ratio of myelinated vagal fibers. During the preterm period
there is a monotonic increase in RSA from 32-37 weeks gestational age . Opportunities for skin-to-skin contact
(i.e., Kangeroo care) between mother and preterm enhance the
development of RSA. Paralleling the enhanced vagal regulation, these authors also reported
more rapid improvement in state organization and a more mature neurodevelopmental
profile. However, the enhanced development of RSA was only relative to preterm controls
not receiving skin-to-skin contact and was still substantially lower than reports of RSA in
typically delivered fullterms .
In longitudinal studies evaluating heart rate and RSA in term infants during the first year
postpartum, heart rate reliably slows with age, although RSA changes are less obvious . In these studies the effects
of development on RSA appear to be maximized during the first 6 months postpartum and
taper during the 6 – 12-month period. Although these developmental trends have been
reported and replicated, closer inspection of the data indicates that individual differences in
RSA during the first year postpartum are even greater than the developmental shifts.
Based on parallel literatures that describe developmental features in both RSA and the
neuroanatomy of the vagus nerve, we may make two inferences: 1) RSA during early
infancy reflects the functional outflow of the myelinated vagus; and 2) efficient RSA
reactivity and recovery are dependent on both the number of myelinated vagal fibers and the
ratio of myelinated to unmyelinated vagal fibers. The literature on young infants supports
these assumptions by demonstrating increases in RSA during the last trimester through the
first few months postpartum. The second assumption has primarily been tested during
feeding when ingestive-vagal reflexes are recruited, although additional research will need
to examine reactivity during social challenges during the first few months postpartum .
Feeding: Challenging and exercising the vagal brake through an ingestivevagal reflex
To ingest food properly and efficiently, the newborn must have the neural resources to
implement the complex sequence of sucking, swallowing, and breathing. This sequence
requires the coordination of the striated muscles of the face, head, and neck with the
myelinated vagal regulation of the bronchi and the heart. Unlike the striated muscles of the
limbs, striated muscles of the face,head, and neck are regulated by pathways traveling from
the brainstem through several cranial nerves. These pathways are known as special visceral
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
efferent pathways, although anatomically, their targets are not considered visceral. These
pathways are often called branchiomeric, since they regulate the structures that
embryologically emerged from the pharyngeal (branchial or ancient gill) arches. As the
infant matures, the special visceral efferent pathways are recruited by corticobulbar
pathways and expressed through social engagement behaviors. Autonomic support for these
muscles is provided by the myelinated vagus, which can be dynamically monitored by
quantifying RSA. This face-heart connection provides the necessary elements for an
integrated social engagement system (see below).
Since the structures involved in the neural regulation and coordination of the striated
muscles involved in sucking, swallowing, vocalizing, and breathing are all linked to the
myelinated vagus, the functioning of these behaviors, and the link between these behaviors
and RSA, may provide an early indicator of the functional status of a system that will later
be involved in social engagement behaviors.
The status of the face-heart connection can be evaluated by measuring RSA changes during
the ingestive behavior of sucking, which requires coordination of the striated muscles of the
face with visceral changes in heart rate and breathing. Porges and Lipsitt monitored
the integration of sucking behaviors with heart rate and RSA as infants sucked to obtain
sucrose. In response to sucrose, reductions in RSA and corresponding increases in heart rate
paralleled increased sucking frequency. When the availability of sucrose was terminated,
RSA and heart rate returned to pre-sucrose levels. Moreover, individual differences in
baseline RSA were correlated with the magnitude of heart rate reactivity to the gustatory
stimulation. These findings illustrate that in the healthy neonate, there is a coordinated
ingestive response in which the vagal brake is systematically removed to support the
increased metabolic demands of sucking.
Because ingestive-vagal responses can be systematically elicited, a feeding challenge
paradigm provides an opportunity in newborns and preterm infants to evaluate the status of
coordinated physiological-behavioral sequences that require vagal regulation and control of
the striated muscles of the face, head, and neck. Similar to the full term infants described in
the Porges and Lipsitt study, clinically stable low-birthweight preterm infants (near the time
of discharge) also decreased RSA and increased heart rate during feeding . When feeding was terminated, heart rate and RSA returned to pre-feeding levels. In a
second study, with more clinically compromised infants , RSA and heart
rate were monitored before, during, and after oral or gastric-tube bolus feedings in preterm
infants at approximately 33 – 34 weeks postmenstrual age. The preterm neonates were
categorized into two groups based on gestational age at birth. The earlier-born group had
gestational ages less than 30 weeks and the later-born group had gestational ages greater
than 30 weeks. Consistent with the above studies, RSA decreased in both groups during
feeding. However, post-feeding RSA increased toward pre-feed levels (i.e., recovered) only
in later-born infants. The results confirmed the assumption that the higher risk group,
independent of corrected gestational age, experienced compromised vagal regulation during
the feeding paradigm.
The primary characteristics of the feeding response is a withdrawal of vagal control of the
heart to increase metabolic activity necessary to ingest food and a post-feeding recovery of
vagal tone to foster a calm state and support digestion. Thus, during metabolically
demanding ingestive behaviors such as sucking, there is a reduction of myelinated cardiac
vagal tone to allow greater mobilization of energy resources. Following these ingestive
behaviors, there is a recovery of vagal function to support digestion and calm the infant.
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The studies described above indicate that term infants and stable older preterm infants
modulate the “vagal brake” during feeding. This ingestive-vagal reflex might be mediated
solely at the brainstem level and might not be sensitive to the increasing number and
efficiency of corticobulbar pathways connecting the cortex with the source nucleus of the
myelinated vagus (the nucleus ambiguus) that arise during maturation. From an evolutionary
perspective, the adaptive consequence of these higher-order neuroanatomical changes would
enable the older infant to use social cues to regulate the vagal brake. It is possible that
through neuroception , the loving caregiver’s facial features and vocal
prosody trigger temporal corticolimbic pathways that dampen defensive reactions and
recruit the vagal brake to calm. In contrast, the facial and vocal features of a stranger might
inhibit the vagal brake to allow mobilizing, protesting, and defensive behaviors.
The Social Engagement System
A face-heart connection evolved in mammals as source nuclei of vagal pathways shifted
ventrally from the phylogenetically older dorsal motor nucleus (e.g., unmyelinated vagal
pathways) to the nucleus ambiguus (e.g., myelinated vagal pathways). This resulted in an
anatomical and neurophysiological linkage between neural regulation of the heart via the
myelinated vagus and the special visceral efferent pathways that regulate the striated
muscles of the face, head, and neck. Together this linkage between brainstem motor systems
responsible for cardiovascular functions and those necessary for regulating the face, head,
and neck form an integrated “Social Engagement System.”
With increased cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control over the brainstem
via direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g., corticoreticular) neural pathways
originating in the motor cortex and terminating in the source nuclei of the myelinated motor
fibers emerging from the brainstem (e.g., specific neural pathways embedded within cranial
nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI). These cranial nerves then extend from their source nuclei to
control visceromotor structures (i.e., heart, bronchi) as well as branchiomotor structures
(muscles of the face, head, and neck).
Specifically, the Social Engagement System includes the regulation of the eyelids through
the orbicularis oculi (e.g., social gaze and gesture), muscles of facial expression (e.g.,
emotional expression), middle ear muscles (e.g., extracting human voice from background
sounds), muscles of mastication (e.g., ingestion, sucking), laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles
(e.g., vocalizing, swallowing, breathing), and muscles of head turning and tilting (e.g., social
gesture and orientation). Collectively, these muscles act as filters for social stimuli (i.e.,
observing others’ facial expressions and the detection of prosody in human voice), and they
allow the expression of the motor behaviors necessary for engagement with the social
environment.
Based on the Polyvagal Theory, the development of the mammalian myelinated vagus is
critical in the development of the face-heart connection, which links social behavior and
autonomic regulation. Thus, with more optimal vagal regulation, features of more adaptive
social behavior emerge. Without a functioning myelinated vagus, social behavior would be
compromised and more primitive defensive strategies, such as fight-flight mobilization and
tantrums (mediated by the sympathetic nervous system) and shutdown behaviors (mediated
by the unmyelinated vagal system), would be more frequently expressed. Clinically, the
status of vagal myelination becomes critical for the newborn and the young infant as they
attempt to engage and disengage the caregiver and to explore social reciprocity as a
mechanism to regulate physiology and behavior.
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Model: Autonomic state provides a neural platform for social behavior
The unique features of the autonomic nervous system that support mammalian social
behavior start to develop during the last trimester of fetal life. Specifically, myelination of
vagal efferent fibers from the nucleus ambiguus to the sinoatrial node (i.e., cardiac
pacemaker) begins during the last trimester. This process continues during the first few
months postpartum and can be monitored by quantifying the amplitude of RSA. Regulation
of the myelinated vagus (i.e., vagal brake) provides a mechanism to rapidly increase
metabolic output by releasing the “brake” on the heart’s pacemaker (i.e., sinoatrial node).
The release of the vagal brake results in an instantaneous increase in heart rate.
Subsequently, when the metabolic demands decrease, inhibitory vagal influence on the heart
is reinstated, and heart rate instantaneously decreases. The regulation of the vagal brake
impacts important developmental processes related to survival, including 1) improved
reactivity and recovery of the ingestive-vagal reflexes involved during feeding, 2) an
expanded capacity to self-regulate and calm, and 3) improved abilities to both spontaneously
engage others and to be soothed by others. This developmental time line is illustrated in
Prematurity, illness, or negelect may dampen the developmental trajectory of the vagal
circuit. Atypical maturation of this circuit may be reflected in myelination of the vagus,
interneuronal connections in the brainstem that form the face-heart connection, and/or
corticobulbar regulation of the brainstem circuits regulating both vagal activity and the
striated muscles of the face, head, and neck. The consequences of these delays or disruptions
in typical neural maturation would be expressed as lower levels of RSA, less efficient
reactivity and recovery of the “vagal brake,” difficulties in behavioral state regulation, poor
affective tone, and diminished abilities for reciprocal social engagement behaviors.
The myelinated vagus is not the sole mediator of autonomic state, in general, or heart rate,
specifically. Heart rate is influenced by intrinsic cardiac mechanisms, surrounding thoracic
anatomy, the sympathetic nervous system, and the unmyelinated vagus originating in the
dorsal nucleus of the vagus. The development of the sympathetic nervous system and the
unmyelinated vagal circuit has not been extensively studied in the human fetus and has been
assumed to be functioning at term. Within our phylogenetic perspective, we assume that
these circuits are functioning at the start of the last trimester. Below, we support this
assumption with a brief review of the limited literature focusing on studies of the
embryological development of the central regulators and peripheral pathways directly
influencing heart rate or the contractility of the heart. Although only the development of
efferent (motor) fibers are discussed, afferent (sensory) pathways play a vital role in both
autonomic function and in providing sufficient input to trigger normal neural development.
The development of the autonomic nervous system in the human fetus mirrors the broader
phylogenetic progression described above. The oldest existing autonomic system, comprised
of unmyelinated vagal fibers originating from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
(DMNX), is also, embryologically, the earliest system to develop in utero. An immature,
undifferentiated DMNX first appears in the brainstem at 9 weeks gestation . Magnocellular subdivisions
become visible by 13 weeks, and clear demarcation of DMNX subnuclei, including the
lateral cardiomotor subnucleus, occurs by 23 weeks. At 28 weeks, all magnocellular
subnuclei are considered essentially mature . Some, however, including
Nara et al, 1991, believe there may be some postnatal changes in the DMNX, such as
increased nuclear columnar length and volume. Even if present, however, these postnatal
changes are not considered to have much functional significance or physiological
consequence in the neonate.
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The other major component of the parasympathetic, cardioinhibitory ANS is the newest,
myelinated vagal system, which originates in the nucleus ambiguus (NA). This system, as
predicted by the Polyvagal Theory, develops last in the fetus, and continues functional
development well into the first postnatal year. Mature neurons appear in the rostral NA by 8
or 9 weeks gestation and fill the nucleus by 12.5 weeks . Unlike mature
neurons in the lateral subnucleus of the DMNX, however, axons of these mature neurons
have not yet reached cardiac tissue to exert cardioinhibitory effects. The functional
significance of vagal fibers from the NA depends heavily on myelination, which does not
begin until 23 weeks gestation, when near mature axon diameter is achieved . Myelination of NA vagal fibers increases linearly from 24 to 40 weeks
gestation and, again, continues actively during the first year postpartum .
Development of the sympathetic, cardioexcitatory ANS is less well described in the
literature. Phylogenetically, this largely catecholaminergic system appears before the
mammalian NA vagal system and after the older DMNX vagus. According to the Polyvagal
Theory, then, this system should begin development in the human fetus sometime between
the two parasympathetic systems. Anatomically, sympathetic innervation of cardiac tissue is
complex and difficult to isolate. Postganglionic cardiomotor nuclei lie mostly within the
cardiothoracic and middle cervical ganglia, which lie caudal to the sympathetic superior
cervical ganglion. Functionally, sympathetic influence on the heart is also varied. Unlike the
two vagal circuits, which exert mostly chronotropic effects (slowing heart rate), sympathetic
activity leads to both chronotropic (increasing heart rate) by innervating pacemaker tissue
and inotropic (increasing cardiac contractility) by innervating ventricular myocardium.
Investigations using fetal heart rate monitoring to infer sympathetic activity provide
potential insight into development of this system. Using continuous 24-hour fetal heart rate
monitoring in 28 healthy women, who were 16 to 28 weeks pregnant, Kinbraia, Zarnadze,
Kintraia, & Kashakashvili reported that fetal locomotor activity increased between
16 and 20 weeks gestation. At this stage, increases in activity are accompanied by
corresponding increases in heart rate, which returns to normal during “quiet” fetal periods.
Since the vagal brake is not functional during this period of fetal development, these
increases in heart rate are most likely due to activity in the sympathetic nervous system.
Furthermore, the authors interpret an absence of such coordinated heart rate increase with
increased locomotion by 24 weeks gestation as “developmental retardation.”
Measurement of RSA can map the development of the myelinated vagus and also enable
dynamic monitoring of vagal reactivity and recovery elicited during feeding to quantify the
status of ingestive-vagal reflexes. The literature documents that both amplitude of RSA and
pattern of RSA responses during feeding are sensitive indices of risk in preterm and term
infants. Ingestive-vagal reflexes elicited during feeding provide an opportunity early in
development to evaluate a neural circuit that will later be involved in social engagement
behaviors. Eliciting these reflexes provides an opportunity to exercise the neural circuits
coordinating both the striated muscles of the face and neck and the vagal brake. As the
infant develops, the brainstem structures involved in ingestive-vagal reflexes are
increasingly recruited by higher brain structures, which regulate the facial and vocal features
involved in reciprocal social interactions. Thus, when brainstem ingestive-vagal reflexes are
functional, the first year postpartum is characterized by an increase in the efficiency with
which corticobulbar pathways recruit and regulate these same brainstem nuclei for the
purpose of social engagement. If, during early infancy, ingestive-vagal reflexes are not
efficiently working, then there will be difficulties coordinating sucking, swallowing, and
breathing. Problems in regulating these survival-related processes may provide a sensitive
prognostic index leading to difficulties not only in social behavior, but also in the
Porges and Furman
Infant Child Dev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
development of cognitive and language skills that are dependent on appropriate behavioral
and physiological state regulation.
Changes in RSA represent a dynamic adjustment of the inhibitory action of the vagus
(“vagal brake”) on the heart. Functionally, the removal of the vagal brake provides a
physiological state that promotes vigilance as an intermediary and precautionary
psychological process to monitor risk in the environment. The outcome of this assessment
includes the induction of different physiological states either in which social behaviors can
proceed, or in which defensive fight-flight strategies associated with increased sympathetic
excitation are necessary. If defensive behaviors are not necessary to maintain or to negotiate
safety, then the rapid vagal regulatory mechanisms that dampen autonomic state are
reinstated, allowing the individual to calm and self-soothe. Further support for this
interpretation can be seen in the infant data in which suppression of RSA is correlated with
maternal reports of longer attention spans and being more easily soothed . For example, Huffman et al. found that 12-week-old infants with higher
baseline RSA expressed fewer negative behaviors and were less disrupted by experimental
procedures than age-matched infants with lower baseline RSA. Moreover, consistent with
the vagal brake concept, the infants who decreased RSA during the laboratory assessment
were rated on maternal report temperament scales as having longer attention spans and being
more easily soothed.
The regulation of behavioral state is a critical determinant of the range of social behaviors an
individual can express. The underlying mechanisms mediating behavioral state are tightly
linked to the autonomic nervous system. Investigation of the early maturational changes in
vagal regulation of autonomic state unmasks several of the behavioral features that infants
exhibit. For example, greater suppression of RSA during challenging situations is related to
better state regulation, greater self-soothing, more attentional control, and greater capacity
for social engagement .
The ability to regulate state follows a developmental trajectory during the early part of life.
As the neural circuits involved in state regulation become more available to the developing
child, there are parallel opportunities for social engagement behaviors and the development
of strong social bonds. Without the dynamic, efficient myelinated vagus, it is difficult to
regulate behavioral state and to use the features of the Social Engagement System (i.e.,
facial expression, vocal prosody), which at birth are involved in feeding behaviors (i.e.,
ingestive-vagal reflexes). Developmental limitations in the vagal system, expressed as low
level of RSA and difficulties in regulating RSA, may lower thresholds to negative or
ambiguous environmental cues with resultant hyper-reactivity and severe limitations in the
ability to self-sooth and calm.
Social behavior and the capacity to manage challenge are dependent on the neural regulation
of physiological state. The neural circuits involved in the regulation of physiological state
are modified during gestation and continue during postnatal life. When these circuits are
easily available and efficiently functioning, then the laws of learning and the impact of
experience can shape behavior. However, when these circuits are not available, either as a
function of phase of development or during periods of increased environmental risk, then
state regulation is compromised, social skills are not easily learned, and social bonds
become difficult to establish. During most of the lifespan, the vagal brake and the other
features of the Social Engagement System are readily available and contribute to the
numerous opportunities for social learning to occur. Without the efficient vagal brake
turning off defensive systems and blunting their disruptive manifestations , prosocial behavior is limited and opportunities for social learning and social
bonding are minimized.
Acknowledgments
The research described in this manuscript was supported, in part, by NIH Grant R01 HD053570 from the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development and NIH Grant T32 MH18882 from the American Psychological
Association Diversity Program in Neuroscience.