Rethinking Semantic Segmentation from a Sequence-to-Sequence Perspective
with Transformers
Sixiao Zheng1*
Jiachen Lu1
Hengshuang Zhao2
Xiatian Zhu3
Zekun Luo4
Yabiao Wang4
Yanwei Fu1
Jianfeng Feng1
Tao Xiang3, 5
Philip H.S. Torr2
Li Zhang1†
1Fudan University
2University of Oxford
3University of Surrey
4Tencent Youtu Lab
5Facebook AI
 
Most recent semantic segmentation methods adopt
a fully-convolutional network (FCN) with an encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder progressively reduces
the spatial resolution and learns more abstract/semantic
visual concepts with larger receptive ﬁelds. Since context
modeling is critical for segmentation, the latest efforts have
been focused on increasing the receptive ﬁeld, through either dilated/atrous convolutions or inserting attention modules. However, the encoder-decoder based FCN architecture remains unchanged. In this paper, we aim to provide
an alternative perspective by treating semantic segmentation as a sequence-to-sequence prediction task. Speciﬁcally,
we deploy a pure transformer (i.e., without convolution and
resolution reduction) to encode an image as a sequence of
patches. With the global context modeled in every layer of
the transformer, this encoder can be combined with a simple
decoder to provide a powerful segmentation model, termed
SEgmentation TRansformer (SETR). Extensive experiments
show that SETR achieves new state of the art on ADE20K
(50.28% mIoU), Pascal Context (55.83% mIoU) and competitive results on Cityscapes. Particularly, we achieve the
ﬁrst position in the highly competitive ADE20K test server
leaderboard on the day of submission.
1. Introduction
Since the seminal work of , existing semantic segmentation models have been dominated by those based on
fully convolutional network (FCN). A standard FCN segmentation model has an encoder-decoder architecture: the
encoder is for feature representation learning, while the decoder for pixel-level classiﬁcation of the feature representa-
*Work done while Sixiao Zheng was interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
†Li Zhang ( ) is the corresponding author with
School of Data Science, Fudan University.
tions yielded by the encoder. Among the two, feature representation learning (i.e., the encoder) is arguably the most
important model component . The encoder,
like most other CNNs designed for image understanding,
consists of stacked convolution layers.
Due to concerns
on computational cost, the resolution of feature maps is reduced progressively, and the encoder is hence able to learn
more abstract/semantic visual concepts with a gradually increased receptive ﬁeld. Such a design is popular due to two
favorable merits, namely translation equivariance and locality. The former respects well the nature of imaging process which underpins the model generalization ability
to unseen image data. Whereas the latter controls the model
complexity by sharing parameters across space. However, it
also raises a fundamental limitation that learning long-range
dependency information, critical for semantic segmentation
in unconstrained scene images , becomes challenging
due to still limited receptive ﬁelds.
To overcome this aforementioned limitation, a number
of approaches have been introduced recently. One approach
is to directly manipulate the convolution operation. This includes large kernel sizes , atrous convolutions ,
and image/feature pyramids . The other approach is to
integrate attention modules into the FCN architecture. Such
a module aims to model global interactions of all pixels in
the feature map . When applied to semantic segmentation , a common design is to combine the attention
module to the FCN architecture with attention layers sitting
on the top. Taking either approach, the standard encoderdecoder FCN model architecture remains unchanged. More
recently, attempts have been made to get rid of convolutions
altogether and deploy attention-alone models instead.
However, even without convolution, they do not change the
nature of the FCN model structure: an encoder downsamples the spatial resolution of the input, developing lowerresolution feature mappings useful for discriminating semantic classes, and the decoder upsamples the feature rep-
 
resentations into a full-resolution segmentation map.
In this paper, we aim to provide a rethinking to the semantic segmentation model design and contribute an alternative. In particular, we propose to replace the stacked convolution layers based encoder with gradually reduced spatial resolution with a pure transformer , resulting in
a new segmentation model termed SEgmentation TRansformer (SETR). This transformer-alone encoder treats an
input image as a sequence of image patches represented
by learned patch embedding, and transforms the sequence
with global self-attention modeling for discriminative feature representation learning. Concretely, we ﬁrst decompose an image into a grid of ﬁxed-sized patches, forming a
sequence of patches. With a linear embedding layer applied
to the ﬂattened pixel vectors of every patch, we then obtain
a sequence of feature embedding vectors as the input to a
transformer. Given the learned features from the encoder
transformer, a decoder is then used to recover the original
image resolution. Crucially there is no downsampling in
spatial resolution but global context modeling at every layer
of the encoder transformer, thus offering a completely new
perspective to the semantic segmentation problem.
This pure transformer design is inspired by its tremendous success in natural language processing (NLP) .
More recently, a pure vision transformer or ViT has
shown to be effective for image classiﬁcation tasks. It thus
provides direct evidence that the traditional stacked convolution layer (i.e., CNN) design can be challenged and image
features do not necessarily need to be learned progressively
from local to global context by reducing spatial resolution.
However, extending a pure transformer from image classi-
ﬁcation to a spatial location sensitive task of semantic segmentation is non-trivial. We show empirically that SETR
not only offers a new perspective in model design, but also
achieves new state of the art on a number of benchmarks.
The following contributions are made in this paper: (1)
We reformulate the image semantic segmentation problem
from a sequence-to-sequence learning perspective, offering an alternative to the dominating encoder-decoder FCN
model design. (2) As an instantiation, we exploit the transformer framework to implement our fully attentive feature
representation encoder by sequentializing images. (3) To
extensively examine the self-attentive feature presentations,
we further introduce three different decoder designs with
varying complexities.
Extensive experiments show that
our SETR models can learn superior feature representations as compared to different FCNs with and without attention modules, yielding new state of the art on ADE20K
(50.28%), Pascal Context (55.83%) and competitive results
on Cityscapes. Particularly, our entry is ranked the 1st place
in the highly competitive ADE20K test server leaderboard.
2. Related work
Semantic segmentation Semantic image segmentation has
been signiﬁcantly boosted with the development of deep
neural networks. By removing fully connected layers, the
fully convolutional network (FCN) is able to achieve
pixel-wise predictions. While the predictions of FCN are
relatively coarse, several CRF/MRF based approaches are developed to help reﬁne the coarse predictions.
To address the inherent tension between semantics and location , coarse and ﬁne layers need to be aggregated for
both the encoder and decoder. This leads to different variants of the encoder-decoder structures for multilevel feature fusion.
Many recent efforts have been focused on addressing
the limited receptive ﬁeld/context modeling problem in
FCN. To enlarge the receptive ﬁeld, DeepLab and Dilation introduce the dilated convolution.
Alternatively, context modeling is the focus of PSPNet and
DeepLabV2 . The former proposes the PPM module to
obtain different region’s contextual information while the
latter develops ASPP module that adopts pyramid dilated
convolutions with different dilation rates.
Decomposed
large kernels are also utilized for context capturing.
Recently, attention based models are popular for capturing
long range context information. PSANet develops the
pointwise spatial attention module for dynamically capturing the long range context. DANet embeds both spatial
attention and channel attention. CCNet alternatively
focuses on economizing the heavy computation budget introduced by full spatial attention. DGMN builds a dynamic graph message passing network for scene modeling
and it can signiﬁcantly reduce the computational complexity. Note that all these approaches are still based on FCNs
where the feature encoding and extraction part are based on
classical ConvNets like VGG and ResNet . In this
work, we alternatively rethink the semantic segmentation
task from a different perspective.
Transformer Transformer and self-attention models have
revolutionized machine translation and NLP .
Recently, there are also some explorations for the usage
of transformer structures in image recognition. Non-local
network appends transformer style attention onto the
convolutional backbone. AANet mixes convolution and
self-attention for backbone training. LRNet and standalone networks explore local self-attention to avoid
the heavy computation brought by global self-attention.
SAN explores two types of self-attention modules.
Axial-Attention decomposes the global spatial attention into two separate axial attentions such that the computation is largely reduced. Apart from these pure transformer based models, there are also CNN-transformer hybrid ones. DETR and the following deformable version
Linear Projection
Transformer Layer
Transformer Layer
Layer Norm
Layer Norm
Multi-Head
conv-conv-4x
reshape-conv
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the proposed SEgmentation TRansformer (SETR) (a). We ﬁrst split an image into ﬁxed-size patches,
linearly embed each of them, add position embeddings, and feed the resulting sequence of vectors to a standard Transformer encoder. To
perform pixel-wise segmentation, we introduce different decoder designs: (b) progressive upsampling (resulting in a variant called SETR-
PUP); and (c) multi-level feature aggregation (a variant called SETR-MLA).
utilize transformer for object detection where transformer
is appended inside the detection head.
STTR and
LSTR adopt transformer for disparity estimation and
lane shape prediction respectively. Most recently, ViT 
is the ﬁrst work to show that a pure transformer based image
classiﬁcation model can achieve the state-of-the-art. It provides direct inspiration to exploit a pure transformer based
encoder design in a semantic segmentation model.
The most related work is which also leverages attention for image segmentation. However, there are several
key differences. First, though convolution is completely removed in as in our SETR, their model still follows the
conventional FCN design in that spatial resolution of feature
maps is reduced progressively. In contrast, our sequence-tosequence prediction model keeps the same spatial resolution
throughout and thus represents a step-change in model design. Second, to maximize the scalability on modern hardware accelerators and facilitate easy-to-use, we stick to the
standard self-attention design. Instead, adopts a specially designed axial-attention which is less scalable to
standard computing facilities. Our model is also superior in
segmentation accuracy (see Section 4).
3.1. FCN-based semantic segmentation
In order to contrast with our new model design, let us
ﬁrst revisit the conventional FCN for image semantic
segmentation. An FCN encoder consists of a stack of sequentially connected convolutional layers. The ﬁrst layer
takes as input the image, denoted as H×W ×3 with H×W
specifying the image size in pixels. The input of subsequent layer i is a three-dimensional tensor sized h × w × d,
where h and w are spatial dimensions of feature maps, and
d is the feature/channel dimension. Locations of the tensor in a higher layer are computed based on the locations of
tensors of all lower layers they are connected to via layerby-layer convolutions, which are deﬁned as their receptive
ﬁelds. Due to the locality nature of convolution operation,
the receptive ﬁeld increases linearly along the depth of layers, conditional on the kernel sizes (typically 3 × 3). As
a result, only higher layers with big receptive ﬁelds can
model long-range dependencies in this FCN architecture.
However, it is shown that the beneﬁts of adding more layers
would diminish rapidly once reaching certain depths .
Having limited receptive ﬁelds for context modeling is thus
an intrinsic limitation of the vanilla FCN architecture.
Recently, a number of state-of-the-art methods suggest that combing FCN with attention mechanism
is a more effective strategy for learning long-range contextual information. These methods limit the attention learning to higher layers with smaller input sizes alone due to its
quadratic complexity w.r.t. the pixel number of feature tensors. This means that dependency learning on lower-level
feature tensors is lacking, leading to sub-optimal representation learning. To overcome this limitation, we propose
a pure self-attention based encoder, named SEgmentation
TRansformers (SETR).
3.2. Segmentation transformers (SETR)
Image to sequence SETR follows the same input-output
structure as in NLP for transformation between 1D sequences. There thus exists a mismatch between 2D image
and 1D sequence. Concretely, the Transformer, as depicted
in Figure 1(a), accepts a 1D sequence of feature embeddings
Z ∈RL×C as input, L is the length of sequence, C is the
hidden channel size. Image sequentialization is thus needed
to convert an input image x ∈RH×W ×3 into Z.
A straightforward way for image sequentialization is to
ﬂatten the image pixel values into a 1D vector with size of
3HW. For a typical image sized at 480(H) × 480(W) × 3,
the resulting vector will have a length of 691,200. Given
the quadratic model complexity of Transformer, it is not
possible that such high-dimensional vectors can be handled
in both space and time. Therefore tokenizing every single
pixel as input to our transformer is out of the question.
In view of the fact that a typical encoder designed for
semantic segmentation would downsample a 2D image x ∈
RH×W ×3 into a feature map xf ∈R
16 ×C, we thus
decide to set the transformer input sequence length L as
256 . This way, the output sequence of the transformer can be simply reshaped to the target feature map xf.
To obtain the HW
256 -long input sequence, we divide an
image x ∈RH×W ×3 into a grid of H
16 patches uniformly, and then ﬂatten this grid into a sequence.
further mapping each vectorized patch p into a latent Cdimensional embedding space using a linear projection
function f: p −→e ∈RC, we obtain a 1D sequence of
patch embeddings for an image x. To encode the patch spacial information, we learn a speciﬁc embedding pi for every
location i which is added to ei to form the ﬁnal sequence input E = {e1 + p1, e2 + p2, · · · , eL + pL}. This way, spatial information is kept despite the orderless self-attention
nature of transformers.
Transformer Given the 1D embedding sequence E as
input, a pure transformer based encoder is employed to
learn feature representations. This means each transformer
layer has a global receptive ﬁeld, solving the limited receptive ﬁeld problem of existing FCN encoder once and
for all. The transformer encoder consists of Le layers of
multi-head self-attention (MSA) and Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) blocks (Figure 1(a)). At each layer l, the input to self-attention is in a triplet of (query, key, value)
computed from the input Zl−1 ∈RL×C as:
query = Zl−1WQ, key = Zl−1WK, value = Zl−1WV , (1)
where WQ/WK/WV ∈RC×d are the learnable parameters
of three linear projection layers and d is the dimension of
(query, key, value). Self-attention (SA) is then formulated as:
SA(Zl−1) = Zl−1 + softmax( Zl−1WQ(ZWK)⊤
)(Zl−1WV ).
MSA is an extension with m independent SA operations
and project their concatenated outputs: MSA(Zl−1) =
[SA1(Zl−1); SA2(Zl−1); · · · ; SAm(Zl−1)]WO, where
WO ∈Rmd×C. d is typically set to C/m. The output of
MSA is then transformed by an MLP block with residual
skip as the layer output as:
Zl = MSA(Zl−1) + MLP(MSA(Zl−1)) ∈RL×C.
Note, layer norm is applied before MSA and MLP
blocks which is omitted for simplicity.
{Z1, Z2, · · · , ZLe} as the features of transformer layers.
3.3. Decoder designs
To evaluate the effectiveness of SETR’s encoder feature
representations Z, we introduce three different decoder designs to perform pixel-level segmentation. As the goal of
the decoder is to generate the segmentation results in the
original 2D image space (H × W), we need to reshape
the encoder’s features (that are used in the decoder), Z,
from a 2D shape of HW
256 × C to a standard 3D feature map
16 × C. Next, we brieﬂy describe the three decoders.
(1) Naive upsampling (Naive) This naive decoder ﬁrst
projects the transformer feature ZLe to the dimension of
category number (e.g., 19 for experiments on Cityscapes).
For this we adopt a simple 2-layer network with architecture: 1 × 1 conv + sync batch norm (w/ ReLU) + 1 × 1
conv. After that, we simply bilinearly upsample the output to the full image resolution, followed by a classiﬁcation
layer with pixel-wise cross-entropy loss. When this decoder
is used, we denote our model as SETR-Na¨ıve.
(2) Progressive UPsampling (PUP) Instead of one-step
upscaling which may introduce noisy predictions, we consider a progressive upsampling strategy that alternates conv
layers and upsampling operations. To maximally mitigate
the adversarial effect, we restrict upsampling to 2×. Hence,
a total of 4 operations are needed for reaching the full resolution from ZLe with size H
16 . More details of this
process are given in Figure 1(b). When using this decoder,
we denote our model as SETR-PUP.
(3) Multi-Level feature Aggregation (MLA) The third
design is characterized by multi-level feature aggregation
(Figure 1(c)) in similar spirit of feature pyramid network
However, our decoder is fundamentally different because the feature representations Zl of every SETR’s
layer share the same resolution without a pyramid shape.
Speciﬁcally, we take as input the feature representations
{Zm} (m ∈{ Le
M , · · · , M Le
M }) from M layers uniformly distributed across the layers with step Le
M to the decoder. M streams are then deployed, with each focusing on
Hidden size
Table 1. Conﬁguration of Transformer backbone variants.
Semantic FPN 
Hybrid-Base
Hybrid-Base
Hybrid-DeiT
SETR-Na¨ıve
SETR-Na¨ıve-Base
SETR-MLA-Base
SETR-PUP-Base
SETR-Na¨ıve-DeiT
SETR-MLA-DeiT
SETR-PUP-DeiT
Table 2. Comparing SETR variants on different pre-training
strategies and backbones.
All experiments are trained on
Cityscapes train ﬁne set with batch size 8, and evaluated using the
single scale test protocol on the Cityscapes validation set in mean
IoU (%) rate. “Pre” denotes the pre-training of transformer part.
“R” means the transformer part is randomly initialized.
one speciﬁc selected layer. In each stream, we ﬁrst reshape
the encoder’s feature Zl from a 2D shape of HW
256 × C to a
3D feature map H
16 × C. A 3-layer (kernel size 1 × 1,
3 × 3, and 3 × 3) network is applied with the feature channels halved at the ﬁrst and third layers respectively, and the
spatial resolution upscaled 4× by bilinear operation after
the third layer. To enhance the interactions across different streams, we introduce a top-down aggregation design
via element-wise addition after the ﬁrst layer. An additional
3 × 3 conv is applied after the element-wise additioned feature. After the third layer, we obtain the fused feature from
all the streams via channel-wise concatenation which is then
bilinearly upsampled 4× to the full resolution. When using
this decoder, we denote our model as SETR-MLA.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental setup
We conduct experiments on three widely-used semantic
segmentation benchmark datasets.
Cityscapes densely annotates 19 object categories in
images with urban scenes. It contains 5000 ﬁnely annotated
images, split into 2975, 500 and 1525 for training, validation and testing respectively. The images are all captured at
a high resolution of 2048 × 1024. In addition, it provides
19,998 coarse annotated images for model training.
Pre Backbone ADE20K Cityscapes
SETR-MLA-DeiT 1K
SETR-PUP-DeiT 1K
Table 3. Comparison to FCN with different pre-training with
single-scale inference on the ADE20K val and Cityscapes val set.
ADE20K is a challenging scene parsing benchmark
with 150 ﬁne-grained semantic concepts. It contains 20210,
2000 and 3352 images for training, validation and testing.
PASCAL Context provides pixel-wise semantic labels for the whole scene (both “thing” and “stuff” classes),
and contains 4998 and 5105 images for training and validation respectively. Following previous works, we evaluate on
the most frequent 59 classes and the background class (60
classes in total).
Implementation details Following the default setting
(e.g., data augmentation and training schedule) of public
codebase mmsegmentation , (i) we apply random resize
with ratio between 0.5 and 2, random cropping (768, 512
and 480 for Cityscapes, ADE20K and Pascal Context respectively) and random horizontal ﬂipping during training
for all the experiments; (ii) We set batch size 16 and the total iteration to 160,000 and 80,000 for the experiments on
ADE20K and Pascal Context. For Cityscapes, we set batch
size to 8 with a number of training schedules reported in Table 2, 6 and 7 for fair comparison. We adopt a polynomial
learning rate decay schedule and employ SGD as the
optimizer. Momentum and weight decay are set to 0.9 and
0 respectively for all the experiments on the three datasets.
We set initial learning rate 0.001 on ADE20K and Pascal
Context, and 0.01 on Cityscapes.
Auxiliary loss As we also ﬁnd the auxiliary segmentation loss helps the model training.
Each auxiliary loss head follows a 2-layer network.
auxiliary losses at different Transformer layers: SETR-
Na¨ıve (Z10, Z15, Z20), SETR-PUP (Z10, Z15, Z20, Z24),
SETR-MLA (Z6, Z12, Z18, Z24). Both auxiliary loss and
main loss heads are applied concurrently.
Multi-scale test We use the default settings of mmsegmentation . Speciﬁcally, the input image is ﬁrst scaled to
a uniform size. Multi-scale scaling and random horizontal
ﬂip are then performed on the image with a scaling factor
(0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75). Sliding window is adopted
for test (e.g., 480 × 480 for Pascal Context). If the shorter
side is smaller than the size of the sliding window, the image is scaled with its shorter side to the size of the sliding
Figure 2. Qualitative results on ADE20K: SETR (right column)
vs. dilated FCN baseline (left column) in each pair. Best viewed
in color and zoom in.
FCN (160k, SS) 
ResNet-101
FCN (160k, MS) 
ResNet-101
CCNet 
ResNet-101
Strip pooling 
ResNet-101
DANet 
ResNet-101
OCRNet 
ResNet-101
UperNet 
ResNet-101
Deeplab V3+ 
ResNet-101
SETR-Na¨ıve (160k, SS)
SETR-Na¨ıve (160k, MS)
SETR-PUP (160k, SS)
SETR-PUP (160k, MS)
SETR-MLA (160k, SS)
SETR-MLA (160k, MS)
SETR-PUP-DeiT (160k, SS)
SETR-PUP-DeiT (160k, MS) 1K
SETR-MLA-DeiT (160k, SS)
SETR-MLA-DeiT (160k, MS) 1K
Table 4. State-of-the-art comparison on the ADE20K dataset.
Performances of different model variants are reported. SS: Singlescale inference. MS: Multi-scale inference.
window (e.g., 480) while keeping the aspect ratio. Synchronized BN is used in decoder and auxiliary loss heads. For
training simplicity, we do not adopt the widely-used tricks
such as OHEM loss in model training.
Baselines We adopt dilated FCN and Semantic
FPN as baselines with their results taken from .
Our models and the baselines are trained and tested in the
same settings for fair comparison. In addition, state-of-theart models are also compared. Note that the dilated FCN is
with output stride 8 and we use output stride 16 in all our
models due to GPU memory constrain.
SETR variants Three variants of our model with different decoder designs (see Sec. 3.3), namely SETR-Na¨ıve,
and SETR-MLA. Besides, we use two variants of the encoder “T-Base” and “T-Large” with 12 and 24
layers respectively (Table 1). Unless otherwise speciﬁed,
we use “T-Large” as the encoder for SETR-Na¨ıve, SETR-
PUP and SETR-MLA. We denote SETR-Na¨ıve-Base as the
model utilizing “T-Base” in SETR-Na¨ıve.
Though designed as a model with a pure transformer
encoder, we also set a hybrid baseline Hybrid by using a
Figure 3. Qualitative results on Pascal Context: SETR (right
column) vs. dilated FCN baseline (left column) in each pair. Best
viewed in color and zoom in.
FCN (80k, SS) 
ResNet-101
FCN (80k, MS) 
ResNet-101
DANet 
ResNet-101
EMANet 
ResNet-101
SVCNet 
ResNet-101
Strip pooling 
ResNet-101
GFFNet 
ResNet-101
APCNet 
ResNet-101
SETR-Na¨ıve (80k, SS)
SETR-Na¨ıve (80k, MS)
SETR-PUP (80k, SS)
SETR-PUP (80k, MS)
SETR-MLA (80k, SS)
SETR-MLA (80k, MS)
SETR-PUP-DeiT (80k, SS)
SETR-PUP-DeiT (80k, MS)
SETR-MLA-DeiT (80k, SS)
SETR-MLA-DeiT (80k, MS)
Table 5. State-of-the-art comparison on the Pascal Context
dataset. Performances of different model variants are reported.
SS: Single-scale inference. MS: Multi-scale inference.
ResNet-50 based FCN encoder and feeding its output feature into SETR. To cope with the GPU memory constraint
and for fair comparison, we only consider ‘T-Base” in Hybrid and set the output stride of FCN to 1/16. That is, Hybrid is a combination of ResNet-50 and SETR-Na¨ıve-Base.
Pre-training We use the pre-trained weights provided by
ViT or DeiT to initialize all the transformer layers and the input linear projection layer in our model. We
denote SETR-Na¨ıve-DeiT as the model utilizing DeiT 
pre-training in SETR-Na¨ıve-Base. All the layers without
pre-training are randomly initialized.
For the FCN encoder of Hybrid, we use the initial weights pre-trained on
ImageNet-1k. For the transformer part, we use the weights
pre-trained by ViT , DeiT or randomly initialized.
We use patch size 16 × 16 for all the experiments. We
perform 2D interpolation on the pre-trained position embeddings, according to their location in the original image
for different input size ﬁne-tuning.
Evaluation metric Following the standard evaluation protocol , the metric of mean Intersection over Union
(mIoU) averaged over all classes is reported. For ADE20K,
Figure 4. Qualitative results on Cityscapes: SETR (right column) vs. dilated FCN baseline (left column) in each pair. Best viewed in
color and zoom in.
FCN (40k, SS) 
ResNet-101
FCN (40k, MS) 
ResNet-101
FCN (80k, SS) 
ResNet-101
FCN (80k, MS) 
ResNet-101
PSPNet 
ResNet-101
DeepLab-v3 (MS)
ResNet-101
NonLocal 
ResNet-101
CCNet 
ResNet-101
ResNet-101
Axial-DeepLab-XL (MS)
Axial-ResNet-XL
Axial-DeepLab-L (MS)
Axial-ResNet-L
SETR-PUP (40k, SS)
SETR-PUP (40k, MS)
SETR-PUP (80k, SS)
SETR-PUP (80k, MS)
Table 6. State-of-the-art comparison on the Cityscapes validation set. Performances of different training schedules (e.g., 40k
and 80k) are reported. SS: Single-scale inference. MS: Multiscale inference.
additionally pixel-wise accuracy is reported following the
existing practice.
4.2. Ablation studies
Table 2 and 3 show ablation studies on (a) different variants of SETR on various training schedules, (b) comparison to FCN and Semantic FPN , (c) pre-training
on different data, (d) comparison with Hybrid, (e) compare to FCN with different pre-training. Unless otherwise
speciﬁed, all experiments on Table 2 and 3 are trained on
Cityscapes train ﬁne set with batch size 8, and evaluated
using the single scale test protocol on the Cityscapes validation set in mean IoU (%) rate. Experiments on ADE20K
also follow the single scale test protocol.
From Table 2, we can make the following observations:
(i) Progressively upsampling the feature maps, SETR-
PSPNet 
ResNet-101
DenseASPP 
DenseNet-161
BiSeNet 
ResNet-101
PSANet 
ResNet-101
DANet 
ResNet-101
OCNet 
ResNet-101
CCNet 
ResNet-101
Axial-DeepLab-L 
Axial-ResNet-L
Axial-DeepLab-XL 
Axial-ResNet-XL
SETR-PUP (100k)
Table 7. Comparison on the Cityscapes test set. ‡: trained on
ﬁne and coarse annotated data.
PUP achieves the best performance among all the variants on Cityscapes. One possible reason for inferior performance of SETR-MLA is that the feature outputs of different transformer layers do not have the beneﬁts of resolution pyramid as in feature pyramid network (FPN) (see
Figure 5). However, SETR-MLA performs slightly better
than SETR-PUP, and much superior to the variant SETR-
Na¨ıve that upsamples the transformers output feature by
16× in one-shot, on ADE20K val set (Table 3 and 4). (ii)
The variants using “T-Large” (e.g., SETR-MLA and SETR-
Na¨ıve) are superior to their “T-Base” counterparts, i.e.,
SETR-MLA-Base and SETR-Na¨ıve-Base, as expected. (iii)
While our SETR-PUP-Base (76.71) performs worse than
Hybrid-Base (76.76), it shines (78.02) when training with
more iterations (80k). It suggests that FCN encoder design
can be replaced in semantic segmentation, and further con-
ﬁrms the effectiveness of our model. (iv) Pre-training is critical for our model. Randomly initialized SETR-PUP only
gives 42.27% mIoU on Cityscapes. Model pre-trained with
DeiT on ImageNet-1K gives the best performance on
Cityscapes, slightly better than the counterpart pre-trained
Figure 5. Visualization of output feature of layer Z1, Z9, Z17, Z24
of SETR trained on Pascal Context. Best viewed in color.
Figure 6. Examples of attention maps from SETR trained on Pascal Context.
with ViT on ImageNet-21K. (v) To study the power
of pre-training and further verify the effectiveness of our
proposed approach, we conduct the ablation study on the
pre-training strategy in Table 3. For fair comparison with
the FCN baseline, we ﬁrst pre-train a ResNet-101 on the
Imagenet-21k dataset with a classiﬁcation task and then
adopt the pre-trained weights for a dilated FCN training for
the semantic segmentation task on ADE20K or Cityscapes.
Table 3 shows that with ImageNet-21k pre-training FCN
baseline experienced a clear improvement over the variant
pre-trained on ImageNet-1k.
However, our method outperforms the FCN counterparts by a large margin, verifying that the advantage of our approach largely comes
from the proposed sequence-to-sequence modeling strategy
rather than bigger pre-training data.
4.3. Comparison to state-of-the-art
Results on ADE20K Table 4 presents our results on
the more challenging ADE20K dataset.
MLA achieves superior mIoU of 48.64% with single-scale
(SS) inference. When multi-scale inference is adopted, our
method achieves a new state of the art with mIoU hitting
50.28%. Figure 2 shows the qualitative results of our model
and dilated FCN on ADE20K. When training a single model
on the train+validation set with the default 160,000 iterations, our method ranks 1st place in the highly competitive
ADE20K test server leaderboard.
Results on Pascal Context Table 5 compares the segmentation results on Pascal Context.
Dilated FCN with the
ResNet-101 backbone achieves a mIoU of 45.74%.
Using the same training schedule, our proposed SETR signiﬁcantly outperforms this baseline, achieving mIoU of
54.40% (SETR-PUP) and 54.87% (SETR-MLA). SETR-
MLA further improves the performance to 55.83% when
multi-scale (MS) inference is adopted, outperforming the
nearest rival APCNet with a clear margin. Figure 3 gives
some qualitative results of SETR and dilated FCN. Further visualization of the learned attention maps in Figure 6
shows that SETR can attend to semantically meaningful
foreground regions, demonstrating its ability to learn discriminative feature representations useful for segmentation.
Results on Cityscapes Tables 6 and 7 show the comparative results on the validation and test set of Cityscapes respectively. We can see that our model SETR-PUP is superior to FCN baselines, and FCN plus attention based approaches, such as Non-local and CCNet ; and its
performance is on par with the best results reported so far.
On this dataset we can now compare with the closely related
Axial-DeepLab which aims to use an attentionalone model but still follows the basic structure of FCN.
Note that Axial-DeepLab sets the same output stride 16 as
ours. However, its full input resolution is
much larger than our crop size 768 × 768, and it runs more
epochs (60k iteration with batch size 32) than our setting
(80k iterations with batch size 8). Nevertheless, our model
is still superior to Axial-DeepLab when multi-scale inference is adopted on Cityscapes validation set. Using the ﬁne
set only, our model (trained with 100k iterations) outperforms Axial-DeepLab-XL with a clear margin on the test
set. Figure 4 shows the qualitative results of our model and
dilated FCN on Cityscapes.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we have presented an alternative perspective for semantic segmentation by introducing a sequenceto-sequence prediction framework. In contrast to existing
FCN based methods that enlarge the receptive ﬁeld typically with dilated convolutions and attention modules at the
component level, we made a step change at the architectural
level to completely eliminate the reliance on FCN and elegantly solve the limited receptive ﬁeld challenge. We implemented the proposed idea with Transformers that can model
global context at every stage of feature learning.
with a set of decoder designs in different complexity, strong
segmentation models are established with none of the bells
and whistles deployed by recent methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our models set new state of the
art on ADE20, Pascal Context and competitive results on
Cityscapes. Encouragingly, our method is ranked the 1st
place in the highly competitive ADE20K test server leaderboard on the day of submission.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (No.2018SHZDZX01),
ZJLab, and Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-
Inspired Technology.