HAL Id: hal-01506551
 
Submitted on 27 Sep 2019
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
A probabilistic approach to the estimation of regional
photovoltaic power production
Yves-Marie Saint-Drenan, Garrett H. Good, Martin Braun
To cite this version:
Yves-Marie Saint-Drenan, Garrett H. Good, Martin Braun.
A probabilistic approach to the
estimation of regional photovoltaic power production.
Solar Energy, 2017, 147, pp.257-276.
￿10.1016/j.solener.2017.03.007￿. ￿hal-01506551￿
 
A Probabilistic Approach to the Estimation
of Regional Photovoltaic Power Production
Y.M. Saint-Drenan1,2,*, G. H. Good1, M. Braun1,3
1Fraunhofer Institute for Wind Energy and Energy System Technology, Koenigstor 59, 34119 Kassel,
2MINES ParisTech, PSL Research University, O.I.E. – Centre Observation, Impacts, Energy,
CS 10207 – 06904 Sophia Antipolis CEDEX, France
3University of Kassel, Wilhelmshöher Allee 71 – 73, 34121 Kassel, Germany
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 561 7294 246; fax: +49 561 7294 260 E-mail address:
 (Y.M. Saint-Drenan)
Forecasting the total photovoltaic (PV) power generated in the control areas of the
transmission system operators (TSO) is an important step in the integration of the large
amounts of PV energy into the German electricity supply system. A standard approach
for evaluating the regional PV power generation from weather forecast consists in
upscaling the forecast of a limited set of reference plants to the complete area. Previous
studies shown that this method can lead to large errors when the set of reference plants
has different characteristics or weather conditions than the set of unknown plants. In
this paper, an alternative to the upscaling approach is proposed. In this method, called a
probabilistic regional PV model, an average PV model with a very limited number of
inputs (two module orientation angles) is used to calculate the power generation of the
most frequent module orientation angles. The resulting power values are finally
weighted according to their probability of occurrence to estimate the actual power
generation. The implementation of this model thus only requires information on the
location and peak capacity of the plant installed in a region and no PV plant
measurement is necessary. The proposed method has been evaluated against the
estimate of the total power generation provided by the German TSOs, which shows that
an RMSE ranging from 4.2 to 4.9% can be obtained with this method using on IFS
meteorological forecast. The regional power forecasted with the probabilistic approach
was also compared to the day-ahead forecast disseminated by the TSO. This analysis
shows that the forecast evaluated with the proposed approach has an RMSE less than
0.5% higher than the reference forecasts. This is considered a promising result given
that the forecast evaluated with the probabilistic model is based on one single weather
model and that – at the exception of the model calibration - no statistical postprocessing method is used to optimize its performance.
1. Introduction
Over the last years, Germany has witnessed a rapid development of its photovoltaic (PV)
capacity. In the beginning of 2016, more than 1.5 million PV plants with a total installed
capacity of 36.66 GWp were connected to the German grid. With Germany having an
energy demand varying between 35 and 75 GW and a minute reserve power (tertiary
 
control reserve) of -5.5 and +7 GW , the accurate consideration of the PV power
generation is thus crucial for the secure and economical operation of the power system.
For the integration of the large amount of PV power into the electricity supply system,
the transmission system operators must assess and forecast the total PV power
generated in their control areas. Since only a limited number of power measurements
are available, an exact determination of the total power generated by the PV plants
installed in a region is not possible. The actual value of the power generated by the
numerous PV plants installed in a control area must instead be estimated using the
limited information available for each PV plant (peak capacity, location, time of
installation). This estimate, which is referred to in this paper as an estimate of the
regional PV power generation, is very important, as it is used for the grid monitoring and
as a basis for the PV power forecast.
The upscaling algorithm is currently the standard approach in Germany for estimating
the regional PV power generation. The principle of the upscaling method is to assess the
normalized power generation of any PV plant installed in a region by a spatial
interpolation of the normalized power of a set of reference plants. This approach has
been described by e.g. Lorenz et al. and Schierenbeck et al. . Saint-Drenan et al.
conducted a detailed analysis of the sources of error of the upscaling method in ,
which shows that the uncertainty of this method results mainly from two issues:
The spotty acquisition of the irradiation field by a limited number of point
measurements, and,
Differences between the characteristics of the reference and uncharacterized PV
A methodology was proposed by Shaker et al. to identify the most adapted set of
reference plants by a mixture of k-means clustering and PCA and to derive an estimate
of the total PV power generation based on measurements from this set of reference
plants using linear regression or fuzzy-logic operators . A prerequisite for the
implementation of this approach is however that power measurements of all plants
installed in the considered region are available over a training time period of at least 4
months. This requirement makes the implementation of this method difficult when the
availability of PV power measurements is limited.
An alternative approach to the upscaling method and its modified versions , 
with the aim of mitigating the two issues mentioned above without the need for PV
power measurements is proposed in . This method, called probabilistic approach, is
based on two main ideas. Firstly, given that meteorological data is available region-wide
(e.g. from NWP model or satellite derived irradiation), the irradiation and temperature
of each PV plant installed in the considered region can be considered explicitly instead
of interpolating data from a set of reference plants. Secondly, values derived from the
statistical analysis of numerous PV plants are used as the parameters of a PV plant
model, rather than considering only the parameters of the set of reference plants. The
probabilistic approach thus avoids the first issue of the upscaling method by efficiently
using the meteorological data available for the power estimation of each plant installed
in the considered region. The problem of representativeness of the set of reference
plants is also mitigated by the probabilistic approach by using statistical values for the
model parameters.
 
A first validation of this approach is proposed in , where the results of the upscaling
and probabilistic approaches are compared for several hundreds of PV plants located in
Southern Germany. This analysis shows that the performance of the probabilistic
approach is slightly better than that of the upscaling approach when the number of
reference plants is high, and that the probabilistic approach outperforms the upscaling
method when the number of reference plants is low. It however fails to clarify to what
extent the results can be generalized for different regions, and especially for the control
areas of the transmission system operators (TSOs), for which regional PV forecast are
needed by grid operators. One major goal of this paper is thus to evaluate and analyse
the performances of the probabilistic approach at TSO level, which is highly relevant for
the grid integration of PV electricity.
In contrast to the work presented in , where power measurements of several
hundreds of PV plant has been used to validate the probabilistic approach, assessing the
performances of this method on control areas raises the problem of choosing the true
value of the total power generated. Indeed, as previously mentioned, only a limited
subset of the plants is measured and the access to these measurements is very difficult
for most stakeholders. As a result, it is impossible to get the actual value of the
aggregated power generation on that regional scale and the only possibility is to use a
best guess, which has a given uncertainty. It was therefore decided to assess the
performances of the proposed approach against TSO estimates of the PV power
generation, which can be considered as the best estimate of this regional power
generation. These values are evaluated by upscaling power measurements from
numerous PV power plants installed in their control area.
The use of TSO estimates raises a number of questions related to the relevance of the
validation presented in this paper. Since the reference power values are estimated by an
upscaling method, it is questionable to which extend it is relevant to propose an
alternative approach to the upscaling? To answer this first question, it is important to
note that the power measurements used by the German TSOs are - to date - not
available to any forecast provider. It is thus not possible to use the same information
than the TSO for forecasting purposes. A forecast provider has thus to develop its
forecast approach independently from the TSO by e.g. collecting its own power
measurements. The access to power measurements being in Germany extremely
difficult, this prerequisite can noticeably limit the number of companies being able to
propose a forecast product. The methodology proposed in this paper being
implementable without power measurements, its validation may be highly relevant to
stakeholders interested by PV power forecast but without access to measurements. A
second question may be what is the value of the validation proposed in this paper since
the actual aggregated power generation is not known and an estimate is used as true
value? In a rigorous scientific context, the relevance of a comparison of the output of the
proposed method with the TSO estimates is unclear since the actual value is unknown
and both estimates have a given uncertainty. However, the chosen validation reflects
the situation faced by forecast providers during the evaluation of their model output:
the performances of a PV power prediction are assessed by TSO using their estimates.
Though the validation proposed in this paper is of limited relevance from a scientific
perspective, it is nevertheless pertinent in an industrial context.
 
This paper is structured in three main parts. The first part describes the motivations
and the principle of the probabilistic approach already introduced in (section 2). The
difference between the TSO estimates and the output of the probabilistic approach are
analysed in the second part (section 3). The results are finally summarized and
discussed in the concluding part of this paper (section 4).
2 Approach
2.1 Motivation
The motivation for the development of the probabilistic approach is to design a method
mitigating the two problems identified in the upscaling method: The uncertainty
resulting from the acquisition of the meteorological information by a coarse network of
reference plants and the lack of representativeness of the set of reference plants.
The mitigation of these two problems by the probabilistic approach is based on two
main ideas, (a) the efficient use of available meteorological data and (b) the use of
statistical information on the PV plant parameter for the calculation of the PV power.
a) Efficient use of available meteorological data
As previously mentioned, one issue with the upscaling method is that the meteorological
fields are only assessed by a limited number of points (set of reference PV plants). This
approach is justified when an estimate is made from power measurements but when a
NWP-based power forecast is made this approach is suboptimal since meteorological
information is available region-wide and thus for each single plant installed in the
considered region. Based on this consideration, the first idea behind the probabilistic
approach consists of using all weather information available instead of only that at the
locations of the reference PV plants.
b) Use of statistical information on PV plant parameters for the calculation of PV power
The second issue of the upscaling method is that an error may occur when nonrepresentative PV plants are used as reference plants. Lorenz and Heinemann addressed
this issue in : “In order to determine a suitable set of representative systems, in a first
step the basic characteristics of the complete set of systems in an area have to be
described”. The recommendation of Lorenz and Heinemann is then to select a subset of
representative reference plants among a larger set of plants using the characteristics of
the complete set. This approach is problematic when the set of plants with available
measurements is limited. Alternatively, if statistical information on the different
parameters of a PV plant is available, it may be advantageous to directly use it for the
calculation of the PV power. The second idea pursued in the development of the
probabilistic approach is therefore to use statistical data on the parameters of PV plants
for the calculation of the PV power, which should guarantee that the parameter used
well describes the complete set of systems in an area.
A preliminary step to the implementation of the two ideas described above is the
selection of a PV plant model. Here, the choice of the model has to compromise between
a high accuracy and a limited number of parameters. The motivations for the choice of
 
the model as well as a description of the different parts of the model are given in section
To implement the probabilistic approach, a statistical analysis of the model parameter is
then necessary. At this step, one must take care that the data assessed during the
statistical analysis can be used for simulating a PV plant. In particular, the nonlinearity
of the model with the input parameter is taken into consideration. For example, the PV
power simulated with a southward orientation is not equal to the mean of the PV power
simulated with an eastward and westward orientation. To cope with this nonlinearity,
the approach chosen is a statistical analysis to identify the parameter sets (Ai)i=1...n that
occur frequently, as well as their probability (wi)i=1...n . With this information, the power
production of a PV plant can be estimated according to the following equation:
is an estimate of the power produced at time t by a PV plant located at x [kW]
is the peak capacity of the PV plant [kWp]
is the global horizontal irradiance at time t and location x [W/m2]
is the air temperature at time t and location x [°C]
represents the PV model used to calculated the normalized PV power
represents the set of plant parameters needed by the PV model
is the probability of occurrence of a parameter set Ai
The choice of the term “probabilistic approach” for the method described in this section
has been motivated by Eq. 1. Though a single (deterministic) power value is calculated
for each plant, the proposed methodology is very similar to a probabilistic approach
since all possible configurations are considered separately, resulting in an ensemble of
estimates of the PV power production. A deterministic value is then evaluated from this
ensemble by a weighted average of the ensemble members, the weights being the
probabilities of occurrences of each scenario, which is evaluated in the statistical
The goal of the statistical analysis is therefore to identify sets of PV plant parameters Ai
and their probability of occurrence wi. The database used for this purpose as well as for
the statistical analysis of each model parameters is presented in section 2.3. A detailed
description of the calculation steps of the probabilistic model is finally given in section
2.2 PV plant model selection
The first step needed for the implementation of the regional probabilistic PV model is
the selection of a PV plant model. A model giving the output PV power generation as a
function of the time, location, global horizontal irradiation and air temperature is
needed. With the PV model being the cornerstone of the probabilistic approach, its
accuracy directly impacts the performance of the algorithm. Under this perspective, the
most accurate model should be preferred. Nevertheless, the choice of an accurate but
too detailed model would imply the need to make a statistical analysis of some
 
parameters that are difficult to obtain. In this case, the situation can occur where a
detailed model used with statistical information of low quality results in a lower quality
than would a simpler model. With regards to this, the choice of a robust model with a
limited number of parameters should be preferred. A compromise is thus required
between minimizing the amount of information on the PV plant needed by the model
and maximizing the model accuracy.
The model selection is based on the work conducted by Saint-Drenan , where a
sensitivity analysis revealed that the model parameters to which the PV power is the
most sensitive are the module orientation angles and the power curve. In this previous
work, a statistical analysis of power curves of several hundreds of PV plants also showed
that large differences exist among single PV plants but that the difference between
average power curves evaluated for difference classes of peak power is very small.
Accordingly, we assume that a constant power curve can be used when the aggregated
power of a large number of PV plants is evaluated. Based on this finding, the model used
in has been simplified. The different calculation steps of the simplified model used in
the present analysis are described below.
With local shading being neglected, the plane of array (POA) irradiation can be
estimated from the global irradiation and the sun position using a set of models
commonly used for this purpose . Here, the separation and transposition models
proposed by Skartveit et al. and Perez et al. are each respectively used for
estimating the plane of array irradiation from the global horizontal irradiation. The
ground albedo is assumed to be constant and equal to 20%. The module azimuth and tilt
angle are the two PV plant information required for this first step.
To estimate the POA irradiation effectively contributing to the photovoltaic effect
(effective irradiation), optical losses are calculated using the formulation of Martin and
Ruiz , where the fitting coefficients are assumed constant and fixed to the set of
values representative for crystalline modules provided by the authors.
The module efficiency is evaluated using the model proposed by Beyer et al. in ,
which requires four parameters. Three parameters describe the dependency of the
module efficiency with the POA irradiation for a module temperature equal to 25°C. The
fourth parameter quantifies the temperature dependency of the module efficiency (Ross
parameters), which is assumed to be linear . The reference values of the Beyer et al
model proposed by Lorenz et al in are used for the simulation of the module
efficiency (Figure 1 left) and a constant value equal to 0.030 °Cm2/W is assumed for the
parameter of the Ross model. Based on the sensitivity analysis conducted in , the
ohmic losses occurring in the DC cables are neglected. Further loss factors taking place
in the DC part of the PV plant such as module mismatch, soiling, and shading are also
neglected and it can therefore be assumed that the specific power calculated with the
module model is equal to that fed into the inverter.
The efficiency of the inverter is evaluated using the model proposed by Schmidt et Sauer
 . In this model, the inverter losses are assumed to be the sum of three loss terms
(self consumption, voltage drop and ohmic losses), which are quantified by three
parameters. The database of PV inverter provided by Photon is used for the
determination of the standard inverter parameters. Here, the parameters of the Schmidt
et Sauer model corresponding to the mean power curve of inverters with an euro-
 
efficiency comprised between 75 and 90% is used as reference value for the PV inverter
(Figure 1 right). Finally, the inverter model needs to consider the sizing ratio, which is
equal to the rated power of the inverter divided by the module peak power. A constant
sizing ratio of 0.85 is assumed.
Figure 1: Left: reference PV module efficiency from . Right: reference PV inverter efficiency evaluated
from the Photon inverter database .
With the selected model, besides from the coordinates of the plant, the time, the global
horizontal irradiance and air temperature which can be considered to be known (see
section 1), the two parameters of the PV model are the module azimuth and tilt angles.
As statistic analysis of these two angles is thus conducted in the following section to
implement the regional model as defined in equation (1).
With the different loss factors being neglected, it is clear that the selected PV plant
model reflects the power generation of a PV plant in optimal conditions. It can thus be
expected that power values simulated with the model described previously overestimate the actual power generation of many plants. This problem is addressed by
calibrating the result of the regional model to the targeted power values. The constant
derating factor fitted in this calibration accounts for the aggregated effect of the different
neglected losses as well as for the difference between the performance ratios obtained
with the model and those of the plants installed in the consideration .
It is also assumed here that a PV plant has a single fixed orientation. Special cases, where
a PV plant is made of module on different orientations or where the modules are
mounted on a solar tracker are thus not considered. It is assumed that the disregard of
these special cases is not problematic for the application addressed in this work, as the
large majority of plants have – or at least can be simulated with - a single fixed
orientation. Finally, we have not considered the effect of inverter clipping on the power
generation. Though this effect may have significant effect on single plants, we expect
that this effect is smoothed by the aggregation of power generation of numerous plants.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the effect of module degradation on the PV power
generation is not considered in the chosen model. This effect has been intentionally
omitted due to the uncertainty on the ageing rate . We expect pragmatically that
the effect of ageing is limited by the calibration procedure previously mentioned,
whereas it is clear that the degradation occurring between the time period used for the
calibration and that used for the validation will bring about an estimation error. A better
 
consideration of this loss mechanism may be considered in a future development of the
proposed approach.
2.3 Estimation of the weights of the reference configurations (module orientation
The two parameters of the PV plant model introduced in section 2.2 being the module
azimuth and tilt angle, the goal of the present section is to identify the most frequently
occurring values of this pair of angles as well as their frequency of occurrence for the
implementation of the regional PV power model described in equation (1). For this
purpose, a database including the peak power, location and orientation angles of more
than 35 000 plants is used. This database is resulting on the one hand from the
collection of plant meta-information publicly available on the internet and
on the other hand from the characterisation of several hundreds of plants from
historical data using the parameter estimation approach described in . A detailed
description of this database is available in .
Since characteristics of PV plants are known to be different for large and small plants ,
the dependence between the tilt angle and the nominal capacity was first tested by
plotting all values of the tilt angles contained in the database against the corresponding
nominal capacities (grey dots in Figure 2). Due to the different order of magnitude of the
nominal PV plant capacity, the data are displayed with a semi-log scale. In order to
better visualize the dependency between the two parameters, bin average and standard
deviation are also represented (red and blue lines, respectively). The width of the bins is
constant in the logarithmic scale.
A clear dependency between the tilt angle and the size of the PV plant (nominal
capacity) can be observed. For PV plants smaller than 10 kWp, the bin-averages of the tilt
angle increases from 31 to 35°. Between 10 and 100 kWp, bin averages of the tilt angle
decrease from 32° to 16° and remain relatively constant until 1000 kWp. While the
dependency of the average tilt angle with the nominal capacity is continuous until 1000
kWp, a strong discontinuity can be observed at 1000 kWp: the average tilt angle included
in the classes 600-1000 and 1000-2000 kWp are 17° and 26° respectively. This
discontinuity is also observable in the scatter points. The bin-average of the tilt angles
for nominal capacity values greater than 1000 kWp is relatively constant and close to 26°.
 
Figure 2: Scatter plot of the tilt angle against the PV plant nominal capacity. Grey points: all values; red
lines: bin averages; blue lines: standard deviation for each bin.
In order to quantify the statistical dependency between the tilt angle and the size of a PV
plant, 10 classes of nominal capacity were chosen to reflect the trend of the bin averages
of the tilt angle observed in Figure 2 and to encompass the maximum number of values
per class. Probability density distributions of the tilt angles have then been evaluated for
each class. The results are displayed in Figure 3, where the colours of the different lines
correspond to different classes of nominal capacity.
Figure 3: Probability density distribution of the tilt angle for different classes of the nominal PV plant
capacity (line colours)
The trend observed in the Figures 2 and 3 can be explained as follows. For small to
medium plants, PV modules are directly mounted on building roofs so that the tilt angle
is determined by the roof inclination of the building. In contrast, large plants are more
frequently mounted on a rack system with an optimal tilt angle. This explains why the
tilt angle is suboptimal for small plants but becomes optimal, as plants get larger. A more
detailed analysis of the effect of the plant size on the module tilt angle can be found in
 
The calculated probability distributions of the tilt angles represented in Figure 4 shows
the importance of considering the size of the PV plants when estimating the statistical
properties of the module orientation angles. The displayed values are however not
sufficient for implementing the model given in Equation 1 since the frequency of
occurrence for each combination of tilt and azimuth angle is necessary. A joint
probability distribution of the two module orientation angles has thus been evaluated
for each class of the peak capacity (Figure 4). For this purpose, azimuth angles ranging
from -90 to 90° with a step of 5° and tilt angles ranging from 0 to 60° with a step of 5°
have been considered.
 
Figure 4: Joint probability distributions of the module orientation angles for 10 classes of
2.4 Conclusion
The set of model parameter (Ai) introduced in Equation 1 includes the 432 combinations
of tilt and azimuth angles considered for the calculation of the joint probability
distributions (see Figure 4). This set of parameter is the same for all plant. The weights
wi introduced in Equation 1 are the probabilities of occurrence displayed in Figure 4.
According to the results described in section 2.3, the set of weights (wi) will be different
depending on the size of the PV plant (i). It is thus necessary to differentiate the PV
plants installed in the considered region according to their peak capacity when
implementing equation 1 for the estimation of the regional PV power generation. This is
possible in Germany using the register of RES plants , where the location and peak
capacity of each plant is available.
3 Implementation and validation of the probabilistic model
3.1 Experimental setup
The proposed methodology is validated against the estimates of the total PV power
generation of the four Germany transmission system operators in their control area.
Time series of the total PV power generation with a time resolution of 15min have been
collected on the websites of the four German TSOs for the years 2014 and 2015.
These data are estimates of the actual PV power generation made by the TSOs by
generally upscaling the power measurements of a set of reference plants. Data of the
year 2014 are used for the calibration of the model (section 3.2) and data for the year
2015 for the model validation (section 3.3). It would have been optimal to use the actual
power generation instead of the estimates provided by the TSO for the validation.
Unfortunately, the numerous plants installed in Germany being not measured, the true
value is not available and TSO data represent the best guess of the total PV power
generation. Though this approach makes a definitive conclusion on the performance of
the proposed model difficult (a given uncertainty can be expected for the TSO estimates),
it is representative of a real-world situation. Indeed, TSOs evaluate the skill of their
forecast against their estimate.
The location and peak capacities of all plants installed in Germany have been collected
from the register of plants funded by the German renewable energy act , which
provides the plant locations (x) and the installed capacity (Ppeak,) in Eq. 1. The weights
(wi) are chosen under consideration of the installed capacity of each installed plant
using the results of the statistical analysis presented in section 2.3.
 
Since day-ahead forecast is one of the most important applications of regional model for
the integration of the PV energy in the electricity supply system, we decided to use NWP
forecast data for the global horizontal irradiation and air temperature needed for the
implementation of Equation 1. We used the 2-meter temperature and the solar surface
radiation downwards parameter from the IFS model (ECMWF) for each plant location
listed in the RES database. These parameters have been extracted from the model run
starting at 00:00 and for a time lead comprised between 24 and 48 hours. The two
meteorological quantities have then been linearly interpolated to match with the time
resolution of the TSO estimates.
Since a day-ahead forecast is evaluated with the proposed methodology, publicly
available day-ahead forecast provided by the German TSOs have also been collected for
the year 2015, which allows a comparison of the forecast error obtained with the
proposed methodology with that of a third party (reference). This comparison is
conducted in section 3.3.
Since the effects of snow and shading are not considered in the model presented in
section 2, the calibration and validation are conducted without winter months (April to
October of the respective years).
3.2 Model calibration
The goal of the model calibration is to determine a derating factor accounting for the
different loss processes neglected in the model selection. This derating factor also
accounts for systematic modelling errors. Though this step is motivated by the selection
of the model in section 2.2, it can also be considered as a model output statistic aimed at
improving the performance of the model.
For estimating the derating factors for the four German control areas, the rough output
of the probabilistic model is compared with the TSO estimates for the year 2014 . This comparison is illustrated in Figure 5,
where the TSO estimates are plotted against the output of the probabilistic approach for
the four control areas (light grey dots).
We can observe in Figure 5 that - as expected (see Section 2.2) – the rough output of the
probabilistic model overestimate the actual PV power generation of the four German
control areas. Derating factors have been evaluated by a simple regression with the data
displayed in Figure 5. The black lines in Figure 5 represent these derating factors. With
values equal to 0.82205 and 0.81826, the derating factors are very similar for the
Amprion and 50 Hertz control areas. The smallest and largest derating factors are found
for the TenneT (0.72858) and TransNetBW (0.88464) control areas respectively.
 
Figure 5: Scatter plot of the rough output of the probabilistic model against the TSO
estimates (light grey dots) and fitted correction (black lines) for the four German control
It is interesting to note that the larger is the control area, the smaller is the fitted
derating factor. It appears thus that the derating factor account for a decrease of the
regional power generation resulting from a smoothing effect that is underestimated by
the probabilistic model. Indeed, the maximal values found with the probabilistic model
are all approximately equal to 0.8 for the four control areas while the maximal values of
the TSO estimates are equal to ca. 0.6, 0.65, 0.65 and 0.75 for the TenneT, Amprion, 50
Hertz and TransNetBW control area respectively (sorted by increasing size of the
control area). The underestimation of the power decrease due to smoothing effect with
the probabilistic model is probably stemming from the chosen weather data, whose
spatial variations are smoother than the actual ones.
The evaluated derating factors are now used to calibrate the output of the probabilistic
model of the validation data set, which is compared to the TSO estimates in the following
It is here assumed that the derating factors assessed with the data of 2014 are valid for
the year 2015. The validity of this assumption is not obvious since several issues change
the characteristics of the match between TSO estimate and output of the probabilistic
method with time. Firstly, the statistics of the PV plant orientation angles can change as
new plants are installed. We consider that this effect can be disregarded considering the
newly installed PV capacity between 2014 and 2015 with respect to the installed
capacity in 2014 (see Annexes 1 to 4). Secondly, improvements of the weather model
 
can result in a change of the characteristics of the output of the probabilistic model with
time, which would in turn make the derating factor evaluated with 2014 data
suboptimal for 2015. Thirdly and finally, changes in the algorithms used by the TSO for
estimating the total power generated in their control area can also results in a difference
between the optimal derating factors for the two time periods.
3.3 Model validation
The values of the calibrated output of the probabilistic model are compared with the
TSO estimates of the actual PV power generation in the four scatter plots of Figure 6. It
can be observed that the scatter points are centred on the identity line, which shows
that the calibration indeed removed the bias observed with uncalibrated data in Figure 5.
Figure 6: Scatter plot of the calibrated output of the probabilistic model against the TSO
estimates (light grey dots) for the validation time period.
A comparison of the time series of the forecast disseminated by TenneT and the
calibrated output of the probabilistic model with TenneT estimate is displayed for the
time period 14-21/08/2015 in Figure 7. It can be observed that the output of the
probabilistic approach matches well with the TSO estimate and that there are even days
when it outperform the forecast provided by the TSOs.
 
Figure 7: Comparison of the time series of the forecast disseminated by the TSO (blue) and
the calibrated output of the probabilistic model (red) with the TSO estimates (grey) for the
TenneT control area between 14/08/2015 and 21/08/2015
Different error metrics have been evaluated to assess the performance of the
probabilistic approach, which are given in Table 3. The results are expressed in percent
of the installed capacity. In addition, the root mean square errors of the probabilistic
method and the forecast disseminated by the TSOs are displayed in Figure 8. Since the
root mean square error (RMSE) is mainly used by the TSOs, the following analysis is
focusing on this metric.
Table 3: Average power generation, bias, MAE and RMSE of the calibrated regional PV
power calculation for the four German control areas evaluated with the TSO estimates of the
actual PV power generation (in % of the installed capacity).
TransNetBW
Average power
generation
0.2167 W/Wp
0.2425 W/Wp
0.2477 W/Wp
0. 2802 W/Wp
Probabilistic
Probabilistic
Probabilistic
In Figure 8, the TSOs are sorted by increasing size of the control area. It can be observed
that the RMSE increases as the size of the control area decreases. It can also be noted in
Table 3 and Figure 8 that at the exception of TransNetBW, RMSE values obtained with
the probabilistic model are all below 5% and even very close to 4% for TenneT. The
reason for the higher RMSE value obtained for the TransNetBW control area may on the
one hand be explained by the smaller spatial extension of the area in comparison to
 
other control areas. On the other hand, as can be seen in Annex 4, the last input of the
TransNetBW EEG register has been recorded in July 2014 while registers of the other
TSO are more recent with last input recorded between April and May 2016 (see Annexes
1, 2 and3). The higher error obtained for TransNetBW may thus also be resulting from a
mismatch between the set of plants used for the calculation and the actual ones.
Accordingly the higher RMSE value obtained for TransNetBW should be considered with
some caution and cannot be used as an indicator of the performance of the proposed
approach. The results obtained for the TransNetBW control area are therefore not
further considered in the continuation of this analysis.
Figure 8 RMSE of the forecast calculated with the probabilistic model (blue bars) and
RMSE of the day-ahead forecast disseminated by the TSOs (yellow bars). (More detailed
analyses of the errors are given in Annexes 1, 2, 3 and 4)
The performances of the probabilistic model are then compared to those obtained with
the day-ahead forecast provided by the TSOs. The dissemination of a day-ahead forecast
by the TSO is made mandatory by the EEG act. It is however unclear which forecast
products are delivered and if those are representative for the forecast used
operationally by the TSOs. This benchmark has to be interpreted with caution, since the
TSO forecast methodology is unknown. It can for example be noted that the RMSE of the
forecast provided by Amprion is noticeably higher than those of the three other TSOs.
This value is probably corresponding to an under-average forecast and will not be
further considered in the present analysis. Given the relatively low RMSE values
obtained for TenneT and 50 Hertz, we consider that the data provided by the TSO are
corresponding to outputs of cutting-edge forecast systems. The comparison will thus be
limited to these two control areas.
 
It can be observed in Table 3 and Figure 8 that the error obtained with the probabilistic
model is only 0.43 and 0.36 higher than that of the day-ahead forecast provided by the
TenneT and 50 Hertz respectively. This can be considered as a positive result
considering that the forecast evaluated with the probabilistic model is based on one
single weather model and that – with the exception of the model calibration – no postprocessing scheme has been used. Indeed, most commercial forecast providers optimize
the skill of their forecast by means of statistical post-processing and/or by implementing
a multi-model approach.
4 Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, an alternative to the upscaling approach for estimating the aggregated PV
power generation of PV plants installed in a region was presented. In this method, called
a probabilistic regional PV model, an average PV model with a very limited number of
inputs (two module orientation angles) is used to calculate the power generation of the
most frequent module orientation angles. The resulting power values are finally
weighted according to their probability of occurrence to estimate the actual power
generation. The probability of occurrence of the module orientation is assessed on the
basis of a database with more than 35 000 PV plants. The implementation of this model
only requires information on the location and peak capacity of the plant installed in a
region and no PV plant measurement is necessary.
The advantage of this method is that a value of the PV power generation can be
estimated for each PV plant installed in the region of interest with local meteorological
data. The interpolation error made in the upscaling method is thus avoided with the
proposed methodology. Furthermore, it is hoped that the problem of representativity
faced by the upscaling method are mitigated by the method proposed in this paper
by using statistical distribution of module orientation angles as input. Lastly, the
proposed approach allows forecasting the aggregated PV power generation of any
region without PV power measurements, which characteristics is highly valuable for
numerous stakeholders without access to the numerous PV power measurement data
needed to apply the upscaling method.
The validation of the proposed model against TSO estimates shown that the RMSE
obtained with the probabilistic model is below 5%. The forecast made with the
probabilistic approach was found to be less than 0.5% higher than the forecast delivered
by the TSOs. This is considered a positive result considering that this forecast is
evaluated with only one single weather model and that we do not use a MOS scheme
while commercial forecast providers generally optimize their forecast accuracy by using
a multi-model approach or/and by implementing statistical post-processing techniques.
The proposed methodology can thus be considered as an interesting alternative to the
upscaling approach in situations where no or little power measurements are available.
As shown in and , the upscaling method yields very accurate results when it is
used with numerous PV power measurements. In that case, the added value of the
proposed methodology is less obvious but it can be expected that a combination of the
two approaches may be interesting to e.g. limit the effect of unrepresentative reference
 
Though the validation of the probabilistic approach is made using PV power forecast, the
focus of this paper is on the calculation of the aggregated power generation of a fleet of
PV plants and not on the reduction of the PV power forecast error. It is solely validated
that the proposed methodology can be implemented to model a fleet of PV plant in a
forecast context. The improvement of the forecast skill may be considered using adapted
approaches such as e.g. the explicit consideration of systematic forecast errors with fog
and low stratus .
It is finally interesting to note that, thanks to its flexibility, the proposed approach offer a
wide scope for improvements and further developments.
It can at first glance be expected that the performance of the method increases with the
quality of the statistical information used (average PV plant model and distribution of
the module orientation angles). An improvement of the statistical analysis presented in
this paper by using more PV plants may thus represent a possible continuation of this
work. Alternatively, module orientation angles assessed from LiDAR data could
also be used instead –or together with the statistical data in the future.
It should however be noted that the performance of a forecast system are evaluated by
the TSO against an estimate of the actual generation, which is based on the upscaling of a
limited set of reference plants. Situations can thus occur where an improvement of the
probabilistic forecast by e.g. using LiDAR data or improved statistics is interpreted as a
degradation of the forecast skill. This would happen if the difference between the
forecast and the TSO estimates increases. Such situations are probable given that
medium to large reference plants are mainly used by TSO for estimating the actual PV
production while the probabilistic approach is taking into account characteristics of all
plant sizes, including small ones. Should the goal of a forecast be to match with the TSO
estimate, a more pragmatic approach may consist in choosing the statistical input of the
probabilistic method giving the best match between model output and TSO estimates.
This is a difficult issue given the number of parameters and the ill-conditioned nature of
the problem. However, it could be addressed by implementing inverse modelling
techniques, which could also represent a possible continuation of the work presented in
this paper.
Finally, it should be noted that winter months have been excluded for the present
analysis. The reason for that is that the effects of snow and shading on the PV power
generation are not considered in the model described in this paper. A consideration of
these effects could also be addressed in a further development of the proposed
methodology.
Acknowledgement
This work was completed within the framework of the EWeLiNE project (Erstellung
innovativer
Leistungsprognosemodelle
Netzintegration
wetterabhängiger Energieträger) funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy. The authors would like to thank the German TSOs Amprion, TenneT
and 50 Hertz for their support in understanding the integration mechanisms of RES
energy in the electricity supply system and all the related data. We would like to thank
the German weather service DWD for the pleasant cooperation and productive
discussions. The authors are indebted to Prof. Lucien Wald for his time and valuable
 
feedback. We would also like to thank the Transvalor team, who take care of the SoDa
Service that makes the access to the HelioClim databases efficient and user-friendly.