Interpretability of Deep Learning Models: A Survey
of Results
Supriyo Chakraborty∗, Richard Tomsett§, Ramya Raghavendra∗, Daniel Harborne†, Moustafa Alzantot‡,
Federico Cerutti†, Mani Srivastava‡, Alun Preece†, Simon Julier††, Raghuveer M. Rao¶,
Troy D. Kelley¶, Dave Braines§, Murat Sensoy∥, Christopher J. Willis∗∗, Prudhvi Gurram¶
∗IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, †Crime and Security Research Institute, Cardiff University, ‡ UCLA, § IBM UK,
¶ Army Research Lab, Adelphi, ∥Ozyegin University, ∗∗BAE Systems AI Labs †† University College London
Abstract—Deep neural networks have achieved near-human
accuracy levels in various types of classiﬁcation and prediction
tasks including images, text, speech, and video data. However,
the networks continue to be treated mostly as black-box function
approximators, mapping a given input to a classiﬁcation output.
The next step in this human-machine evolutionary process –
incorporating these networks into mission critical processes such
as medical diagnosis, planning and control – requires a level of
trust association with the machine output.
Typically, statistical metrics are used to quantify the uncertainty of an output. However, the notion of trust also depends on
the visibility that a human has into the working of the machine.
In other words, the neural network should provide humanunderstandable justiﬁcations for its output leading to insights
about the inner workings. We call such models as interpretable
deep networks.
Interpretability is not a monolithic notion. In fact, the subjectivity of an interpretation, due to different levels of human
understanding, implies that there must be a multitude of dimensions that together constitute interpretability. In addition, the
interpretation itself can be provided either in terms of the lowlevel network parameters, or in terms of input features used by
the model. In this paper, we outline some of the dimensions that
are useful for model interpretability, and categorize prior work
along those dimensions. In the process, we perform a gap analysis
of what needs to be done to improve model interpretability.
I. INTRODUCTION
Advances in machine learning and deep learning have had
a profound impact on many “low-level” tasks such as object
recognition and behaviour monitoring. Recently, researchers
have begun to explore how these approaches can be used
in “high-level” domains such as healthcare, criminal justice
system, ﬁnance, and military decision making . As the
importance of the decisions aided using machine learning
increases, it becomes more important for users to be able
to suitably weight the assistance provided by such systems.
A key property is interpretability — users should have the
ability to understand and reason about the model output.
However, despite several years of research effort, progress
in this area remains limited . For example, multi-layer
neural networks, in spite of the their tremendous success in
achieving near-human accuracy levels in certain prediction
and classiﬁcation tasks , operate as black boxes, and offer
little to no explanation/visibility into why speciﬁc features are
selected over others during training, or how the correlations in
the training data are represented in the choice of the features,
or why a speciﬁc pathway in the network (e.g., transforming
raw data to classiﬁcation output) is selected over others.
While deep learning based models are motivated by neuroscientiﬁc advancements in the understanding of the working
of the human brain, a critical distinction, that has often been
made between the two, is attributed to the human ability to
“think” . Informally, it is this ability to think, that allows
humans to not only make a prediction, but also justify or
rationalize it through a series of logically consistent and
understandable choices leading up to the prediction. This
justiﬁcation, in turn, enables the decision maker to implicitly
or explicitly associate a measure of conﬁdence to the prediction aiding the decision making process. The counterpart to
the human thought process in deep learning models is often
referred to as interpretability .
One may argue that the above justiﬁcation should be in
terms of the low-level machine parameters and their sequential
updates due to a learning algorithm. However, a closer inspection of even the human thought process reveals that we do not
actually interpret the working of our brain in terms of its lowlevel parameters. We do not justify our predictions based on
the learning algorithm used by the brain or the way it chooses
to represent information (model parameters). Instead, it is
typical to provide justiﬁcations, more often than not in a posthoc setting, using prior information that can correlate model
response with physical observations. This implies that the
notion of interpretability is not restricted to model parameters
alone but can be deﬁned at multiple levels such as: model
parameters and learning algorithms, or functionality of the
model, or a combination of both.
In fact, as observed in , the notion of interpretability is
not even a monolithic concept but reﬂects several different
dimensions, which are summarized below:
• Model Transparency: This is deﬁned in terms of three
parameters: (i) simulatability – whether a human can
use the input data together with the model to reproduce
every calculation step necessary to make the prediction.
This allows the human to understand the changes in the
model parameters caused by the training data; (ii) decomposability – whether there is an intuitive explanation
for all the model parameters; and ﬁnally (iii) algorithmic
transparency – which is essentially an ability to explain
the working of the learning algorithm. For example, the
choice of a hyperplane in the Support Vector Machine
(SVM) can be explained in terms of the marginal points
and the decision boundary. However, for a deep neural
network, the non-linearities added into the features at
each layer makes it difﬁcult to explain the features being
used for the output.
• Model Functionality: This is deﬁned in terms of (i)
textual description – providing a semantically meaningful description of the model output. To do so, one
might use a composition of models, one for prediction
and another one to generate a textual explanation; (ii)
visualization – another common means of explaining
the working of a model is through visualization of the
parameters. One popular approach to visualize highdimensional distributed representations is using the t-
SNE mechanism ; and ﬁnally (iii) local explanation
– where instead of explaining the entire mapping of a
model, local changes introduced by a speciﬁc input vector
for a given output class is computed. For example, in
neural networks, the gradient of the output can be used
to identify speciﬁc weights and the local changes that are
inﬂuenced by the input vector.
In this paper, our primary contribution is a categorization of prior work on machine interpretability based on the
above dimensions. We then provide a brief exposition of a
coalition setting in which we want to train an interpretable
deep neural network and conclude by identifying challenges
that are unique to this setting and their inﬂuence on model
interpretability.
II. SUMMARY OF PRIOR ART
In this section, we describe recent work on improving the
interpretability of deep learning models. We classify each work
according to the dimensions of interpretability introduced in
the previous section, outlined by . Note that this review is
not fully comprehensive, but represents a survey of methods
and results that we consider particularly pertinent to our future
research goals in deep learning interpretability.
A. Model transparency
Much of the recent work on deep learning interpretability
has focussed on understanding what the network has learned
and why it has learned it; in other words, it addresses the
dimensions of decomposability and algorithmic transparency.
Given the size and complexity of deep models, the third
dimension of transparency simulatability - is assumed to be
very low. The references provided here thus relate only to the
ﬁrst two transparency dimensions.
Erhan et al. developed one of the ﬁrst methods for
visualizing the responses of individual units in (unsupervised)
deep belief networks. They developed methods for analyzing
units in any layer of a network, while previous methods only
looked at units in the ﬁrst (input) layer. Zeiler and Fergus
 extended this idea to (supervised) convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) by using deconvolutional networks –
CNNs that map features to the input pixel space – to analyse
higher-layer units. They used their visualizations to guide
modiﬁcations to the CNN that improved its accuracy, and
showed that having a minimum model depth was crucial to its
performance. This work provides an important example of how
increased transparency is not just important for understanding
model behaviour; it can also guide us to build better models.
Karpathy et al. provided similar insights for recurrent neural networks (RNNs) – speciﬁcally Long-Short-Term-Memory
(LSTM) RNNs. They trained an LSTM RNN one character at
a time on different texts, and developed a method to show the
activation of individual units as they generated new text. They
showed that some cells learned easily-interpretable features
in the text that spanned over a long time-range; for example, keeping track of quotations or line-lengths. Other units,
though, produced less easily interpretable outputs, switching
on and off with no easily discernible pattern.
Much further work on understanding higher-layer representations in deep models has focused on CNNs. Mahendran
and Vedaldi investigated the information contained in
image representations at different CNN levels, revealing that
deeper layers learn increasingly abstract representations of the
image contents, thus making their responses more invariant to
changes in the input image. Yosinski et al. built on this
work, improving the presentation of the image representations
and releasing a software tool that provides several different
visualizations designed to reveal the function that each neuron
is performing within the network. Using similar methods,
Nguyen et al. showed that CNNs learn the global structure, details, and context of objects rather than a small number
of local discriminating features.
Several groups have taken an alternative approach to understanding CNNs: generating the CNN’s preferred image for
each class it has learned. Simonyan et al. provide an
early example of this, generating images by maximizing the
output score of the network for each class in turn. Their images
qualitatively demonstrate the input features that most represent
each class. Nguyen et al. make use of a Deep Generator
Network to generate preferred images for particular neurons
in a CNN, producing very realistic synthetic images that they
claim make their method more easily interpretable when trying
to understand what a CNN has learned.
Another approach to understanding deep networks was
developed by Li et al. , who focused on whether different
networks learn similar features (convergent learning). Their
method involves ﬁrst training many networks, then analyzing
the representations learned by each network at a per-neuron,
or per-neuron-group level. They found that representations
could be learned both by individual neurons and by groups
of neurons, and that, while multiple networks reliably learn
certain features, other features were distinct to individual
networks. This work reveals that, while deep networks may
show similar levels of performance, they can differ in what
they learn from the training data.
Koh and Liang propose a method to investigate a
model from the point of view of its training data. They do
this by asking how a model’s predictions would differ if a
particular data point were altered, or not seen during training
at all. They use a scaled-up derivation of statistical inﬂuence
functions to approximate the effects of changing every training
point without having to fully retrain the model. Their method
provides a way of assessing the importance of particular
training points on the classiﬁcation of a test point, allowing
the model-builder to ﬁnd training points that contribute most
to classiﬁcation errors. This reveals how outliers can dominate
learned model parameters, and potentially indicate mis-labeled
training data. Additionally, they show it is possible to generate
“adversarial” training images (images that are modiﬁed with
noise such that the modiﬁcation is imperceptible to a human,
but results in a degradation in model performance). Prior to
this work, adversarial examples had only been considered as
inputs engineered to cause already-trained models to misclassify them , ; Koh and Liang show that classiﬁers
can also be attacked through specially engineered training data.
A recent and promising approach due to Shwartz-Ziv and
Tishby provides a deeper insight into some of the above
results by analyzing deep networks using information theory.
They calculate how information is preserved on each layer’s
inputs and outputs using the Information Bottleneck framework . Their method shows that the common stochastic
gradient descent optimization method for learning parameters
undergoes two separate phases during training. Early on (the
“drift” phase), the variance of the weights’ gradients is much
smaller than the means of the gradients, indicating a high
signal-to-noise ratio. Later during training (the “diffusion”
phase), there is a rapid reversal such that the variance of
the weights’ gradients becomes greater than the means of the
gradients, indicating a low signal-to-noise ratio. During this
diffusion phase, ﬂuctuations dominate the stochastic gradient
descent and the error saturates. These results lead to a new
interpretation of how stochastic gradient descent optimizes
the network: compression by diffusion creates efﬁcient internal representations. They also suggest that simpler stochastic diffusion algorithms could be used during the diffusion
phase of training, reducing training time. Additionally, the
results in show that many different weight values can
produce an optimally performing network, with implications
for efforts to interpret single units. These results, along with
explanations for the importance of network depth and the
information bottleneck optimality of the layers, make Shwartz-
Ziv and Tishby’s work extremely promising for improving the
transparency of deep learning, though their results so far are
theoretical and their methods yet to be extended to real-world
scenarios involving large networks and complex data.
B. Model Functionality
Model functionality can be explained by post-hoc interpretations of what the model has done. Lipton identiﬁes four
kinds of post-hoc explanation: textual (the model gives a
justiﬁcation for its output in text, or spoken language), visual
(the model justiﬁes its decision by some visualization method),
local (the model justiﬁes its decision in the context of the
local feature space around the input) and by example (the
model provides examples of similar inputs) . All of these
kinds of explanation have been explored by the deep learning
community.
t-SNE (t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbourhood Embedding)
 is a widely-used visualization method designed to show the
data’s inherent structure across multiple scales. Though not
itself a “deep” method, t-SNE is frequently used alongside
deep learning, as both deal well with high dimensional data.
t-SNE visualizations can help in understanding the data and,
therefore, what an algorithm might have learned, but does not
directly explain the decisions of a particular algorithm.
Terrapattern is a recent interactive tool for exploring
visually similar areas in cities based on satellite images. The
creators of Terrapattern trained a CNN using labelled satellite
images. After this supervised learning phase, they removed
the top classiﬁcation layers of the network and used the
remaining convolutional layers to generate features for each
tile in their satellite images. They use these compressed feature
representations to ﬁnd the most similar-looking tiles to a
particular query tile using k-Nearest Neighbours. The purpose
of the system is to help users identify visually similar map
locations rather than to make the CNN more interpretable, but
by presenting examples of tiles that are close in the CNN’s
feature space, the user gains a post-hoc explanation of what
the CNN has learned from the data.
Recent work by Hendricks et al. attempts to provide
a model that both classiﬁes images, and provides accurate
text explanations for why the image belongs to a particular
category. Their description generation method is inspired by
recent advances in automatic captioning techniques, which
aim to provide appropriate text descriptions of images or
videos. Hendricks et al. expand on Donahue et al.’s
captioning and recognition method . Their model consists
of a CNN that extracts visual features, combined with two
LSTM RNNs that learn to create a caption. The ﬁrst RNN,
trained on the image descriptions, generates words based only
on the previously generated word, while the second RNN
is fed the ﬁrst RNN’s output, the image features, and the
image category predicted by the CNN. The second RNN then
generates the next word conditioned on this input. They show
that this method generates image and class-relevant explanations for classiﬁcation decisions on a difﬁcult bird-species
discrimination task. The results are impressive; however, the
model does not guarantee that the descriptions it learns will
correspond to the visual features that humans interpret them
as referring to, and does not provide a way to check this. By
contrast, Xu et al.’s caption generation method can show
where in the image the network is focusing its attention while
generating each word in its description, but does not perform
classiﬁcation.
Several groups have developed methods for identifying and
visualizing the features in individual test data points that contribute the most towards a classiﬁer’s output (i.e. local explanation). Perhaps the most well-known method is Ribeiro et al.’s
Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME), an
algorithm that provides explanations of decisions for any
machine learning model . The LIME algorithm outputs
a binary vector representing the input: each bit corresponds to
an input feature (e.g. a word in a document, or a contiguous
region – super-pixel – in an image), with ones indicating
that the feature was important for the classiﬁer’s output,
and a zero indicating it was unimportant. It calculates the
importance of each feature by generating perturbed samples
of the input point and using these samples (labeled by the
original model) to learn a local approximation to the model.
LIME can be particularly helpful in identifying confusing
input features, allowing for dataset debugging or improved
feature engineering. LIME works with any model, and was
tested on a CNN in . However, its sampling approach
means it can be too slow for interactive use with complex
models. Recent work by Elenberg et al. develops an alternative
method producing similar outputs using an efﬁcient streaming
algorithm, improving the speed of explanation generation up
to 10x over LIME .
Another recent method, due to Ross et al. and inspired
by LIME, allows a developer to constrain their model during
training to be “right for the right reasons” (RRR) rather than
learning spurious correlations in the training data. RRR works
using binary masks that specify whether an input feature
should be irrelevant to the classiﬁcation of that example,
as assessed by a human expert. The authors additionally
propose an automatic method that learns a set of models
using different masks designed to create models with different
decision boundaries. This automated approach provides a way
of quantifying ambiguity in the training data by counting
the number of different models that can be learned without
reducing accuracy.
Turning to methods developed speciﬁcally for interpreting
deep models, the recently-proposed layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) algorithm from Wojciech Samek’s group ,
 uses the fact that the individual neural network units
are differentiable to decompose the network output in terms
of its input variables. It is a principled method that has a
close relationship to Taylor decomposition and is applicable
to arbitrary deep neural network architectures . The output
is a heatmap over the input features that indicates the relevance
of each feature to the model output. This makes the method
particularly well suited to analyzing image classiﬁers, though
the method has also been adapted for text and electroencephalogram signal classiﬁcation . Samek et al. have
also developed an objective metric for comparing the output of
LRP with similar heatmapping algorithms. Kumar et al. 
present an alternative heat-mapping method that can show the
image regions that the model was most attentive to, but also
allows for multiple classes to be associated with these regions
of attention, whereas LRP assumes all features make either a
zero or positive contribution to the single predicted class.
Finally, Lei et al. developed a local explanation approach that reveals the most relevant sentences in sentiment
prediction from text documents. Their method combines two
modular components – a generator and encoder – that operate together and learn candidate rationales for a prediction.
Rationales are simply subsets of the words from the input
text that satisfy two properties: the selected words represent
short, coherent pieces of text (e.g., phrases), and the selected
words alone must result in the same prediction as the whole
original text. For a given input text, the generator speciﬁes a
distribution over possible rationales. The encoder then maps
the rationale to task speciﬁc values. The distribution that
minimizes the regularized encoder loss function is used as
the rationale.
III. A COALITION PERSPECTIVE
We consider the problem of model interpretation within
a coalition setting in which multiple disparate parties come
together to forge an ad-hoc coalition geared towards achieving
a common mission. Each party owns a slice of data but
has policy-based constraints that places restrictions on the
information that it can share with other coalition members.
The success of the mission is thus contingent upon maximum
utilization of this distributed data to build a common model
shared among all the parties.
As is evident from the above setting, any decision made
using the common model has to be adequately justiﬁed for it
to be accepted by all the coalition members. Such a justiﬁcation can only be generated using an interpretable model.
In addition, it is quintessential that the common model is
established as fair (i.e., unbiased), accountable and transparent
to the coalition members. Finally, the policy-constraints within
a coalition together with the non-homogeneity between the
model architectures might make it difﬁcult to use techniques
such as layer-wise relevance propagation for interpretation.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CHALLENGES
We now discuss in detail challenges unique to coalition and
possible alternative approaches to providing interpretability.
A. Fairness and Accountability
With rapid adoption of machine learning techniques there
has also been a growing recognition that the same techniques
also raise novel ethical, policy, and legal challenges. In particular, policymakers, regulators, and advocates have expressed
fears about the potentially discriminatory impact of data-driven
learning approaches, especially the dangers of inadvertently
encoding bias into automated decisions. At the same time,
there is an increasing alarm that the complexity of machine
learning and opaqueness of data mining processes may reduce
the justiﬁcation for consequential decisions to ”the algorithm
made me do it” or ”this is what the model says.”
To begin, a formal deﬁnition of fairness is in order when
fairness becomes a machine learning objective. What does
it mean for an algorithm to be fair, possibly in the presence of (e.g.: human, social, contextual etc.) bias in the the
dataset? . Motivated by these concerns, Matthew et. al.
study a technical deﬁnition of fairness modeled after Rawl’s
notion of ”fair equality of opportunity” . They also introduce the notion of a ”discrimination index”, and show that
standard algorithms for our problem exhibit structured discriminatory behavior. Yang et. al. consider the problem of
ranking a set of individuals bvased on demographic, behavioral
or other characteristics wherein rankers can, and often do,
discriminate against individuals and disadvantaged members
of protected groups despite seemingly automatic and objective
metrics . The authors formulate a fairness measure by
taking several well-known statistical parity measures proposed
in literature and make them rank-aware by placing them within
well-known IR evaluation techniques .
We would need to develop new computational techniques
for discrimination-aware data mining . Legal deﬁnitions
and distributional constraints and geographic parity can be
good starting points but how to translate them to practical
algorithmic contexts remains an open question. Needless to
mention, turning fairness into a computational problem may
bring us back to the same place we started at, so we need to
think about how we can keep fairness measures, fair.
Accountability may be viewed as the ability to inspect
a model in post hoc, and make it available for human or
algorithmic inspection. Many important decisions histiorically
made by humans are now being made by algorithms, whose
accountability measures and legal standards are far from
satisfactory . While model transparency is important, it is
neither necessary nor sufﬁcient in the industry. Source code is
often propreitary, and transparency may be undesirable where
private information or security are of concern. Accountability
is arguably more important, even in the absence of model
transparency. Adler et. al. present a technique for auditing
black-box models, which can reveal the extent to which the
models take advantage of particular features in the dataset ,
without knowing how the models work . While there may
be technical challenges in allowing public auditing while
protecting proprietary information, private auditing may be the
right option, for which methods need to be developed ,
 , . Practical methods to test machine learning algorithms for policy compliance need to be developed, with the
expectation that we can prove that an algorithm behaves in a
certain way without necessarily having to reveal the algorithm.
Another desirable behavior in this respect is for the model
to be able to state its goals, and for someone other than the
creator to be able to verify that these goals are achieved and if
not, be able to demonstrate the causal origins of the outcome
predicted by the model.
B. Interpretability versus Explainability
Computational models that impart reasoning behind their
decisions, often use the terms “interpretability” and “explainability” synonymously , , . This is true, even when
the community acknowledges the need for clear taxonomy .
We would like to propose a differentiation between these terms
and in doing so, we are able to clarify the process of forming
testable metrics within the problem space.
When talking about the explainability of a model, we suggest that this refers speciﬁcally to the type and completeness
of the output given when a model is queried for reasoning
behind its decision. This means that explanations of the same
type can be compared using a metric without need for any
further context . However, explanations of different types
(saliency map images and text captions for example )
can’t be compared using a metric.
Interpretability, we would suggest, speciﬁcally refers to
the interpretation arrived at by a user agent when given an
explanation from a model. Thus, applying a metric to the
interpretability of a model must be done with a context, e.g.
the task the model is being used for, the knowledge and
experience of the user agent, the speciﬁc query that requires
an explanation etc. By adding this context, explanations of
different types (more speciﬁcally the interpretations they lead
to) can be compared with a metric.
We illustrate this difference with the following use case.
Given a scenario in which a model is predicting accurately but
the decision maker also demands a high level of conﬁdence in
the intelligence being provided by the system, an explanation
from the model must lead to an interpretation that gives strong
reasoning (in the eyes of the user agent) to the conclusion of
the model. However, in a scenario where a skilled agent is
looking to debug an erroneous classiﬁcation, the explanation
must point more closely to the underlying architecture of the
model to allow for an interpretation to form of what might
need changing in the model to improve it. Further motivation
for the differentiation between the terms can be seen when the
user agent from the ﬁrst use case is placed in to the second use
case. The explanation offered would be unchanged in terms of
its type and quality but the interpretation is likely to be of a
lower quality because the user agent now lacks the knowledge
to utilize the explanation.
C. Bayesian approach to interpretability
Compared to deep learning approaches, Bayesian reasoning
provides a uniﬁed framework for model building, inference,
prediction and decision making. There is explicit accounting for uncertainty and variability of outcomes. Finally, the
framework is also robust to model overﬁtting and Bayes
rule provides an automatic “Occam’s Razor” effect, penalizing unnecessarily complex models. However, for reasons of
computational tractability of inferences, Bayesian reasoning
is restricted primarily to conjugate and linear models.
The above leads us to the observation that there exists
elements in the Bayesian reasoning and deep learning frameworks that complement each other. This observation has been
exploited in recent work on Bayesian Deep Learning (BDL) in
particular aiming to integrate deep learning and Bayesian
models within a uniform probabilistic framework. Such a
neural network can help interpretability in terms of both model
transparency and model functionality.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the UK Ministry of Defence under Agreement Number
W911NF-16-3-0001. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied,
of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government, the
UK Ministry of Defence or the UK Government. The U.S. and
UK Governments are authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Government purposes notwithstanding any copy-right notation