Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
A STRUCTURED SELF-ATTENTIVE
SENTENCE EMBEDDING
Zhouhan Lin‡⋄∗, Minwei Feng⋄, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos⋄, Mo Yu⋄,
Bing Xiang⋄, Bowen Zhou⋄& Yoshua Bengio‡†
⋄IBM Watson
‡Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA), Universit´e de Montr´eal
†CIFAR Senior Fellow
 
{mfeng, cicerons, yum, bingxia, zhou}@us.ibm.com
This paper proposes a new model for extracting an interpretable sentence embedding by introducing self-attention. Instead of using a vector, we use a 2-D matrix
to represent the embedding, with each row of the matrix attending on a different
part of the sentence. We also propose a self-attention mechanism and a special
regularization term for the model. As a side effect, the embedding comes with an
easy way of visualizing what speciﬁc parts of the sentence are encoded into the
embedding. We evaluate our model on 3 different tasks: author proﬁling, sentiment classiﬁcation and textual entailment. Results show that our model yields a
signiﬁcant performance gain compared to other sentence embedding methods in
all of the 3 tasks.
INTRODUCTION
Much progress has been made in learning semantically meaningful distributed representations of
individual words, also known as word embeddings .
On the other hand, much remains to be done to obtain satisfying representations of phrases and
sentences. Those methods generally fall into two categories. The ﬁrst consists of universal sentence
embeddings usually trained by unsupervised learning . This includes SkipThought
vectors , ParagraphVector , recursive auto-encoders , Sequential Denoising Autoencoders (SDAE), FastSent , etc.
The other category consists of models trained speciﬁcally for a certain task. They are usually
combined with downstream applications and trained by supervised learning. One generally ﬁnds
that speciﬁcally trained sentence embeddings perform better than generic ones, although generic
ones can be used in a semi-supervised setting, exploiting large unlabeled corpora. Several models
have been proposed along this line, by using recurrent networks , recursive networks and convolutional networks as an intermediate step in creating sentence
representations to solve a wide variety of tasks including classiﬁcation and ranking . A common approach in previous
methods consists in creating a simple vector representation by using the ﬁnal hidden state of the
RNN or the max (or average) pooling from either RNNs hidden states or convolved n-grams. Additional works have also been done in exploiting linguistic structures such as parse and dependence
trees to improve sentence representations .
For some tasks people propose to use attention mechanism on top of the CNN or LSTM model to
introduce extra source of information to guide the extraction of sentence embedding . However, for some other tasks like sentiment classiﬁcation, this is not directly applicable since there is no such extra information: the model is only given one single sentence as input.
In those cases, the most common way is to add a max pooling or averaging step across all time steps
∗This work has been done during the 1st author’s internship with IBM Watson.
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
experience
restaurant
Figure 1: A sample model structure showing the sentence embedding model combined with a fully
connected and softmax layer for sentiment analysis (a). The sentence embedding M is computed as
multiple weighted sums of hidden states from a bidirectional LSTM (h1, ..., hn), where the summation weights (Ai1, ..., Ain) are computed in a way illustrated in (b). Blue colored shapes stand for
hidden representations, and red colored shapes stand for weights, annotations, or input/output.
 , or just pick up the hidden representation at the last time step as the
encoded embedding .
A common approach in many of the aforementioned methods consists of creating a simple vector
representation by using the ﬁnal hidden state of the RNN or the max (or average) pooling from
either RNNs hidden states or convolved n-grams. We hypothesize that carrying the semantics along
all time steps of a recurrent model is relatively hard and not necessary. We propose a self-attention
mechanism for these sequential models to replace the max pooling or averaging step. Different from
previous approaches, the proposed self-attention mechanism allows extracting different aspects of
the sentence into multiple vector representations. It is performed on top of an LSTM in our sentence
embedding model. This enables attention to be used in those cases when there are no extra inputs. In
addition, due to its direct access to hidden representations from previous time steps, it relieves some
long-term memorization burden from LSTM. As a side effect coming together with our proposed
self-attentive sentence embedding, interpreting the extracted embedding becomes very easy and
Section 2 details on our proposed self-attentive sentence embedding model, as well as a regularization term we proposed for this model, which is described in Section 2.2. We also provide a
visualization method for this sentence embedding in section 2.3. We then evaluate our model in
author proﬁling, sentiment classiﬁcation and textual entailment tasks in Section 4.
The proposed sentence embedding model consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is a bidirectional
LSTM, and the second part is the self-attention mechanism, which provides a set of summation
weight vectors for the LSTM hidden states. These set of summation weight vectors are dotted
with the LSTM hidden states, and the resulting weighted LSTM hidden states are considered as
an embedding for the sentence. It can be combined with, for example, a multilayer perceptron to
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
be applied on a downstream application. Figure 1 shows an example when the proposed sentence
embedding model is applied to sentiment analysis, combined with a fully connected layer and a
softmax layer. Besides using a fully connected layer, we also proposes an approach that prunes
weight connections by utilizing the 2-D structure of matrix sentence embedding, which is detailed
in Appendix A. For this section, we will use Figure 1 to describe our model.
Suppose we have a sentence, which has n tokens, represented in a sequence of word embeddings.
S = (w1, w2, · · · wn)
Here wi is a vector standing for a d dimentional word embedding for the i-th word in the sentence.
S is thus a sequence represented as a 2-D matrix, which concatenates all the word embeddings
together. S should have the shape n-by-d.
Now each entry in the sequence S are independent with each other. To gain some dependency between adjacent words within a single sentence, we use a bidirectional LSTM to process the sentence:
ht = −−−−→
LSTM(wt, −−→
ht = ←−−−−
LSTM(wt, ←−−
And we concatenate each −→
ht with ←−
ht to obtain a hidden state ht. Let the hidden unit number for each
unidirectional LSTM be u. For simplicity, we note all the n hts as H, who have the size n-by-2u.
H = (h1, h2, · · · hn)
Our aim is to encode a variable length sentence into a ﬁxed size embedding. We achieve that by
choosing a linear combination of the n LSTM hidden vectors in H. Computing the linear combination requires the self-attention mechanism. The attention mechanism takes the whole LSTM hidden
states H as input, and outputs a vector of weights a:
a = softmax
Here Ws1 is a weight matrix with a shape of da-by-2u. and ws2 is a vector of parameters with
size da, where da is a hyperparameter we can set arbitrarily. Since H is sized n-by-2u, the annotation vector a will have a size n. the softmax(˙) ensures all the computed weights sum up to 1.
Then we sum up the LSTM hidden states H according to the weight provided by a to get a vector
representation m of the input sentence.
This vector representation usually focuses on a speciﬁc component of the sentence, like a special set
of related words or phrases. So it is expected to reﬂect an aspect, or component of the semantics in
a sentence. However, there can be multiple components in a sentence that together forms the overall
semantics of the whole sentence, especially for long sentences. (For example, two clauses linked
together by an ”and.”) Thus, to represent the overall semantics of the sentence, we need multiple m’s
that focus on different parts of the sentence. Thus we need to perform multiple hops of attention.
Say we want r different parts to be extracted from the sentence, with regard to this, we extend the
ws2 into a r-by-da matrix, note it as Ws2, and the resulting annotation vector a becomes annotation
matrix A. Formally,
A = softmax
Here the softmax(˙) is performed along the second dimension of its input. We can deem Equation
6 as a 2-layer MLP without bias, whose hidden unit numbers is da, and parameters are {Ws2, Ws1}.
The embedding vector m then becomes an r-by-2u embedding matrix M. We compute the r
weighted sums by multiplying the annotation matrix A and LSTM hidden states H, the resulting
matrix is the sentence embedding:
PENALIZATION TERM
The embedding matrix M can suffer from redundancy problems if the attention mechanism always
provides similar summation weights for all the r hops. Thus we need a penalization term to encourage the diversity of summation weight vectors across different hops of attention.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
The best way to evaluate the diversity is deﬁnitely the Kullback Leibler divergence between any 2
of the summation weight vectors. However, we found that not very stable in our case. We conjecture
it is because we are maximizing a set of KL divergence (instead of minimizing only one, which is
the usual case), we are optimizing the annotation matrix A to have a lot of sufﬁciently small or
even zero values at different softmax output units, and these vast amount of zeros is making the
training unstable. There is another feature that KL doesn’t provide but we want, which is, we want
each individual row to focus on a single aspect of semantics, so we want the probability mass in the
annotation softmax output to be more focused. but with KL penalty we cant encourage that.
We hereby introduce a new penalization term which overcomes the aforementioned shortcomings.
Compared to the KL divergence penalization, this term consumes only one third of the computation.
We use the dot product of A and its transpose, subtracted by an identity matrix, as a measure of
redundancy.
Here ∥•∥F stands for the Frobenius norm of a matrix. Similar to adding an L2 regularization term,
this penalization term P will be multiplied by a coefﬁcient, and we minimize it together with the
original loss, which is dependent on the downstream application.
Let’s consider two different summation vectors ai and aj in A. Because of the softmax, all entries
within any summation vector in A should sum up to 1. Thus they can be deemed as probability
masses in a discrete probability distribution. For any non-diagonal elements aij(i ̸= j) in the AAT
matrix, it corresponds to a summation over elementwise product of two distributions:
k are the k-th element in the ai and aj vectors, respectively. In the most extreme case,
where there is no overlap between the two probability distributions ai and aj, the correspond aij will
be 0. Otherwise, it will have a positive value. On the other extreme end, if the two distributions are
identical and all concentrates on one single word, it will have a maximum value of 1. We subtract
an identity matrix from AAT so that forces the elements on the diagonal of AAT to approximate
1, which encourages each summation vector ai to focus on as few number of words as possible,
forcing each vector to be focused on a single aspect, and all other elements to 0, which punishes
redundancy between different summation vectors.
VISUALIZATION
The interpretation of the sentence embedding is quite straight forward because of the existence of
annotation matrix A. For each row in the sentence embedding matrix M, we have its corresponding
annotation vector ai. Each element in this vector corresponds to how much contribution the LSTM
hidden state of a token on that position contributes to. We can thus draw a heat map for each row of
the embedding matrix M This way of visualization gives hints on what is encoded in each part of
the embedding, adding an extra layer of interpretation. (See Figure 3a and 3b).
The second way of visualization can be achieved by summing up over all the annotation vectors,
and then normalizing the resulting weight vector to sum up to 1. Since it sums up all aspects of
semantics of a sentence, it yields a general view of what the embedding mostly focuses on. We can
ﬁgure out which words the embedding takes into account a lot, and which ones are skipped by the
embedding. See Figure 3c and 3d.
RELATED WORK
Various supervised and unsupervised sentence embedding models have been mentioned in Section
1. Different from those models, our proposed method uses a new self-attention mechanism that
allows it to extract different aspects of the sentence into multiple vector-representations. The matrix
structure together with the penalization term gives our model a greater capacity to disentangle the
latent information from the input sentence. We also do not use linguistic structures to guide our
sentence representation model. Additionally, using our method we can easily create visualizations
that can help in the interpretation of the learned representations.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Some recent work have also proposed supervised methods that use intra/self-sentence attention. Ling
et al. proposed an attention based model for word embedding, which calculates an attention
weight for each word at each possible position in the context window. However this method cannot
be extended to sentence level embeddings since one cannot exhaustively enumerate all possible
sentences. Liu et al. proposes a sentence level attention which has a similar motivation but
done differently. They utilize the mean pooling over LSTM states as the attention source, and use
that to re-weight the pooled vector representation of the sentence.
Apart from the previous 2 variants, we want to note that Li et al. proposed a same self
attention mechanism for question encoding in their factoid QA model, which is concurrent to our
work. The difference lies in that their encoding is still presented as a vector, but our attention
produces a matrix representation instead, with a specially designed penalty term. We applied the
model for sentiment anaysis and entailment, and their model is for factoid QA.
The LSTMN model also proposed a very successful intra-sentence level attention mechanism, which is later used by Parikh et al. . We see our attention and theirs as having
different granularities. LSTMN produces an attention vector for each of its hidden states during the
recurrent iteration, which is sort of an ”online updating” attention. It’s more ﬁne-grained, targeting
at discovering lexical correlations between a certain word and its previous words. On the contrary,
our attention mechanism is only performed once, focuses directly on the semantics that makes sense
for discriminating the targets. It is less focused on relations between words, but more on the semantics of the whole sentence that each word contributes to. Computationally, our method also scales up
with the sentence length better, since it doesn’t require the LSTM to compute an annotation vector
over all of its previous words each time when the LSTMN computes its next step.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We ﬁrst evaluate our sentence embedding model by applying it to 3 different datasets: the Age
dataset, the Yelp dataset, and the Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) Corpus. These 3
datasets fall into 3 different tasks, corresponding to author proﬁling, sentiment analysis, and textual entailment, respectively. Then we also perform a set of exploratory experiments to validate
properties of various aspects for our sentence embedding model.
AUTHOR PROFILING
The Author Proﬁling dataset1 consists of Twitter tweets in English, Spanish, and Dutch. For some of
the tweets, it also provides an age and gender of the user when writing the tweet. The age range are
split into 5 classes: 18-24, 25-34, 35-49, 50-64, 65+. We use English tweets as input, and use those
tweets to predict the age range of the user. Since we are predicting the age of users, we refer to it
as Age dataset in the rest of our paper. We randomly selected 68485 tweets as training set, 4000 for
development set, and 4000 for test set. Performances are also chosen to be classiﬁcation accuracy.
Table 1: Performance Comparision of Different Models on Yelp and Age Dataset
BiLSTM + Max Pooling + MLP
CNN + Max Pooling + MLP
We compare our model with two baseline models: biLSTM and CNN. For the two baseline models.
The biLSTM model uses a bidirectional LSTM with 300 dimensions in each direction, and use max
pooling across all LSTM hidden states to get the sentence embedding vector, then use a 2-layer
ReLU output MLP with 3000 hidden states to output the classiﬁcation result. The CNN model
uses the same scheme, but substituting biLSTM with 1 layer of 1-D convolutional network. During
training we use 0.5 dropout on the MLP and 0.0001 L2 regularization. We use stochastic gradient
descent as the optimizer, with a learning rate of 0.06, batch size 16. For biLSTM, we also clip the
1 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
(a) 1 star reviews
(b) 5 star reviews
Figure 2: Heatmap of Yelp reviews with the two extreme score.
norm of gradients to be between -0.5 and 0.5. We searched hyperparameters in a wide range and
ﬁnd the aforementioned set of hyperparameters yields the highest accuracy.
For our model, we use the same settings as what we did in biLSTM. We also use a 2-layer ReLU
output MLP, but with 2000 hidden units. In addition, our self-attention MLP has a hidden layer with
350 units (the da in Section 2), we choose the matrix embedding to have 30 rows (the r), and a
coefﬁcient of 1 for the penalization term.
We train all the three models until convergence and select the corresponding test set performance
according to the best development set performance. Our results show that the model outperforms
both of the biLSTM and CNN baselines by a signiﬁcant margin.
SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
We choose the Yelp dataset2 for sentiment analysis task. It consists of 2.7M yelp reviews, we take
the review as input and predict the number of stars the user who wrote that review assigned to the
corresponding business store. We randomly select 500K review-star pairs as training set, and 2000
for development set, 2000 for test set. We tokenize the review texts by Stanford tokenizer. We use
2 challenge
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
100 dimensional word2vec as initialization for word embeddings, and tune the embedding during
training across all of our experiments. The target number of stars is an integer number in the range
of , inclusive. We are treating the task as a classiﬁcation task, i.e., classify a review text into
one of the 5 classes. We use classiﬁcation accuracy as a measurement.
For the two baseline models, we use the same setting as what we used for Author Proﬁling dataset,
except that we are using a batch size of 32 instead. For our model, we are also using the same
setting, except that we choose the hidden unit numbers in the output MLP to be 3000 instead. We
also observe a signiﬁcant performance gain comparining to the two baselines. (Table 1)
As an interpretation of the learned sentence embedding, we use the second way of visualization
described in Section 2.3 to plot heat maps for some of the reviews in the dataset. We randomly
select 5 examples of negative (1 star) and positive (5 stars) reviews from the test set, when the model
has a high conﬁdence (> 0.8) in predicting the label. As shown in Figure 2, we ﬁnd that the model
majorly learns to capture some key factors in the review that indicate strongly on the sentiment
behind the sentence. For most of the short reviews, the model manages to capture all the key factors
that contribute to an extreme score, but for longer reviews, the model is still not able to capture all
related factors. For example, in the 3rd review in Figure 2b), it seems that a lot of focus is spent on
one single factor, i.e., the ”so much fun”, and the model puts a little amount of attention on other
key points like ”highly recommend”, ”amazing food”, etc.
TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT
We use the biggest dataset in textual entailment, the SNLI corpus for our
evaluation on this task. SNLI is a collection of 570k human-written English sentence pairs manually
labeled for balanced classiﬁcation with the labels entailment, contradiction, and neutral. The model
will be given a pair of sentences, called hypothesis and premise respectively, and asked to tell if the
semantics in the two sentences are contradicting with each other or not. It is also a classiﬁcation
task, so we measure the performance by accuracy.
We process the hypothesis and premise independently, and then extract the relation between the two
sentence embeddings by using multiplicative interactions proposed in Memisevic (see Appendix B for details), and use a 2-layer ReLU output MLP with 4000 hidden units to map the hidden
representation into classiﬁcation results. Parameters of biLSTM and attention MLP are shared across
hypothesis and premise. The biLSTM is 300 dimension in each direction, the attention MLP has
150 hidden units instead, and both sentence embeddings for hypothesis and premise have 30 rows
(the r). The penalization term coefﬁcient is set to 0.3. We use 300 dimensional GloVe word embedding to initialize word embeddings. We use AdaGrad as the optimizer,
with a learning rate of 0.01. We don’t use any extra regularization methods, like dropout or L2
normalization. Training converges after 4 epochs, which is relatively fast.
This task is a bit different from previous two tasks, in that it has 2 sentences as input. There are
a bunch of ways to add inter-sentence level attention, and those attentions bring a lot of beneﬁts.
To make the comparison focused and fair, we only compare methods that fall into the sentence
encoding-based models. i.e., there is no information exchanged between the hypothesis and premise
before they are encoded into some distributed encoding.
Table 2: Test Set Performance Compared to other Sentence Encoding Based Methods in SNLI Datset
Test Accuracy
300D LSTM encoders 
600D (300+300) BiLSTM encoders 
300D Tree-based CNN encoders 
300D SPINN-PI encoders 
300D NTI-SLSTM-LSTM encoders 
1024D GRU encoders with SkipThoughts pre-training 
300D NSE encoders 
Our method
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
We ﬁnd that compared to other published approaches, our method shows a signiﬁcant gain (≥1%)
to them, except for the 300D NSE encoders, which is the state-of-the-art in this category. However,
the 0.2% different is relatively small compared to the differences between other methods.
EXPLORATORY EXPERIMENTS
In this subsection we are going to do a set of exploratory experiments to study the relative effect of
each component in our model.
EFFECT OF PENALIZATION TERM
Since the purpose of introducing the penalization term P is majorly to discourage the redundancy
in the embedding, we ﬁrst directly visualize the heat maps of each row when the model is presented
with a sentence. We compare two identical models with the same size as detailed in Section 4.1
trained separately on Age dataset, one with this penalization term (where the penalization coefﬁcient
is set to 1.0) and the other with no penalty. We randomly select one tweet from the test set and
compare the two models by plotting a heat map for each hop of attention on that single tweet. Since
there are 30 hops of attention for each model, which makes plotting all of them quite redundant, we
only plot 6 of them. These 6 hops already reﬂect the situation in all of the 30 hops.
(c) without penalization
(d) with 1.0 penalization
Figure 3: Heat maps for 2 models trained on Age dataset. The left column is trained without the
penalization term, and the right column is trained with 1.0 penalization. (a) and (b) shows detailed
attentions taken by 6 out of 30 rows of the matrix embedding, while (c) and (d) shows the overall
attention by summing up all 30 attention weight vectors.
(a) Yelp without penalization
(b) Yelp with penalization
Figure 4: Attention of sentence embedding on 3 different Yelp reviews. The left one is trained
without penalization, and the right one is trained with 1.0 penalization.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 3: Performance comparision regarding the penalization term
Penalization coefﬁcient
From the ﬁgure we can tell that the model trained without the penalization term have lots of redundancies between different hops of attention (Figure 3a), resulting in putting lot of focus on the word
”it” (Figure 3c), which is not so relevant to the age of the author. However in the right column, the
model shows more variations between different hops, and as a result, the overall embedding focuses
on ”mail-replies spam” instead. (Figure 3d)
For the Yelp dataset, we also observe a similar phenomenon. To make the experiments more explorative, we choose to plot heat maps of overall attention heat maps for more samples, instead of
plotting detailed heat maps for a single sample again. Figure 4 shows overall focus of the sentence
embedding on three different reviews. We observe that with the penalization term, the model tends
to be more focused on important parts of the review. We think it is because that we are encouraging
it to be focused, in the diagonals of matrix AAT (Equation 8).
To validate if these differences result in performance difference, we evaluate four models trained
on Yelp and Age datasets, both with and without the penalization term. Results are shown in Table
3. Consistent with what expected, models trained with the penalization term outperforms their
counterpart trained without.
In SNLI dataset, although we observe that introducing the penalization term still contributes to encouraging the diversity of different rows in the matrix sentence embedding, and forcing the network
to be more focused on the sentences, the quantitative effect of this penalization term is not so obvious
on SNLI dataset. Both models yield similar test set accuracies.
EFFECT OF MULTIPLE VECTORS
Having multiple rows in the sentence embedding is expected to provide more abundant information
about the encoded content. It makes sence to evaluate how signiﬁcant the improvement can be
brought by r. Taking the models we used for Age and SNLI dataset as an example, we vary r from
1 to 30 for each task, and train the resulting 10 models independently (Figure 5). Note that when
r = 1, the sentence embedding reduces to a normal vector form.
From this ﬁgure we can ﬁnd that, without having multiple rows, the model performs on-par with
its competitiors which use other forms of vector sentence embeddings. But there is signiﬁcant
Figure 5: Effect of the number of rows (r) in matrix sentence embedding. The vertical axes indicates
test set accuracy and the horizontal axes indicates training epoches. Numbers in the legends stand
for the corresponding values of r. (a) is conducted in Age dataset and (b) is conducted in SNLI
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
difference between having only one vector for the sentence embedding and multiple vectors. The
models are also quite invariant with respect to r, since in the two ﬁgures a wide range of values
between 10 to 30 are all generating comparable curves.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we introduced a ﬁxed size, matrix sentence embedding with a self-attention mechanism. Because of this attention mechanism, there is a way to interpret the sentence embedding in
depth in our model. Experimental results over 3 different tasks show that the model outperforms
other sentence embedding models by a signiﬁcant margin.
Introducing attention mechanism allows the ﬁnal sentence embedding to directly access previous
LSTM hidden states via the attention summation. Thus the LSTM doesn’t need to carry every piece
of information towards its last hidden state. Instead, each LSTM hidden state is only expected to
provide shorter term context information around each word, while the higher level semantics, which
requires longer term dependency, can be picked up directly by the attention mechanism. This setting
reliefs the burden of LSTM to carry on long term dependencies. Our experiments also support that,
as we observed that our model has a bigger advantage when the contents are longer. Further more,
the notion of summing up elements in the attention mechanism is very primitive, it can be something
more complex than that, which will allow more operations on the hidden states of LSTM.
The model is able to encode any sequence with variable length into a ﬁxed size representation,
without suffering from long-term dependency problems. This brings a lot of scalability to the model:
without any modiﬁcation, it can be applied directly to longer contents like paragraphs, articles, etc.
Though this is beyond the focus of this paper, it remains an interesting direction to explore as a
future work.
As a downside of our proposed model, the current training method heavily relies on downstream
applications, thus we are not able to train it in an unsupervised way. The major obstacle towards
enabling unsupervised learning in this model is that during decoding, we don’t know as prior how
the different rows in the embedding should be divided and reorganized. Exploring all those possible
divisions by using a neural network could easily end up with overﬁtting. Although we can still do
unsupervised learning on the proposed model by using a sequential decoder on top of the sentence
embedding, it merits more to ﬁnd some other structures as a decoder.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the developers of Theano and Lasagne. The ﬁrst author would also like to thank IBM Watson for providing resources,
fundings and valuable discussions to make this project possible, and Caglar Gulcehre for helpful
discussions.