V-Net: Fully Convolutional Neural Networks for
Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation
Fausto Milletari1, Nassir Navab1,2, Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi3
1 Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Germany
2 Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
3 Department of Neurology, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at
M¨unchen, Germany
Abstract. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been recently
employed to solve problems from both the computer vision and medical image analysis ﬁelds. Despite their popularity, most approaches are
only able to process 2D images while most medical data used in clinical
practice consists of 3D volumes. In this work we propose an approach
to 3D image segmentation based on a volumetric, fully convolutional,
neural network. Our CNN is trained end-to-end on MRI volumes depicting prostate, and learns to predict segmentation for the whole volume at
once. We introduce a novel objective function, that we optimise during
training, based on Dice coeﬃcient. In this way we can deal with situations where there is a strong imbalance between the number of foreground
and background voxels. To cope with the limited number of annotated
volumes available for training, we augment the data applying random
non-linear transformations and histogram matching. We show in our experimental evaluation that our approach achieves good performances on
challenging test data while requiring only a fraction of the processing
time needed by other previous methods.
Introduction and Related Work
Recent research in computer vision and pattern recognition has highlighted the
capabilities of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to solve challenging tasks
such as classiﬁcation, segmentation and object detection, achieving state-of-theart performances. This success has been attributed to the ability of CNNs to
learn a hierarchical representation of raw input data, without relying on handcrafted features. As the inputs are processed through the network layers, the
level of abstraction of the resulting features increases. Shallower layers grasp
local information while deeper layers use ﬁlters whose receptive ﬁelds are much
broader that therefore capture global information .
Segmentation is a highly relevant task in medical image analysis. Automatic
delineation of organs and structures of interest is often necessary to perform tasks
such as visual augmentation , computer assisted diagnosis , interventions
 and extraction of quantitative indices from images . In particular, since
diagnostic and interventional imagery often consists of 3D images, being able to
 
Fig. 1. Slices from MRI volumes depicting prostate. This data is part of the
PROMISE2012 challenge dataset .
perform volumetric segmentations by taking into account the whole volume content at once, has a particular relevance. In this work, we aim to segment prostate
MRI volumes. This is a challenging task due to the wide range of appearance
the prostate can assume in diﬀerent scans due to deformations and variations of
the intensity distribution. Moreover, MRI volumes are often aﬀected by artefacts
and distortions due to ﬁeld inhomogeneity. Prostate segmentation is nevertheless an important task having clinical relevance both during diagnosis, where the
volume of the prostate needs to be assessed , and during treatment planning,
where the estimate of the anatomical boundary needs to be accurate .
CNNs have been recently used for medical image segmentation. Early approaches obtain anatomy delineation in images or volumes by performing patchwise image classiﬁcation. Such segmentations are obtained by only considering
local context and therefore are prone to failure, especially in challenging modalities such as ultrasound, where a high number of mis-classiﬁed voxel are to be
expected. Post-processing approaches such as connected components analysis
normally yield no improvement and therefore, more recent works, propose to
use the network predictions in combination with Markov random ﬁelds , voting strategies or more traditional approaches such as level-sets . Patch-wise
approaches also suﬀer from eﬃciency issues. When densely extracted patches are
processed in a CNN, a high number of computations is redundant and therefore
the total algorithm runtime is high. In this case, more eﬃcient computational
schemes can be adopted.
Fully convolutional network trained end-to-end were so far applied only to 2D
images both in computer vision and microscopy image analysis . These
models, which served as an inspiration for our work, employed diﬀerent network
architectures and were trained to predict a segmentation mask, delineating the
structures of interest, for the whole image. In a pre-trained VGG network
architecture was used in conjunction with its mirrored, de-convolutional,
equivalent to segment RGB images by leveraging the descriptive power of the
features extracted by the innermost layer. In three fully convolutional deep
neural networks, pre-trained on a classiﬁcation task, were reﬁned to produce
segmentations while in a brand new CNN model, especially tailored to tackle
biomedical image analysis problems in 2D, was proposed.
In this work we present our approach to medical image segmentation that
leverages the power of a fully convolutional neural networks, trained end-to-end,
to process MRI volumes. Diﬀerently from other recent approaches we refrain
from processing the input volumes slice-wise and we propose to use volumetric
convolutions instead. We propose a novel objective function based on Dice coef-
ﬁcient maximisation, that we optimise during training. We demonstrate fast and
accurate results on prostate MRI test volumes and we provide direct comparison
with other methods which were evaluated on the same test data 4.
16 Channels
128 x 128 x 64
32 Channels
64 x 64 x 32
64 Channels
32 x 32 x 16
128 Channels
16 x 16 x 8
256 Channels
256 Channels
16 x 16 x 8
128 Channels
32 x 32 x 16
64 Channels
64 x 64 x 32
32 Channels
128 x 128 x 64
"Down" Conv.
"Down" Conv.
"Down" Conv.
"Down" Conv.
"Up" Conv.
"Up" Conv.
"Up" Conv.
"Up" Conv.
2 Ch. (Prediction)
128x128x64
1 Ch. (Input)
128x128x64
"Down" Conv.
Convolutional Layer
2x2 ﬁlters, stride: 2
"Up" Conv.
De-convolutional Layer
2x2 ﬁlters, stride: 2
Fine-grained features
forwarding
Convolution using a
5x5x5 ﬁlter, stride: 1
PReLu non-linearity
Element-wise sum
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of our network architecture. Our custom implementation of Caﬀe processes 3D data by performing volumetric convolutions.
Best viewed in electronic format.
In Figure 2 we provide a schematic representation of our convolutional neural
network. We perform convolutions aiming to both extract features from the data
4 Detailed results available on 
and, at the end of each stage, to reduce its resolution by using appropriate stride.
The left part of the network consists of a compression path, while the right part
decompresses the signal until its original size is reached. Convolutions are all
applied with appropriate padding.
The left side of the network is divided in diﬀerent stages that operate at
diﬀerent resolutions. Each stage comprises one to three convolutional layers.
Similarly to the approach presented in , we formulate each stage such that it
learns a residual function: the input of each stage is (a) used in the convolutional
layers and processed through the non-linearities and (b) added to the output of
the last convolutional layer of that stage in order to enable learning a residual
function. As conﬁrmed by our empirical observations, this architecture ensures
convergence in a fraction of the time required by a similar network that does
not learn residual functions.
The convolutions performed in each stage use volumetric kernels having size
5×5×5 voxels. As the data proceeds through diﬀerent stages along the compression path, its resolution is reduced. This is performed through convolution with
2 × 2 × 2 voxels wide kernels applied with stride 2 (Figure 3). Since the second
operation extracts features by considering only non overlapping 2×2×2 volume
patches, the size of the resulting feature maps is halved. This strategy serves a
similar purpose as pooling layers that, motivated by and other works discouraging the use of max-pooling operations in CNNs, have been replaced in our
approach by convolutional ones. Moreover, since the number of feature channels
doubles at each stage of the compression path of the V-Net, and due to the
formulation of the model as a residual network, we resort to these convolution
operations to double the number of feature maps as we reduce their resolution.
PReLu non linearities are applied throughout the network.
Replacing pooling operations with convolutional ones results also to networks
that, depending on the speciﬁc implementation, can have a smaller memory
footprint during training, due to the fact that no switches mapping the output
of pooling layers back to their inputs are needed for back-propagation, and that
can be better understood and analysed by applying only de-convolutions
instead of un-pooling operations.
Downsampling allows us to reduce the size of the signal presented as input
and to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the features being computed in subsequent
network layers. Each of the stages of the left part of the network, computes a
number of features which is two times higher than the one of the previous layer.
The right portion of the network extracts features and expands the spatial
support of the lower resolution feature maps in order to gather and assemble
the necessary information to output a two channel volumetric segmentation.
The two features maps computed by the very last convolutional layer, having
1×1×1 kernel size and producing outputs of the same size as the input volume,
are converted to probabilistic segmentations of the foreground and background
regions by applying soft-max voxelwise. After each stage of the right portion of
the CNN, a de-convolution operation is employed in order increase the size of
the inputs (Figure 3) followed by one to three convolutional layers involving half
the number of 5 × 5 × 5 kernels employed in the previous layer. Similar to the
left part of the network, also in this case we resort to learn residual functions in
the convolutional stages.
2x2x2 Convolution
with stride 2
2x2x2 De-convolution
with stride 2
Fig. 3. Convolutions with appropriate stride can be used to reduce the size of
the data. Conversely, de-convolutions increase the data size by projecting each
input voxel to a bigger region through the kernel.
Similarly to , we forward the features extracted from early stages of the
left part of the CNN to the right part. This is schematically represented in Figure
2 by horizontal connections. In this way we gather ﬁne grained detail that would
be otherwise lost in the compression path and we improve the quality of the ﬁnal
contour prediction. We also observed that when these connections improve the
convergence time of the model.
We report in Table 1 the receptive ﬁelds of each network layer, showing the
fact that the innermost portion of our CNN already captures the content of
the whole input volume. We believe that this characteristic is important during
segmentation of poorly visible anatomy: the features computed in the deepest
layer perceive the whole anatomy of interest at once, since they are computed
from data having a spatial support much larger than the typical size of the
anatomy we seek to delineate, and therefore impose global constraints.
Table 1. Theoretical receptive ﬁeld of the 3 × 3 × 3 convolutional layers of the
Input Size Receptive Field
Input Size Receptive Field
476 × 476 × 476
22 × 22 × 22
528 × 528 × 528
72 × 72 × 72
546 × 546 × 546
172 × 172 × 172 R-Stage 1
551 × 551 × 551
372 × 372 × 372
551 × 551 × 551
Dice loss layer
The network predictions, which consist of two volumes having the same resolution as the original input data, are processed through a soft-max layer which
outputs the probability of each voxel to belong to foreground and to background.
In medical volumes such as the ones we are processing in this work, it is not uncommon that the anatomy of interest occupies only a very small region of the
scan. This often causes the learning process to get trapped in local minima of
the loss function yielding a network whose predictions are strongly biased towards background. As a result the foreground region is often missing or only
partially detected. Several previous approaches resorted to loss functions based
on sample re-weighting where foreground regions are given more importance
than background ones during learning. In this work we propose a novel objective function based on dice coeﬃcient, which is a quantity ranging between 0
and 1 which we aim to maximise. The dice coeﬃcient D between two binary
volumes can be written as
where the sums run over the N voxels, of the predicted binary segmentation
volume pi ∈P and the ground truth binary volume gi ∈G. This formulation of
Dice can be diﬀerentiated yielding the gradient
computed with respect to the j-th voxel of the prediction. Using this formulation
we do not need to assign weights to samples of diﬀerent classes to establish
the right balance between foreground and background voxels, and we obtain
results that we experimentally observed are much better than the ones computed
through the same network trained optimising a multinomial logistic loss with
sample re-weighting (Fig. 6).
Our CNN is trained end-to-end on a dataset of prostate scans in MRI. An
example of the typical content of such volumes is shown in Figure 1. All the
volumes processed by the network have ﬁxed size of 128 × 128 × 64 voxels and
a spatial resolution of 1 × 1 × 1.5 millimeters.
Annotated medical volumes are not easy to obtain due to the fact that one or
more experts are required to manually trace a reliable ground truth annotation
and that there is a cost associated with their acquisition. In this work we found
necessary to augment the original training dataset in order to obtain robustness
and increased precision on the test dataset.
During every training iteration, we fed as input to the network randomly
deformed versions of the training images by using a dense deformation ﬁeld obtained through a 2 × 2 × 2 grid of control-points and B-spline interpolation.
This augmentation has been performed ”on-the-ﬂy”, prior to each optimisation iteration, in order to alleviate the otherwise excessive storage requirements.
Additionally we vary the intensity distribution of the data by adapting, using
histogram matching, the intensity distributions of the training volumes used
in each iteration, to the ones of other randomly chosen scans belonging to the
A Previously unseen MRI volume can be segmented by processing it in a feedforward manner through the network. The output of the last convolutional layer,
after soft-max, consists of a probability map for background and foreground. The
voxels having higher probability (> 0.5) to belong to the foreground than to the
background are considered part of the anatomy.
Sagittal Coronal
Fig. 4. Qualitative results on the PROMISE 2012 dataset .
We trained our method on 50 MRI volumes, and the relative manual ground
truth annotation, obtained from the ”PROMISE2012” challenge dataset .
This dataset contains medical data acquired in diﬀerent hospitals, using different equipment and diﬀerent acquisition protocols. The data in this dataset
is representative of the clinical variability and challenges encountered in clinical settings. As previously stated we massively augmented this dataset through
random transformation performed in each training iteration, for each mini-batch
fed to the network. The mini-batches used in our implementation contained two
volumes each, mainly due to the high memory requirement of the model during
training. We used a momentum of 0.99 and a initial learning rate of 0.0001 which
decreases by one order of magnitude every 25K iterations.
Dice coefﬁcient bins
Number of test volumes
Fig. 5. Distribution of volumes with respect to the Dice coeﬃcient achieved
during segmentation.
We tested V-Net on 30 MRI volumes depicting prostate whose ground truth
annotation was secret. All the results reported in this section of the paper were
obtained directly from the organisers of the challenge after submitting the segmentation obtained through our approach. The test set was representative of
the clinical variability encountered in prostate scans in real clinical settings .
We evaluated the approach performance in terms of Dice coeﬃcient, Hausdorﬀdistance of the predicted delineation to the ground truth annotation and
in terms of score obtained on the challenge data as computed by the organisers
of ”PROMISE 2012” . The results are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 5.
Table 2. Quantitative comparison between the proposed approach and the current best results on the PROMISE 2012 challenge dataset.
Avg. Hausdorﬀdistance Score on challenge task
V-Net + Dice-based loss
0.869 ± 0.033
5.71 ± 1.20 mm
V-Net + mult. logistic loss 0.739 ± 0.088
10.55 ± 5.38 mm
Imorphics 
0.879 ± 0.044
5.935 ± 2.14 mm
ScrAutoProstate
0.874 ± 0.036
5.58 ± 1.49 mm
0.835 ± 0.055
7.73 ± 2.68 mm
0.834 ± 0.082
7.90 ± 3.82 mm
Fig. 6. Qualitative comparison between the results obtained using the Dice coeﬃcient based loss (green) and re-weighted soft-max with loss (yellow).
Our implementation5 was realised in python, using a custom version of the
Caﬀe6 framework which was enabled to perform volumetric convolutions via
CuDNN v3. All the trainings and experiments were ran on a standard workstation equipped with 64 GB of memory, an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-5820K CPU
working at 3.30GHz, and a NVidia GTX 1080 with 8 GB of video memory. We
let our model train for 48 hours, or 30K iterations circa, and we were able to
segment a previously unseen volume in circa 1 second. The datasets were ﬁrst
normalised using the N4 bias ﬁled correction function of the ANTs framework
 and then resampled to a common resolution of 1 × 1 × 1.5 mm. We applied
random deformations to the scans used for training by varying the position of
the control points with random quantities obtained from gaussian distribution
with zero mean and 15 voxels standard deviation. Qualitative results can be seen
in Fig. 4.
Conclusion
We presented and approach based on a volumetric convolutional neural network
that performs segmentation of MRI prostate volumes in a fast and accurate manner. We introduced a novel objective function that we optimise during training
based on the Dice overlap coeﬃcient between the predicted segmentation and the
ground truth annotation. Our Dice loss layer does not need sample re-weighting
when the amount of background and foreground pixels is strongly unbalanced
and is indicated for binary segmentation tasks. Although we inspired our architecture to the one proposed in , we divided it into stages that learn residuals
and, as empirically observed, improve both results and convergence time. Future works will aim at segmenting volumes containing multiple regions in other
modalities such as ultrasound and at higher resolutions by splitting the network
over multiple GPUs.
5 Implementation available at 
6 Implementation available at 
Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge NVidia corporation, that donated a Tesla K40
GPU to our group enabling this research, Dr. Geert Litjens who dedicated some
of his time to evaluate our results against the ground truth of the PROMISE
2012 dataset and Ms. Iro Laina for her support to this project.