Document downloaded from:
This paper must be cited as:
The final publication is available at
Additional Information
Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (www.loni.ucla.edu/ADNI).
 
 
Eskildsen, SF.; Coupé, P.; Fonov, V.; Manjón Herrera, JV.; Leung, KK.; Guizard, N.;
Wassef, SN.... . BEaST: Brain extraction based on nonlocal segmentation technique.
NeuroImage. 59(3):2362-2373. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.012
BEaST: Brain Extraction based on nonlocal Segmentation Technique
Simon F. Eskildsena,b,, Pierrick Coupéa, Vladimir Fonova, José V. Manjónc, Kelvin K. Leungd, Nicolas
Guizarda, Shafik N. Wassefa, Lasse Riis Østergaardb, D. Louis Collinsa and the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative**
aMcConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3801 University Street,
Montreal, Canada
bDepartment of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7D, Aalborg, Denmark
cInstituto de Aplicaciones de las Tecnologías de la Información y de las Comunicaciones Avanzadas (ITACA),
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain
dDementia Research Centre (DRC), UCL Institute of Neurology, Queens Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK
Abstract – Brain extraction is an important step in the analysis of brain images. The variability in
brain morphology and the difference in intensity characteristics due to imaging sequences make
the development of a general purpose brain extraction algorithm challenging. To address this
issue, we propose a new robust method (BEaST) dedicated to produce consistent and accurate
brain extraction. This method is based on nonlocal segmentation embedded in a multi-resolution
framework. A library of 80 priors is semi-automatically constructed from the NIH-sponsored MRI
study of normal brain development, the International Consortium for Brain Mapping, and the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative databases.
In testing, a mean Dice similarity coefficient of 0.9834±0.0053 was obtained when performing
leave-one-out cross validation selecting only 20 priors from the library. Validation using the online
Segmentation Validation Engine resulted in a top ranking position with a mean Dice coefficient of
0.9781±0.0047. Robustness of BEaST is demonstrated on all baseline ADNI data, resulting in a very
low failure rate. The segmentation accuracy of the method is better than two widely used publicly
available methods and recent state-of-the-art hybrid approaches. BEaST provides results
comparable to a recent label fusion approach, while being 40 times faster and requiring a much
smaller library of priors.
Keywords: Brain extraction, skull stripping, patch-based segmentation, multi-resolution, MRI, BET
** Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database (www.loni.ucla.edu/ADNI). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design
and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report.
investigators
 
Eskildsen et al., 2011
1. Introduction
Brain extraction (or skull stripping) is an important step in many neuroimaging analyses, such as
registration, tissue classification, and segmentation. While methods such as the estimation of
intensity normalization fields and registration do not require perfect brain masks, other methods
such as measuring cortical thickness rely on very accurate brain extraction to work properly. For
instance, failure to remove the dura may lead to an overestimation of cortical thickness , while removing part of the brain would lead to an underestimation. In cases
of incorrect brain extraction, subjects may be excluded from further processing, a potentially
expensive consequence for many studies. The solution of manually correcting the brain masks is
a labour intensive and time-consuming task that is highly sensitive to inter- and intra-rater
variability .
An accurate brain extraction method should exclude all tissues external to the brain, such as
skull, dura, and eyes, without removing any part of the brain. The number of methods proposed
to address the brain segmentation problem reflects the importance of accurate and robust brain
extraction. During the last 15 years, more than 20 brain extraction methods have been proposed
using a variety of techniques, such as morphological operations ,
atlas matching , deformable surfaces , level sets , histogram analysis
 , watershed , graph cuts ,
label fusion , and hybrid techniques . Studies
evaluating these methods have found varying accuracy .
While some methods are better at removing non-brain tissue, at the cost of removing brain tissue,
others are better at including all brain tissue, at the cost of including non-brain tissue . This is a classic example of the trade-off between
sensitivity and specificity.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
Beyond the technical issues, the brain extraction problem is further complicated by the fact that
no accepted standard exists for what to include in brain segmentation. While there is consensus
among methods that obvious non-brain structures, such as skull, dura, and eyes should be
removed as part of the brain extraction process, there are divergent opinions on other structures
and tissues, such as the amount of extra-cerebral cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF), blood vessels, and
nerves. Some methods define the target segmentation as white matter (WM) and gray matter
(GM) only , while others include CSF, veins, and the optic chiasms . Depending on the objective for the subsequent analysis it is important
to remove tissues that may be confused with brain tissue in the images.
Most brain extraction methods are developed to work on T1-weighted (T1w) magnetic resonance
images (MRI), since this is a common modality in structural neuroimaging as it provides
excellent contrast for the different brain tissues. In addition, the brain segmentation performed
using T1w images can be mapped to other modalities if needed. However, due to the various
acquisition sequences and scanner types, the appearance of the brain in T1w images may vary
significantly between scans, which complicates the task of developing a brain extraction method
that works across sequences and scanners. A further complication is the anatomical variability of
the brain. Neuroimaging studies are performed on individuals at all ages with and without tissue
altered by pathologies. Therefore, existing brain extraction methods often need to be adapted
specifically for a certain type of study or, in the best case, need to be tuned to work on a certain
population. A method that works reliably and robustly on a variety of different brain
morphologies and acquisition sequences without requiring adjustment of parameters would
greatly reduce the need for manual intervention and exclusion of subjects in neuroimaging
Building on recent work on label fusion , the multi-atlas propagation and segmentation (MAPS) method was adapted to brain extraction to address the problem of variability in anatomy and
acquisition, producing more robust results and leading to the best currently published results
 . In label fusion approaches, multiple atlases are selected from a library of
Eskildsen et al., 2011
previously labelled images. After non-rigid registrations of these atlases to the target image, their
labels are merged through a label fusion procedure (e.g.; majority vote, STAPLE, etc.) to obtain the final segmentation. This type of method is
dependent on the accuracy of the non-rigid registrations. Registration errors may result in
segmentation errors, as all selected labels are typically weighted equally. Like many of the labelfusion methods, by using a large library of labelled images (priors), MAPS compensates for
possible registration errors, which leads to superior results compared to other popular brain
extraction methods. However, due to the large library and the time consuming multiple non-rigid
registrations step in MAPS, the processing time per subject on an Intel Xeon CPU (X5472
3GHz) is 19 h. Furthermore, in many studies it is not feasible to build a large library of priors
and the long processing time may be a bottleneck in the analysis pipeline.
A recent framework inspired by nonlocal means MRI denoising has been introduced to achieve the label fusion segmentation task.
This method has demonstrated promising segmentation results without the need for non-rigid
registrations . Instead of performing the fusion of nonlinearly deformed atlas
structures, this method achieves the labelling of each voxel individually by comparing its
surrounding neighbourhood with patches in training subjects in which the label of the central
voxel is known. In this paper, we present the adaptation of this patch-based segmentation
approach to perform brain extraction. The patch-based segmentation method cannot be directly
applied to brain extraction, because i) false positives are likely to occur as extra-cerebral tissue
may resemble brain within the patch structure, and ii) the computational complexity is high and
this becomes a significant problem for large structures. To address these issues, we propose to
apply the patch-based segmentation within a multi-resolution approach to extract the brain. We
validate the performance of the proposed method on multiple collections of T1w MRI and
demonstrate that the method robustly and consistently extracts the brain from subjects at all ages
(from children to elderly) and from healthy subjects as well as patients with Alzheimer’s Disease
(AD). The main contribution of this paper is the development of a robust procedure to identify
accurate brain masks with an extensive validation on multiple datasets acquired on different
scanners and from different populations.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
2. Definition of brain mask
As mentioned in the introduction, no standard exists defining what should be included and
excluded when performing the brain extraction. In our study, we aim to exclude all extra-cerebral
tissues, which resemble GM or WM by image intensity and may affect subsequent analyses.
Such tissues include the superior sagittal sinus (may resemble GM) and the optic chiasms (may
resemble WM). Following this principle, we accept inclusion of internal CSF and CSF proximate
to the brain, as the T1w MR signal from CSF is easily separated from non-liquid structures and
subsequent analyses may benefit from the inclusion of CSF as noted in . We
propose the following definition of a mask separating the brain from non-brain tissue:
Included in the mask
 All cerebral and cerebellar white matter
 All cerebral and cerebellar gray matter
 CSF in ventricles (lateral, 3rd and 4th) and the cerebellar cistern
 CSF in deep sulci and along the surface of the brain and brain stem
 The brainstem (pons, medulla)
Excluded from the mask
 Skull, skin, muscles, fat, eyes, dura mater, bone and bone marrow
 Exterior blood vessels – specifically the carotid arteries, the superior sagittal sinus and
the transverse sinus
 Exterior nerves – specifically the optic chiasms
3. Proposed brain extraction method
The proposed Brain Extraction based on nonlocal Segmentation Technique (BEaST), is inspired
by the patch-based segmentation first published in Coupé et al. and extended in Coupé et
al. . As done in Coupé et al. , we use sum of squared differences (SSD) as the
metric for estimation of distance between patches. Using SSD as the similarity metric requires
that the intensity of brain tissue is consistent across subjects and imaging sequences. Therefore,
Eskildsen et al., 2011
we perform intensity normalization and spatial normalization before constructing the library of
priors. Because manual brain segmentation from scratch is an extremely time consuming
process, and because some automated techniques yield reasonable results, the gold standard of
library priors is constructed using a semi-automatic method that involves extensive manual
correction of automatically generated brain masks.
The following describes the normalization, the construction of the library containing the priors,
and the fundamental patch-based segmentation method as well as our contribution of embedding
the method in a multi-resolution approach to improve segmentation accuracy and computation
3.1 Normalization
Image intensity normalization of the T1w MRI data is performed by first applying the bias field
correction algorithm N3 followed by the intensity normalization proposed in
Nyul and Udupa . Spatial normalization is achieved by 9 degrees of freedom linear
registration to the publicly available ICBM152 average 
that defines the MNI Talairach-like stereotaxic space, and resampled on a 193×229×193 voxel
grid with isotropic 1 mm spacing. A final intensity normalization is performed in stereotaxic
space by linearly scaling the intensities to the range [0;100] using 0.1%–99.9% of the voxels in
the intensity histogram within an approximate stereotaxic brain mask.
3.2 Construction of library
3.2.1 Datasets used
The library of segmentation priors is built from several datasets: the NIH-funded MRI study of
normal brain development (termed here the NIH Paediatric Database, or NIHPD) 
(age: 5–18y), the International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM) database (age: 18–43y), and the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database
 (age: 55–91y). The NIHPD and ICBM databases consist of healthy
subjects, while the ADNI database, in addition to cognitive normal (CN) subjects, contains scans
of subjects with AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This way, almost the entire human
Eskildsen et al., 2011
life span is covered and subjects with atrophic anatomy are included, which provides a
representative library of priors for performing brain extraction.
We chose 10 random T1-weighted (T1w) magnetic resonance (MR) scans from each of the
NIHPD and ICBM databases. From the ADNI database we chose 20 random T1w MR scans at
the time of screening from each class (CN, MCI, AD). In total, our library consists of 80
template MRI images with their associated brain masks described below. All scans were
acquired using 1.5T field strength.
3.2.2 Priors construction
Ideally, one would use MRI data with manually segmented brain masks from multiple experts to
create the priors. Unfortunately, manual segmentation is heavily time consuming - taking
between 6 and 8 h per brain for a 1mm3 isotropic volume to generate a mask that is consistent in
3D in coronal, sagittal and transverse views. Furthermore, inter- and intra-rater variability can
lead to errors in the priors. We have decided to take a more pragmatic approach where
automated tools are used to get a good estimate of the cortical surface and manual correction is
used afterwards to correct any errors. This way, we benefit from the high reproducibility of the
automated technique as well as the anatomical expertise of the manual raters. Priors were
generated using one of two strategies, depending on the source of the data.
NIHPD and ICBM: The NIHPD and ICBM databases contain T2w and PDw images in addition
to T1w images. T1w images have high signal for the brain tissue, while T2w and PDw images
have high signal for CSF (see Fig. 1). We take advantage of this fact to build the priors library.
By adding intensities from the three different sequences, we obtained an image with a very high
signal for the intracranial cavity (ICC) (Fig. 1A), which could be easily extracted using the
widely used Brain Extraction Tool (BET) from the FMRIB Software Library
(FSL, (Fig. 1B). From the ICC segmentation,
we used Fast Accurate Cortex Extraction (FACE) to delineate
the boundary between GM and CSF in the cerebrum (Fig. 1C). Cerebellum and brain stem were
added by non-linearly fitting masks in stereotaxic space. Finally, extensive and careful manual
corrections were performed to get an optimal brain segmentation matching our definition (see
Section 2) (Fig. 1D). On average, such corrections took between 1 and 2 h per brain.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
ADNI: Priors from the ADNI database were constructed using the semi-automatic segmentations
used in MAPS . These segmentations are accurate definitions of the GM and
WM of the brain, but all interior CSF is excluded (see Fig 2A). Therefore, we deformed a
spherical mesh initialized around the brain to fit smoothly along the border of the segmentation.
In this manner, we obtained a similar definition of brain segmentation as for the NIHPD and
ICBM data. Finally, these segmentations were manually corrected in the same way as was done
for the NIHPD and ICBM data (Fig. 2B).
All library priors were flipped along the mid-sagittal plane to increase the size of the library
utilizing the symmetric properties of the human brain, yielding 160 priors (original and flipped)
from the 80 semi-automated segmentations described above.
3.3 Patch-based segmentation
The proposed method is an extension of the patch-based segmentation method described in
Coupé et al. . In brief, a label is applied to a given voxel in the target image based on the
similarity of its surrounding patch P(xi) to all the patches P(xs,j) in the library within a search
volume. For each voxel xi of the target image, the surrounding neighbourhood is searched for
similar patches in the N library images. A nonlocal means estimator v(xi) is used to estimate the
label at xi:
where l(xs,j) is the label of voxel xs,j at location j in library image s. We used l(xs,j) {0,1}, where
0 is background and 1 is object (brain). The weight w(xi, xs,j) assigned to label l(xs,j) depends on
the similarity of P(xi) to P(xs,j) and is computed as:
‖ ( ) ( )‖
where ||∙||2 is the L2-norm, normalized by the number of patch elements and computed between
each intensity of the elements of the patches P(xi) and P(xs,j). The parameter h of the weighting
Eskildsen et al., 2011
function is locally adapted as in Coupé et al. by using the minimal distance found
between the patch under study and the patches of the library.
These calculations are computationally impractical if made for all patches in all library images.
Thus, to decrease computation time several strategies are used in our method.
Initialization mask: First, to reduce the size of the area to segment, an initialization mask M is
constructed as the union of all segmentation priors Si minus the intersection of all Si:
The patch-based segmentation is performed within this region of interest (ROI) only under the
assumption that the library is representative of all brain sizes after spatial normalization. This
approach reduces the ROI by 50% compared with the union of all Si and by 85% compared with
the entire stereotaxic space (Fig. 3).
Template pre-selection: Furthermore, the N closest images from the library are selected based
on their similarity to the target image within the defined ROI (initialization mask, see Eq. 3). The
similarity is calculated as the SSD between the target and each of the template images in the
Patch pre-selection: Finally, to reduce the number of patches to consider, preselection of the
most similar patches is done as proposed in Coupé et al. using the patch mean and
variance. The main idea is that similar patches should have similar means and similar variances.
Thus, patches that are dissimilar with regard to mean and variance are not used in the weighted
estimation. We use the structural similarity (ss) measure :
where μ is the mean and σ is the standard deviation of the patches centered on voxel xi and voxel
xs,j at location j in template s. Only patches from the library with ss > 0.95, when compared to the
patch under consideration, are selected for the nonlocal means estimator at voxel xi.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
3.4 Multi-resolution framework
In order to obtain optimal performance for brain extraction, the patch size needs to be large
compared to the patch sizes used to segment smaller structures such as the hippocampus. For
example, a small patch in the dura may resemble gray matter of the brain as the T1 intensities of
these structures often are similar. Thus, a large patch size, including more structural information,
is needed to avoid inclusion of extra-cerebral tissue, such as dura or fat. This is computationally
impractical in the stereotaxic resolution. Therefore, we suggest embedding the patch-based
segmentation within a multi-resolution framework, which provides the opportunity to effectively
have spatially large patch sizes while still being computationally practical.
In brief, the multi-resolution framework enables propagation of segmentation across scales by
using the resulting segmentation at the previous scale to initialize the segmentation at the current
The library images, labels, initialization mask, and target image at the stereotaxic resolution Vj
are all resampled to a lower resolution Vj−k, and the patch-based segmentation is performed. The
nonlocal means estimator vV
j−k (xi) at the Vj−k resolution is propagated to a higher resolution
Vj−k+1 by upsampling using trilinear interpolation. The estimator function vV
j−k(xi) can be
considered as the confidence level of which label to assign the voxel. Values close to 0 are likely
background, while values close to 1 are likely object. We define a confidence level α to assign
labels to the voxels at each scale. Voxels with vV
j−k(xi) < α are labelled background, and voxels
j−k(xi) > (1 − α) are labelled object. Segmentation of these two sets of voxels is considered
final, and they are excluded from further processing. Voxels with vV
j−k(xi) in the range [α ; 1 − α]
are propagated and processed at a higher resolution (Vj−k+1). This procedure is repeated until the
resolution of the stereotaxic space Vj is reached. In this manner, the initialization mask of each
resolution step is limited to the voxels with uncertain segmentation at the previous step (Fig. 3).
This greatly reduces the computational cost. At the stereotaxic resolution, segmentation is done
by thresholding the estimator vV
j(xi) at 0.5.
During experiments, we used three resolutions (k = 2) with isotropic voxel spacing respectively
of 4 mm, 2 mm, and 1 mm (stereotaxic space resolution) (see Fig. 3). We empirically chose
Eskildsen et al., 2011
confidence level α and variable patch size and search area depending on the resolution (see Table
Voxel size (mm3) Patch size (voxels) Search area (voxels)
Table 1. Patch size, search area, and confidence level α chosen for the three resolutions
4. Validation
In our validation of the proposed method we used the Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) adapted to binary images when comparing to the gold standard brain segmentations
described above. The DSC is defined as
| | | |, where A is the set of voxels in the proposed
segmentation and B is the set of voxels in the reference segmentation and |∙| is the cardinality.
Furthermore, we calculated the false positive rate (FPR) as
| | and the false negative rate
| |, where FP is the set of false positive voxels, TN the set of true negative voxels,
FN the set of false negative voxels, and TP the set of true positive voxels.
To visualize errors, we generated false positive and false negative images for each segmentation
using the gold standard. These error images were averaged and the resulting image intensities
were projected onto the three principal planes (axial, coronal, sagittal) using mean intensity
projection in a manner similar to that done in Segmentation Validation Engine (Shattuck et al.,
4.1 Leave-one-out cross validation
To evaluate the robustness and the accuracy of BEaST, we measured the segmentation accuracy
in a leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) fashion. Each of the 80 library images was
processed with the remaining 79 images as priors (158 after mid-sagittal flipping), and the
resulting segmentation was compared to the manually corrected labels in the library. In this
Eskildsen et al., 2011
experiment, we varied the number of selected priors from the library to evaluate the impact of N
on segmentation accuracy. During our experiment, N varied from 2 to 40.
4.2 Comparison to other methods
A comparison to BET and VBM8 ( 
was performed. We chose to compare with BET, as BET is publicly available, widely used, and
has been shown to perform well in several recent brain extraction comparisons . The choice of VBM8 was based on its availability
and the fact that it is the highest-ranking publicly available method in the archive of the online
Segmentation
Validation
segmentation
( 
BET iteratively deforms an ellipsoid mesh, initialized inside the brain, to the GM/CSF boundary.
The target of BET is very similar to our definition of the optimal brain segmentation (see Section
2). We used BET version 2.1 from FSL version 4.1. Since BET performs better with robust brain
center estimation and when the neck is not visible in the image , we applied
BET on the normalized and stereotaxically aligned images with default parameters.
VBM8 performs the brain extraction by thresholding the tissue probability map in stereotaxic
space, generated using the SPM framework , and
followed by repeated morphological openings to remove non-brain tissues connected by thin
bridges. We used release 419 of VBM8, which was the latest version by the time of writing. By
experiments, we found that VBM8 provided better results when initialized with native images in
contrast to stereotactically registered images. In order to perform the best fair comparison, this
method was thus applied in native space.
BET and VBM8 were applied on the entire library of scans and DSCs, FPRs, and FNRs were
calculated using the gold standard segmentations.
4.3 Independent validation
Comparing the results of BEaST to gold standard segmentations, which are also used as priors, a
bias may be introduced that affect the results in favour of BEaST. Such a comparison effectively
demonstrates that the method can provide results similar to our definition. However, when
Eskildsen et al., 2011
comparing to methods with no priors, a bias is introduced. Therefore, we performed validation
using an independent test set available in the online Segmentation Validation Engine (SVE) of
brain segmentation methods . The test set consists of 40 T1w MRI scans
(20 males and 20 females; age range 19 - 40). The web service allows the comparison of results
with hand-corrected brain masks. The DSC, sensitivity (SEN), and specificity (SPE) are
calculated automatically, where SEN and SPE are related to FNR and FPR by: SEN=1 - FNR
and SPE=1 - FPR. The web service contains an archive of all uploaded results, which enables
segmentation methods to be objectively benchmarked and compared between each other.
4.4 Robustness
Finally, we evaluated the robustness of BEaST, and compared it to BET, by applying the method
to all 1.5T T1w baseline ADNI data (200 AD, 408 MCI, and 232 CN). A strict manual quality
control procedure was carried out to label the results “pass” or “fail” corresponding to whether
the individual brain mask met the definition given in Section 2 and whether the mask was
sufficient for further processing in a cortical surface analysis study. Masks from BEaST and BET
were rated in a blinded fashion (i.e., the rater did not know which of the 1680 masks came from
which procedure. This way, the failure rate of BEaST was compared to the failure rate of BET
on the same data. A comparison to BET was chosen as BET demonstrated better compliance
with our brain mask definition (see Section 2) than VBM8 during our validation experiments.
5. Results
5.1 Leave-one-out cross validation
Figure 4 shows the DSCs for increasing number of priors selected from the library when
compared to the gold standard. As shown in Coupé et al. , increasing the number of
selected priors improves the segmentation accuracy with the average DSC increasing from
0.9797 (N=2) to 0.9856 (N=40). In our experiment, accuracy is high even when using only very
few selected priors. Increasing the number of selected priors appears to make the segmentations
more consistent as the standard deviation is reduced from 0.0072 (N=2) to 0.0049 (N=40). The
results show a single persistent outlier that does not benefit from increasing N. This outlier is the
segmentation of the youngest (age=6y) subject in the dataset. The remaining NIHPD subjects in
Eskildsen et al., 2011
the dataset are aged from 7y to 18y. This suggests that the maturation of the brain and skull alters
the structural appearance in the T1w scans. Thus, the structural redundancy of the “youngest
scan” is low within the library, and increasing N does not increase the number of similar patches.
Though the experiment showed an increase of accuracy with increasing N, we chose N=20 for
further experiments as the higher accuracy comes at a cost of longer computation time. Figure 5a
shows the segmentation accuracy within the different groups used in the experiments for N=20.
With an average DSC of 0.9901, the accuracy on ICBM data is significantly higher (p<0.001,
two-tailed t-test) than the accuracy of the other groups tested. This may be due to the fact that the
10 ICBM data sets evaluated here were acquired on a single scanner, and thus are more
homogeneous than the other groups, which lead to higher redundancy and better matches of
patches during the segmentation process for this group of example data.
5.2 Comparison to other methods
In Table 2, the DSC, FPR, and FNR are provided for BET, VBM8, and BEaST (N=20) when
tested on the three different datasets used in our study. BET yielded very high DSC for ICBM
and NIHPD, while the results are more mixed on ADNI as indicated by the high standard
deviation and the increased rates of false positives and false negatives. VBM8 provided slightly
lower DSC on ICBM and NIHPD with similar FPR and FNR distributions, which are visualized
in Fig. 6. On the ADNI dataset, VBM8 provided on average DSC values larger than those
obtained by BET and is more consistent in its segmentation. In fact, VBM8 never results in
catastrophic segmentations, which BET has a tendency to do from time to time (this can be
observed on the false positives map in Fig. 6c, top row). BEaST yielded consistently high DSC
on all data with generally balanced FPR and FNR that were significantly lower than the other
methods except for the FNR on ICBM and ADNI, where VBM8 provides similar FNR values.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
Table 2. Average DSC, FPR, and FNR for the methods tested on the different data sets used. The
best results from each column are underlined. Two bottom rows: p-values for two-tailed paired ttest comparing BEaST and respectively BET and VBM8. Significant (p<0.05) results are shown
in italic and highly significant (p<0.01) results are shown in bold.
Figure 7 shows typical examples of brain masks obtained by BET, VBM8 and BEaST on the five
different groups tested here (NIHPD, ICBM, ADNI-CN, ADNI-MCI, ADNI-AD). On NIHPD
and ICBM data, BET behaved quite well with only minor segmentation errors, such as inclusion
of the transverse sinus and part of the eye sockets. On ADNI data, more serious errors were
found using BET. These include inclusion of dura and marrow of the skull while gyri are often
cut off in atrophic brains. VBM8 had a tendency to perform over-segmentations on all groups
and sometimes included dura proximate to the brain, carotid arteries, ocular fat / muscle, and
parts of the eyes. On the positive side, VBM8 rarely removes part of the brain due to the
consistent over-segmentation (see Fig. 6). BEaST generally provided a more consistent and
robust segmentation without serious errors.
Figure 5b-d show the resulting DSCs, FPRs, and FNRs of BEaST compared to BET and VBM8.
We measured the segmentation output for BEaST at each resolution by thresholding the nonlocal
means estimator at 0.5. As shown, the accuracy increases along with scale, and at 2 mm voxel
sizes (requiring about 1.25 min) BEaST has already significantly (p=0.01, paired t-test) higher
median (and mean) accuracy than BET (Fig. 5b). The difference in DSCs between the techniques
may seem small. However, when measuring DSC in the context of whole brain segmentations,
small changes in the coefficient correspond to large changes in volume as demonstrated in
 . In our case a change of 0.01 in DSC corresponds to about 30-40 cm3
0.975±0.003
0.975±0.003
0.944±0.115
0.967±0.002
0.972±0.003
0.963±0.005
0.990±0.002
0.981±0.005
0.985±0.011
BEaST compared to other methods (p-values)
2.19×10-15
6.35×10-10
1.81×10-21
1.12×10-22
Eskildsen et al., 2011
depending on brain size and the false positives - false negatives ratio. This volume is relatively
large when compared to the size of the structures, which are usually measured in neuroimaging
studies (e.g.; the size of the human hippocampus is about 3.5 cm3). The varying bias of the DSC
when segmenting structures of different sizes in our case is considered
low, as the brains have been spatially normalized. The FPRs and FNRs shown in Fig. 5c-d
illustrate the large effect of a small difference in DSC. Compared to VBM8, the FPR is reduced
by 74% using BEaST, and FNR is reduced by 67% compared to BET. Because of the consistent
over-segmentation, VBM8 has an FNR similar to BEaST at the highest resolution. Even though
the results of BET have a similar median FPR compared to the FPR of BEaST, the FPR of BET
is significantly (p=0.05) different from the FPR of BEaST.
5.3 Independent Validation
Images from the independent test dataset from the Segmentation Validation Engine were
normalized in the same way as the library images. Validation of BEaST (N=20) using the test
dataset resulted in a mean DSC of 0.9781±0.0047 with FPR of 1.13%±0.35% and FNR of
0.60%±0.25% (see At the time of writing, this
result was the best of all the methods published on the website. MAPS had a second place with a
DSC of 0.9767±0.0021 followed by VBM8 with a DSC of 0.9760±0.0025. When compared with
BEaST, the differences in results with these two other techniques are statistically significant
(p<0.03, paired t-test).
5.4 Robustness
After careful, blinded quality control of the 2×840 baseline ADNI data volumes from BEaST
(N=20) and BET, 599 images processed with BEaST were found to be acceptable for further
cortical surface analysis while only 125 images processed with BET were acceptable. This
corresponds to a failure rate of 29% for BEaST and 85% for BET. Figure 8 shows examples of
segmentations that failed the quality control. As seen from the figure, if any part of the cortex
was removed or any part of the dura was included by the segmentation, the result was rejected.
Performing a second pass with BEaST (N=20) using the 599 accepted segmentations with
corresponding images as priors, and re-applying BEaST the failure rate was reduced to 10% corresponding to 86 scans (see Fig. 8 for
examples of improvements after second pass). Many of these persistently failing scans had
motion or Gibbs ringing artifacts, and some had parts of the brain present outside the
initialization mask. No catastrophic errors were detected and the manual corrections needed for
passing the brain masks were small. In fact, for other types of analyses, such as segmentations of
deep brain structures, all brain masks produced by BEaST would pass the quality control.
5.5 Computation time
In our experiments, with 20 images selected from the template library, the total processing time
using a single thread on an Intel Core i7-950 processor at 3.06 GHz was less than 30 min per
subject. With 10 images, the processing time was less than 20 min per subject. By contrast,
without the multi-resolution step, but using the initialization mask, the processing time was
around 320 min. Removing the initialization mask increased the processing time to 42 h. The
average processing times of BET and VBM8 were about respectively 2.5 min and 12 min,
including the spatial and intensity normalization. Obtaining the segmentation of BEaST at 2 mm
voxel sizes takes about 2 min including the spatial and intensity normalization, and the
corresponding DSCs are significantly (p<0.03) higher than either BET or VBM8 (Fig. 5b). This
suggests that a fast low-resolution result may be available for certain analyses that do not require
a highly detailed mask. Compared to MAPS, which yields similar accuracy as BEaST, the
processing time of BEaST is about 40 times shorter on similar hardware.
6. Discussion
The leave-one-out cross-validation showed that the segmentation accuracy is consistently high
(average DSC for N=20: 0.9834±0.0053) and that selecting more priors from the library increase
the accuracy. However, there is a trade-off between the number of selected priors and
segmentation accuracy, why we chose to set N=20 for our validation. The results showed a
higher accuracy on ICBM data compared to the other groups tested. This may be caused by the
fact that i) all ICBM images were acquired using the same scanner, and ii) the anatomical
variability within this group may be smaller than the other groups studied. This suggests that the
accuracy may be improved by extending the number of priors for the groups with higher
Eskildsen et al., 2011
anatomical variability and multi-site acquisitions. Although the results show that only a
relatively small library is needed, the library still needs to be representative of all the data for the
patch-based segmentation to work optimally.
The excellent results on ICBM and NIHPD suggest that using an unbalanced library of priors
does not impair the segmentation accuracy of the data, which is underrepresented in the library.
We used only 10 priors from each of these databases in the library, while using 60 priors from
the ADNI database. The template pre-selection seems sufficiently robust to select the appropriate
The chosen patch sizes and search areas seem appropriate for segmenting the brain. The choice
of α=0.2 was chosen empirically. Generally, the choice of α can be viewed as a trade-off
between computation time and segmentation accuracy. However, performing the segmentations
only at the highest resolution may result in false positives as illustrated in Fig. 3, bottom row.
Thus, the aim of the low resolution segmentation is to exclude dura and other tissues with similar
intensity compositions as those found within the brain. We found that setting α=0.2 consistently
achieved this.
6.1 Comparison to publicly available methods
Our comparison to other popular brain extraction methods showed that BET and VBM8 provides
very good results for scans of normal individuals, while pathological data seems to impose a
problem for these methods. BET has widely been the preferred brain extraction method for
almost 10 years, and for many purposes BET is still sufficient. The simplicity of the method
without the need for priors or registration is appealing. However, the emergence of large
databases with thousands of images with and without pathology calls for flexible and robust
brain extraction methods. This can be achieved by using label fusion methods as demonstrated in
 and our study.
Testing on all baseline ADNI data demonstrated that BEaST reduced the failure rate from 85%
to 29% when compared to BET. These high failure rates were caused by a very strict quality
Eskildsen et al., 2011
control, where a brain segmentation was discarded if any error according to the definition
(Section 2) was discovered. A failure rate of 29% is still unacceptable. However, after a second
pass, where the accepted segmentations were included into the library of priors, the failure rate
was reduced to 10%, which is acceptable as the manual corrections needed are small. A third
pass may have passed a few more brain masks. However, as the errors seemed to stem from
either image artifacts or insufficient initialization mask (or insufficient linear registration), a third
pass was not attempted. Learning from priors enables iterative procedures (boot-strapping) for
propagating the segmentation definition, where low failure rates can be obtained. This cannot be
achieved by segmentation methods without priors, such as BET and VBM8.
Compared to BET and VBM8, BEaST produced less than half of the segmentation errors,
increasing the average DSC from respectively 0.9522 and 0.9647 to 0.9834. In terms of speed,
BET is faster than BEaST, if the segmentations are performed at the highest resolution.
However, stopping the processing at 2 mm voxel sizes results in computation times similar to
BET, while still obtaining significantly (p=0.01, paired two-tailed t-test) higher segmentation
accuracy. Compared to the combined atlas and morphological approach in VBM8, BEaST yields
superior segmentation results on all data tested in the study. The error maps (Fig. 6) show that
VBM8 consistently oversegments the brain compared to our definition. BET behaves similarly,
but with less over-segmentations. To be fair, such segmentations may be useful in many cases
and thus should not be considered as erroneous. However, for the application of cortical surface
analysis, it is crucial to not include proximate dura in the brain segmentation, as this may lead to
over-segmentations of the cortex and in turn to overestimations of cortical thickness .
A limitation of the quantitative comparison is that the DSC does not necessarily say anything
about whether the resulting segmentation is sufficient for the subsequent processing. For
example, many false negatives may be due to only removing CSF from the surface of the brain
compared to the gold standard. As such, these discrepancies are not fatal errors for the
subsequent processing.
Eskildsen et al., 2011
The high DSC of BEaST compared to VBM8 and BET in the LOOCV can be explained by the
fact that BEaST learns from the priors, while the other methods have no segmentation priors.
This means that BEaST delivers segmentations we can expect to match the definition, while this
is not the case for BET and VBM8. Thus the results of BEaST are biased toward the
segmentations of the priors and the DSC may be artificially high in the LOOCV. That is why the
independent validation using the SVE was necessary.
The bias toward the priors illustrates the flexibility of the patch-based approach. If another
definition is needed, the right priors just need to be available for BEaST to provide consistent
segmentations on new data. This is also a limitation of BEaST in its current form. While other
pathologies, which do not significantly change the appearance of the brain tissues, such as
fronto-temporal dementia, should be consistently segmented with the current library of BEaST,
other pathologies, such as tumors and lesions, may impose a problem for the segmentation. Over
time, a library representative for the large variety of brains may be constructed to overcome this
limitation in the future.
6.2 Comparison to state of the art
In terms of Dice overlap, results obtained by BEaST are better than those reported from recent
hybrid brain extraction approaches and similar to those
from a label fusion approach, MAPS . In the label fusion approach, the
library is more than 10 times larger and the processing time about 40 times longer. The short
processing time in BEaST (<30 min) results from only needing linear registrations and the
advantage of using the ROI in the multi-resolution strategy. The current implementation runs as
a single thread. However, the nonlocal means calculations can easily be parallelized and
implemented to exploit the common multi-core CPUs and even GPU processing , which will decrease processing time significantly, possibly making it
close to real time.
Using the online segmentation validation engine we obtained a truly
objective measure of the performance of BEaST. A mean DSC of 0.9781 is significantly
Eskildsen et al., 2011
(p=0.03, paired t-test) better than the best score by MAPS (0.9767). An advantage of the
nonlocal means approach is the possibility to use the redundancy in the image priors. While
conventional label fusion approaches provide a one-to-one mapping between the image under
study and the image priors, the nonlocal means approach provides a one-to-many mapping to
support the segmentation decision at each voxel. That is why a relatively small number of library
priors are needed in the patch-based segmentation compared to conventional label fusion
approaches. This makes it feasible to distribute the method as downloadable software. We intend
to make BEaST available online ( including the library if
permission to redistribute the data can be obtained.
As in conventional label fusion, the nonlocal means approach enables the segmentation of
different targets simultaneously. For example, the intracranial cavity may be obtained by
generating priors using appropriate methods, such as the multi-modal approach used as
intermediate step to obtain the brain segmentation priors for the ICBM and NIHPD datasets.
Also, separation of cerebellum and brain stem from the cerebrum may be achieved with high
accuracy if the appropriate structural priors are available.
Recent work by Wang et al. showed that several segmentation algorithms perform
systematic errors, which can be corrected using a wrapper-based learning method. In the study,
BET was used to demonstrate the wrapper-based approach, which improved the average DSC
from 0.948 to 0.964. This similarity is still lower than the average similarity obtained by BEaST.
There are no indications that the accuracy of BEaST can be improved using the wrapper-based
learning approach, as the error maps of BEaST show no systematic error (Fig. 6). The false
positives and false negatives are uniformly distributed across the brain. The segmentations of
VBM8 may benefit from the wrapper approach, as these exhibit consistent over-segmentations.
All images used in this study were acquired using scanners with 1.5T field strengths. Though the
results demonstrated robustness towards multi-site acquisition, the sensitivity to scanner field
strength remains to be investigated. As shown in , the scanner field
strength has significant impact on intra-cranial cavity segmentations. A similar effect can be
Eskildsen et al., 2011
expected for brain extractions. However, our results indicate that extending the library with
appropriate templates (in this case images from 3T scanners) may deal with a potential bias. This
is supported by the results obtained by MAPS on data from scanners with
1.5T and 3T field strengths.
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have proposed a new brain extraction method, BEaST, based on nonlocal
segmentation embedded within a multi-resolution framework. The accuracy of the method is
higher than BET, VBM8, and recent hybrid approaches and similar to that of a recent label
fusion method MAPS, while being much faster and requiring a smaller library of priors. Using
all baseline ADNI data, the study demonstrated that the nonlocal segmentation is robust and
consistent if the right priors are available.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Professor Nick Fox, Dementia Research Centre, Institute of
Neurology, London, for contributing with the ADNI semi-automatic brain segmentations. This
work has been supported by funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research MOP-
84360 & MOP-111169 as well as CDA (CECR)-Gevas-OE016. KKL acknowledges support
from the MRC, ARUK and the NIHR. The Dementia Research Centre is an Alzheimer's
Research UK Co-ordinating Centre and has also received equipment funded by the Alzheimer's
Research UK. This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Health Institute Carlos III
through the RETICS Combiomed, RD07/0067/2001.
The authors recognize the work done by Professor Steve Smith and Dr. Christian Gaser for
making respectively BET and VBM8 available to the neuroimaging community.
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904). ADNI is
funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Abbott, AstraZeneca
AB, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai Global Clinical Development,
Eskildsen et al., 2011
Elan Corporation, Genentech, GE Healthcare, GlaxoSmithKline, Innogenetics, Johnson and
Johnson, Eli Lilly and Co., Medpace, Inc., Merck and Co., Inc., Novartis AG, Pfizer Inc, F.
Hoffman-La Roche, Schering-Plough, Synarc, Inc., as well as non-profit partners the
Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, with participation from
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Private sector contributions to ADNI are facilitated by
the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is
the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the
Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego. ADNI data
are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of California, Los
Angeles. This research was also supported by NIH grants P30AG010129, K01 AG030514, and
the Dana Foundation.
Eskildsen et al., 2011