node2vec: Scalable Feature Learning for Networks
Aditya Grover
Stanford University
 
Jure Leskovec
Stanford University
 
Prediction tasks over nodes and edges in networks require careful
effort in engineering features used by learning algorithms. Recent
research in the broader ﬁeld of representation learning has led to
signiﬁcant progress in automating prediction by learning the features themselves. However, present feature learning approaches
are not expressive enough to capture the diversity of connectivity
patterns observed in networks.
Here we propose node2vec, an algorithmic framework for learning continuous feature representations for nodes in networks. In
node2vec, we learn a mapping of nodes to a low-dimensional space
of features that maximizes the likelihood of preserving network
neighborhoods of nodes. We deﬁne a ﬂexible notion of a node’s
network neighborhood and design a biased random walk procedure,
which efﬁciently explores diverse neighborhoods. Our algorithm
generalizes prior work which is based on rigid notions of network
neighborhoods, and we argue that the added ﬂexibility in exploring
neighborhoods is the key to learning richer representations.
We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of node2vec over existing state-ofthe-art techniques on multi-label classiﬁcation and link prediction
in several real-world networks from diverse domains. Taken together, our work represents a new way for efﬁciently learning stateof-the-art task-independent representations in complex networks.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database applications—Data mining; I.2.6 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Learning
General Terms: Algorithms; Experimentation.
Keywords: Information networks, Feature learning, Node embeddings, Graph representations.
INTRODUCTION
Many important tasks in network analysis involve predictions
over nodes and edges. In a typical node classiﬁcation task, we
are interested in predicting the most probable labels of nodes in
a network . For example, in a social network, we might be
interested in predicting interests of users, or in a protein-protein interaction network we might be interested in predicting functional
labels of proteins . Similarly, in link prediction, we wish to
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
KDD ’16, August 13 - 17, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
c⃝2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4232-2/16/08...$15.00
DOI: 
predict whether a pair of nodes in a network should have an edge
connecting them . Link prediction is useful in a wide variety
of domains; for instance, in genomics, it helps us discover novel
interactions between genes, and in social networks, it can identify
real-world friends .
Any supervised machine learning algorithm requires a set of informative, discriminating, and independent features. In prediction
problems on networks this means that one has to construct a feature
vector representation for the nodes and edges. A typical solution involves hand-engineering domain-speciﬁc features based on expert
knowledge. Even if one discounts the tedious effort required for
feature engineering, such features are usually designed for speciﬁc
tasks and do not generalize across different prediction tasks.
An alternative approach is to learn feature representations by
solving an optimization problem . The challenge in feature learning is deﬁning an objective function, which involves a trade-off
in balancing computational efﬁciency and predictive accuracy. On
one side of the spectrum, one could directly aim to ﬁnd a feature
representation that optimizes performance of a downstream prediction task. While this supervised procedure results in good accuracy, it comes at the cost of high training time complexity due to a
blowup in the number of parameters that need to be estimated. At
the other extreme, the objective function can be deﬁned to be independent of the downstream prediction task and the representations
can be learned in a purely unsupervised way. This makes the optimization computationally efﬁcient and with a carefully designed
objective, it results in task-independent features that closely match
task-speciﬁc approaches in predictive accuracy .
However, current techniques fail to satisfactorily deﬁne and optimize a reasonable objective required for scalable unsupervised feature learning in networks. Classic approaches based on linear and
non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques such as Principal
Component Analysis, Multi-Dimensional Scaling and their extensions optimize an objective that transforms a representative data matrix of the network such that it maximizes the variance of the data representation. Consequently, these approaches invariably involve eigendecomposition of the appropriate data matrix
which is expensive for large real-world networks. Moreover, the
resulting latent representations give poor performance on various
prediction tasks over networks.
Alternatively, we can design an objective that seeks to preserve
local neighborhoods of nodes. The objective can be efﬁciently optimized using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) akin to backpropogation on just single hidden-layer feedforward neural networks.
Recent attempts in this direction propose efﬁcient algorithms but rely on a rigid notion of a network neighborhood, which
results in these approaches being largely insensitive to connectivity patterns unique to networks. Speciﬁcally, nodes in networks
 
could be organized based on communities they belong to (i.e., homophily); in other cases, the organization could be based on the
structural roles of nodes in the network (i.e., structural equivalence) . For instance, in Figure 1, we observe nodes
u and s1 belonging to the same tightly knit community of nodes,
while the nodes u and s6 in the two distinct communities share the
same structural role of a hub node. Real-world networks commonly
exhibit a mixture of such equivalences. Thus, it is essential to allow
for a ﬂexible algorithm that can learn node representations obeying
both principles: ability to learn representations that embed nodes
from the same network community closely together, as well as to
learn representations where nodes that share similar roles have similar embeddings. This would allow feature learning algorithms to
generalize across a wide variety of domains and prediction tasks.
Present work. We propose node2vec, a semi-supervised algorithm
for scalable feature learning in networks. We optimize a custom
graph-based objective function using SGD motivated by prior work
on natural language processing . Intuitively, our approach returns feature representations that maximize the likelihood of preserving network neighborhoods of nodes in a d-dimensional feature space. We use a 2nd order random walk approach to generate
(sample) network neighborhoods for nodes.
Our key contribution is in deﬁning a ﬂexible notion of a node’s
network neighborhood. By choosing an appropriate notion of a
neighborhood, node2vec can learn representations that organize
nodes based on their network roles and/or communities they belong to. We achieve this by developing a family of biased random
walks, which efﬁciently explore diverse neighborhoods of a given
node. The resulting algorithm is ﬂexible, giving us control over the
search space through tunable parameters, in contrast to rigid search
procedures in prior work . Consequently, our method generalizes prior work and can model the full spectrum of equivalences
observed in networks. The parameters governing our search strategy have an intuitive interpretation and bias the walk towards different network exploration strategies. These parameters can also
be learned directly using a tiny fraction of labeled data in a semisupervised fashion.
We also show how feature representations of individual nodes
can be extended to pairs of nodes (i.e., edges). In order to generate
feature representations of edges, we compose the learned feature
representations of the individual nodes using simple binary operators. This compositionality lends node2vec to prediction tasks
involving nodes as well as edges.
Our experiments focus on two common prediction tasks in networks: a multi-label classiﬁcation task, where every node is assigned one or more class labels and a link prediction task, where we
predict the existence of an edge given a pair of nodes. We contrast
the performance of node2vec with state-of-the-art feature learning
algorithms . We experiment with several real-world networks from diverse domains, such as social networks, information
networks, as well as networks from systems biology. Experiments
demonstrate that node2vec outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
up to 26.7% on multi-label classiﬁcation and up to 12.6% on link
prediction.
The algorithm shows competitive performance with
even 10% labeled data and is also robust to perturbations in the
form of noisy or missing edges. Computationally, the major phases
of node2vec are trivially parallelizable, and it can scale to large
networks with millions of nodes in a few hours.
Overall our paper makes the following contributions:
1. We propose node2vec, an efﬁcient scalable algorithm for
feature learning in networks that efﬁciently optimizes a novel
network-aware, neighborhood preserving objective using SGD.
2. We show how node2vec is in accordance with established
Figure 1: BFS and DFS search strategies from node u (k = 3).
principles in network science, providing ﬂexibility in discovering representations conforming to different equivalences.
3. We extend node2vec and other feature learning methods based
on neighborhood preserving objectives, from nodes to pairs
of nodes for edge-based prediction tasks.
4. We empirically evaluate node2vec for multi-label classiﬁcation and link prediction on several real-world datasets.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
brieﬂy survey related work in feature learning for networks. We
present the technical details for feature learning using node2vec
in Section 3. In Section 4, we empirically evaluate node2vec on
prediction tasks over nodes and edges on various real-world networks and assess the parameter sensitivity, perturbation analysis,
and scalability aspects of our algorithm. We conclude with a discussion of the node2vec framework and highlight some promising directions for future work in Section 5. Datasets and a reference implementation of node2vec are available on the project page:
 
RELATED WORK
Feature engineering has been extensively studied by the machine
learning community under various headings. In networks, the conventional paradigm for generating features for nodes is based on
feature extraction techniques which typically involve some seed
hand-crafted features based on network properties . In contrast, our goal is to automate the whole process by casting feature
extraction as a representation learning problem in which case we
do not require any hand-engineered features.
Unsupervised feature learning approaches typically exploit the
spectral properties of various matrix representations of graphs, especially the Laplacian and the adjacency matrices. Under this linear
algebra perspective, these methods can be viewed as dimensionality reduction techniques. Several linear (e.g., PCA) and non-linear
(e.g., IsoMap) dimensionality reduction techniques have been proposed . These methods suffer from both computational and statistical performance drawbacks. In terms of computational efﬁciency, eigendecomposition of a data matrix is expensive
unless the solution quality is signiﬁcantly compromised with approximations, and hence, these methods are hard to scale to large
networks. Secondly, these methods optimize for objectives that are
not robust to the diverse patterns observed in networks (such as homophily and structural equivalence) and make assumptions about
the relationship between the underlying network structure and the
prediction task. For instance, spectral clustering makes a strong
homophily assumption that graph cuts will be useful for classiﬁcation . Such assumptions are reasonable in many scenarios, but
unsatisfactory in effectively generalizing across diverse networks.
Recent advancements in representational learning for natural language processing opened new ways for feature learning of discrete
objects such as words. In particular, the Skip-gram model aims
to learn continuous feature representations for words by optimizing a neighborhood preserving likelihood objective. The algorithm
proceeds as follows: It scans over the words of a document, and
for every word it aims to embed it such that the word’s features
can predict nearby words (i.e., words inside some context window). The word feature representations are learned by optmizing
the likelihood objective using SGD with negative sampling .
The Skip-gram objective is based on the distributional hypothesis which states that words in similar contexts tend to have similar
meanings . That is, similar words tend to appear in similar word
neighborhoods.
Inspired by the Skip-gram model, recent research established
an analogy for networks by representing a network as a “document” . The same way as a document is an ordered sequence of words, one could sample sequences of nodes from the
underlying network and turn a network into a ordered sequence of
nodes. However, there are many possible sampling strategies for
nodes, resulting in different learned feature representations. In fact,
as we shall show, there is no clear winning sampling strategy that
works across all networks and all prediction tasks. This is a major
shortcoming of prior work which fail to offer any ﬂexibility in sampling of nodes from a network . Our algorithm node2vec
overcomes this limitation by designing a ﬂexible objective that is
not tied to a particular sampling strategy and provides parameters
to tune the explored search space (see Section 3).
Finally, for both node and edge based prediction tasks, there is
a body of recent work for supervised feature learning based on existing and novel graph-speciﬁc deep network architectures . These architectures directly minimize the loss function
for a downstream prediction task using several layers of non-linear
transformations which results in high accuracy, but at the cost of
scalability due to high training time requirements.
FEATURE LEARNING FRAMEWORK
We formulate feature learning in networks as a maximum likelihood optimization problem. Let G = (V, E) be a given network.
Our analysis is general and applies to any (un)directed,
(un)weighted network. Let f : V →Rd be the mapping function from nodes to feature representaions we aim to learn for a
downstream prediction task. Here d is a parameter specifying the
number of dimensions of our feature representation. Equivalently,
f is a matrix of size |V | × d parameters. For every source node
u ∈V , we deﬁne NS(u) ⊂V as a network neighborhood of node
u generated through a neighborhood sampling strategy S.
We proceed by extending the Skip-gram architecture to networks
 . We seek to optimize the following objective function,
which maximizes the log-probability of observing a network neighborhood NS(u) for a node u conditioned on its feature representation, given by f:
log Pr(NS(u)|f(u)).
In order to make the optimization problem tractable, we make
two standard assumptions:
• Conditional independence. We factorize the likelihood by assuming that the likelihood of observing a neighborhood node
is independent of observing any other neighborhood node
given the feature representation of the source:
Pr(NS(u)|f(u)) =
Pr(ni|f(u)).
• Symmetry in feature space. A source node and neighborhood node have a symmetric effect over each other in feature space. Accordingly, we model the conditional likelihood of every source-neighborhood node pair as a softmax
unit parametrized by a dot product of their features:
Pr(ni|f(u)) =
exp(f(ni) · f(u))
v∈V exp(f(v) · f(u)).
With the above assumptions, the objective in Eq. 1 simpliﬁes to:
f(ni) · f(u)
The per-node partition function, Zu = P
v∈V exp(f(u) · f(v)),
is expensive to compute for large networks and we approximate it
using negative sampling . We optimize Eq. 2 using stochastic
gradient ascent over the model parameters deﬁning the features f.
Feature learning methods based on the Skip-gram architecture
have been originally developed in the context of natural language .
Given the linear nature of text, the notion of a neighborhood can be
naturally deﬁned using a sliding window over consecutive words.
Networks, however, are not linear, and thus a richer notion of a
neighborhood is needed. To resolve this issue, we propose a randomized procedure that samples many different neighborhoods of a
given source node u. The neighborhoods NS(u) are not restricted
to just immediate neighbors but can have vastly different structures
depending on the sampling strategy S.
Classic search strategies
We view the problem of sampling neighborhoods of a source
node as a form of local search. Figure 1 shows a graph, where
given a source node u we aim to generate (sample) its neighborhood NS(u). Importantly, to be able to fairly compare different
sampling strategies S, we shall constrain the size of the neighborhood set NS to k nodes and then sample multiple sets for a single
node u. Generally, there are two extreme sampling strategies for
generating neighborhood set(s) NS of k nodes:
• Breadth-ﬁrst Sampling (BFS) The neighborhood NS is restricted to nodes which are immediate neighbors of the source.
For example, in Figure 1 for a neighborhood of size k = 3,
BFS samples nodes s1, s2, s3.
• Depth-ﬁrst Sampling (DFS) The neighborhood consists of
nodes sequentially sampled at increasing distances from the
source node. In Figure 1, DFS samples s4, s5, s6.
The breadth-ﬁrst and depth-ﬁrst sampling represent extreme scenarios in terms of the search space they explore leading to interesting implications on the learned representations.
In particular, prediction tasks on nodes in networks often shuttle between two kinds of similarities: homophily and structural
equivalence . Under the homophily hypothesis nodes
that are highly interconnected and belong to similar network clusters or communities should be embedded closely together (e.g.,
nodes s1 and u in Figure 1 belong to the same network community). In contrast, under the structural equivalence hypothesis 
nodes that have similar structural roles in networks should be embedded closely together (e.g., nodes u and s6 in Figure 1 act as
hubs of their corresponding communities). Importantly, unlike homophily, structural equivalence does not emphasize connectivity;
nodes could be far apart in the network and still have the same
structural role. In real-world, these equivalence notions are not exclusive; networks commonly exhibit both behaviors where some
nodes exhibit homophily while others reﬂect structural equivalence.
We observe that BFS and DFS strategies play a key role in producing representations that reﬂect either of the above equivalences.
In particular, the neighborhoods sampled by BFS lead to embeddings that correspond closely to structural equivalence. Intuitively,
we note that in order to ascertain structural equivalence, it is often sufﬁcient to characterize the local neighborhoods accurately.
For example, structural equivalence based on network roles such as
bridges and hubs can be inferred just by observing the immediate
neighborhoods of each node. By restricting search to nearby nodes,
BFS achieves this characterization and obtains a microscopic view
of the neighborhood of every node. Additionally, in BFS, nodes in
the sampled neighborhoods tend to repeat many times. This is also
important as it reduces the variance in characterizing the distribution of 1-hop nodes with respect the source node. However, a very
small portion of the graph is explored for any given k.
The opposite is true for DFS which can explore larger parts of
the network as it can move further away from the source node u
(with sample size k being ﬁxed). In DFS, the sampled nodes more
accurately reﬂect a macro-view of the neighborhood which is essential in inferring communities based on homophily. However,
the issue with DFS is that it is important to not only infer which
node-to-node dependencies exist in a network, but also to characterize the exact nature of these dependencies. This is hard given
we have a constrain on the sample size and a large neighborhood
to explore, resulting in high variance. Secondly, moving to much
greater depths leads to complex dependencies since a sampled node
may be far from the source and potentially less representative.
Building on the above observations, we design a ﬂexible neighborhood sampling strategy which allows us to smoothly interpolate
between BFS and DFS. We achieve this by developing a ﬂexible
biased random walk procedure that can explore neighborhoods in a
BFS as well as DFS fashion.
Random Walks
Formally, given a source node u, we simulate a random walk of
ﬁxed length l. Let ci denote the ith node in the walk, starting with
c0 = u. Nodes ci are generated by the following distribution:
P(ci = x | ci−1 = v) =
if (v, x) ∈E
where πvx is the unnormalized transition probability between nodes
v and x, and Z is the normalizing constant.
Search bias α
The simplest way to bias our random walks would be to sample
the next node based on the static edge weights wvx i.e., πvx = wvx.
(In case of unweighted graphs wvx = 1.)
However, this does
not allow us to account for the network structure and guide our
search procedure to explore different types of network neighborhoods. Additionally, unlike BFS and DFS which are extreme sampling paradigms suited for structural equivalence and homophily
respectively, our random walks should accommodate for the fact
that these notions of equivalence are not competing or exclusive,
and real-world networks commonly exhibit a mixture of both.
We deﬁne a 2nd order random walk with two parameters p and q
which guide the walk: Consider a random walk that just traversed
edge (t, v) and now resides at node v (Figure 2). The walk now
needs to decide on the next step so it evaluates the transition probabilities πvx on edges (v, x) leading from v. We set the unnormalized transition probability to πvx = αpq(t, x) · wvx, where
αpq(t, x) =
if dtx = 0
if dtx = 1
if dtx = 2
Figure 2: Illustration of the random walk procedure in node2vec.
The walk just transitioned from t to v and is now evaluating its next
step out of node v. Edge labels indicate search biases α.
and dtx denotes the shortest path distance between nodes t and x.
Note that dtx must be one of {0, 1, 2}, and hence, the two parameters are necessary and sufﬁcient to guide the walk.
Intuitively, parameters p and q control how fast the walk explores
and leaves the neighborhood of starting node u. In particular, the
parameters allow our search procedure to (approximately) interpolate between BFS and DFS and thereby reﬂect an afﬁnity for different notions of node equivalences.
Return parameter, p. Parameter p controls the likelihood of immediately revisiting a node in the walk. Setting it to a high value
(> max(q, 1)) ensures that we are less likely to sample an alreadyvisited node in the following two steps (unless the next node in
the walk had no other neighbor). This strategy encourages moderate exploration and avoids 2-hop redundancy in sampling. On the
other hand, if p is low (< min(q, 1)), it would lead the walk to
backtrack a step (Figure 2) and this would keep the walk “local”
close to the starting node u.
In-out parameter, q. Parameter q allows the search to differentiate
between “inward” and “outward” nodes. Going back to Figure 2,
if q > 1, the random walk is biased towards nodes close to node t.
Such walks obtain a local view of the underlying graph with respect
to the start node in the walk and approximate BFS behavior in the
sense that our samples comprise of nodes within a small locality.
In contrast, if q < 1, the walk is more inclined to visit nodes
which are further away from the node t. Such behavior is reﬂective of DFS which encourages outward exploration. However, an
essential difference here is that we achieve DFS-like exploration
within the random walk framework. Hence, the sampled nodes are
not at strictly increasing distances from a given source node u, but
in turn, we beneﬁt from tractable preprocessing and superior sampling efﬁciency of random walks. Note that by setting πv,x to be
a function of the preceeding node in the walk t, the random walks
are 2nd order Markovian.
Beneﬁts of random walks. There are several beneﬁts of random
walks over pure BFS/DFS approaches. Random walks are computationally efﬁcient in terms of both space and time requirements.
The space complexity to store the immediate neighbors of every
node in the graph is O(|E|). For 2nd order random walks, it is
helpful to store the interconnections between the neighbors of every node, which incurs a space complexity of O(a2|V |) where a
is the average degree of the graph and is usually small for realworld networks. The other key advantage of random walks over
classic search-based sampling strategies is its time complexity. In
particular, by imposing graph connectivity in the sample generation process, random walks provide a convenient mechanism to increase the effective sampling rate by reusing samples across different source nodes. By simulating a random walk of length l > k we
can generate k samples for l −k nodes at once due to the Marko-
[f(u) ⊞f(v)]i = fi(u)+fi(v)
[f(u) ⊡f(v)]i = fi(u) ∗fi(v)
Weighted-L1
∥f(u) · f(v)∥¯1i = |fi(u) −fi(v)|
Weighted-L2
∥f(u) · f(v)∥¯2i = |fi(u) −fi(v)|2
Table 1: Choice of binary operators ◦for learning edge features.
The deﬁnitions correspond to the ith component of g(u, v).
vian nature of the random walk. Hence, our effective complexity
per sample. For example, in Figure 1 we sample a
random walk {u, s4, s5, s6, s8, s9} of length l = 6, which results
in NS(u) = {s4, s5, s6}, NS(s4) = {s5, s6, s8} and NS(s5) =
{s6, s8, s9}. Note that sample reuse can introduce some bias in the
overall procedure. However, we observe that it greatly improves
the efﬁciency.
The node2vec algorithm
Algorithm 1 The node2vec algorithm.
LearnFeatures (Graph G = (V, E, W), Dimensions d, Walks per
node r, Walk length l, Context size k, Return p, In-out q)
π = PreprocessModiﬁedWeights(G, p, q)
G′ = (V, E, π)
Initialize walks to Empty
for iter = 1 to r do
for all nodes u ∈V do
walk = node2vecWalk(G′, u, l)
Append walk to walks
f = StochasticGradientDescent(k, d, walks)
node2vecWalk (Graph G′ = (V, E, π), Start node u, Length l)
Inititalize walk to [u]
for walk_iter = 1 to l do
curr = walk[−1]
Vcurr = GetNeighbors(curr, G′)
s = AliasSample(Vcurr, π)
Append s to walk
return walk
The pseudocode for node2vec, is given in Algorithm 1. In any
random walk, there is an implicit bias due to the choice of the start
node u. Since we learn representations for all nodes, we offset this
bias by simulating r random walks of ﬁxed length l starting from
every node. At every step of the walk, sampling is done based on
the transition probabilities πvx. The transition probabilities πvx for
the 2nd order Markov chain can be precomputed and hence, sampling of nodes while simulating the random walk can be done ef-
ﬁciently in O(1) time using alias sampling. The three phases of
node2vec, i.e., preprocessing to compute transition probabilities,
random walk simulations and optimization using SGD, are executed sequentially. Each phase is parallelizable and executed asynchronously, contributing to the overall scalability of node2vec.
node2vec is available at: 
Learning edge features
The node2vec algorithm provides a semi-supervised method to
learn rich feature representations for nodes in a network. However,
we are often interested in prediction tasks involving pairs of nodes
instead of individual nodes. For instance, in link prediction, we predict whether a link exists between two nodes in a network. Since
our random walks are naturally based on the connectivity structure
between nodes in the underlying network, we extend them to pairs
of nodes using a bootstrapping approach over the feature representations of the individual nodes.
Given two nodes u and v, we deﬁne a binary operator ◦over the
corresponding feature vectors f(u) and f(v) in order to generate
a representation g(u, v) such that g : V × V →Rd′ where d′ is
the representation size for the pair (u, v). We want our operators
to be generally deﬁned for any pair of nodes, even if an edge does
not exist between the pair since doing so makes the representations
useful for link prediction where our test set contains both true and
false edges (i.e., do not exist). We consider several choices for the
operator ◦such that d′ = d which are summarized in Table 1.
EXPERIMENTS
The objective in Eq. 2 is independent of any downstream task and
the ﬂexibility in exploration offered by node2vec lends the learned
feature representations to a wide variety of network analysis settings discussed below.
Case Study: Les Misérables network
In Section 3.1 we observed that BFS and DFS strategies represent extreme ends on the spectrum of embedding nodes based on
the principles of homophily (i.e., network communities) and structural equivalence (i.e., structural roles of nodes). We now aim to
empirically demonstrate this fact and show that node2vec in fact
can discover embeddings that obey both principles.
We use a network where nodes correspond to characters in the
novel Les Misérables and edges connect coappearing characters. The network has 77 nodes and 254 edges. We set d = 16
and run node2vec to learn feature representation for every node
in the network. The feature representations are clustered using kmeans. We then visualize the original network in two dimensions
with nodes now assigned colors based on their clusters.
Figure 3(top) shows the example when we set p = 1, q = 0.5.
Notice how regions of the network (i.e., network communities) are
colored using the same color.
In this setting node2vec discovers clusters/communities of characters that frequently interact with
each other in the major sub-plots of the novel. Since the edges between characters are based on coappearances, we can conclude this
characterization closely relates with homophily.
In order to discover which nodes have the same structural roles
we use the same network but set p = 1, q = 2, use node2vec to get
node features and then cluster the nodes based on the obtained features. Here node2vec obtains a complementary assignment of node
to clusters such that the colors correspond to structural equivalence
as illustrated in Figure 3(bottom). For instance, node2vec embeds
blue-colored nodes close together. These nodes represent characters that act as bridges between different sub-plots of the novel.
Similarly, the yellow nodes mostly represent characters that are at
the periphery and have limited interactions. One could assign alternate semantic interpretations to these clusters of nodes, but the
key takeaway is that node2vec is not tied to a particular notion of
equivalence. As we show through our experiments, these equivalence notions are commonly exhibited in most real-world networks
and have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the learned
representations for prediction tasks.
Experimental setup
Our experiments evaluate the feature representations obtained
through node2vec on standard supervised learning tasks: multilabel classiﬁcation for nodes and link prediction for edges. For
both tasks, we evaluate the performance of node2vec against the
following feature learning algorithms:
Figure 3: Complementary visualizations of Les Misérables coappearance network generated by node2vec with label colors reﬂecting homophily (top) and structural equivalence (bottom).
• Spectral clustering : This is a matrix factorization approach in which we take the top d eigenvectors of the normalized Laplacian matrix of graph G as the feature vector
representations for nodes.
• DeepWalk : This approach learns d-dimensional feature
representations by simulating uniform random walks. The
sampling strategy in DeepWalk can be seen as a special case
of node2vec with p = 1 and q = 1.
• LINE : This approach learns d-dimensional feature representations in two separate phases.
In the ﬁrst phase, it
learns d/2 dimensions by BFS-style simulations over immediate neighbors of nodes. In the second phase, it learns the
next d/2 dimensions by sampling nodes strictly at a 2-hop
distance from the source nodes.
We exclude other matrix factorization approaches which have already been shown to be inferior to DeepWalk . We also exclude
a recent approach, GraRep , that generalizes LINE to incorporate information from network neighborhoods beyond 2-hops, but
is unable to efﬁciently scale to large networks.
In contrast to the setup used in prior work for evaluating samplingbased feature learning algorithms, we generate an equal number of
samples for each method and then evaluate the quality of the obtained features on the prediction task. In doing so, we discount for
performance gain observed purely because of the implementation
language (C/C++/Python) since it is secondary to the algorithm.
Thus, in the sampling phase, the parameters for DeepWalk, LINE
and node2vec are set such that they generate equal number of samples at runtime. As an example, if K is the overall sampling budget,
then the node2vec parameters satisfy K = r · l · |V |. In the optimization phase, all these benchmarks optimize using SGD with two
key differences that we correct for. First, DeepWalk uses hierarchical sampling to approximate the softmax probabilities with an objective similar to the one use by node2vec. However, hierarchical
softmax is inefﬁcient when compared with negative sampling .
Hence, keeping everything else the same, we switch to negative
sampling in DeepWalk which is also the de facto approximation in
node2vec and LINE. Second, both node2vec and DeepWalk have
BlogCatalog
Spectral Clustering
node2vec settings (p,q)
0.25, 0.25
Gain of node2vec [%]
Table 2: Macro-F1 scores for multilabel classiﬁcation on BlogCatalog, PPI (Homo sapiens) and Wikipedia word cooccurrence networks with 50% of the nodes labeled for training.
a parameter for the number of context neighborhood nodes to optimize for and the greater the number, the more rounds of optimization are required. This parameter is set to unity for LINE, but since
LINE completes a single epoch quicker than other approaches, we
let it run for k epochs.
The parameter settings used for node2vec are in line with typical
values used for DeepWalk and LINE. Speciﬁcally, we set d = 128,
r = 10, l = 80, k = 10, and the optimization is run for a single epoch. We repeat our experiments for 10 random seed initializations, and our results are statistically signiﬁcant with a p-value
of less than 0.01.The best in-out and return hyperparameters were
learned using 10-fold cross-validation on 10% labeled data with a
grid search over p, q ∈{0.25, 0.50, 1, 2, 4}.
Multi-label classiﬁcation
In the multi-label classiﬁcation setting, every node is assigned
one or more labels from a ﬁnite set L. During the training phase, we
observe a certain fraction of nodes and all their labels. The task is
to predict the labels for the remaining nodes. This is a challenging
task especially if L is large. We utilize the following datasets:
• BlogCatalog : This is a network of social relationships
of the bloggers listed on the BlogCatalog website. The labels represent blogger interests inferred through the metadata provided by the bloggers. The network has 10,312 nodes,
333,983 edges, and 39 different labels.
• Protein-Protein Interactions (PPI) : We use a subgraph of
the PPI network for Homo Sapiens. The subgraph corresponds to the graph induced by nodes for which we could
obtain labels from the hallmark gene sets and represent biological states. The network has 3,890 nodes, 76,584
edges, and 50 different labels.
• Wikipedia : This is a cooccurrence network of words
appearing in the ﬁrst million bytes of the Wikipedia dump.
The labels represent the Part-of-Speech (POS) tags inferred
using the Stanford POS-Tagger . The network has 4,777
nodes, 184,812 edges, and 40 different labels.
All these networks exhibit a fair mix of homophilic and structural equivalences. For example, we expect the social network of
bloggers to exhibit strong homophily-based relationships; however,
there might also be some “familiar strangers”, i.e., bloggers that do
not interact but share interests and hence are structurally equivalent
nodes. The biological states of proteins in a protein-protein interaction network also exhibit both types of equivalences. For example,
they exhibit structural equivalence when proteins perform functions
complementary to those of neighboring proteins, and at other times,
they organize based on homophily in assisting neighboring proteins
in performing similar functions. The word cooccurence network is
fairly dense, since edges exist between words cooccuring in a 2length window in the Wikipedia corpus. Hence, words having the
same POS tags are not hard to ﬁnd, lending a high degree of homophily. At the same time, we expect some structural equivalence
Micro-F1 score
BlogCatalog
Macro-F1 score
PPI (Homo Sapiens)
Spectral Clustering
Figure 4: Performance evaluation of different benchmarks on varying the amount of labeled data used for training. The x axis denotes the
fraction of labeled data, whereas the y axis in the top and bottom rows denote the Micro-F1 and Macro-F1 scores respectively. DeepWalk
and node2vec give comparable performance on PPI. In all other networks, across all fractions of labeled data node2vec performs best.
in the POS tags due to syntactic grammar patterns such as nouns
following determiners, punctuations succeeding nouns etc.
Experimental results. The node feature representations are input
to a one-vs-rest logistic regression classiﬁer with L2 regularization.
The train and test data is split equally over 10 random instances. We
use the Macro-F1 scores for comparing performance in Table 2 and
the relative performance gain is over the closest benchmark. The
trends are similar for Micro-F1 and accuracy and are not shown.
From the results, it is evident we can see how the added ﬂexibility in exploring neighborhoods allows node2vec to outperform
the other benchmark algorithms. In BlogCatalog, we can discover
the right mix of homophily and structural equivalence by setting
parameters p and q to low values, giving us 22.3% gain over Deep-
Walk and 229.2% gain over LINE in Macro-F1 scores. LINE showed
worse performance than expected, which can be explained by its
inability to reuse samples, a feat that can be easily done using the
random walk methods. Even in our other two networks, where we
have a mix of equivalences present, the semi-supervised nature of
node2vec can help us infer the appropriate degree of exploration
necessary for feature learning. In the case of PPI network, the best
exploration strategy (p = 4, q = 1) turns out to be virtually indistinguishable from DeepWalk’s uniform (p = 1, q = 1) exploration
giving us only a slight edge over DeepWalk by avoiding redudancy
in already visited nodes through a high p value, but a convincing
23.8% gain over LINE in Macro-F1 scores. However, in general,
the uniform random walks can be much worse than the exploration
strategy learned by node2vec. As we can see in the Wikipedia word
cooccurrence network, uniform walks cannot guide the search procedure towards the best samples and hence, we achieve a gain of
21.8% over DeepWalk and 33.2% over LINE.
For a more ﬁne-grained analysis, we also compare performance
while varying the train-test split from 10% to 90%, while learning parameters p and q on 10% of the data as before. For brevity,
we summarize the results for the Micro-F1 and Macro-F1 scores
graphically in Figure 4. Here we make similar observations. All
methods signiﬁcantly outperform Spectral clustering, DeepWalk
outperforms LINE, node2vec consistently outperforms LINE and
achieves large improvement over DeepWalk across domains. For
example, we achieve the biggest improvement over DeepWalk of
26.7% on BlogCatalog at 70% labeled data. In the worst case, the
search phase has little bearing on learned representations in which
case node2vec is equivalent to DeepWalk. Similarly, the improvements are even more striking when compared to LINE, where in
addition to drastic gain (over 200%) on BlogCatalog, we observe
high magnitude improvements upto 41.1% on other datasets such
as PPI while training on just 10% labeled data.
Parameter sensitivity
The node2vec algorithm involves a number of parameters and
in Figure 5a, we examine how the different choices of parameters
affect the performance of node2vec on the BlogCatalog dataset using a 50-50 split between labeled and unlabeled data. Except for the
parameter being tested, all other parameters assume default values.
The default values for p and q are set to unity.
We measure the Macro-F1 score as a function of parameters p
and q. The performance of node2vec improves as the in-out parameter p and the return parameter q decrease. This increase in
performance can be based on the homophilic and structural equivalences we expect to see in BlogCatalog. While a low q encourages
outward exploration, it is balanced by a low p which ensures that
the walk does not go too far from the start node.
We also examine how the number of features d and the node’s
neighborhood parameters (number of walks r, walk length l, and
neighborhood size k) affect the performance. We observe that performance tends to saturate once the dimensions of the representations reaches around 100. Similarly, we observe that increasing
the number and length of walks per source improves performance,
Macro-F1 score
8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Number of walks per node, r
Macro-F1 score
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110
Length of walk, l
10 12 14 16 18 20
Context size, k
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Fraction of missing edges
Macro-F1 score
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Fraction of additional edges
Macro-F1 score
Figure 5: (a). Parameter sensitivity (b). Perturbation analysis for multilabel classiﬁcation on the BlogCatalog network.
which is not surprising since we have a greater overall sampling
budget K to learn representations. Both these parameters have a
relatively high impact on the performance of the method. Interestingly, the context size, k also improves performance at the cost of
increased optimization time. However, the performance differences
are not that large in this case.
Perturbation Analysis
For many real-world networks, we do not have access to accurate
information about the network structure. We performed a perturbation study where we analyzed the performance of node2vec for
two imperfect information scenarios related to the edge structure
in the BlogCatalog network. In the ﬁrst scenario, we measure performace as a function of the fraction of missing edges (relative to
the full network). The missing edges are chosen randomly, subject
to the constraint that the number of connected components in the
network remains ﬁxed. As we can see in Figure 5b(top), the decrease in Macro-F1 score as the fraction of missing edges increases
is roughly linear with a small slope. Robustness to missing edges
in the network is especially important in cases where the graphs
are evolving over time (e.g., citation networks), or where network
construction is expensive (e.g., biological networks).
In the second perturbation setting, we have noisy edges between
randomly selected pairs of nodes in the network. As shown in
Figure 5b(bottom), the performance of node2vec declines slightly
faster initially when compared with the setting of missing edges,
however, the rate of decrease in Macro-F1 score gradually slows
down over time. Again, the robustness of node2vec to false edges
is useful in several situations such as sensor networks where the
measurements used for constructing the network are noisy.
Scalability
To test for scalability, we learn node representations using node2vec
with default parameter values for Erdos-Renyi graphs with increasing sizes from 100 to 1,000,000 nodes and constant average degree
log10 nodes
log10 time (in seconds)
sampling + optimization time
sampling time
Figure 6: Scalability of node2vec on Erdos-Renyi graphs with an
average degree of 10.
of 10. In Figure 6, we empirically observe that node2vec scales linearly with increase in number of nodes generating representations
for one million nodes in less than four hours. The sampling procedure comprises of preprocessing for computing transition probabilities for our walk (negligibly small) and simulation of random
walks. The optimization phase is made efﬁcient using negative
sampling and asynchronous SGD .
Many ideas from prior work serve as useful pointers in making the sampling procedure computationally efﬁcient. We showed
how random walks, also used in DeepWalk , allow the sampled
nodes to be reused as neighborhoods for different source nodes appearing in the walk. Alias sampling allows our walks to generalize to weighted networks, with little preprocessing . Though
we are free to set the search parameters based on the underlying
task and domain at no additional cost, learning the best settings of
Common Neighbors
| N(u) ∩N(v) |
Jaccard’s Coefﬁcient
|N (u)∩N (v)|
|N (u)∪N (v)|
Adamic-Adar Score
t∈N (u)∩N (v)
log|N (t)|
Preferential Attachment
| N(u) | · | N(v) |
Table 3: Link prediction heuristic scores for node pair (u, v) with
immediate neighbor sets N(u) and N(v) respectively.
our search parameters adds an overhead. However, as our experiments conﬁrm, this overhead is minimal since node2vec is semisupervised and hence, can learn these parameters efﬁciently with
very little labeled data.
Link prediction
In link prediction, we are given a network with a certain fraction of edges removed, and we would like to predict these missing
edges. We generate the labeled dataset of edges as follows: To obtain positive examples, we remove 50% of edges chosen randomly
from the network while ensuring that the residual network obtained
after the edge removals is connected, and to generate negative examples, we randomly sample an equal number of node pairs from
the network which have no edge connecting them.
Since none of feature learning algorithms have been previously
used for link prediction, we additionally evaluate node2vec against
some popular heuristic scores that achieve good performance in
link prediction. The scores we consider are deﬁned in terms of the
neighborhood sets of the nodes constituting the pair (see Table 3).
We test our benchmarks on the following datasets:
• Facebook : In the Facebook network, nodes represent
users, and edges represent a friendship relation between any
two users. The network has 4,039 nodes and 88,234 edges.
• Protein-Protein Interactions (PPI) : In the PPI network for
Homo Sapiens, nodes represent proteins, and an edge indicates a biological interaction between a pair of proteins. The
network has 19,706 nodes and 390,633 edges.
• arXiv ASTRO-PH : This is a collaboration network generated from papers submitted to the e-print arXiv where nodes
represent scientists, and an edge is present between two scientists if they have collaborated in a paper. The network has
18,722 nodes and 198,110 edges.
Experimental results.
We summarize our results for link prediction in Table 4. The best p and q parameter settings for each
node2vec entry are omitted for ease of presentation. A general observation we can draw from the results is that the learned feature
representations for node pairs signiﬁcantly outperform the heuristic benchmark scores with node2vec achieving the best AUC improvement on 12.6% on the arXiv dataset over the best performing
baseline (Adamic-Adar ).
Amongst the feature learning algorithms, node2vec outperforms
both DeepWalk and LINE in all networks with gain up to 3.8% and
6.5% respectively in the AUC scores for the best possible choices
of the binary operator for each algorithm. When we look at operators individually (Table 1), node2vec outperforms DeepWalk and
LINE barring a couple of cases involving the Weighted-L1 and
Weighted-L2 operators in which LINE performs better. Overall,
the Hadamard operator when used with node2vec is highly stable
and gives the best performance on average across all networks.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied feature learning in networks as a searchbased optimization problem. This perspective gives us multiple advantages. It can explain classic search strategies on the basis of
Common Neighbors
Jaccard’s Coefﬁcient
Adamic-Adar
Pref. Attachment
Spectral Clustering
Spectral Clustering
Spectral Clustering
Spectral Clustering
Table 4: Area Under Curve (AUC) scores for link prediction. Comparison with popular baselines and embedding based methods bootstapped using binary operators: (a) Average, (b) Hadamard, (c)
Weighted-L1, and (d) Weighted-L2 (See Table 1 for deﬁnitions).
the exploration-exploitation trade-off. Additionally, it provides a
degree of interpretability to the learned representations when applied for a prediction task. For instance, we observed that BFS can
explore only limited neighborhoods. This makes BFS suitable for
characterizing structural equivalences in network that rely on the
immediate local structure of nodes. On the other hand, DFS can
freely explore network neighborhoods which is important in discovering homophilous communities at the cost of high variance.
Both DeepWalk and LINE can be seen as rigid search strategies
over networks. DeepWalk proposes search using uniform random walks. The obvious limitation with such a strategy is that it
gives us no control over the explored neighborhoods. LINE 
proposes primarily a breadth-ﬁrst strategy, sampling nodes and optimizing the likelihood independently over only 1-hop and 2-hop
neighbors. The effect of such an exploration is easier to characterize, but it is restrictive and provides no ﬂexibility in exploring
nodes at further depths. In contrast, the search strategy in node2vec
is both ﬂexible and controllable exploring network neighborhoods
through parameters p and q. While these search parameters have intuitive interpretations, we obtain best results on complex networks
when we can learn them directly from data. From a practical standpoint, node2vec is scalable and robust to perturbations.
We showed how extensions of node embeddings to link prediction outperform popular heuristic scores designed speciﬁcally for
this task. Our method permits additional binary operators beyond
those listed in Table 1. As a future work, we would like to explore
the reasons behind the success of Hadamard operator over others, as well as establish interpretable equivalence notions for edges
based on the search parameters. Future extensions of node2vec
could involve networks with special structure such as heterogeneous information networks, networks with explicit domain features for nodes and edges and signed-edge networks. Continuous
feature representations are the backbone of many deep learning algorithms, and it would be interesting to use node2vec representations as building blocks for end-to-end deep learning on graphs.
Acknowledgements. We are thankful to Austin Benson, Will Hamilton, Rok Sosiˇc, Marinka Žitnik as well as the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This research has been supported
in part by NSF CNS-1010921, IIS-1149837, NIH BD2K, ARO
MURI, DARPA XDATA, DARPA SIMPLEX, Stanford Data Science Initiative, Boeing, Lightspeed, SAP, and Volkswagen.