Australian Journal of
Educational Technology
2002, 18(1), 1-12
Designing real life cases to support
authentic design activities
Sue Bennett, Barry Harper and John Hedberg
University of Wollongong
Teachers in a range of disciplines are interested in engaging their students in
authentic activities that reflect the experiences of real world practitioners.
Adopting this approach requires the design and implementation of learning
environments that incorporate and support such activities. This paper
describes two real life cases developed as support materials for learners
undertaking a major multimedia design project. Their implementation in a
graduate education subject forms the basis of a wider study investigating
learners' interpretations and use of case materials.
Introduction
Many teachers recognise the value in involving their students in tasks that
reflect the way knowledge and skills are used in practice. The challenge
they face is to incorporate these authentic activities and the realistic
contexts needed to support them into the learning experiences they design
for their students. One popular method for illustrating the complexities of
real life is with cases which present detailed accounts of situations through
the actions of key characters, the issues that arise and the outcomes that
eventuate. As part of a study into how learners interpret these rich sources
of information, two cases documenting real life design projects were
created to prepare students embarking on the development of their own
multimedia package. This paper describes the theoretical framework,
design decisions and the implementation of the cases in a graduate subject
which was the focus of the investigation.
Theoretical framework
Authentic activities
Many theorists argue the importance of providing students with authentic
experiences - experiences that reflect real world ways of knowing and
doing. It is thought that such experiences allow learners to transfer
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2002, 18(1)
knowledge from formal education to practice, and so provide
opportunities for meaningful learning.
These ideas are based on recent re-conceptions of learning which suggest
that :
1. "People transfer learning with difficulty, needing both context and
content learning."
2. "Skills and knowledge are best acquired within realistic contexts."
3. "Assessment must take more realistic and holistic forms."
In designing learning environments to support these authentic activities
there must be an alignment between the context in which learning is
presented in the formal setting and the real life setting in which that
knowledge will be called upon. But what is meant by authenticity and how
can these kinds of experiences be designed and supported?
Some researchers conceive of a generic kind of authenticity. Such activities
achieve authenticity because they reflect the nature of real problems as
ill-structured,
collaborative,
containing
perspectives and offering multiple paths and solutions . Jonassen suggests that an authentic activity may
simply be one that is personally meaningful to the learner - that is engaging
and relevant in a way that assists them in their own meaning-making.
Other researchers argue that emphasis should be placed on engaging
students in cognitive processes that reflect the real world counterpart
 . This would involve learners in the same types of
cognitive challenges as are present in the work environment, but not
necessarily in exactly the same tasks an expert practitioner would perform
 .
Honebein, Duffy and Fishman argue that an activity is not
inherently authentic, but authentic in relation to some other activity. The
level and nature of authenticity presented to learners will depend upon
many factors. Some situations may require a high level of sensory fidelity
in their representation so that practical skills may be developed. Other
learning situations may focus more upon developing or applying
conceptual knowledge or skills, such as critical thinking or problem
solving. In others social interaction and negotiation may be crucial.
Case based learning
There are a variety of reasons espoused for adopting a case based approach
to learning. A prominent argument is that case based learning involves
Bennett, Harper and Hedberg
complex, authentic situations in which the learner (usually a novice) must
learn to think like a practitioner (an expert). This reflects a view that
learning is a process of moving towards greater expertise.
Cases offer a means to contextualise learning in a way that connects
content and action. Schank and Cleary characterise case based
learning as a natural extension of our ability to learn from previous
experience. Experts are people with a store of previous cases upon which
they draw when confronted by a new situation. Jonassen argues that
the inclusion of cases in a constructivist learning environment provides
learners with access to experiences that they have not previously
encountered. Furthermore a case based approach which combines
engagement with meaningful real world tasks and expert coaching can
provide deeper insights into processes and practices .
Riesback describes case based reasoning as requiring learners to
compare a new situation to previous experiences, by looking for matching
characteristics and then adapting old solutions to create a new one. In
order to successfully retrieve previous cases, learners must label (or index)
them appropriately at the time of learning - the goal of learning being to
transfer knowledge to a new situation.
Using cognitive flexibility theory as their basis, Spiro and Jehng 
argue that multiple representations, such as those offered by case based
instruction, best support learning in complex, ill-structured knowledge
domains. Their approach attempts to retain the complexities and
contradictions inherent in realistic situations.
The use of cases for learning is not new. Case based instruction has a firmly
established tradition in professional disciplines such as business and law,
most notably at Harvard University . Recently cases
have found application in other disciplines, such as teacher education,
educational psychology and instructional design .
Although case based learning has developed a variety of interpretations
and applications, the approach is most broadly defined as requiring
"students to actively participate in real or hypothetical problem situations,
reflecting the kind of experiences naturally encountered in the discipline
under study" . Different conceptions of
teaching and learning will determine the nature of the cases developed and
the ways in which learners interact with the materials .
Most authors discuss two aspects of the case method: a) the case narrative
or description and; b) the implementation of the case (or cases) in the
learning environment.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2002, 18(1)
Cases may act as examples or illustrations, present new knowledge or
describe a problem situation. Cases may be paradigmatic, exemplary or
idiosyncratic. The essence of a case is the description of the context,
including the physical, social and organisational aspects .
Materials may consist of one detailed case requiring sustained engagement,
possibly from multiple perspectives, or feature short vignettes on a variety
of topics. As noted by Sykes and Bird , little is known of the
effectiveness of these alternatives and their suitability is likely to depend
upon such factors as the availability of background material and the
desired learning outcomes.
The representation of the case based learning materials must also be
considered. While text is a popular traditional medium, the Cognition and
Technology Group at Vanderbilt prefer to use high quality video
and computer based formats which offer increased scope for sensory
fidelity . Supporting resources may include
written documentation (including letters, reports, memos, articles),
graphics, audio, video or animation.
The most common approach to implementation of cases incorporates study
questions as a focus for individual reflection, small group deliberations and
whole class discussion . Variations on this
approach include: participation in the case as a simulation or field
experience ; inclusion of cases as support for decision
making and; student preparation of their own cases
 .
Support for learners in the form of scaffolding and modelling may also be a
feature of a case based approach. Spiro and Jehng advocate the
inclusion of commentaries which provide learners with expert guidance by
explaining how cases relate to themes and how themes are related to each
other. Jonassen describes a case based learning environment that
aims to bridge the gap between advanced biomedical knowledge and its
application to real world clinical diagnosis, with scaffolding in the form of
calculation tools provided at major decision points, prompting learners to
investigate relationships between variables. Miller and Kantrov 
emphasise the need for case analysis to take learners beyond the immediate
scope of the case context to address larger issues and extract
generalisations.
It is important to make a distinction between approaches which are
predominantly case or problem based. Problem based learning shares
many of the same attributes as the case approach in that it seeks to engage
learners in authentic activities within realistic situations. Ogden 
makes the useful distinction that case based learning is the study of past
Bennett, Harper and Hedberg
solutions whereas problem based learning involves developing a 'new'
solution. Cases are of value in providing multiple perspectives and
examples, particularly relevant for the kind of case to case reasoning
required in a legal system reliant on precedents. Problem based approaches
often use a case as the starting point only. For example, medical students
working in small groups are presented with a problem situation
constructed from actual patient records and using the process of research
and clinical reasoning arrive at a diagnosis .
The literature on case based learning is dominated by theoretical
arguments for its instructional effectiveness and descriptions of the design
and application of a case based approach. There is however little research
reporting on the nature of the case based learning experience - a
shortcoming noted by many authors including McKeachie and
Ertmer et. al. . Specific studies have explored some aspects of case
based learning, such as self regulation and problem solving behaviour,
however these do not yet form a connected or comprehensive body of
knowledge. In particular little is known of how learners make sense of the
rich contextual information presented in a case and use that in other
situations.
The design of a case based learning environment
The setting
The study was conducted with two groups enrolled in Interactive
Multimedia Design, an advanced level subject in the Master of Education in
IT program at the University of Wollongong. Students in the subject form
small project teams and work with a real client to develop an interactive
multimedia package which will address a specific educational need. The
nature of the task requires learners to draw on conceptual knowledge and
production skills developed in previous subjects, to work within a team of
people with diverse interests and backgrounds, and to manage the
relationship with a client who might have different expectations of the
process and outcomes. These are also aspects of a real world multimedia
design project, and through this activity learners encounter situations
similar to those a professional designer would experience.
Like any other learning activity which aims to be authentic, there are
limitations that need to be recognised. Although this is a team project, the
other members of the development team are also students. This means that
the relationships and hierarchy do not reflect those that would be found in
a real world design team, with implications for the authority of the project
manager in the student group. Also most of the team members will have
rudimentary production skills rather than be experienced graphic
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2002, 18(1)
designers, media production experts or programmers. This may impact on
how team works together and manages their own and the client's
expectations of the final product.
Design of the subject
There is arguably no such thing as a typical instructional design project.
Each is influenced by a variety of factors including the educational
philosophy of the teacher/designer, characteristics of the students, the
institutional setting and the availability of human and financial resources,
all of which must be assessed and reassessed throughout a project.
1. Project
design and
development
4. Cognitive
Software for
multimedia
authoring,
concept mapping,
media editing
2. Related
Related design
examples and
Contextual
Computer lab
facilities, skills
workshops, class
discussion list
3. Information
References,
proformas,
examples, media
5.Conversation
Collaboration
Asynchronous
discussion list,
electronic mail
Figure 1: Jonassen's model for a constructivist learning environment
Goel and Pirolli argue that design problems by their very nature are
not amenable to rule based solutions. The ill-structured nature of
instructional design problems means that not only are there multiple paths
towards a ‘solution’, but that there are multiple interpretations and
Bennett, Harper and Hedberg
solutions as well. Expert designers address these complex, multifaceted
problems by drawing on their knowledge of theory and research and their
previous professional experience.
Jonassen's model for a constructivist learning environment (CLE)
provides a framework for supporting learners as they work on their own
design problems. Cases present solutions to past problems that may
compensate for learners’ lack of experience and may help learners develop
an understanding of concepts and strategies useful in similar situations.
This model has been used as a framework for redesigning the subject, as
described in Figure 1.
1. Project space
The project space is the focus of the learning environment and in this
subject comprises the design ‘problem’ for which learners develop a
multimedia solution. Students work in small project teams and liase
with a real client. A number of clients are available for learners to chose
from, or they may find their own. The design problems tend to be illstructured and complex and engage learners in the kind of thinking
required by practitioners in the design and development of a project.
2. Related cases
Cases provide the main instructional support and analysis activities
focus on developing the learner's understanding of instructional design
through individual reflection and group discussion. The activities
incorporate two facets of case based learning suggested in the literature
- 1) learning from experts, and 2) developing ideas through personal
reflection and social interaction. The two cases developed for this
subject provides insights into the experiences of the designers that
enhance learners' understanding of the development process.
3. Information resources
Information resources include references to relevant sources of
information including readings and Web sites, proforma documents
usable for guiding the development of design statements, examples and
descriptions of other projects, and useful media resources.
4. Cognitive tools
Students use multimedia authoring software to explore and test their
design ideas on screen, leading to a prototype version of their
multimedia package. Other software tools are made available to assist
learners with problem representation, concept mapping, information
gathering and organisation, storyboarding and media design.
5. Conversation and collaboration tools
Asynchronous communication tools, such as electronic mail and
discussion lists, are used to support interpersonal, small group and
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2002, 18(1)
whole class interaction. An array of other tools are available to meet the
individual communication needs of the project teams.
6. Social and contextual support
Social and contextual support is provided through a class discussion
forum for general communication, access to the computer laboratory
facilities and other meeting spaces, and the scheduling of face to face
meetings and optional skills development workshops. The role of the
instructor as facilitator and mentor is an essential component of this
environment.
Design of the cases
Ertmer and Russell suggest that instructional design students need
to develop skills in problem solving, critical thinking and reasoned
judgement needed to work with complex, multi-faceted design problems.
Table 1 below outlines the design principles that underpin the
development of the cases in relation to the desired outcomes for this subject
and the team design activities.
The instructional design cases prepared for this study illustrate the nature
of design problems as ill-structured and ill-defined. The two cases are real
life examples, tracing the development of Exploring the Nardoo and
StageStruck by the Interactive Multimedia Learning Laboratory in the
Faculty of Education at the University of Wollongong. The cases present
the approach of the project designers to interpreting the needs of the client
and target learners, developing appropriate instructional solutions,
representing their design ideas and implementing these in the product. The
cases are not presented as exemplars, but instead aim to convey the
multiple issues which arose and to illustrate the ambiguities and
contingencies that are part of the design and development process.
The case materials themselves depart from the traditional narrative form in
which the case author summarises the events for the learner. As the
intention is to provide a rich information source that learners can explore
and make sense of themselves, materials are maintained in their 'rawest'
form. In doing so it is possible to maintain a level of detail, complexity and
ambiguity which would be more difficult to achieve in a concise format.
Constructed as a series of Web pages linked from the main subject site, the
various components are linked from an introductory page which provides
a brief overview of the project and a timeline of major events. These were
developed from archival records of the projects including meeting notes,
email communication and diary entries. They are the only 'pre-packaged'
materials included and from here learners can follow links to a range of
other resources.
Bennett, Harper and Hedberg
Table 1: Desired outcomes against case analysis and project tasks
Instructional design
students need to develop the
knowledge and skills to:
Case materials and activities
aim to develop these skills by
engaging learners with
realistic, detailed design
cases which:
The team design activities
aim to develop these skills by
engaging learners in a
project which requires them
make sense of a complex
design problem by
identifying and analysing
the critical issues in a
contain multiple issues
and perspectives
describe and assess the
features of a particular
learning problem
consider multiple
possibilities for design
solutions by applying
knowledge of
instructional strategies
illustrate how designers
generate their initial ideas
from an understanding of
instructional strategies
consider how different
strategies might be
applied to a particular
learning situation
select the most
appropriate solution by
considering possible
designs in light of
situational factors
illustrate how designers
determine which methods
are most suitable in a
particular situation given
a range of contextual
determine which design
solution would be most
appropriate in a
particular situation
communicate design
decisions to others and
negotiate as necessary
include details of
communication between
designers and others
work with a real client to
whom they must explain
and justify their design
document and/or
prototype a design
include relevant
documents and files as
part of the case materials
prepare a description of
their design within a
design statement template
evaluate a design solution
in terms of the initial
include the designer’s
reflections on the overall
process and solution
evaluate their design
solution by reflecting on
their project experiences
and their original
intentions
These include accounts from the key project designers which, apart from
minor editing to improve readability, are included as direct transcripts of
interviews conducted with the researcher. This allows learners to read the
conversation in its original context and in the designer's own words.
Students can also examine original design documents, including versions
of the project design statements, storyboards, concept maps and early
prototypes. Also included are reviews of the final products and papers
written about subsequent research projects. Copies of the CD-ROM
products are also provided to learners so that they can examine them in
conjunction with the case accounts.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2002, 18(1)
Implementation
The aim of the cases was to provide learners who were beginning work on
their own team projects with access to accounts of other projects which
might have relevance to their own. To focus their study of the cases, they
were given a series of analysis questions for which they provided
individual responses. These questions asked them to describe the design
process and key events, relate the experiences of the case designers to
concepts from the literature and/or their own experiences, examine a
particular design feature, and identify the major management issues.
At the next class meeting a discussion in their project teams focussed on
how the design and management issues highlighted in the case might be
relevant to their own projects. These issues were then shared in a whole
class discussion. This series of activities was designed to allow the learner
to first develop their own ideas about the cases and then to share them
with the other members of their team and later with the whole class group.
The intention was also to take them from specific discussion of the cases to
the broader issues and lead into their own project experience .
Towards the completion of their group projects learners were also required
to respond individually to a series of reflective questions and then submit
their own reflective case, developed collaboratively by the project team.
The aim of this task was to draw them out of the often all-consuming
project development tasks and ask them to again examine the main design
and management issues, now in terms of their own project experience.
Data collected throughout the session, in the form of student work,
discussion list transcripts and interviews with students and the instructor,
are currently being analysed. It is anticipated that investigation of
individual responses and the patterns and themes which emerge will
provide insights into the ways learners examine and interpret the cases and
use their understanding of them to inform their own project work.
Conclusion
An examination of the literature advocating the use of authentic activities
suggests that cases may be useful in helping learners develop an
understanding of the complexities of real life situations. Two real life cases
developed to support learners undertaking a major design project provide
a rich source of information featuring personal accounts and original
documents. It is intended that learners will be prompted by the case
analysis questions to explore the multiple perspectives and issues within
the cases to develop their own view of the development process, and in
Bennett, Harper and Hedberg
discussion with others in their team and class explore the wider issues.
This process of analysis, experience and reflection could also be applied to
other learning situations in which learners with varying backgrounds and
skills could benefit from the opportunity to examine a related case before
they embark on their experience.