Parkinsonian rest tremor can be detected accurately based on neuronal oscillations recorded
from the subthalamic nucleus
Hirschmann, J.; Schoffelen, J.M.; Schnitzler, A.; Gerven, M.A.J. van
2017, Article / Letter to editor , pp. 2029-2036)
Doi link to publisher: 
Version of the following full text: Publisher’s version
Published under the terms of article 25fa of the Dutch copyright act. Please follow this link for the
Terms of Use: 
Downloaded from: 
Download date: 2025-03-26
To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).
Parkinsonian rest tremor can be detected accurately based on neuronal
oscillations recorded from the subthalamic nucleus
J. Hirschmann a,b,⇑, J.M. Schoffelen a, A. Schnitzler b,c, M.A.J. van Gerven a
a Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
b Institute of Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany
c Center for Movement Disorders and Neuromodulation, Medical Faculty, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Germany
a r t i c l e
Article history:
Accepted 25 July 2017
Available online 9 August 2017
Tremor detection
Parkinson’s disease
Neuronal oscillations
Deep brain stimulation
Subthalamic nucleus
Hidden Markov Model
h i g h l i g h t s
 Tremor can be detected accurately in short segments of STN local ﬁeld potential recordings.
 Four power estimates from a single DBS electrode contact pair sufﬁce for successful detection.
 High frequency oscillations are the most useful feature for tremor detection.
a b s t r a c t
Objective: To investigate the possibility of tremor detection based on deep brain activity.
Methods: We re-analyzed recordings of local ﬁeld potentials (LFPs) from the subthalamic nucleus in 10
PD patients (12 body sides) with spontaneously ﬂuctuating rest tremor. Power in several frequency bands
was estimated and used as input to Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) which classiﬁed short data segments
as either tremor-free rest or rest tremor. HMMs were compared to direct threshold application to individual power features.
Results: Applying a threshold directly to band-limited power was insufﬁcient for tremor detection (mean
area under the curve [AUC] of receiver operating characteristic: 0.64, STD: 0.19). Multi-feature HMMs, in
contrast, allowed for accurate detection (mean AUC: 0.82, STD: 0.15), using four power features obtained
from a single contact pair. Within-patient training yielded better accuracy than across-patient training
(0.84 vs. 0.78, p = 0.03), yet tremor could often be detected accurately with either approach. High frequency oscillations (>200 Hz) were the best performing individual feature.
Conclusions: LFP-based markers of tremor are robust enough to allow for accurate tremor detection in
short data segments, provided that appropriate statistical models are used.
Signiﬁcance: LFP-based markers of tremor could be useful control signals for closed-loop deep brain
stimulation.
 2017 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights
1. Introduction
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a widely used treatment for
Parkinson’s
 . While its efﬁcacy is well established, its efﬁciency
can potentially be optimized. Conventional DBS is applied continuously although motor symptoms are usually ﬂuctuating. Moreover, the beneﬁt of DBS is often compromised by side-effects,
which can usually be alleviated by reducing stimulation power,
i.e. the energy applied per unit of time. Suggested approaches to
reduce power include electric ﬁeld steering , optimization of pulse patterning 
and closed-loop stimulation .
In closed-loop DBS, stimulation is exclusively applied in the
presence of symptoms rather than continuously. The approach
has been demonstrated to reduce the occurrence of side-effects,
such as dysarthria . Furthermore, it is more
energy-efﬁcient than continuous DBS and thus expected to reduce
the amount of surgeries for battery replacement . Finally, and most importantly, it was reported that closed-loop DBS may improve symptom suppression .
 
1388-2457/ 2017 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding author at: Institute of Clinical Neuroscience and Medical
Psychology, Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
E-mail address: (J. Hirschmann).
Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Clinical Neurophysiology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clinph
In order to implement closed-loop DBS, it is necessary to ﬁrst
facilitate reliable symptom detection. Ideally, detection is achieved
without the need to add further measurement channels to the DBS
system, i.e. by online analysis of deep brain recordings. Obviously,
such online monitoring makes sense only for symptoms which wax
and wane dynamically. Furthermore, the symptom must have a
known and robust neural correlate.
Rest tremor is a cardinal symptom of PD that fulﬁlls both of
these requirements. It is highly dynamic and well characterized
with respect to its electrophysiology . Tremorrelated activity occurs throughout the motor network, including
the basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, and primary motor cortex
 . In the presence of
tremor, these areas produce coherent neuronal oscillations at tremor frequency . Furthermore,
beta power (13–30 Hz) and beta band coupling are reduced during
tremor . Finally, local ﬁeld potential (LFP)
recordings in the subthalamic nucleus (STN) have revealed an
 and a change in high frequency oscillations (HFOs). In particular, the ratio between slow
HFO power (200–300 Hz) and fast HFO power (300–400 Hz) was
reported to increase reliably during tremor (Hirschmann et al.,
It is important to note that the above-listed power differences
between rest tremor and tremor-free rest relate to temporal averages (tens to hundreds of seconds). It is unclear whether LFP-based
markers of tremor are robust enough to allow for a moment-bymoment detection of tremor. Here, we show that such that detection in short data segments is indeed possible, provided that
appropriate statistical methods are used.
2. Methods
2.1. Patients
This study is a re-analysis of a dataset collected previously
 . In order to have a sufﬁcient
amount of data, we selected those patients with at least two continuous data epochs, containing at least 12 s of tremor-free rest
and 12 s of rest tremor each. Recordings from 10 patients (12 STNs)
met this inclusion criterion. Patient S10 was the only patient not
included in earlier studies.
All patients were diagnosed with idiopathic PD, experienced
waxing and waning rest tremor, and were selected for DBS surgery.
Clinical details are provided in Table 1. The study was approved by
the ethics committee of the Medical Faculty of the Heinrich Heine
University Düsseldorf (Study No. 3209), was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and required written
informed consent.
2.2. Recordings
Patients were recorded one day after electrode implantation.
Patients S01-S09 were off oral dopaminergic medication for
12 h. Patient S10 had received 200 mg of levodopa 3.5 h before
the measurement started to avoid painful upper limb cramps. Subcutaneous apomorphine administration was paused 1.5 to 2 h
before measurements started.
Each patient underwent two sessions containing rest (5 min)
followed by one of two motor tasks: static forearm extension or
self-paced
ﬁst-clenching
approximately
 . Patients S08 and S09 were only recorded at rest for
20 min and 15 min, respectively. Movements were performed with
the symptom-dominant body side in ﬁve 1-min blocks which were
interleaved by 1 min pauses to avoid fatigue. Except for the analysis of voluntary movement in Section 3.2, we exclusively consider
the rest condition in this paper.
Local ﬁeld potentials (LFPs) from the STN, the magnetoencephalogram (MEG; Elekta Oy, Helsinki, Finland) and the surface
electromyogram (EMG) of the extensor digitorum communis and
ﬂexor digitorum superﬁcialis muscles of both upper limbs were
recorded simultaneously. Here, we concentrated on LFPs because
they are in principle available to implanted DBS systems with sensing capacity and could therefore be used to control closed-loop
Externalized,
nonferromagnetic leads connected DBS electrodes to the ampliﬁer of
the MEG system. Electrode contacts were referenced to the left
mastoid and rearranged to a bipolar montage ofﬂine by subtracting
signals from neighboring contacts. EMG electrodes were referenced to surface electrodes at the muscle tendons. A hardware ﬁlter
0.1–660 Hz.
preprocessing consisted of the application of a high-pass ﬁlter with
a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz and signal rectiﬁcation. Individual tremor frequency was deﬁned as the highest peak of the EMG power
spectrum during tremor.
Information on patients. Columns 7 and 8 show that deep brain stimulation generally reduced the contralateral upper limb rest tremor score of the Uniﬁed Parkinson’s Disease
Rating Scale. OFF/OFF = medication off/stimulation off. B = 8-contact, non-segmented electrode by Boston Scientiﬁc. M = 4-contact, non-segmented electrode by Medtronic
(model 3389). S = 4-contact, non-segmented electrode by St. Jude Medical.
Upper limb
tremor score
control OFF/OFF
Upper limb
tremor score
control OFF/ON
Tremorfree rest
Tremor-free, voluntary
movement ipsilat. to
tremor (min)
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
2.3. Contact selection
STN activity was recorded by the macroelectrode later used for
DBS. Electrode contact coordinates were retrieved as described in
 , and the contact pair with maximum
STN atlas probability was selected. For subject S03, this choice
was revised post-hoc to achieve better detection accuracy.
2.4. Feature computation
electrophysiological
changes associated with tremor, we deﬁned four frequencydomain features: power at individual tremor frequency ±1 Hz
 , beta power and the HFO power ratio . Bandlimited spectral power was estimated using the multitaper method
 as implemented in FieldTrip . When computing power, the frequency was set to the band
center and the spectral smoothing was set to half the band width
for optimal band coverage. The time courses of power features
were estimated using non-overlapping time windows with a
length of 2 s. 2 s was found to be a good compromise between fast
tremor detection and the reliable estimation of power in the low
frequency range in a preliminary analysis (data not shown).
Figs. SF1 and SF2 of the Supplementary Material show LFP power
at 0.5 Hz frequency resolution for each selected contact pair.
To evaluate the ‘true’ tremor state of the patient we computed
ﬂexor EMG power at individual tremor frequency for the same
epochs. States are henceforth referred to as NO-TREMOR and TRE-
MOR, respectively.
2.5. Data annotation
Large parts of the data were pre-labeled as NO-TREMOR or TRE-
MOR based on visual inspection of EMG traces. The annotation was
incomplete, however, since no label had been given in case of
doubt. For this study, we completed the annotation by applying a
threshold to EMG power at individual tremor frequency. The
threshold was initially set just low enough to isolate all epochs
originally labeled TREMOR. The threshold and/or the resulting
labels were adapted manually as required to avoid rapid label
switching in longer, near-threshold episodes and the misinterpretation of EMG artifacts as tremor. Supplementary Table ST1 compares this highly individualized data annotation procedure to the
usage of a ﬁxed threshold.
In a subset of patients, we additionally analyzed epochs of voluntary, repetitive ﬁst-clenching. Threshold crossings in these
epochs resulted in the assignment of the label MOVE instead of
TREMOR. Patients with kinetic tremor, i.e. tremor during voluntary
movement, were excluded from the analysis.
2.6. Hidden Markov models
Hidden Markov models (HMMs) estimate the underlying state
sequence generating a discrete sequence of observations . They are widely used in a variety of tasks that
require analysis of sequential data, such as the decoding of speech
comparison
nucleotide
sequences . Recently, HMMs have also been applied
to MEG data to investigate the dynamics of brain networks
 .
Here, we used the Hidden Markov Toolbox for Matlab (https://
www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/HMM/hmm.html) to infer the
motor state from a 4-element feature vector (tremor band power,
beta power, low gamma power, HFO power ratio) at each time
step. The motor state was assumed to be dichotomous (NO-
TREMOR or TREMOR). In Section 3.2, we included repetitive ﬁstclenching (MOVE) as a third possible state.
The general procedure is outlined in Fig. 1. Each dataset was
divided into two continuous folds, each containing at least 12 s
of tremor-free rest and 12 s of rest tremor. These two folds were
from two different sessions in case there was enough rest tremor
and tremor-free rest in both sessions. Otherwise, they were taken
from the same session. In this case, the length of each fold was chosen such that the amount of state changes (tremor on- and offsets)
was approximately equal in both folds.
One fold was designated the train fold and the other was designated the test fold. In case of across-patient training, the train fold
consisted of data from all subjects save the one currently analyzed,
concatenated in time. The EMG-derived labels and the features of
the train fold were used to ﬁt a HMM. So, unlike in most other
HMM applications, the state variable was observable and used
for training. The features of the test fold served as input to the
HMM, which returned an estimate of the state. This estimate was
compared to the EMG-derived state sequence of the test fold. Then,
train and test fold were interchanged and the procedure was
cross-validation).
distinguishing
between tremor-free rest, rest tremor and ﬁst-clenching, crossvalidation was not applied due to limited amounts of data.
Hidden Markov Models assume that observations are generated
by a stationary Markov process. In consequence, the probability of
changing from NO TREMOR to TREMOR should not depend on how
much time has passed since the last tremor epoch and vice versa.
We veriﬁed this assumption by analyzing the sequence of EMGderived state labels (Fig. SF3, Supplementary Material).
2.6.1. Model ﬁtting
All features were Z-transformed prior to model ﬁtting using
mean and standard deviation of the test fold. Model ﬁtting
involved computation of the state transition rates in the test fold,
yielding the 4  4 transition probability matrix T. A Dirichlet prior
reﬂecting expected transition rates was added in case of withinpatient training, deﬁned by the transition rates averaged over all
subjects save the one currently analyzed.
Emission densities describe the distribution of observations
given the state. They were modeled by a Gaussian Mixture Model,
the components of which were restricted to have diagonal covariance. We used the Matlab function ﬁtgmdist to sequentially ﬁt
Gaussian Mixture Models with one up to ten components, and
chose the model with minimal Akaike Information Criterion
 . Initial state probabilities were obtained by computing the fraction of training episodes labeled NO-TREMOR, TREMOR,
or MOVE, respectively.
2.6.2. State estimation
State probabilities were estimated in a pointwise fashion using
posterior decoding . The posterior probability is deﬁned as
ctðiÞ ¼ Pðqt ¼ ij0; hÞ;
denoting the probability that the current state qt equals state i,
given the observation sequence O and model parameters h. The
state estimate was obtained by applying a probability threshold
to c (see Fig. 1). The sensitivity/speciﬁcity of detection can be
manipulated by changing this threshold.
2.7. Quantiﬁcation of detector performance
Detector performance was quantiﬁed by the well-established
area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
(ROC). The ROC is a plot of sensitivity vs. false positive rate as a
function of decision threshold and conveys information about the
tradeoff between sensitivity and speciﬁcity. For example, in the
context of tremor detection, a sensitivity of 0.90 and a false positive rate of 0.05 would mean that 95% of all tremor-free episodes
were correctly classiﬁed while 10% of the tremor episodes were
missed. The area under the ROC curve is 1 in case of perfect discrimination and 0.5 in case of random guessing. In contrast to other
performance measures, such as accuracy, the AUC is independent
of the particular threshold choice.
Note that we did not quantify detection latency in this study,
another relevant performance indicator, due to the difﬁculty of
determining exact tremor onset times. In many subjects, tremor
emerged in a gradual and variable fashion and clear onsets were
not discernible.
2.8. Signiﬁcance testing
To test whether the AUC deviated signiﬁcantly from chance we
applied the Normal approximation of the U-distribution . To assess the inﬂuence of detector type
(HMM or power threshold) and frequency band (tremor frequency,
beta, low gamma, HFO) we performed a repeated measures analysis of variance and post-hoc tests in SPSS24 (IBM).
3. Results
Data from ten patients were included (Table 1). Two patients
experienced ﬂuctuating tremor bilaterally, so that both body sides
could be analyzed.
3.1. Tremor-free rest vs. Rest tremor
3.1.1. Detection accuracy
HMMs based on all four LFP frequency-domain features yielded
accuracies >0.85 in nine out of 12 data sets (Table 2). Fig. 2 displays
four examples of successful state decoding. Sub Fig. 2A–C show an
excellent match between EMG and the HMM state estimate.
Fig. 2D displays a case with good detection performance. Two short
tremor episodes, however, were not detected. In all but one case,
visual inspection of LFP data suggested that detection was not
based on artifacts caused by tremor-induced movement of the
extension cables (Fig. SF3, Supplementary Material).
3.1.2. Within-patient training vs. across-patient training
Within-patient training yielded signiﬁcantly better accuracy
than across-patient training (p = 0.03, Wilcoxon signed rank test).
In spite of this, many individuals showed good accuracy in both
settings (Table 2). This ﬁnding demonstrates that individual training data are useful, but not always necessary for successful tremor
detection.
3.1.3. Receiver operating characteristic
Fig. 3A depicts the ROCs for all individual 4-feature-HMMs and
the group-average. With two exceptions (S03 and S07), all curves
deviated substantially from the diagonal, indicating good detector
performance (mean AUC: 0.82, STD: 0.15, Min: 0.46, Max: 0.98).
The area under the group-average ROC curve deviated signiﬁcantly
from chance level (p < 0.001).
3.1.4. Comparison between features and detector types
We investigated the AUCs associated with single-feature detectors to reveal whether some power features were more useful than
others. In addition, we tested two ways of detecting tremor:
threshold application directly to individual power features and
threshold application to the output of single-feature HMMs, i.e.
the posterior probability of tremor.
We found a main effect of detector type ðF1;11 = 5.87, p = 0.03)
and a main effect of frequency band ðF3;33 = 4.66, p = 0.01), but
no interaction between them ðF3;33 = 2.12, p = 0.12), indicating that
HMM-based detection outperformed raw feature-based detection
regardless of the frequency band under consideration (Fig. 3B).
Post-hoc tests showed that the HFO power ratio had more discriminative potential than any of the other features (all p  0.04).
Fig. 1. Workﬂow for training and testing Hidden Markov Models. A threshold was applied to EMG power at individual tremor frequency to obtain the tremor state. The data
were divided into a train a test fold. State and features of the train fold were used to ﬁt a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). The model received the features of the test fold as
input and returned the posterior probability of tremor. Applying a threshold to the posterior probability resulted in the predicted state, which was compared to the EMGderived state of the test fold.
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
Detector performance. Detection was based on subthalamic power features. The third column relates to across-patient training. Columns 4–6 relate to within-patient training.
Hemisphere
Accuracy across
Accuracy within
Sensitivity within
Speciﬁcity within
Fig. 2. Examples of tremor detection based on subthalamic power features. Four examples illustrating the match between predicted and true state. (A) S05, fold 1; (B) S02 left,
fold 1; (C) S10, fold 2; (D) S01, fold 2. Upper rows of subplots show the rectiﬁed EMG. Background shading represents the labels (blue: NO-TREMOR, red: TREMOR). Lower
rows of subplots show the recordings from which features were derived in gray (rescaled, arbitrary units). The red line in the foreground depicts the predicted state. The inset
depicts an enlargement of the rectiﬁed EMG shown in (A). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
Fig. 3. Receiver operating characteristic. (A) Receiver operating characteristic of the full, 4-feature Hidden Markov Model for all individual patients and the group average
(thick red line). The black diagonal indicates chance level. (B) Left: Main effect of factor detector type (threshold on raw features, threshold on single-feature HMM output) on
area under the curve (AUC). Right: Main effect of factor frequency band (power at individual tremor frequency, beta power, low gamma power and HFO power ratio) on AUC. *:
p < 0.05; **: p < 0.01. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
3.2. Tremor-free rest vs. Rest tremor vs. Voluntary movement
In order to assess tremor-speciﬁcity, we trained a 3-state HMM
which distinguished tremor-free rest, rest tremor and repetitive
ﬁst-clenching. We included those four patients who had performed
voluntary movements with the tremulous body side and who did
not exhibit kinetic tremor (Table 1).
Fig. 4A shows an example of state decoding. The general pattern
of short tremor episodes preceding blocks of voluntary movement
is reﬂected in the decoded sequence. Tremor was occasionally mistaken for voluntary movement, however, and vice versa. The average confusion matrix (Fig. 4B) shows that, across the group, the
HMMs were mostly correct when predicting tremor-free rest or
voluntary movement (speciﬁcity: 0.77 and 0.75). When the predicted state was rest tremor, however, the true state was often voluntary movement (speciﬁcity: 0.40).
4. Discussion
Several studies have investigated temporal averages of LFP
power estimates and found signiﬁcant differences between Parkinsonian rest tremor and tremor-free rest. This study demonstrates
that these differences are robust enough to allow for momentby-moment detection of tremor based on STN activity, suggesting
that LFP markers of tremor could in principle be useful for closedloop DBS. Similar robustness has recently been demonstrated for
STN LFP correlates of grip force .
The current study is clinically relevant because it introduces a
ﬂexible means to detect PD rest tremor with little hardware and
computational demands based on LFP markers. Furthermore, it
shows which markers to use and how to use them efﬁciently. Nevertheless, further efforts need to be undertaken before PD patients
can proﬁt from automatic symptom detection.
4.1. LFP-based tremor detection – A ﬂexible, low-demand alternative
to peripheral detection
It was reported previously that DBS conditioned on accelerometer
measurements
 can suppress tremor. Our ﬁndings
suggest that LFP markers of tremor could be a valid alternative to
peripheral
detection.
implanted DBS systems, i.e. there is no need for sensors in addition
to the deep brain electrodes. This aspect is relevant because additional sensors pose additional requirements on patient compliance
and safety, e.g. the necessity to wear peripheral sensors on
tremulous body parts or the necessity to protect the system from
manipulation and interference.
Besides low demands on hardware, the method proposed here
requires little computational resources, as it operates on only a
small set of power features from a single electrode contact pair.
Finally, it offers the possibility to adjust sensitivity as needed.
The neurologist or patient may adapt the threshold on the posterior probability of tremor until tremor is sufﬁciently suppressed,
similar to the setting of pulse amplitude in conventional DBS
4.2. Comparison to previous studies
Previous reports on intraoperative data have successfully
demonstrated tremor detection based on LFPs in either single case
studies or small cohorts . The current study improves on
earlier investigations by using a small set of features, by performing sensitivity analysis and by performing detection in a much
richer data set, including long tremor-free and tremor episodes
as well as multiple on- and offsets. Thus, it was possible to study
the model in situations other than tremor onset or tremor only , and to compare
within-patient training to across-patient training. Moreover, we
addressed the important issue of cable movement. While such
tremor-associated artifacts allow for excellent detection performance, they are not expected in implanted devices, and may thus
lead to overly optimistic expectations.
4.3. Generalization
Although the availability of individual training data proved to
be advantageous, tremor could often be detected when models
were trained on data from different patients. This observation is
in agreement with previous studies , and implies that tremor detection can be
achieved in patients who did not undergo intracranial LFP recordings or did not exhibit waxing and waning tremor during these
recordings. Importantly, generalization further implies that the
LFP pattern associated with tremor is similar across patients.
4.4. Marker utility
The comparison of AUCs associated with single-feature detectors allowed contrasting the discriminative potential of power at
individual tremor frequency, beta power, low gamma power and
Fig. 4. Distinguishing tremor-free rest, rest tremor and voluntary movement. (A) Single-case example (S05). The patient performed repetitive, self-paced ﬁst-clenching
(green) and rested in between movement blocks (blue). Rest tremor emerged spontaneously during pauses (red). (B) Average confusion matrix. Individual matrices were
divided by the total amount of test samples before averaging, to ensure that all subjects contributed equally to the average. (For interpretation of the references to colour in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
 , the HFO power ratio was found to be the
best individual marker of rest tremor, performing almost as well as
the full, 4-feature input vector. Please note that the importance of
HFOs, rather than oscillations at tremor frequency, is a further indication that tremor detection was based on physiological features
rather than tremor-related artifacts.
4.5. Detector utility
Pilot studies applying closed-loop DBS in PD patients have triggered or adapted DBS conditional on current estimates of STN beta
power, i.e. the decision was based directly on this particular power
feature . While this
approach may be useful for detecting akinesia, we found that
applying a threshold directly to any of the single power features
was generally not sufﬁcient for tremor detection. Performance
could be increased substantially when using power as input to a
single-feature HMM and applying a threshold to the model output
instead of the feature itself. This performance gain evidences the
utility of the HMM, which models the underlying process instead
of trusting the data blindly. For example, an HMM can learn that
the tremor state changes rarely although LFP power estimates
are rather volatile. In consequence, HMMs provide more stable
and more accurate predictions.
4.6. Limitations
The current study demonstrates the feasibility of discriminating
Parkinsonian rest tremor and tremor-free rest based on STN power.
Tremor and voluntary movement, however, could not be distinguished reliably, meaning that the model would tend to trigger
stimulation during tremor and voluntary movement if it was actually used for controlling DBS. The confusion of tremor and voluntary movement could partly be due to the presence of weak
kinetic tremor, which is difﬁcult to see in the EMG. For an episode
with kinetic tremor, the assumption of mutually exclusive states is
violated and the labels TREMOR and MOVE are both correct. It is
also possible that power modulations which differentiate between
tremor and voluntary movement occur at a faster timescale than
the one considered here (2s-resolution) or that these two kinds
of movement share a common oscillatory proﬁle due to a common
associated process, such as a transient increase of alertness.
Dealing with voluntary movement is a general challenge to
closed-loop DBS that applies also to approaches based on beta
power , which is reduced during voluntary
movement, and to systems based on peripheral detectors, which
are challenged by voluntary movements with symptom-like kinematics. For example, Salarian et al. developed a highly effective tremor detector based on gyroscope measurements, but reported an
increase of the false positive rate when patients engaged in voluntary movements similar to tremor, such as brushing the teeth
 .
As a further challenge to closed-loop DBS in PD, tremor-free
rest, rest tremor and voluntary movements are not the only categories that need to be distinguished. Ideally, a closed-loop control
algorithm would trigger DBS whenever tremor, akinesia, or rigidity
is present, regardless of whether or not a voluntary movement is
currently performed, and regardless of whether the patient is ON
or OFF medication. Such robust multi-category discrimination
not only requires a very sophisticated decoder, but also an extensive database for training, containing many repetitions of all possible symptom combinations in the presence and absence of
different kinds of voluntary movement and medication. The current results might motivate the establishment of such a database.
Finally, putting the approach into practice will come with
additional challenges. First, the usage of a time-window delays
stimulator update and further implies that very short tremor
epochs may go undetected. Second, sensitivity needs to be
improved further prior to clinical use and it needs to be assured
that tremor is detected at very short latency. Third, it must be
considered that continuous sensing consumes power, diminishing
the power savings achieved by closed-loop DBS. Khanna et al.
addressed this issue using an existing, experimental closed-loop
system which applied DBS to a tank with saline solution whenever
simulated sensorimotor beta power crossed a pre-deﬁned threshold . They found that closed-loop DBS required
less power than continuous DBS, unless closed-loop DBS was
triggered more than 94% of the time. These ﬁndings suggest that
closed-loop DBS saves energy in practice. It has to be noted,
additional
demands, e.g. for HFO ampliﬁcation and processing.
5. Conclusions and outlook
We conclude that tremor detection based on STN activity is feasible. It requires only a few features from a single electrode
While we established the approach to detect rest tremor in PD
patients with electrodes targeting the STN, it may be useful for
other patient groups. Given the similarity between tremorrelated activity in STN and the motor thalamus and the similarity between the oscillatory
networks involved in Parkinsonian rest tremor and essential tremor , it is conceivable that our approach is transferable to thalamic DBS and
essential tremor. Since key markers of tremor such as HFOs have
also been observed in the pallidum , the approach may also be useful in PD patients receiving pallidal stimulation.
The work leading to this publication was supported by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) with funds from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and the
People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme under REA grant
agreement no. 605728 (P.R.I.M.E. – Postdoctoral Researchers International Mobility Experience). Further funding was provided by
Netherlands
Organisation
[639.072.513 to MG, 864.14.011 to JMS]. The funding sources were
not involved in study design, in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data, in the writing of the report, or in the decision
to submit the article for publication.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the patients for participating in this
study. And we are very thankful to Markus Butz, Lars Wojtecki,
Christian Hartmann, Nienke Hoogenboom, Saskia Elben, Tolga
Özkurt, Jan Vesper, Lena Storzer and Omid Abassi for their help
in acquiring the data re-analyzed here.
Disclosures
AS has been serving as a consultant for Medtronic Inc, Boston Scientiﬁc, St. Jude Medical and has received lecture fees from Boston
Scientiﬁc, St. Jude Medical, Medtronic Inc, UCB, MEDA Pharma,
Teva Pharma, and GlaxoSmithKline. AS is a government employee
and receives through his institution funding for his research from
the German Research Council, the German Ministry of Education
J. Hirschmann et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 128 2029–2036
and Health, and the Helmholtz Association. JH, JMS and MG declare
no conﬂict of interest. All authors have approved the ﬁnal
manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at