Perception & Psychophysics
1994, 55 (4), 399-411
Visual motion and attentional capture
ANNE P, HILLSTROM and STEVEN YANTIS
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
Previous work has shown that abrupt visual onsets capture attention. This occurs even with
stimuli that are equiluminant with the background, which suggests that the appearance of a
new perceptual object, not merely a change in luminance, captures attention. Three experiments
are reported in which this work was extended by investigating the possible role ofvisual motion
in attentional capture. Experiment 1 revealed that motion can efficiently guide attention when
it is perfectly informative about the location of a visual search target, but that it does not draw
attention when it does not predict the target's position. This result was obtained with several
forms ofmotion, including oscillation, looming, and nearby moving contours. To account for these
and other results, we tested a new-object account of attentional capture in Experiment 2 by using
a global/local paradigm. When motion segregated a local letter from its perceptual group, the
local letter captured attention as indexed by an effect on latency ofresponse to the task-relevant
global configuration. Experiment 3 ruled out the possibility that the motion in Experiment 2 captured attention merely by increasing the salience of the moving object. We argue instead that
when motion segregates a perceptual element from a perceptual group, a new perceptual object
is created, and this event captures attention. Together, the results suggest that motion as such
does not capture attention but that the appearance of a new perceptual object does.
Motion, like many other visual features, is registered
effortlessly by the human visual system. For example, discontinuities in motion can be detected in visual search
without attentional scrutiny , just as salient discontinuities in color and orientation can be . These findings suggest that
visual motion can be detected without attention; motion
is therefore often categorized as one of the "building
blocks" of early vision. This has contributed to the belief that attention is involuntarily captured by moving objects: A natural way to draw someone's attention is to
wave one's arms, and William James listed "moving
things" among the sensorial stimuli to which attention is
drawn involuntarily . Yet although findings support the claim that motion can be detected effortlessly when it is the target of search, there
currently exists no direct evidence about whether motion
captures attention.
The argument that motion captures attention runs as follows: (1) Attributes that can be detected without attentional scrutiny capture attention; (2) motion can be detected without
attentional scrutiny; (3) therefore, motion captures attention. However, Premise 1 of this argument does not hold
in general. To see why, one must draw a distinction between voluntary, goal-directed attentional guidance and
stimulus-driven attentional capture . Goal-directed attentional guidance is revealed by
experiments in which subjects allocate attention on the
basis oftask instructions and knowledge about current environmental contingencies. For instance, an informative
spatial cue presented in advance of a visual display makes
search more efficient , and knowledge that a salient feature distinguishes the target from all distractors in a display yields
response times (RTs) that do not increase with the number of display elements . In these cases, subjects' knowledge of the relationship between the location of the target and various
other attributes of the display can be used to direct attention efficiently.
Stimulus-driven attentional capture, in contrast, is said
to occur when attention is drawn to an attribute that is
independent of or irrelevant to the subject's task. For instance, an invalid peripheral cue slows search for a target even when subjects know that the position of the cue
is uncorrelated with the position of the target . Yantis and Jonides found that an object that
appears abruptly in a previously blank location draws attention even when the abrupt onset element is no more
likely to be a visual-search target than any other element
in the display.
Almost all reported examples of efficient detection of
an object or attribute in visual search are instances of goal-
Copyright 1994 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
directed attention allocation. For example, a feature singleton (e.g., a unique red element among green elements)
is detected rapidly in search, but only if observers adopt
a deliberate attentional set for singletons, or enter what
Bacon and Egeth (in press) call "singleton detection
mode. " When a search display contains a feature singleton that is no more likely to be the target than any other
element in the display, it does not capture attention. For
example, Jonides and Yantis compared the visual
search performance of three groups of subjects looking
for a prespecified target element among varying numbers
of nontarget elements. In one group, there was a uniquely
colored element in each display (e.g., a red letter among
green ones); in a second group, there was a single bright
element among dim ones on each trial; in a third group,
one element appeared abruptly in a previously blank location (an onset) among multiple no-onset elements
(created by removing camouflaging line segments from
block figure eight placeholders). In all three cases, the
position of the unique element was uncorrelated with the
position of the target. In these circumstances, only the
onset element captured attention; the highly salient color
and brightness singletons did not. Corroborating results
have been reported by Theeuwes .
These results show that features that can be detected
without attentional scrutiny do not necessarily capture attention in a bottom-up or stimulus-driven fashion. Therefore, for one to determine whether motion captures attention in a purely bottom-up fashion, it is not enough
to know that motion can be detected without attentional
scrutiny. One must show that motion draws attention even
when it is irrelevant to the observer's current perceptual
The hypothesis that motion captures attention is motivated in part by the common knowledge that motion is
an effective way of drawing someone's attention, and in
part by the similarity between motion and onsets (both
involve the appearance of stimulus energy in a previously
blank location). These considerations lead us to expect
that motion will capture attention even when it is not part
of the observer's attentional set. We tested this hypothesis in Experiment 1 by examining the effect of a single
moving element among stationary elements in visual
EXPERIMENT 1
In Experiment 1, exactly one element in each search
array exhibited motion. In the motion-relevant condition,
the target, if present, was always the element exhibiting
motion. In the motion-irrelevant condition, the position
of the target was uncorrelated with the position of the
moving element. On the basis of previous reports , we expected subjects in
the motion-relevant condition to use the motion to direct
attention efficiently, yielding RTs that would be independent of display size. This condition thus provided a way
to ensure that the motion we employed was salient enough
to guide attention when it was relevant.
The motion-irrelevant condition provided a strong test
of the hypothesis that motion captures attention. In this
condition, the moving element was the target on lid of
the trials in each condition, where d is display size. If
motion captures attention, we should observe display-size
functions with zero slopes in the motion-irrelevant condition, where there is no incentive to deliberately attend
to motion.
Five implementations of motion were tested in this way.
These included three types of motion in which the contours of the letter remained stationary, but elements or
textures within or near the letter moved: (1) Diagonally
striped texture inside the moving element moved smoothly
from right to left; (2) dots revolved around the moving
element; or (3) random dots inside the moving element
rapidly and randomly repositioned (producing scintillation). Two types of whole-letter motion were also used:
(4) horizontal oscillation; and (5) looming (in which the
moving element alternately grew large and small).
Ninety-three Johns Hopkins University students (52 male and 41
female) participated in this experiment for $5 or to fulfill a research
participation requirement for an introductory psychology course.
In the motion-relevant condition, 14 subjects participated in the
streaming-texture motion condition, and 5 in each of the other four
motion conditions; in the motion-irrelevant condition, II subjects
participated in the looming motion condition, and 12 in each of the
other four motion conditions. No subject had participated in a related experiment before participating in this one, and no subject
plJrticipated in more than one of the between-subject conditions of
this experiment.
Equipment and Stimuli
The stimuli were displayed on a Taxan UVl150 21-in. color monitor controlled by an Artist Graphics XJS-1280 graphics board in
a 386-based computer. The subjects responded by pressing buttons
mounted on a response panel sitting on the table in front of them.
A chinrest was used to maintain a constant viewing distance of
Each display contained 4, 10, or 16 letters randomly positioned
in a 6 x 6 array ofpositions and shifted slightly (up to 0.8
0 horizontally and vertically) from base positions to avoid global configuration effects. The letter and array dimensions varied between implementations of motion. Table I lists the stimulus dimensions for
the various motion types. Figure I shows a schematic representation of the layout of a display-size 10, target-present display in the
streaming-texture condition. In one randomly selected position of
each display, there was apparent motion, described below. The stimulus elements were block Ls and Ts that were upright or rotated
, or 270°. The background of the display was always
black. Schematics of sample elements are shown in reverse contrast in Figure 2: Stationary stimulus elements are shown in the top
row and a representation of the type of motion is shown in the bottom row. The figures are not drawn to scale.
Streaming texture. The letters were outlined in white with a texture of black and white diagonal stripes inside that were 0.2° wide,
measured horizontally.
The motion was created by displacing the diagonal stripes 0.02°
to the left every 16.7 msec within the area defined by the outline
of the block letter until a response was made. Thus, the stripes appeared at the right edges of the letter and moved smoothly at a rate
of 1.3°/sec until reaching the left edges of the letter. The moving
stripes had the appearance of a revolving barbershop pole.
MOTION AND ATTENTION
Stimulus Dimensions (in Degrees of Visual Angle) in Experiment 1
Inter-Element
Motion Type
Height/Width
Streaming texture
Revolving dots
Scintillation
Oscillation
*The first measurement in each pair is for stationary elements and the larger size of
the looming element. The second measurement is for the smaller size of the looming
Revolving dots. The letters were black and were outlined in white.
Surrounding each letter were four small, white squares evenly spaced
on the circumference of an invisible circle of radius 1.6
0 centered
on the letter, positioned beginning at about 80
0 clockwise from vertical. Each square was 0.2
0 in size.
The squares revolved clockwise around one of the letters at a
rate of 0.71 revolutions/sec and were displayed at 12 positions in
one revolution. They were displayed and stationary for 83 msec
at a time and erased for the next 33 msec before being displayed
again at the next position 0.08 revolutions away, and so on until
a response was made. The motion appeared smooth. The squares
surrounding all ofthe remaining letters in the display were stationary and always positioned at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o'clock around the
Scintillation. The letters were outlined in white and filled with
a random dot texture which was created by dividing each letter into
0 squares that were randomly assigned to be black or white.
Scintillation was produced in the letter with motion by randomly
reassigning the positions of the white squares in all remaining
frames. All frames had the same number of white squares so that
the mean luminance of the letter did not vary. There was actually
a sequence of five frames that was displayed repeatedly; the repe-
Figure 1. A sample display from the streaming texture condition
of Experiment 1: Display Size 10, target present.
tition was not evident to the viewer. Each frame was presented for
Oscillation. The letters were solid white. Movement was created
by displacing one letter 0.5 0 horizontally in each frame, to the left
in one frame, to the right in the next, and so on. The letter was
present at the left location for 67 msec, was absent for the next
50 msec, was present at the right location for 67 msec, and was
absent for 50 msec, and so on until a response was made.
Looming. The letters were black and were outlined in white.
To create the looming at one location, two sizes of the same letter
shape, centered at the same location, were alternated. The larger
size was the same size as the stationary letters. The smaller size
0 in height with strokes 0.5
0 wide. The letter was large
for 83 msec, absent for 17 msec, small for 83 msec, absent for
17 msec, and so on until a response was made.
There were two between-subject variables, motion type (streaming texture, revolving dots, scintillation, oscillation, and looming)
and motion relevance (motion relevant or irrelevant to search), and
two within-subject variables, display size (4, 10, and 16) and trial
type (in the motion-relevant condition: target present and target absent; in the motion-irrelevant condition: target present/stationary,
target present/moving, and target absent). The subjects completed
10 blocks of trials.
The total number of trials in each condition is shown in Table 2.
The target was present in half the trials and absent in the other half.
In the motion-relevant condition, the target, when present, was always the moving element. In the motion-irrelevant condition, the
moving element had a probability lid of being the target, where
d is display size. The purpose of this aspect of the design, as stated
earlier, was to ensure that there was no incentive for subjects to
deliberately attend to the moving element. These proportions were
achieved differently for different types of motion. In the revolvingdots condition, whether or not the target moved was determined
randomly and independently for each trial, resulting in some random fluctuation in the proportion of target-moving trials between
subjects. For the remaining types of motion, the number of trials
in each condition was fixed at the values shown in Table 2, so that
given the total number of target-present trials for the display size,
there were as close to lid moving targets as possible.
A small red fixation dot appeared in the middle of the screen
throughout each block of trials. Each trial started when the fixation dot was displayed alone for 2 sec. Then the search array was
displayed until the subject responded or until 5 sec had elapsed without a response. The search array disappeared and the next trial began immediately after the previous trial ended. Motion began the
moment the search array appeared and continued to the end of the
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
Scintillation
Revolving Dots
Streaming Texture
Oscillation
jt!"••••••••••
Figure 2. Stimuli from Experiment 1. (Schematics of the stimuli for the five types of motion. Top row: stationary elements. Bottom row: movement.)
On every trial, the subject searched for a T, which could be rotated 0
, among Ls, each at one of the four
orientations, chosen randomly. If a T was present, the subject
pressed the left response button with the left hand; if no Twas
present, the subject pressed the right response button with the right
The subjects in the motion-relevant group were told that the target, if present, was always the element with motion (of course, on
half the trials the moving element was a nontarget). They were encouraged to use this to guide their search. The subjects in the motionirrelevant group were informed that one element in each display
would be moving, but that it was no more and no less likely to be
the target than was any other element in the display. They were
not specifically instructed whether or not to use the motion to guide
their search. The subjects were told that when each trial began they
should fixate on the central dot, but that eye movements were allowed once the search display appeared.
Each subject participated for one session that lasted about 45 min.
The session started with a practice block of about 15 trials. Each
block began with 3 warmup trials. Each trial to which no response
Number of Trials in Each Condition of Experiment 1
Display Size
Motion-Relevant Trials
Motion-Irrelevant Trials
Streaming texture
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Revolving dots
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Scintillation
Present/moving
Presentlstationary
Oscillation and looming
Present/moving
Present/stationary
*These numbers are approximate. Each target-present trial was randomly assigned to
a movement condition with probability lid that the target would be moving. where
d is display size.
tThis probability was inadvertently set to 1/9 rather than 1/10.
or an incorrect response was made was followed by a feedback tone
and a single recovery trial, chosen randomly from the trials constructed for the block. Data from the practice, warmup, and recovery
trials were not analyzed. There was a short break after each block,
lasting a minimum of 15 sec. The break after the fifth block lasted
about 2 min.
The subjects were told to respond as quickly as possible while
maintaining accuracy: They were encouraged to make no more than
two errors per block. Ifthree errors were made within a single block,
a message was displayed, encouraging the subject to slow down
so as to improve accuracy. The message was repeated whenever
another three errors were made in the same block. At the end of
each block, a summary of the speed and accuracy for that block
was displayed.
Results and Discussion
In this and all subsequent experiments reported in this
article, outliers were removed from the data sets before
the analyses were carried out. Outliers were defined as
RTs faster than 300 msec or slower than 3 standard deviations above the mean for that subject in that condition.
This resulted in the removal of less than 2% of all observations. Very few trials were eliminated for being too fast.
All statistical tests reported in this paper were conducted
with the use of a significance criterion of p < .05.
Table 3 shows the error rates in Experiment 1. The
overall error rates were 3.7%,3.5%,3.2%,2.2%, and
2.4% for the streaming-texture, revolving-dots, scintillation, oscillation, and looming conditions, respectively.
Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) of the error rates were
carried out on motion-relevant and motion-irrelevant conditions separately. The ANOVA for the motion-relevant
conditions included three factors: motion type, target presence, and display size. None of the main effects and none
MOTION AND ATTENTION
of the interactions were significant (all Fs :5 1). The
ANOVA for motion-irrelevant trials, conducted only on
data for target-present trials, had three factors: motion
type, target motion, and display size. Error rates varied
significantly with display size [F(2,108) = 8.9], but not
with motion type or trial type [F(4,54) =
F(l,54) = 2.5]. None of the interactions were significant
[motion type x trial type, F(4,54) < 1; motion type x
display size, F(8,108) < 1; trial type x display size,
F(2,108) = 2.1; and motion type x trial type X display
size, F(8,108) = 1.2].
Correlations between speed and accuracy were calculated for target-present trials to check for the possibility
of speed-accuracy tradeoffs. Mean RTs and error rates
were averaged across subjects for each combination of
within-subject factors, resulting in six RTs and error rates
to be correlated for each motion-relevant, motion-type
condition, and nine pairs to be correlated for each motionirrelevant motion-type condition. Correlations for each
of the 10 groups ofsubjects (5 motion types x 2 motionrelevance conditions) ranged from r(4) = 0:95 for relevant, revolving-dot motion to r(4) = -0.74 for relevant,
streaming-texture motion. All but two ofthe correlations
were negative, suggesting the possibility of a speed-accuracy tradeoff, but most of the correlations were small
(between 0 and -.36) and none of the negative correlations were significant.
Response Times
Figure 3 shows the RTs for each condition of the experiment. Motion-relevant conditions are shown with
dashed lines; motion-irrelevant conditions, with solid
lines. Mean RTs for motion-relevant trials were analyzed
with an ANOVA that included three factors: motion type,
display size (4, 10, or 16), and target presence (present
Error Rates (in Percent) for Each Condition of Experiment 1
Display Size
Motion-Relevant Trials
Motion-Irrelevant Trials
Streaming texture
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Revolving dots
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Scintillation
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Oscillation
Present/moving
Present/stationary
Present/moving
Present/stationary
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
Display Size
Figure 3. Results from Experiment 1. Response time is plotted as
a function of display size for target-absent trials and for targetpresent trials with targets at the movement location and at stationary locations for the five types of motion: (a) Streaming texture.
(b) Revolving dots. (c) ScintiUation. (d) Oscillation. (e) Looming.
or absent). The main effect of motion type was not significant [F(4,29) = 1.4], nor were any ofthe interactions
involving motion type [F(8,58) = 2.0 for motion type x
display size, F(4,29) = 1.0 for motion type x target presence, and F(8,58) < 1 for motion type x display size
x target presence]. Responses to target-present trials were
significantly faster than responses to target-absent trials
[F(I,29) = 7.68]. Responses slowed significantly as display size increased [F(2,58) = 23.1]. Display size did not
interact significantly with target presence [F(2,58) = 1.5],
as would be expected if the display-size effect was due
to self-terminating, serial search through the display
 . Rather, the pattern of effects
is consistent with an effect like lateral inhibition, which
should have increased equally for target-present and
target-absent trials as target-distractor proximity increased
with display size. The results are consistent with previous
reports that when
motion is perfectly correlated with the position ofthe target, subjects can direct their attention to the moving element, make a presence/absence decision, and respond
without scanning other elements in the display.
Mean RTs for target-present, motion-irrelevant trials
were analyzed with an ANOVA that included three fac-
Motion Irrelevant
Motion Relevant
Stationary
Slopes of the Display Size Functions (Milliseconds/Element)
for Each Condition of Experiment 1
tors: motion type, display size (4, 10, or 16), and trial
type (moving or stationary). The main effect of motion
type was significant [F(4,54) = 9.1]; we will not discuss
this further, because it is irrelevant to our arguments. The
main effect oftrial type was not significant [F(1,54) < 1],
and trial type did not interact significantly with motion
type [F(4,54) = 2.2]. The main effect of display size was
significant [F(2, 108) = 180.0], and the interactions ofdisplay size with motion type and with trial type were significant [F(8, 108) = 3.7 and F(2, 108) = 4. I, respectively]. The three-way interaction ofdisplay size x motion
type x trial type was not significant [F(8,108) = 1.2].
That the display-size effect was smaller for movingtarget trials than for stationary-target trials suggests there
might have been some advantage due to target motion.
However, two further findings eliminate the possibility
that this advantage is strong attentional capture. If motion were capturing attention, we would expect no displaysize effect in the motion-irrelevant, target-moving condition. Table 4 lists the slopes of the display-size function for each condition of Experiment 1. Although the
mean slope for motion targets in the motion-irrelevant
condition is smaller than that for stationary targets (20.2
vs. 26.2 msec/element), it is also significantly greater than
zero [t(58) = 8.3]. Furthermore, the moving-target slope
in the motion irrelevant condition is also significantly
greater than that in the motion-relevant condition (20.2
vs. 3.2 msec/element) [t(61) = 7.1]. Instructions to use
motion to guide search when motion provided useful information about target location significantly attenuated the
display-size effect; this indicates that motion did not capture attention when it was irrelevant. Together, these results suggest that in motion-irrelevant conditions, subjects
had to search the display for the target even when it was
moving. The residual advantage for moving targets may
reflect a strategic decision on the part of some subjects
on some trials to voluntarily direct attention to the moving element. However, the hypothesis that the moving element captures attention, which would require slopes that
are significantly attenuated and near zero, can be ruled
What cannot be ruled out at this time is the possibility
that motion occasionally captured attention or that observers occasionally attended to the moving element during search earlier than would be expected by chance. If
Motion Type
*Slope is significantly greater than zero.
Streaming texture
Revolving dots
Scintillation
Oscillation
(a) Streaming Texture
-- Motion Irrelevant
Motion Relevant
Target Absent
Target Stationa
Target Moving
(b) Revolving Dots
(c) Scintillation
.====='I!I==="'" ~
(d) Oscillation
(e) Looming
====~= == ==:€I
= - -1:1- - -' --1:1
motion captured attention on some trials but not on others,
attenuated but not flat slopes would be expected, and this
is what we observed. This hypothesis could be evaluated
in experiments designed to test for a mixture of trials in
which attention was captured and trials in which it was
not . The design of this
experiment did not include enough trials to carry out such
an analysis.
In summary, Experiment 1 yielded evidence that motion does not strongly capture attention. Contrary to the
predictions ofthe attentional-capture model, display-size
effects in target-moving, irrelevant-motion conditions
were significantly greater than zero.
EXPERIMENT 2
How can we reconcile the results of Experiment 1with
the everyday knowledge that waving to a friend draws
their attention? When someone is searching a crowd for
a specific individual, he/she may adopt a deliberate attentional set for the attributes (such as motion) that are
likely to distinguish the target (friend) from nontargets
(strangers). The results of the motion-relevant condition
of Experiment 1 demonstrated that such a strategy could
be effective. Another possibility is that motion may be
capturing attention only occasionally or partially.
A third possibility, which we examine in Experiments
2 and 3, is motivated by our earlier finding that the onset
of new perceptual objects, even in the absence of a luminance increment, captures attention . In previous work on abrupt onsets, luminance increments and the appearance of new objects
had always been confounded: All abrupt onsets were new
objects accompanied by luminance increments. We unconfounded the two by conducting visual search experiments in which we used elements that were equiluminant
with their backgrounds (elements defined by discontinuities in depth, motion, or texture) and found that new objects captured attention even in the absence of a luminance
increment.
Although motion per se may not capture attention, as
suggested by the results of Experiment 1, motion may play
a role in causing the appearance of a new perceptual object, which in tum can capture attention. To make this
idea concrete, consider the following examples.
The Geometridae moth, found in northern Borneo and
elsewhere, has mottled wings that resemble the lichencovered bark on many trees in its niche. While the moth
remains motionless, it is virtually invisible to predatory
birds because of similarity grouping of the pattern on its
wings with the pattern on the bark. As soon as its wings
move, however, the moth instantly stands out as a new
perceptual object. In this case, we would claim that it is
not the motion of the wings per se that captures attention, but the appearance of the previously camouflaged
perceptual object. Similarly, a motionless leopard blends
in with the shadows and leaves of the jungle; as soon as
it moves, the common fate of the leopard's spots define
a new perceptual object that is easy to segregate from the
MOTION AND ATTENTION
background foliage. In these examples, occasional or partial capture seems an unlikely explanation, since it is not
just attention that is affected by the motion, but the perceptual organization of the entire scene. In other words,
even if attention is focused directly on the camouflaged
object, it may not be seen until motion begins.
The new-object hypothesis is that motion (or any other
attribute) captures attention when it requires the creation
of a new object file. According to Kahneman and Treisman , an
object file is a visual representation of a perceptual object
containing specifications of the various attributes of the
object, including its location, time of appearance, color,
shape, and so forth. They have argued that the object file
may form the basis ofvisual selection in many tasks. Other
evidence for object-based theories of visual attention has
been accumulating for the past several years .
Our claim, then, is that when a new object file is created
to accommodate the appearance of a new perceptual object, attention is directed there in a stimulus-driven fashion
 . Our
previous findings that abrupt visual onsets capture attention is consistent with this
claim: An abrupt onset in a previously unoccupied location is clearly an instance of a new perceptual object.
In the motion-irrelevant conditions of Experiment 1, the
elements were not densely packed and had no characteristics that would afford interelement grouping. A separate
object file would therefore be established for each element at the moment it appeared, and the motion of one
of the elements would be treated as an attribute of that
object with no special attentional status. The moving element would therefore not be expected to capture attention. However, it is possible to construct visual tasks in
which motion does set off an element from a perceptual
In Experiment 2, we used a global/local task to simulate the case of the moth on
the bark. The purpose of the experiment was to determine whether the appearance of a new object defined by
motion would capture attention. The subjects were required to identify a global letter that was formed by a configuration of multiple small, densely packed, local letters
(see Figure 4 for sample stimuli). On some trials, one of
the local letters moved, which set that letter off as a separate perceptual object.
The global letter was always an H or an S. All but one
of the local letters were identical and response neutral
(i.e., they were all the same letter other than H or S).
The remaining unique local letter varied on two dimensions: response compatibility with the global letter, and
temporal profile.
The identity of the unique local letter was compatible,
neutral, or incompatible with the identity of the global
letter (e.g., in the incompatible condition, if the global
letter was an H, the unique local letter was an S). Many
previous experiments have shown that the response com-
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
(until response)
Figure 4. Displays used in Experiments 2 and 3. Panels a, b, and
c show the baseline, onset, and motion conditions of Experiment 2,
respectively; panel d shows the early-motion condition of Experiment 3. The left panel in each row shows the preview display, consisting of a global fJgure eight made up of local figure eights. The
right panel in each row shows a sample target display, in which a
global H is made up of local Es, which are neutral, and a unique
local S, which is incompatible with the global letter. The compatible and neutral conditions are not shown.
patibility of local letters can affect the speed of identifying global letters because of a failure of selective attention , although the more common result
is that identification of the global letter remains uninfluenced by the local letters . In Experiment 2, our measure of attentional
capture by the unique local letter was the magnitude of
the observed response-compatibility effect. No effect of
response-neutral local letters would be expected, whether
or not attention were drawn to them. But if attention were
drawn to a response-eompatible or response-incompatible
local letter, its effect should become stronger.
The second factor varied was the temporal profile of
the unique local letter. The unique local letter was stationary (the baseline condition, as in Figure 4a), exhibited
an abrupt visual onset (the onset condition, as in Figure 4b), or moved (the motion condition, as in Figure 4c).
The new-object hypothesis predicts that attention should
be drawn to the object segregated by motion, and so the
magnitude of response-compatibility effects should be
larger in the motion condition than in the baseline condition. The onset condition was included as a manipulation
check: Our previous work strongly suggested that it should
also produce substantial compatibility effects because it,
too, involved the appearance of a new perceptual object.
Seventeen Johns Hopkins University students (11 females) participated in this experiment to fulfill research participation requirements for an introductory psychology class. No subject had previously participated in a related experiment. The data for 1 of the
subjects were excluded from the analyses; the subject had RTs that
were much slower and costs and benefits an order of magnitude
larger than any other subject in the experiment. Excluding this subject's data did not qualitatively change the results.
Eqnipment and Stimuli
Fourteen of the 17 SUbjects viewed the displays on a Seiko Instruments model CM1450-C color monitor controlled by a Video
Seven VRAM VGA graphics card. For 3 of the subjects, the stimuli were displayed on a CrystalScan model 1024 NI color monitor
controlled by a SpeedStar Plus VGA graphics card. There were
no measurable differences in the displays produced by these two
systems. Both sets of subjects viewed the displays from a distance
of about 60 cm. No chinrest was used. The subjects responded by
pressing buttons mounted on a response panel on the table in front
Each trial consisted of three displays: the fixation display, the
placeholder display, and the target display (see Figure 4). In the
fixation display, a 0.6
0 red crosshair appeared in the center of the
screen for 500 msec, to orient the viewer to the center of the display and to provide warning that the trial was beginning. The placeholder display consisted of a global block figure eight made up of
16 local figure eights, 4 to a row and 5 to a column, that appeared
for 1 sec. The global form was 2.2
0 wide and 3.9
0 high. The local
forms were 0.4
0 wide and 0.6
0 high and were separated 0.6
horizontally and 0.8
0 vertically, measuring center to center. The
local forms were drawn with solid strokes.
The target display, which was present until the subject responded,
consisted of a global letter made up of local letters, sized and positioned exactly as in the placeholder display. The global letter was
revealed by removing some ofthe local figure eights from the global
figure eight. At the same time, each local letter was revealed by
removing some ofthe strokes in the corresponding local figure eight.
The global letter was either H or S on every trial. On each trial,
all of the local letters were the same, either Es or Us, except one.
In neutral response-compatibility trials, the unique letter was the
other response-neutral letter (E if the nonunique local letters were
Us, U if the nonunique local letters were Es). In compatible trials,
the unique local letter was the same as the global letter. In incompatible trials, the unique letter was the other possible global letter
(S if the current global letter was H; H if the current global letter
The position of the unique local letter was chosen so that (I) it
was not in the top or bottom row of the global letter, and (2) it
was part of both the H and the S global letters. These constraints
yielded six possible locations: the four positions in the middle horizontal stroke, the position to the left and just above the horizontal
stroke, and the position to the right and just below the horizontal
What has been described so far characterizes the displays in the
baseline condition (Figure 4a). The onset condition differed from
the baseline condition in the following ways (see Figure 4b). In
the placeholder display, a local figure eight was missing in the location at which the unique letter would appear in the target display. Thus the global figure eight appeared to have a gap in it, and
the onset of the unique local letter filled the gap in the target display. The restrictions on the position ofthe unique local letter were
the same as described in the baseline condition; the position of the
gap in the placeholder display was therefore uninformative about
which target would appear.
The motion condition differed from the baseline condition as follows (see Figure 4c). When the target display appeared, the unique
local letter began moving and continued to do so until the subject
responded. If the local letter appeared in a vertical stroke of the
global letter, it oscillated horizontally. The letter appeared 0.08
to the left of its base position in one frame, 0.08° to the right of
its base position in the next frame, back in the left position in the
next frame, and so on. Ifthe local letter was in one of the two positions closest to fixation, it oscillated vertically. The letter appeared
0 above its base position in one frame, 0.06
0 below its base
position in the next frame, in its high position in the next frame,
and so on. The frame duration during motion was 100 msec.
Target identity (H and S), response compatibility of the unique
local letter (compatible, incompatible, and neutral), and temporal
profile of the unique local letter (baseline, motion, and onset) were
completely crossed within blocks. Hand S appeared equally often
as targets, each of the compatibility factors occurred equally often,
and each of the three temporal profiles occurred equally often. The
subjects completed nine blocks of 54 trials each. The order oftrial
presentation was randomized within each block.
On every trial, the subject responded to the identity ofthe global
letter. All subjects pressed the left button if the global letter was
H and the right button if the global letter was S.
The subjects participated for one session that lasted about 45 min.
The subjects were told to respond as quickly as possible while maintaining high accuracy. They were also told that when each trial began they should fixate on the crosshairs. The instructions were followed by a practice block of 13 trials. Each block began with four
warmup trials. Each trial to which no response or an incorrect response was made was followed by a feedback tone and a single
recovery trial, chosen randomly from the trials constructed for the
block. Data for practice, warmup, and recovery trials were not analyzed. There was a short break after each block, lasting a minimum of 15 sec. The break after the fifth block was at least 2 min.
When three errors were made in a block, a message was displayed
which suggested that the subject should slow down to improve accuracy. The message was repeated whenever another three errors
were accumulated within the same block. At the end of each block,
the subjects were shown a summary of their speed and accuracy
for that block.
Results and Discussion
The data were first analyzed with distance ofthe unique
local letter from fixation included as a factor. There was
no effect of distance and no interaction between distance
MOTION AND ATTENTION
and any other factor, so the results presented here are collapsed across distances for clarity.
Mean RTs for each temporal profile (baseline, motion,
and onset) and response-compatibility condition (compatible, neutral, and incompatible) are shown in Figure 5.
An ANOVA that included two factors, temporal profile
and response compatibility (compatible, neutral, or incompatible), was conducted for the RTs. There were significant main effects of temporal profile and response compatibility, and there was a significant interaction between
them [F(2,30) = 8.8, F(2,30) = 19.3, and F(4,60) =
5.8, respectively]. Simple effects analyses of response
compatibility within each of the temporal profile conditions separately showed that response compatibility influenced RT significantly in the onset and motion conditions [F(2,30) '= 14.7 and F(2,30) = 24.8, respectively],
but not in the baseline condition [F(2,30) = 1.3].
Error rates are shown in Table 5. Subjects had an average error rate of 2.0%. There was no evidence of a
speed-accuracy tradeoff: RT and error rate were positively correlated [r(7) '= 0.84, p < .05].
It appeared that incompatible trials produced more errors than did other trials, to a greater degree for the motion and onset conditions than for the baseline condition.
An ANOVA with two factors, temporal profile and response compatibility, was conducted on the error rates.
There was no significant effect oftemporal profile [F(2,15)
= 1.4], but there was a significant effect ofresponse compatibility and there was an interaction between the two
factors [F(2,30) = 14.4 and F(4,60) '= 2.6, respectively].
Overall, there was no evidence that error rates for motion trials were greater than error rates for onset and baseline trials. Simple effects analyses of response compatibility for each type of temporal profile showed that
response compatibility influenced accuracy significantly
~ Incompatible
~ Compatible
Temporal Profile
Figure S. Results from Experiment 2. Response time is plotted as
a function of response compatibility for each temporal profile ofthe
unique local letter.
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
EXPERIMENT 3
Error Rates (Percent) for Each Condition of Experiment 2
Response Compatibility
in the onset and motion conditions [F(2,30) = 8.0 and
F(2,30) = 10.9, respectively], but not in the baseline condition [F(2,30) = 1.5]. These results for accuracy parallel the results for RT.
In the baseline condition, no response-compatibility effects on RTs were observed. In the motion and onset conditions, the local letter's response compatibility significantly influenced responses to the global letter. This
supports the hypothesis that attention is drawn to a new
perceptual object in at least two ways: (1) when it appears
abruptly in a previously blank location; and (2) when it
segregates from its background because of relative visual
It is tempting to claim that the response-compatibility
effect was seen in the motion condition because motion
itselfcaptured attention. However, we reject that account,
since Experiment I showed that motion does not capture
attention. The rate ofoscillation in Experiment 2 was very
close to the rate used in the oscillation condition of Experiment I, the motion was quite salient in both experiments, and in both cases the subjects had nothing to gain
by choosing to attend to the motion.
Experiment 2 provided tentative support for the newobject account ofattentional capture stated earlier. However, one alternative account is still viable. It is possible
that the local moving element in Experiment 2 influenced
responses to the global letter simply because the moving
element was more salient than the stationary elements in
the display (the motion stimulation sets the element apart
from the remaining indistinct local letters); we will refer
to this possibility as the salience hypothesis. The critical
distinction between the new-object hypothesis and the salience hypothesis is whether the effects of motion on attention are transient or sustained. According to the newobject account, attention is directed to an object ftle when
it is initially created. There is evidence that this attentional
advantage dissipates within a few hundred milliseconds
 . The salience account does not
make this prediction: Once the moving element becomes
distinct and salient, the element should remain so throughout its motion, even ifthe motion itself loses its salience.
In Experiment 3, this distinction was the basis of a test
between the hypotheses. The task was the same as in Experiment 2: The subjects were to identify the shape of a
global letter made up oflocalletters. One third ofthe trials
were baseline trials as in the baseline condition of Experiment 2 (see Figure 4a). One third included motion of a
The design and procedure were identical to those of Experiment 2, except that the early-motion condition replaced the onset
condition.
local letter beginning when the global letter appeared 1 sec
after the placeholder appeared, as in the motion condition of Experiment 2. We will call this the late-motion
condition (see Figure 4c). In these trials, there is segregation ofa new object while the task is being performed,
so both hypotheses predict that there should be larger
response-compatibility effects in the late-motion condition than in the baseline condition. The remaining trials
included motion of a local letter beginning with the onset
of the placeholder display. We will call this the earlymotion condition, to distinguish it from the late-motion
condition (see Figure 4d).lfthe local letter influences performance simply because of increased salience, then the
early-motion condition should yield response-eompatibility
effects that are as large as those in the late-motion condition. If motion captures attention only transiently, when
it causes a new object to appear, then the early-motion
condition should not produce response-compatibility effects that are as large as those in the late-motion condition; the attentional effect of a new object would be expected to decay by the time at which the global letter
Stimuli and Design
The stimuli in this experiment were the same as those in Experiment 2, except that the onset condition was replaced by the earlymotion condition (see Figure 4d). In these trials, motion began when
the placeholder display appeared, and it continued as the letters
replaced the placeholders. What was called the nwtion condition
in Experiment 2 is called the late-nwtion condition in this experiment.
For all the subjects, the stimuli were displayed on a Seiko Instruments model CM1450-C color monitor controlled by a Video
Seven VRAM VGA graphics card and were viewed from a distance of about 60 cm without the use of a chinrest.
Sixteen Johns Hopkins University students (8 females) participated in this experiment to fulfill research participation requirements for an introductory psychology class. No subject had participated in a related experiment before participating in this experiment.
Results and Discussion
Figure 6 shows mean RT as a function of temporal profile and response compatibility. An ANOVA with two factors, temporal proftle (baseline, early motion, and late
motion) and response compatibility (compatible, neutral,
or incompatible), was conducted. There was no significant effect oftemporal proftle [F(2,30) = 2.2], butthere
was a significant effect of response compatibility [F(2,30)
= 9.9]. The interaction between factors was not significant [F(4,60) = 1.8]. Simple effects analyses of response
compatibility for each temporal proftle condition separately revealed a significant effect ofcompatibility for the
late-motion condition [F(2,30) = 6.3], but not for the
Incompatible
Compatible
Temporal ProfIle
MOTION AND ATTENTION
Temporal Profile
The results of Experiment 2 also rule out another alternative explanation for our findings. One could argue
that motion per se does capture attention, but that the
visual search procedure used in Experiment 1 to test this
hypothesis failed to reveal it. Contrary to this possibility, however, the late-motion condition of Experiment 3
yielded attentional capture but the early-motion condition
did not. The task and the implementation of motion were
the same in the two conditions; the only difference consisted in when the motion began. Only if motion captures
attention transiently does the distinction between earlymotion and late-motion results make sense. But Experiment 1 is more similar in this respect to the late-motion
condition of Experiment 3 than to the early-motion condition, and so the transient motion-capture explanation
cannot account for all results satisfactorily. We conclude
that the new-object explanation is the only account that
can accommodate the findings of all three experiments.
730 ~--------------------,
Cl Incompatible
l--J Neutral
E=:J Compatible
L_---I~-.I2~_~-----lC>OL_~"__"""''__
Figure 6. Results from Experiment 3. Response time is plotted as
a function of response compatibility for each temporal prome ofthe
unique local letter.
Error Rates (Percent) for Each Condition of Experiment 3
Response Compatibility
baseline condition or the early-motion condition [F(2,30) =
2.3 and F(2,30) = 1.6, respectively].
Error rates are shown in Table 6. The subjects had an
average error rate of 2.6%. There was no evidence of
a speed-accuracy tradeoff. As responses became faster,
accuracy also improved [r(7) = 0.81, p < .05].
The error rates were entered into an ANOVA with two
factors, temporal profile and response compatibility. A
significant effect of response compatibility was found
[F(2,30) = 9.1], owing to the higher error rates for incompatible trials than for other trials. No evidence of an
effect of temporal profile and no interaction between the
two factors were found [F(2,15) < 1 and F(4,60) = 2.3,
respectively]. Simple effects analyses of response compatibility for each type of temporal profile s~o~ed that
response compatibility influenced accuracy slgmfican~y
in the late-motion condition [F(2,30) = 13.5], but not SIgnificantly in the baseline and early-motion conditions
[F(2,30) = 1.6 and F(2,30) = 2.5, respectively]. These
results for accuracy parallel the results for RT.
In the late-motion conditions, an incompatible local element significantly slowed responses to the global letter.
In the early-motion and baseline conditions, the compatibility of the local letter had no effect on responses to the
global letter. This supports the hypothesis that motion
draws attention to the local letter only transiently at the
creation of a new object, and not because of increased
salience due to motion.
Temporal Profile
Early motion
Late motion
Incompatible
Compatible
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The experiments reported in this article seriously
challenge the common belief that motion captures attention in a stimulus-driven fashion. First, we found in Experiment 1 that the same motion that can be used by an
observer to guide attention efficiently when it is predictive of target location does not capture attention when it
is unpredictive of target location. Experiment 2 showed
that when motion segregates an element from its perceptual group, the "new object" so revealed does capture
attention, and Experiment 3 showed that this occurred
only transiently after the motion began, thereby ruling out
the possibility that attention is captured merely by a salient figure/ground organization.
Motion joins a growing list of features that can guide
attention when they constitute a target's defining attribute
 , but do not capture
attention when they are irrelevant to the observer's task
 . These features are sometimes unseen when
attention is focused elsewhere in the visual scene . Only when subjects
adopt a deliberate state of attentional readiness for attributes like motion, orientation, or color singletons do such
attributes guide attention .
Together, the experiments reported here are consistent
with the claim that the appearance of new perceptual objects, and little else, captures attention. According to this
account, the visual system preattentively segments a visual
scene (for instance, by identifying discontinuities in luminance, color, etc.) into potential objects. Usually the
segmentation is unambiguous, but, as in Experiments 2
and 3, there can be overlap in the objects when edges are
ambiguous or when there are multiple levels of grouping. Object identification then proceeds in parallel, with
HILLSTROM AND YANTIS
attentional priority assigned to objects whose attributes
most closely match those of the target. As evidence about
each object's identity or attributes accumulates, priorities may be dynamically updated to reflect this partial information. When a change occurs (e.g., when something
begins to move) the scene may be resegmented, and if
necessary, an object fIle can be created for each new object . New objects are automatically assigned high attentional priority.
Two types of events have been shown to cause a new
object fIle to be created: (l) the abrupt appearance of an
object in a previously blank location and (2) the segregation of an object from
its background when motion begins (as seen in Experiments 2 and 3). As noted by both psychologists and philosophers , objecthood is not disrupted (Le., newobject fIles are not created) by any number of reasonably
continuous changes in an object's attributes (although the
sorts of changes that may be considered''reasonably continuous" remain to be established).
The new-object hypothesis predicts that any feature that
can cause segregation of an element from its background
should also capture attention, even if that feature does not
capture attention by virtue of its uniqueness alone. For
example, even though irrelevant color singletons do not
capture attention in standard visual search , the new-object hypothesis advanced here
predicts that when an element within a perceptual group
changes color so that element segregates from the group
as a new object, it should draw attention.
A design difference between the search experiment and
the global/local experiments suggests a possible role for
"event novelty" in capturing attention. In Experiment 1,
there was motion on every trial; in Experiments 2 and
3, there was motion on only one third and two thirds of
the trials, respectively. It is possible to suggest that motion does capture attention in a stimulus-driven fashion,
but that the regular and predictable occurrence of motion
on every trial in Experiment 1caused some sort of attentional adaptation or habituation to motion. There are at
least two reasons to doubt the plausibility of this account,
however. First, in Experiment 3, the unique local letter
was attended in the late-motion condition but not in the
early-motion condition, even though the novelty of motion was the same in both cases. Second, abrupt visual
onsets are known to capture attention even when they occur on every trial. These considerations reduce the parsimony of the novelty explanation, although it is still possible that novelty does play some role in attentional
Another tempting, but incomplete, explanation of our
results is that motion tends to draw attention but subjects
use top-down control of attention to inhibit the effect of
motion. This suggestion is consistent with the general
slowing ofRTs in the irrelevant-motion conditions of Experiment 1 and of the motion conditions in Experiments
2 and 3. An inhibition mechanism is also consistent with
the lack of capture in the early-motion condition in Experiment 3. However, the inhibition hypothesis cannot explain why motion does capture attention in the late-motion
conditions in Experiments 2 and 3.
The belief that new things capture attention is as old
as the belief that moving things capture attention. At the
beginning of this article, we noted that William James
numbered motion among the attributes that capture attention. A few pages later James 
quoted Helmholtz as follows:
The natural tendency of attention when left to itself is to
wander to ever new things: and so soon as the interest of
its object is over, so soon as nothing new is to be noticed
there, it passes, in spite of our will, to something else.
The present experiments undermine James's observation
that "moving things" capture attention involuntarily; instead, they corroborate Helmholtz's assertion that "new
things" may draw attention.