BayesWave: Bayesian Inference for Gravitational
Wave Bursts and Instrument Glitches
Neil J. Cornish
Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA
Tyson B. Littenberg
Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA) &
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan
Road, Evanston, IL 60208
A central challenge in Gravitational Wave Astronomy is identifying weak
signals in the presence of non-stationary and non-Gaussian noise.
The separation
of gravitational wave signals from noise requires good models for both.
accurate signal models are available, such as for binary Neutron star systems, it
is possible to make robust detection statements even when the noise is poorly
understood.
In contrast, searches for “un-modeled” transient signals are strongly
impacted by the methods used to characterize the noise. Here we take a Bayesian
approach and introduce a multi-component, variable dimension, parameterized noise
model that explicitly accounts for non-stationarity and non-Gaussianity in data from
interferometric gravitational wave detectors.
Instrumental transients (glitches) and
burst sources of gravitational waves are modeled using a Morlet-Gabor continuous
wavelet frame. The number and placement of the wavelets is determined by a transdimensional Reversible Jump Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm. The Gaussian
component of the noise and sharp line features in the noise spectrum are modeled
using the BayesLine algorithm, which operates in concert with the wavelet model.
 
1. Introduction
The LIGO and Virgo gravitational wave detectors are currently undergoing
major upgrades, with the goal of improving the broadband sensitivity by an order of
magnitude . But it takes more than lasers, mirrors, photodiodes and suspension
systems to detect gravitational waves. Another key component is the signal processing
used to lift the faint gravitational wave signals out of the instrument noise.
Searches for gravitational waves using data from the initial LIGO-Virgo science runs
have shown that non-Gaussian features in the data, such as noise transients or “glitches”,
impact the ability to detect weak signals as the various detection statistics used in the
searches end up with heavier tails than they would for Gaussian noise . The
standard procedure for accounting for these eﬀects is to perform Monte Carlo trials with
scrambled data produced by introducing time lags that break signal coherence between
the detectors in the network. These trials are used to produce background probability
distributions for search statistics – such as the cross correlation of signal templates
with the data – which can then be used to assess the signiﬁcance of events detected
in the zero-lag data. Extensive testing with simulated signal injections into the data
has shown that this standard approach is reliable and robust, though with a sensitivity
that is less than what would be possible if the noise were stationary and Gaussian. The
time-slide approach also has limitations in terms of the detection signiﬁcance that can
be reached . In addition to degrading detection eﬃciency, the non-Gaussianity of
the noise can also impact parameter estimation of quantities like the sky location and
masses of a binary system .
The detection statistics used in the searches are often motivated by analytical
studies assuming Gaussian noise, and then the eﬀects of non-Gaussianity are taken
into account by using the Monte Carlo derived distributions estimated from the actual
detector data. In eﬀect the data are used to infer the noise properties, or at least,
the properties of the noise projected onto the signal manifold deﬁned by the detection
statistic. Here the noise modeling is taken a step further in a comprehensive approach
to gravitational wave detection that employs a multi-component parameterized noise
model in addition to the signal model. The data are used to jointly infer the parameters
of both the noise and signal models, following the motto “model everything and let
the data sort it out”‡. Of course, it is not possible to model every possible feature in
the data, but our ultimate goal is to develop detailed models that can account for a
wide range of non-stationary and non-Gaussian contributions to the instrument noise.
The algorithm described here is a ﬁrst step towards that goal. A key feature of the
noise and signal models is that their degree of complexity is not ﬁxed in advance, but
rather, determined by Bayesian model selection.
For example, short duration, nonstationary noise transients are modeled using a sum of continuous wavelets, but the
number of wavelets is not ﬁxed. Stretches of data with loud glitches that are spread over
‡ With apologies to the two excellent referees for our paper who disliked this motto and requested that
we remove it.
a wide time-frequency volume will be described by a high dimensional model, while quiet
stretches of data will be described by a low dimensional model. Bayesian model selection
naturally ﬁnds the appropriate balance between model ﬁdelity and model complexity,
so there is no danger of “over ﬁtting” the data.
In an earlier study we introduced a discrete orthogonal wavelet model to account
for short-duration, non-stationary features in the instrument noise . This approach
was developed further in collaboration with P. Baker, and a description of the study
can be found in Baker’s Ph.D. thesis . From these foundations we have developed
the BayesWave algorithm for the joint detection and characterization of instrument
glitches and gravitational wave bursts. The types of signals BayesWave targets include
core collapse supernovae, stellar mass black hole mergers and unexpected short duration
signals (up to a few seconds in duration). BayesWave in its current form is not well
suited for studying longer duration signals such as neutron star binary inspirals, isolated
deformed neutron stars or stochastic backgrounds.
The name “BayesWave” is derived from a concatenation of “Bayesian” and
“Wavelets.” The key to the success of the new algorithm is the adoption of a nonorthogonal, continuous Morlet-Gabor wavelet frame§, which provides an extremely
compact representation of bursts and glitches, and has the additional advantage that
the entire analysis can be implemented in the frequency domain.
Bayesian model
selection and parameter inference is implemented using a trans-dimensional Reversible
Jump Markov Chain Monte Carlo (RJMCMC) algorithm that varies both the
model parameters and the model dimension (in our case the number and parameters
of the wavelets used to describe the glitches and gravitational wave signals). Using a
variable number of wavelets builds in a natural parsimony that balances the complexity
of the model against the quality of the ﬁt.
Much of the BayesWave algorithm has
been re-purposed from techniques we developed to detect and characterize thousands
of overlapping signals from compact white dwarf binaries in simulated data from a
future space based gravitational wave detector . The BayesWave algorithm is
run in concert with the BayesLine spectral whitening algorithm, which we describe in
a companion paper . The BayesLine algorithm models the noise spectrum using a
combination of a smooth spline curve and a collection of Lorentzians to ﬁt sharp line
features. BayesLine employs a RJMCMC algorithm to vary the number and placement
of the spline control points and the number of Lorentzians and their parameters.
We begin by reviewing the application of Bayesian inference in gravitational wave
astronomy, with an emphasis on the importance of choosing an appropriate likelihood
Next we describe the glitch and gravitational wave burst models and lay
out our reasons for choosing the Morlet-Gabor wavelet frame. This is followed by an
investigation of various time-frequency clustering priors using simulated Gaussian noise
and simulated gravitational wave signals. The eﬀectiveness of the BayesWave algorithm
is then demonstrated using real-world data from the sixth LIGO science run, including
§ A frame generalizes the concept of a basis to allow for sets that are linearly dependent
glitch detection and reconstruction, and the recovery of hardware and software signal
injections.
2. Bayesian Inference for Gravitational Wave Astronomy
distribution
summarizes
properties
gravitational waveform h that can be inferred from data s under model M:
p(h|s, M) = p(h|M)p(s|h, M)
where p(h|M) is the prior distribution for h in model M, p(s|h, M) is the likelihood of
the data for the given waveform, and p(s|M) =
R p(h|M)p(s|h, M)dh is the marginal
likelihood, or evidence, for the model M under consideration. Here s is a vector of
data collected from a network of gravitational wave detectors, which is a combination
of instrument noise n and a gravitational wave signal h such that s = R ⋆h + n, where
R is a time-delay operator that describes the network response to the two gravitational
wave polarizations h.
The Bayesian approach to data analysis is entirely mechanical.
Once you have
speciﬁed your signal model and the likelihood function, the posterior distribution can
be computed using numerical techniques such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo or
Nested Sampling . From the posterior distribution function we can extract point
estimates and “error bars” for the parameters that characterize the waveform h, and by
comparing the evidence for alternative models, we can quote odds ratios for possibilities
such as “the data contains the signal from a black hole merger” and “the data is purely
instrumental noise.” On the other hand, the quality of what you get out is only as
good as what you put in. If your signal model is ﬂawed, or your likelihood function is
too simple, the posterior distribution will produce misleading results. The frequentist
approach is more forgiving, as the likelihood function is only used to motivate the form
of a search statistic, which is then tuned using signal injections and time slides of the
data (see e.g. Ref. ).
The likelihood function is deﬁned by demanding that the residual formed from
subtracting the gravitational wave model from the data, r = s −R ⋆h, is consistent
with the model for the noise n. For stationary, Gaussian noise this leads to the standard
likelihood function 
p(s|h, M) =
−(rT · C−1 · r)/2
((2π)NdetC)1/2
where C is the noise correlation matrix and N is the length of the data s. For stationary
noise, transforming the data to the frequency domain yields a diagonal correlation
matrix, Cf f′ = Sn(f) δf f′, which allows for faster likelihood evaluations. The existing
Bayesian parameter estimate algorithms that have been applied to LIGO/Virgo data 
assume that the noise is stationary and Gaussian and use oﬀ-source estimates for the
noise spectrum Sn(f). However, non-stationary, non-Gaussian features such as glitches
or wandering lines can bias this type of analysis .
The need for more realistic noise modeling has been emphasized in several studies.
Allen et al. have argued that parameterized noise models are needed to derive
robust search statistics. They found that distributions with heavier tails than a Gaussian
were more robust against noise transients, a result that has been conﬁrmed by R¨over
using a Student-t likelihood function . Clark et al. included a model for Sine-
Gaussian instrument glitches as an alternative hypothesis when computing Bayesian
odds ratios for gravitational wave signals from pulsar glitches. Clark et al. also suggested
that it would be valuable to have a classiﬁcation of instrument glitches that could be
used to construct better models for the instrument noise. Similar “glitch hypotheses”
were considered by Veitch and Vecchio in a study of Bayesian model selection applied
to the search for black hole inspiral signals. The possibility of subtracting instrument
glitches from the data using a physical model of the detector has been investigated by
Ajith et al. . Principe and Pinto have introduced a physically motivated
model for the glitch contribution to the instrument noise, and have used this model
to derive what they refer to as a “locally optimum network detection statistic” .
In their approach the glitches are treated in a statistical sense, while our approach
directly models the glitches present in the data. The possibility of directly deriving
likelihood functions from the data in a Bayesian setting has previously been considered
by Cannon .
In Cannon’s approach the data is ﬁrst reduced to an n-tuple of
quantities such as the parameters produced by a matched ﬁlter search. Then, using
time slides and signal injections, the likelihood distributions for the signal and noise
hypotheses are directly estimated from the data. These are then used to estimate the
posterior probability that a measured set of parameters corresponds to a gravitational
wave event.
The BayesWave algorithm models the data s as linear combination of gravitational
wave signals, h; stationary, colored Gaussian noise, nG; and glitches, g:
s = R ⋆h + g + nG .
The spectrum of the Gaussian component nG is modeled by the BayesLine algorithm,
running on relatively short stretches of data (tens to hundreds of seconds) to allow for
broad spectrum, long term non-stationary behavior. We have experimented with using
more complicated noise models for n, such as the sum of Gaussians proposed by Allen
et al. , but found little beneﬁt from the added complexity . Studies of the
LIGO/Virgo data show that glitches are structured features that occupy a compact
region in the time-frequency plane. It is natural therefore to use some kind of wavelet
representation for the glitches. This could be a continuous wavelet representation such as
the Morlet-Gabor “Sine-Gaussian” wavelets used in the LIGO Omega pipeline and
for performing time-frequency decomposition of the data via Q-scans , or a discrete
wavelet representation such as those used in the Kleine-welle studies of environmental
channels or the coherent WaveBurst burst search pipeline . Principe and
Pinto have shown that typical glitches can be represented as the sum of a small
number of Morlet-Gabor “glitch atoms”.
The BayesWave algorithm uses a transdimensional RJMCMC to model glitches and signals with a variable number of Morlet-
Gabor wavelets, where the number and parameters of the wavelets are not pre-speciﬁed,
but rather, determined from the data.
In principle the RJMCMC algorithm can produce posterior distributions for the
components of the nested model (3) which can be used for model selection. For example,
we can deﬁne a Gaussian noise model to be the state that employs zero glitch or signal
wavelets. Similarly, we can deﬁne a pure glitch model to be one that uses zero signal
wavelets, and likewise, a pure signal model to be any state with zero glitch wavelets.
In practice this is only useful for cases where the relative evidence for each model (the
pairwise Bayes Factors) are within a factor of a thousand or so. Beyond that point,
the less favored models are visited so infrequently that the RJMCMC derived Bayes
Factors become suspect. It is possible to extend the RJMCMC analysis to higher Bayes
Factors by imposing a false prior that weights the less favored model more heavily, then
correct for the false prior when computing the Bayes Factor , but it gets increasingly
diﬃcult to achieve good mixing.
To handle situations with large Bayes Factors we
use thermodynamic integration to directly calculate the evidence for each model. The
various models - Gaussian noise, glitches plus Gaussian noise and gravitational wave
signal plus Gaussian noise - are themselves composite models formed by the union of all
possible spectral estimates from BayesLine, and all possible combinations of wavelets
in the glitch or signal models. Each composite model is explored by a RJMCMC, and
thermodynamic integration is used to compute the evidence for the model.
unaware of any other applications where RJMCMC and thermodynamic integration
have been combined in such a fashion. The evidence is used to select the model that
best describes the data.
3. Glitch and Signal Modeling
Earlier versions of the BayesWave algorithm used orthogonal bases of discrete
Meyer wavelets .
Initially we used a dyadic basis uniformly spaced in log
frequency , and later we experimented with a binary basis uniformly spaced in the
frequency . The parameters in these models were the number, amplitude and timefrequency location of the “active” wavelets. There are several advantages to using a
discrete wavelet grid: the parameters of the wavelet model are completely uncorrelated,
resulting in good mixing of the Markov Chains; and it is easy to identify clusters
of wavelets.
There are also several disadvantages: the shape of the pixels in timefrequency are ﬁxed in advance by the decomposition level of the wavelet transform,
leading to sub-optimal representation of signals/glitches ; and projecting the signal
wavelets onto each detector in the network required the application of a computationally
expensive time translation operator . We eventually concluded that the negatives
outweighed the positives and abandoned discrete wavelets in favor of non-orthogonal
Morlet-Gabor wavelets which have a number of nice properties: their shape in timefrequency is variable and can adapt to ﬁt the signal; they have an analytic Fourier
representation so the entire analysis can be performed in the frequency domain; and
the time shifts needed to project the signal wavelets onto the various detectors are
described by a simple phase shift. The lack of orthogonality is not a major impediment
to achieving good mixing in the Markov Chains, and clusters can be deﬁned using a
metric distance on the wavelet space.
Morlet-Gabor wavelets can be expressed in the time-domain as
Ψ(t; A, f0, Q, t0, φ0) = Ae−(t−t0)2/τ 2 cos(2πf0(t −t0) + φ0) ,
with τ = Q/(2πf0). Here A is the amplitude, Q is the quality factor, t0 and f0 are the
central time and frequency, and φ0 is the phase oﬀset. Their Fourier transform is given
Ψ(f; A, f0, Q, t0, φ0) =
e−π2τ 2(f−f0)2 ×
ei(φ0+2π(f−f0)t0) + e−i(φ0+2π(f+f0)t0)e−Q2f/f0
Since we typically restrict Q > 1, the wavelets are highly peaked around f = f0,
and we may neglect the second term in the Fourier transform. Morlet-Gabor wavelets
have the minimum time-frequency area, πσtσf = 1/2, allowed by the Heisenberg-
Gabor uncertainty principle (their form is closely related to coherent states in quantum
mechanics ). The glitch model employs a variable number of independent wavelets,
Ng,i in each detector. The signal model can either use two sets of independent wavelets
to model h+ and h× at the Geocenter, or for signals with a deﬁnite polarization, a single
set of wavelets to model h+, and an ellipticity parameter ϵ. In the frequency domain
we deﬁne h× = ϵ h+eiπ/2, with the polarization going from linear to circular as ϵ runs
from 0 to 1. Our motivation for assuming elliptical polarization is two-fold: Firstly, the
the small number of detectors available in the early advanced detector era, and the near
alignment of the two LIGO detectors, results in poor polarization sensitivity, making
it diﬃcult to reconstruct h+ and h× separately.
Secondly, we expect most sources
of gravitational waves to show some degree of polarization. For example, the signals
from binary inspirals are elliptically polarized with ellipticities that are approximately
constant across multiple wave cycles, while signals from core collapse supernovae are
thought to be dominantly linearly polarized. In what follows we will assume that the
signals are polarized, and that ϵ is time independent. The Geocenter signal wavelets are
projected onto each detector in the network using sky-location-dependent time-delays
∆t(θ, φ), and antenna patterns F +(θ, φ, ψ), F ×(θ, φ, ψ):
(R ⋆h)i(f) =
i (θ, φ, ψ)h+(f) + F ×
i (θ, φ, ψ)h×(f)
e2πif∆ti(θ,φ) ,
Ψ(f; Aj, f0j, Qj, t0j, φ0j) .
All Ns wavelets in the signal model share the same set of extrinsic parameters describing
the sky location (θ, φ), ellipticity ϵ, and polarization angle ψ. A gravitational wave signal
can be ﬁt equally well (in terms of the likelihood) by the glitch or signal models, but the
evidence for the signal model will be larger as it provides a more parsimonious description
of the data. For a signal described by Ns wavelets incident on a Nd detector network,
the signal model uses Ds = 5Ns + 4 parameters (the 5 extrinsic parameters per wavelet
and the 4 common extrinsic parameters), while the glitch model uses Dg = 5NdNs
parameters. When Ns ≫1 or Nd ≫1, the glitch model requires vastly more parameters
than the signal model. When Ns = 1 and Nd = 1 the extrinsic parameters are irrelevant
and Ds = Dg, which makes it impossible to tell the diﬀerence between an un-modeled
gravitational wave signal and a glitch using a single detector. The most marginal case
for detection is a two detector network and a single sine-Gaussian signal, as then Ds = 9
and Dg = 10. However, despite the near equality of the model dimensions in this case,
the signal model will still be preferred as not all parameters are created equal - models
pay a greater penalty for parameters that are well constrained (measured by the ratio of
prior to posterior volume). Intrinsic parameters such as t0 and f0 fall into this category.
Having deﬁned the likelihood and the building blocks of the signal and glitch models, all
that remains is to specify prior distributions on the model parameters. For the extrinsic
parameters of the signal model we adopt the prior that sources are uniformly distributed
on the sky, with ellipticities uniform in the range ϵ ∈ , and polarization angles
uniform in the range ψ ∈[0, π]. Similarly, we take the prior on the intrinsic parameters t0
and f0 to be uniformly distributed across the observation time and frequency band being
analyzed. These priors should be modiﬁed if we have an electromagnetic counterpart
such as a core collapse supernovae, which would pin down the sky location and perhaps
the ellipticity, and narrow the range on t0.
The phase parameters are taken to be
uniform in the range φ0 ∈[0, 2π]. We take the quality factors to be uniform in the
range Q ∈[Qmin, Qmax], where we typically set Qmin = 2 and Qmax = 40. We adopt
a uniform prior on the number of wavelets in the glitch and signal models across the
range Ns ∈ and Ng ∈[0, 100 × Nd]. The prior range on the quality factor and
number of wavelets was informed by running the analysis on a variety of simulated
signals, such as black hole binary mergers, core collapse supernovae and white noise
bursts, and on glitches in actual LIGO data and ensuring that the parameters used by
the models lay well within the boundaries of the prior range. When running on the
signal model the ranges are set such that Ns ∈ , Ng = 0, while the glitch model
has Ns = 0 and Ng ∈[1, 100×Nd] (in other words, a single glitch wavelet in any detector
is acceptable). The Gaussian noise model has Ng = 0 and Ns = 0. All that remains is to
specify an amplitude prior for the wavelets. In this instance, a uniform prior has little
to recommend it, and we need to specify physically well motivated priors for the signal
and glitch amplitudes. In each case we specify a prior on the amplitude of individual
wavelets, but these may be supplemented by priors on the total power in the signal and
glitch models.
4.1. Glitch amplitude prior
From previous studies we know that loud glitches are less common than quiet glitches.
Once the amplitude of a glitch becomes comparable to the Gaussian noise level it loses
identity and becomes one of the many small disturbances that make up the Gaussian
background. These considerations motivate an amplitude prior expressed in terms of
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the wavelet. For glitches we adopt the form
p(SNR) = SNR
e−SNR/SNR∗
which peaks at SNR = SNR∗. The SNR of a Morlet-Gabor wavelet can be estimated as
2πf0Sn(f0)
which means that the SNR prior is actually a joint prior on A, f0, Q. A non-ﬂat prior
on the SNR will result in a bias in the recovered amplitude which is tolerable so long
as it is not too large. To estimate the bias, consider a single sine-Gaussian signal with
signal-to-noise SNR = (s|s)1/2, and further assume that the template exactly matches
the signal in all parameters other than the amplitude. The posterior distribution for
SNR then has the form
p(SNR|s) ∼SNR e−SNR/SNR∗e−(SNR−SNR)2/2 ,
Note that for large signal-to-noise, the likelihood overwhelms the prior, and in the limit
SNR ≫1 the posterior distribution peaks at
4.2. Signal amplitude prior
For gravitational wave signals we expect the sources to be distributed roughly uniformly
in volume, which implies a prior on the distance D that scales as p(D) ∼D2. Since
the SNR of a signal scales as SNR ∼1/D, the corresponding prior on SNR scales as
p(SNR) ∼SNR−4. One possibility is to use this as the prior on the individual wavelet
SNRs, but such a prior is improper (can not be normalized), and it favors adding large
numbers of undetectable wavelets to the signal model.
While we have reservations
about employing so-called “Malmquist priors”∥, that seek to account for observational
selection eﬀects, convergence can be greatly improved by cutting oﬀthe distribution at
some minimum SNR. This does not aﬀect the ability to reconstruct signals since the
∥We feel that Malmquist priors imply a double counting of what is already contained in the likelihood,
though they may be necessary if the parameter estimation study is following up triggers from a search
pipeline with known selection eﬀects 
Figure 1. The upper panel shows the SNR prior for the glitch wavelets (in red),
deﬁned in Eq. (8), and the signal wavelets (in blue), deﬁned in Eq. (12), for the choice
SNR∗= 4. The lower panel shows the fractional bias in the inferred SNR caused by
using these non-uniform SNR priors. The shaded regions fold in the 1-sigma statistical
error in the SNR estimates, which are always far greater than the systematic biases
from the non-uniform priors.
natural balance between model ﬁdelity and model complexity ensures that only wavelets
with SNR > 3 play a signiﬁcant role. Rather than adopt a hard SNR cut-oﬀ, we instead
choose a function that smoothly goes to zero as SNR →0, and approaches the SNR−4
scaling for high SNR. One such choice is
∗(1 + SNR/(4 SNR∗))5 .
This distribution peaks at SNR = SNR∗. The SNR of a signal wavelet can be estimated
using (9), but with the power spectral density of a single detector Sn(f0) replaced by
the network average
+,i + ϵ2F 2
Thus our SNR prior for the signal model is actually a joint prior on A, f0, Q, ϵ, ψ, θ, φ. As
with the glitch model, there will be a bias away from the maximum likelihood solution
for the inferred SNR caused by the non-uniform prior on SNR. Figure 1 compares the
glitch and signal SNR priors for the choice SNR∗= 4, and shows the fractional bias in
the inferred SNR caused by using a non-uniform prior. In both cases, the bias is tiny
compared to the statistical uncertainty.
4.3. Cluster Priors
In addition to the individual wavelet priors described above, it is possible to introduce
non-local priors that apply to collections of wavelets. On physical grounds we expect
gravitational wave signals, such as black hole mergers or core collapse supernovae,
and glitches to produce coherent clusters of power in a time-frequency representation.
This suggests imposing priors that favor concentrated clusters of wavelets over isolated
Figure 2. Distributions of the number of active wavelets when using the proximity
prior deﬁned in Eq. (17) with the likelihood set equal to a constant. The blue line
is for (α, β, γ) = (4, 1, 0.5) and the red line is for (α, β, γ) = (2, 0.5, 0.5). To achieve
a uniform prior distribution on the number of wavelets, we include a normalization
factor proportional to the inverse of these distributions.
One approach that we considered uses a distance measure to decide which wavelets
are nearby in the time-frequency plane, then groups neighboring wavelets into a cluster.
Treating the wavelets as Gaussian packets in time-frequency space with density
e−(∆f2/2σ2
where ∆f = f0 −f, ∆t = t0 −t, σt = τ and σf = 1/πτ, and computing the overlap
between two wavelets yields the distance measure
12 = dt2 + (πτ1τ2)2df 2
where dt = t01 −t02 and df = f01 −f02 is the diﬀerence in the central time and central
frequencies between wavelets 1, 2. We then set a distance threshold such that all wavelets
within ds < δ of each other were considered to be in a cluster, and used the Flood Fill
algorithm to identify clusters. From this we were able to extract the number of
clusters, the number of wavelets in each cluster, and the signal-to-noise ratio of each
cluster. We experimented with a number of priors that used these quantities to favor
groupings of wavelets, but each attempt ran into various diﬃculties. In general there was
a strong tendency to form large clusters, even in Gaussian noise, and these clusters would
typically have wavelets with extreme Q’s producing an unphysical mix of both very tall
and very long pixels that linked the clusters together. The tendency to over-cluster
could be balanced to a certain extent by adding a prior that disfavored conﬁgurations
with a large number of wavelets, but the bias towards extreme wavelet shapes remained.
Density plots in time-frequency showing the log of the proximity prior
with (α, β, γ) = (4, 1, 0.5) taken from a MCMC run on data containing a Gaussian
enveloped white noise burst with SNR = 15, central frequency f = 180 Hz, central
time t = 2 s and spreads σf = 20 Hz, σt = 0.1 s. The Maximum a Posterior wavelet
model employed 3 wavelets. The upper left panel shows the log of the proximity prior
density overlaid with the shapes of the three wavelets in use at a randomly chosen
iteration of the Markov chain. The other three panels show the prior as seen by the
wavelet colored in white, which are found by excluding the contribution to the prior
from that wavelet.
The approach we settled on employs a “proximity prior” based on a sum of
probability densities surrounding each active wavelet. Since each wavelet covers a region
of the time-frequency plane deﬁned by the density (14), we expect neighboring wavelets
to be close, but not too close.
This motivates a probability density described by a
“hollowed-out” Gaussian of the form
2πσfσt(α2 −β2)
t )/α2 −e−(∆f2/σ2
where α > β sets the overall width of the distribution and β sets the size of the hollowedout region.
We expect that choosing α in the range 2-4 and β in the range 0.5-1
will result in an eﬀective proximity prior for most signal and glitch morphologies. An
extensive study of how these choices aﬀect the performance is currently underway. The
full proximity prior is given by the normalized sum of densities of the form Eq. (18)
surrounding each active wavelet, to which we also add a uniform density component to
allow exploration of the entire time-frequency volume:
t )/α2 −e−(∆f2
where Vtf is the time-frequency volume being analyzed, ∆fi = f0i −f, ∆ti = t0i −t,
and Ai is the normalization factor for the ith hollowed-out Gaussian distribution:
t )/α2 −e−(∆f2/σ2
We set the uniform fraction at γ, and the hollowed-out Gaussian fraction is 1 −γ.
Rather than choosing a ﬁxed fraction γ, we instead choose a ﬁxed density contrast
between the two components, which results in γ taking diﬀerent values depending on
the time-frequency volume being analyzed. The proximity prior favors states with large
numbers of nearby wavelets. This can be seen most clearly in prior-only studies where
the likelihood is set equal to a constant. We ﬁnd that the proximity prior leads to an
approximately power law distribution in the number of active wavelets, as opposed to
the uniform distribution in the number of active wavelets found when using a uniform
time-frequency prior.
The precise form of the wavelet number distribution depends
on the choice of α, β, γ and the size of the time-frequency volume being analyzed.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the number of active wavelets in prior-only studies
with (α, β) = (4, 1) and (α, β) = (2, 0.5).
In each case the range in the number
of active wavelets was set at N = , and the analysis covered the frequency
range f = Hz and a time interval of 8 seconds, resulting in a time-frequency
volume of TFV = 4016. The density contrast in the proximity prior was set such that
γ = 1/(4016/TFV+1) = 0.5. The more aggressive proximity prior with (α, β) = (2, 0.5)
leads to a steeper trend in the number of active wavelets being used. Since our preferred
physical prior on the number of active wavelets is uniform, we include a normalization
factor on the number of wavelets that compensates for the over-clustering caused by the
proximity prior. The obvious choice is to use the inverse of the distribution shown in
Figure 2, which results in a uniform distribution in the number of active wavelets when
the likelihood is set equal to a constant.
Figure 3 shows the log of the proximity prior density for a cluster of wavelets
randomly chosen from a MCMC analysis. The upper left panel shows what the prior
would look like when proposing to add an additional wavelet to the cluster. The other
panels show what the prior looks like for each individual wavelet in the cluster i.e. what
the prior looks like when proposing to add the third wavelet (shown in white) to the
cluster. Note that the dynamic range in the proximity prior between the peak value
and the minimum is of order ∆log p ≈6, which means that the improvement in the
log likelihood needed to add a new wavelet near the cluster is signiﬁcantly lower than
elsewhere in the time-frequency plane.
Figure 4 shows randomly chosen snapshots of the the wavelet distributions for states
with 30 wavelets from runs where the log likelihood was set equal to a constant. The
wavelets are grouped into clusters using the Flood Fill algorithm with a distance
Wavelet clusters, indicated by a common color, in the time-frequency
plane when exploring the prior distributions (likelihood set equal to a constant).
These snapshots were randomly selected 30-wavelet states taken from MCMC runs
with a uniform time-frequency prior (upper panel) and the proximity prior with
α = 4, β = 1, γ = 0.5 (lower panel). The proximity prior leads to a larger number
of multi-wavelet clusters.
tolerance of ds < 4 and assigned a common color. Note that since there are only a
ﬁnite number of colors in the color table being used to make the plot, some wavelets
get plotted in the same color even though they are not in the same cluster. The upper
panel is with a uniform time-frequency prior, while the lower panel is with the proximity
prior. As expected, the proximity prior shows a distinct preference for forming clusters
composed of many wavelets.
Figure 5 shows quantiles of the match between an injected black hole merger signal
¯h and the wavelet reconstruction h found by BayesWave for a ﬂat time-frequency prior
and a proximity prior with α = 4, β = 1, γ = 0.5. The match, or overlap, is deﬁned:
(¯h|¯h)(h|h)
and can range between -1 and 1. The black hole merger signal included inspiral, merger
Figure 5. The median match for the wavelet model as a function of signal-to-noise
ratio for a simulated black hole merger. The red line shows the median match and
the symmetric 90% credible interval for a uniform time-frequency prior, while the
blue line and shaded region shows the same quantities for the proximity prior with
α = 4, β = 1, γ = 0.5.
and ringdown for a system with spins aligned with the orbital angular momentum, and
spin magnitudes χ1 = 0.3, χ2 = 0.2 and masses m1 = 20 M⊙, m2 = 15 M⊙.
proximity prior with α = 2, β = 0.5, γ = 0.5 (not shown in the interest of readability)
produced matches that fell between the two cases shown in Figure 5. In the future
we plan to perform a more extensive study of how the proximity prior performs with
diﬀerent choices of α, β, γ for a variety of simulated signals. For the remainder of the
paper we will adopt the ﬁducial values α = 4, β = 1, γ = 0.5.
Figure 6 shows quantiles of the match as a function of signal-to-noise ratio for a
simulated Gaussian enveloped white noise burst with central frequency f = 180 Hz and
spreads σf = 20 Hz, σt = 0.1 s. Once again the proximity prior signiﬁcantly outperforms
the uniform time frequency prior in terms of the accuracy of the waveform recovery.
5. RJMCMC Implementation
The BayesWave algorithm uses a trans-dimensional RJMCMC technique to explore
the models and their many parameters. Transitions to new states of the chain are drawn
from a proposal distribution, and to achieve eﬃcient sampling the proposals need to be
well adapted to the problem. The most challenging transitions are those that involve
adding or removing a wavelet (the trans-dimensional steps), and birth/death moves
that simultaneously remove one wavelet and add another. To ensure a high acceptance
rate, BayesWave uses a variety of custom tailored proposal distributions and additional
techniques to promote mixing.
Figure 6. The median match for the wavelet model as a function of signal-to-noise
ratio for a simulated white noise burst. The red line shows the median match and
the symmetric 90% credible interval for a uniform time-frequency prior, while the
blue line and shaded region shows the same quantities for the proximity prior with
α = 4, β = 1, γ = 0.5
5.1. Maximization during Burn-in
To speed convergence, standard FFT based techniques are used to maximize over t0, φ0
and A for each wavelet during the “burn-in” stage. Samples from this part of the chain
are discarded since they do not obey the detailed balance condition required for Markov
chains. The maximization allows signals and glitches to be identiﬁed very quickly.
5.2. Parallel Tempering
Convergence to the target distribution is improved by using the Parallel Tempering
approach , where multiple chains are run in parallel at diﬀerent “temperatures” T,
where the likelihood function is modiﬁed such that p(s|h) →p(s|h)1/T. Hot chains
explore the entire prior volume, while cooler chains map the peaks of the posterior
distribution. Exchanges between chains at diﬀerent temperatures help ensure that the
entire posterior distribution is thoroughly explored. The choice of temperature ladder
can signiﬁcantly impact the mixing between chains. We typically use 25-30 chains with
the temperature spacing determined by the adaptive algorithm described in Ref. 
and the maximum temperature ﬁxed to T = 106.
5.3. Fisher matrix proposals
A Fisher information matrix Γ can be computed for each wavelet, and proposals for
updating the parameters of that wavelet can be drawn from the multivariate Gaussian
distribution
2 Γij∆xi∆xj,
where the ∆xi = xi −yi denote displacements in the ﬁve intrinsic parameters that
describe each wavelet. To speed calculation we use an analytic approximation to the
Fisher matrix that can be derived along the same lines as the SNR in (9). Dropping
terms down by factors of e−Q2 relative to leading order, the Fisher matrix for a single
wavelet using the parameters {t0, f0, Q, ln A, φ0} is given by
Jumps are proposed along the eigenvectors of this matrix, scaled by the inverse square
root of the eigenvectors. The eigenvectors come in two groups, one group that mixes t0
and φ0, and another group that mixes f0, Q and ln A. While these jump proposals do not
account for correlations between the parameters of diﬀerent wavelets, the correlations
between wavelets are small, and the single wavelet Fisher matrix based jumps achieve
a healthy acceptance rate of ∼30%.
5.4. Extrinsic parameter proposals
Changes to the extrinsic parameters which describe the location and orientation of the
source are proposed using a mixture of three distributions. The most heavily employed
proposal uses the Fisher information matrix of the Geocenter waveform similar to what
is used for the intrinsic parameters. There is no simple analytic expression for derivatives
of the signal model with respect to extrinsic parameters, so the elements of the Fisher
matrix are computed by ﬁnite diﬀerencing. Numerical diﬀerentiation is computationally
costly so the Fisher matrix is treated as constant over several chain iterations (typically
ten) before being updated.
The Fisher matrix proposal assumes a multivariate Gaussian likelihood which
is a poor approximation for parameters that encode the position and orientation of
the signal.
Ground-based gravitational wave detector networks acquire most of the
positional information by diﬀerences in the arrival time of the signal at each observatory.
For two detector networks (the minimum required for conﬁdent detection) timing-only
considerations produce a degenerate ring on the sky of constant time delay.
degeneracy is broken by the diﬀerent phase and amplitude measured in each detector
but the resulting distributions are not remotely Gaussian (for example, see Figure 15).
We incorporate this known feature of gravitational wave posteriors into a proposal which
rotates the current sky-location uniformly along the ring of constant time delay.
Rounding out the extrinsic parameter proposals is a uniform draw from the prior
on all parameters. Proposals which make such large changes to the extrinsic parameters
are seldom, if ever, accepted by the cold chains but are necessary for the hotter chains
in the parallel tempering scheme to ensure that they fully sample the prior. The full
prior exploration is important to help the cold chains avoid getting trapped in local
maxima of the posterior and to get an accurate estimate of the expectation value of the
likelihood as a function of temperature that is used in the thermodynamic integration.
5.5. Trans-dimensional and birth-death moves
When proposing to add a new wavelet, or swapping out an existing wavelet, the choice
of time-frequency location for the proposed wavelet is key to getting the move accepted.
BayesWave employs two kinds of time-frequency proposals to help facilitate these moves.
The ﬁrst is based on a time-frequency map which favors adding wavelets in regions with
excess power. The second is a proximity proposal, which preferentially seeks to add new
wavelets near to, but not on top of, existing wavelets.
The time-frequency map can be constructed in a variety of ways. One way is to
use a normalized discrete scalogram of the whitened data in each detector. The glitch
model in each detector uses the whitened scalogram for that detector, while the signal
model uses the average of the scalograms for each detector in the network. Another way
of constructing a time-frequency map is to perform a pilot run for each model (signal
and glitch) and form a histogram of where the wavelets get placed in time-frequency
space. Both methods for constructing time-frequency maps have proven to be successful
in testing. The current implementation of the code uses the histogram based approach.
The proximity proposal distribution takes the same functional form as the proximity
prior, though possibly with diﬀerent values for the parameters (α, β, γ). The idea behind
this proposal is that new wavelets are more likely to be needed in the vicinity of an
existing cluster. In the studies presented here the proximity proposal used the same
settings as the proximity prior, with α = 2, β = 0.5, γ = 0.5.
Once the central time t0 and frequency f0 have been drawn from either the timefrequency map or proximity proposal, values for the other wavelet parameters need to be
proposed. The quality factor Q and phase φ0 are drawn from their uniform prior range,
while the amplitude A of the new wavelet is proposed by drawing a value for the proposed
SNR from the amplitude prior (8), and solving for A by inverting the expression in (9).
For wavelets in the signal model, the extrinsic parameters (sky location, polarization
angle and ellipticity) are inherited from the existing signal model wavelets, or if the
signal model currently has no wavelets, these are drawn from their prior distributions.
The Metropolis-Hastings ratio for the trans-dimensional moves includes many non-trivial
terms in the prior and proposal densities, and care has to taken when implementing the
algorithm. The implementation is tested by setting the likelihood equal to a constant
and seeing if the algorithm recovers the prior distributions. It is hard to over-stress how
useful and important this test is when developing a code as complex as BayesWave.
6. Bayesian Evidence
In order to compare various models for the data we need to be able to compute the
posterior probability for each model.
The (un-normalized) posterior probability for
a particular model M is given by the product of its prior odds p(M) and its marginal
likelihood or evidence p(s|M). The marginal likelihood for a model is given by an integral
of the model likelihood weighted by the prior distribution of the model parameters:
p(⃗λ|M)p(s|⃗λ, M)d⃗λ .
This integral is notoriously diﬃcult to evaluate when the model has a large number of
parameters. Several ingenious techniques have been developed to estimate the evidence,
including nested sampling and thermodynamic integration. An alternative approach
is to avoid a direct calculation of the evidence and instead use a trans-dimensional
RJMCMC algorithm to simultaneously explore both the space of models and the
parameters of each model. The probability for each model can then be estimated from
the relative frequency of visits to each model.
BayesWave uses a RJMCMC routine to explore the full range of models
(gravitational wave signals, glitches and Gaussian-noise), so it would seem that we
get the model probabilities for free. We can deﬁne four disjoint composite models: (1)
Gaussian-noise only; (2) Gaussian-noise and glitches - states with one or more glitch
wavelets in use across the network; (3) Gaussian-noise and a gravitational wave signal with one or more signal wavelets in use; (4) Gaussian-noise, glitches and a gravitational
wave signal - with one or more signal wavelets and one or more glitch wavelets in use;
and use the fraction of iterations spent in each model as an estimate of the posterior
probability for each model. The challenge is to get the RJMCMC algorithm to eﬃciently
explore each composite model and to transition between models. It is worth emphasizing
that the composite models are of variable dimensionality - the Gaussian noise model
allows for a variable number of spline control points and Lorentzian line features, and
the glitch and gravitational wave models allow for a variable number of wavelets. Thus
the RJMCMC algorithm has to marginalize over the internal model degrees of freedom
in addition to exploring the composite model space.
In situations where there are
near-coincident loud glitches in multiple detectors or a loud gravitational wave signal,
it becomes very diﬃcult to come up with proposals that allow for eﬃcient transitions
between the all-glitch and all-signal models. One way around this is to do pairwise
comparisons between a sub-set of models, such as Gaussian-noise versus Gaussian-noise
and glitches or Gaussian-noise versus Gaussian-noise and gravitational waves. The ratio
of the Bayes factors from these cases can the be used to compute the glitch/gravitational
wave Bayes factor.
However, even the pairwise model comparisons become challenging for loud events
as the chains spend very little time in the Gaussian-noise model, and make few
transitions between the models, which results in large statistical errors in the Bayes
factors. To overcome this problem we adopted a hybrid approach that uses a RJMCMC
Bayes Factor
Bayes factors between the Gaussian-noise plus glitch model versus the
Gaussian-noise model for simulated single Sine-Gaussians with Q = 12.7 and f0 = 225
Hz in simulated Gaussian noise.
The solid (red) line is computed from RJMCMC
transitions, while the dashed (blue) line is computed via thermodynamic integration.
Our implementation of the RJMCMC approach is unable to compute Bayes factors in
excess of ∼103, which explains the termination of the solid (red) line at SNR = 8 and
the large error bar on this ﬁnal value.
algorithm to marginalize over the parameters in each composite model (including the
number of spline points, wavelets etc), and Thermodynamic Integration to compute
the evidence for the composite model via an integral of the average log likelihood as a
function of “inverse temperature” β = 1/T:
ln p(s|M) =
0 dβ Eβ[ln p(s|⃗λ, M)]
Here the expectation value for the log likelihood for a chain with inverse temperature β,
Eβ[ln p(s|⃗λ, M)], averages over both the model parameters and the model dimension of
the composite model M. To compute the integral (23) we ﬁrst change variables to log β
and discretize using a uniform spacing in log β. Since we already use parallel tempering
to promote mixing of the Markov chains, we have a ready made temperature ladder
with which to compute the evidence.
Figure 7 compares Bayes factors computed using thermodynamic integration and
from RJMCMC transitions for a simple test case with a simulated Sine-Gaussian “glitch”
in simulated Gaussian noise. The two methods agree very well for low SNR glitches, but
beyond SNR = 7.5 our implementation of the RJMCMC technique fails as the Markov
chains rarely transition away from the glitch model. It is possible to push the RJMCMC
technique to higher SNR and higher Bayes factors by introducing pseudo priors on the
models so that the chains spend roughly equal time in each model , but even then
it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd proposals that allow for frequent transitions between the models.
6.1. Evidence Error Estimation
When using Bayesian evidence to perform model selection, such as deciding if a certain
non-Gaussian feature in the data is an instrumental artifact or a gravitational wave
signal, it is important to have reliable estimates of the evidence and the error in the
evidence estimate. One standard technique is to repeat the analysis multiple times using
diﬀerent random number seeds and compute the variance of the evidence estimates, but
this can be extremely costly, especially if we demand better than ∼30% accuracy in the
error estimates. A much cheaper alternative is to develop internal error estimates that
can be computed from a single run. The Nested Sampling technique comes with an
internal error estimate, but we were unable to ﬁnd similar estimates for the RJMCMC
and thermodynamic integration techniques in the literature, so we derive them here.
Bayes Factor
run number
Figure 8. A scatter plot showing Bayes Factors from multiple runs on simulated data
with a SNR = 7 Sine-Gaussian “glitch”. The solid (red) line is for the RJMCMC
method, while the dashed (blue) line is for the thermodynamic integration method.
The error bars are the “2-sigma” ranges computed using our within-run error estimates.
6.1.1. RJMCMC Evidence Error Estimate
Here we derive the statistical error in the
Bayes factor computed by the RJMCMC approach. The extension to cases with three
or more models is straightforward. If we focus on the model parameter indicator, so
eﬀectively marginalizing over the parameters of each model, the Markov chain from a
RJMCMC study can be described by the two-state transition matrix 
where pij is the transition probability between states i →j. The left eigenvalues of the
transition matrix are λ1 = 1 and λ2 = 1 −(p12 + p21) < 1. As we iterate the Markov
chain the components of the initial state that lie along the eigenvector corresponding to
the smaller eigenalue λ2 decay away, and we are left with the stationary state which is
given by the λ1 eigenvector with components
The Bayes factor B12 is simply the relative probability for the two models in the
stationary state:
B12 = p21/p12.
In practice we can only estimate the transition
probabilities from number of counts in each model Nii and the number of transitions
between models Nij.
The joint likelihood of observing the collection of transitions
d = (N11, N12, N21, N22) is given by
p(d|pij) = (N1 + 1)!(N2 + 1)!
N11!N12!N22!N21! (1 −p12)N11pN12
12 (1 −p21)N22pN21
with Ni = Ni1 + Ni2. Setting ∂pijp(d|pij) = 0 yields the maximum likelihood estimate
ˆp12 = N12
ˆp21 = N21
The maximum likelihood estimate for the Bayes factor is given by ˆB12 = ˆp21/ˆp12 =
N1/N2 since in the large N limit N12 = N21. The covariance in these estimates can be
found from the inverse, Cµν, of the Fisher information matrix Γµν = −∂µ∂ν ln p(d|µ).
Here we have used the shorthand µ = pij. The covariance matrix has the form
and using the identity
E(a)2 + Var(b)
E(b)2 −2Cov(a, b)
it follows that
Var(B12) = B2
+ (N2 −N21)
We have veriﬁed the accuracy of this error estimate using extensive Monte Carlo studies
of two state Markov chains.
We also ﬁnd very good agreement between this error
estimate and the brute-force error estimate found from performing multiple runs (see
Figure 8). The one caveat is that the marginalization over the model parameters for
each model needs to be eﬃcient, otherwise our starting assumption that the transitions
can be modeled by a two state Markov chain is violated. If the within-model mixing is
poor, the estimate (30) provides a lower bound on the error. For poorly mixed chains
the error estimate may need to be inﬂated by as much as a factor of 2.
Thermodynamic Integration Evidence Error Estimate The log evidence for
model M given data s can be computed:
ln p(s|M) =
−∞β Eβ[ln p(s|⃗λ, M)]d ln β
In practice the integral is evaluated by discretizing ln β and estimating the expectation
value from the average log likelihood for chains running at the various inverse
temperatures. Numerical error will result from both the discretization of the integral
and from the statistical error in the estimate of the average log likelihoods. We have
developed a numerical technique for estimating both sources of error that is described
below. It is also useful to derive an analytic estimate for the statistical error that can
be compared to the numerical estimate.
Deﬁning x = ln β, y = β Eβ[ln p(s|⃗λ, M)], and ∆xi = xi −xi−1, we can develop a
trapezoid discrectization of the integral:
2(yi + yi−1)∆xi
Now suppose that our estimate for yi is centered at ¯yi and has variance σ2
i . Let us further
assume that the errors at diﬀerent temperatures are uncorrelated: E[(yi−¯yi)(yj −¯yj)] =
i δij. Then
2(¯yi + ¯yi−1)∆xi
i−1∆xi∆xi−1 + σ2
The only subtle point to remember when computing this error estimate for
thermodynamic integration is that the quantity yi is found as the average of a collection
of samples. Thus we need the error on the mean, which for a large number of independent
samples N is given by the central limit theorem as σ2
i = Var[yi]/N. Since we use a
RJMCMC algorithm, our samples are correlated, and to estimate N we ﬁrst have to
thin the chains by an amount determined by their auto-correlation length.
Depending on the spacing of the chains and the length of the runs, the discretization
error may be larger or smaller than the statistical error. While it is possible to estimate
the discretization error analytically, the expression involves derivatives of the average
likelihood which are hard to compute in a reliable fashion. Instead we have developed
a novel approach that simultaneously accounts for the discretization error and the
statistical error.
Taking as input the estimates ¯yi and their variances σ2
i , we ﬁt a
smooth curve to the data and compute the integral using the smooth curve. The curve
is deﬁned by a cubic spline, where the number of spline control points and their location
can be varied. We deﬁne a likelihood ∼e−χ2/2 with
(¯yi −ci)2
where ci are the values of the cubic spline curve at xi. A RJMCMC routine (adapted
from the BayesLine algorithm) marginalizes over the number and location of the
spline points, and at each iteration an estimate for the integral (31) is computed
using the smooth spline curve. The expectation value and variance of these evidence
estimates provide the central value and error estimate for the thermodynamic integration
We concede that there is an element of irony in the fact that we use a
RJMCMC algorithm to estimate error in the thermodynamic integration evidence, but
the method is very robust.
The error estimate was tested in many ways, including the multiple-run test shown
in Figure 8, and tests on known functions. For example, integrating y = 1 + tanh(x)
in the interval x = [−1, 2] with 10 evenly spaced samples and errors of σ = 0.01
yielded I = 3.890496 ± 0.006605 ± 0.0032 using a trapezoid integration, where the
ﬁrst error is the statistical error (34) and the second is the discretization error, and
I = 3.891174 ± 0.006745 for the RJMCMC approach with smooth splines. Since spline
integration is much higher order than trapezoid integration, discretization error is a
tiny fraction of the total error in the RJMCMC approach. The statistical error is in
very good agreement with the estimate from (34). Note that both estimates include the
exact value for the integral, I = 3.891222, within their error ranges. In multiple tests on
diﬀerent functions the RJMCMC approach consistently returned more accurate values
than a simple trapezoid integration.
6.2. Model Selection Examples
The evidence ratio, or Bayes Factor, between competing models tells us how the
prior odds ratio (betting odds) have been changed by the observed data. The Bayes
Factor between the signal or glitch model and Gaussian noise is expected to follow the
relation 
ln BF = (1 −FF2)SNR2
where FF is the ﬁtting factor, which is found by maximizing the match (19), and O is
the Occam factor - the ratio of the prior to posterior volume, the latter being deﬁned as
the region where some large fraction of the posterior weight is concentrated. To leading
order, the term ∆ln O is expected to scale as ∆N log(FF), where ∆N is the diﬀerence
in the number of parameters between the two models . Empirically we ﬁnd that the
BayesWave ﬁtting factors scale roughly as 1−FF ∼1/SNR, so we expect the log Bayes
factor to scale linearly with the signal-to-noise ratio. Figure 9 shows the Bayes factor
between the signal model and the Gaussian noise models for a simulated non-spinning
black hole merger with masses m1 = m2 = 20M⊙, with the expected linear scaling in
SNR for SNR > 18.
Distinguishing non-Gaussian features in the data, be they instrument glitches
or gravitational waves, from the Gaussian noise model is relatively easy.
challenging is distinguishing glitches from gravitational waves. While it is extremely
log Bsignal,noise
Network SNR
model dimension
Bayes Factors versus SNR for a simulated black hole inspiral-mergerringdown signal in simulated noise for the H1L1 detector network. The colors label
the Maximum a Posterior number of wavelets used by the signal model
rare that glitches occur in every detector in the network at the same time, at the same
frequency, and with a similar morphology, the possibility exists, as demonstrated by
the near coherent triggers found in time-slides of the LIGO/Virgo data . In
the absence of waveform templates, BayesWave uses similar models for glitches and
gravitational waves. Both are built from a sum of Morlet-Gabor wavelets, the only
diﬀerence being that the signal model is deﬁned at the Geocenter, and the signals in
each detector are found by projecting onto the network, while the glitch model uses
independent sets of wavelets in each detector. When operating on data containing a
gravitational wave signal, both models are able to produce similar ﬁtting factors. The
signal model achieves a slightly higher ﬁtting factor since both the match and ﬁtting
factor increase with SNR, and the network SNR always exceeds the SNR in any one
instrument. In most instances, the signal model has a lower dimensionality, and pays
a lower Occam penalty as a result. As the number of wavelets needed to reconstruct
the waveform increases, or as the number of detectors in the network is increased, the
signal model gains a decided advantage over the glitch model. The worst case scenario
for the signal model is when there are just two detectors, the signal has a sky location
and polarization that puts most of the SNR in a single detector, and a large fraction of
the signal power can be captured by a single wavelet. In that case the glitch model can
achieve a good ﬁtting factor using 5 parameters, while the signal model is forced to use
9 parameters. BayesWave invariably classiﬁes these signals as glitches. Figure 10 shows
signal/glitch and signal/Gaussian noise Bayes factors for a simulated Sine-Gaussian
signal using diﬀerent detector combinations. The simulated signal had single detector
signal-to-noise ratios of SNRH1 = 12.3, SNRL1 = 9.2, SNRV = 9.6. In each case, there
is clear evidence for a non-Gaussian feature in the data. In the single detector analyses
the signal and glitch models have comparable evidence, despite the fact that the signal
model carries 4 additional extrinsic parameters. But the signal model pays no penalty
for the extra parameters since they are completely unconstrained by data from a single
detector and the posterior distribution follows the prior distribution. The signal model
is heavily favored over the glitch model in all three two-detector network combinations,
and the evidence for the signal model is larger still for the full three-detector network.
log Bsignal,glitch
log Bsignal,noise
Figure 10. Bayes Factors between signal/noise and signal/glitch for simulated Sine-
Gaussian signals for diﬀerent detector combinations
7. Parameter Estimation
Following the pioneering work of Christensen and Meyer , the application of Bayesian
inference and parameter estimation to gravitational wave astronomy has mostly been focused on fully-modeled gravitational wave signals
described by waveform templates h(⃗λ) that depend on some collection of physical
parameters ⃗λ. Very recently Bayesian inference has been applied to partially modeled
sources such as supernovae and Neutron star r-modes , but parameter
estimation and model selection for completely un-modeled signals has not been tackled
until now (Bayesian inference for sky localization of burst signals has been considered
using single sine-Gaussian waveforms ).
When templates are available the posterior distribution for the gravitational
wave signal p(h|s) gets mapped to posterior distributions for the model parameters
Figure 11.
The upper panel shows a stretch of simulated whitened data s(t) in
The simulation includes Gaussian noise and a SNR = 15 Gaussian-enveloped
white-noise burst shown in blue. The red line in the upper panel shows the median
glitch model g(t) reconstructed by BayesWave. The lower panel shows the posterior
distribution for the glitch model, where the colors correspond to the log posterior
density ln p(g(t)|s).
p(⃗λ|s), allowing for a straightforward interpretation of the results, such as producing
credible intervals for the masses and spins of a binary system.
But what does
“parameter estimation” mean in the context of glitches and un-modeled gravitational
wave signals? BayesWave provides posterior distributions for the wavelet parameters
used to reconstruct the signals and glitches, but these have limited physical meaning.
BayesWave also provides posterior distributions for the reconstructed signals h(t) and
glitches g(t), along with posterior distributions for the sky location and polarization
of a gravitational wave source. The posterior distributions for the signal and glitch
waveforms contain the complete information about the waveforms and their physical
properties, but in a form that can be hard to interpret.
Figure 11 shows a stretch
of simulated whitened data containing a Gaussian-enveloped white-noise burst. The
upper panel shows the simulated signal and noise and the median glitch waveform
reconstruction. The lower panel shows the posterior distribution for the glitch model,
where the colors correspond to the log posterior density ln p(g(t)|s). While providing a
useful visualization, plots of the waveform posteriors do not provide a good quantitative
understanding of the signal.
0.03 0.035 0.04 0.045 0.05 0.055 0.06 0.065
100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190
6.9 6.91 6.92 6.93 6.94 6.95 6.96 6.97 6.98
Figure 12. The upper set of panels show posterior distributions for the central time
tc, central frequency fc, duration ∆t and bandwidth ∆f for a SNR = 15 Gaussian
enveloped white noise burst. The blue lines are with the proximity prior and the red
lines are with a uniform time-frequency prior. The black vertical lines indicate the
values for these quantities computed with the waveform used to generate the data.
The lower set of panels show the same quantities, but this time for a SNR = 15 black
hole merger. The parameters for the signals are the same as those used in Figures 5,
At each step in the Markov chain, BayesWave can produce the reconstructed
waveforms as a function of time, or frequency, or time-frequency. The waveforms can
either be whitened, which is what the likelihood actually “sees”, or un-whitened, which
corresponds to the physical signal. While the un-whitened reconstructions would seem to
be the most useful, they tend to be very noisy as the components of the reconstruction
with frequencies outside of the region where the instruments are most sensitive are
poorly constrained. Using the reconstructed waveforms it is possible to compute any
physical quantity of interest, such as the energy ﬂux, rise and decay times, duration
etc at each step of the chain, and produce probability distributions for these quantities.
The choice of summary quantities to extract from the waveforms is virtually unlimited,
but they will have varying utility. The most useful choices will allow us to connect
the reconstructed waveforms to astrophysical models for the signals, or for glitches, to
physical models of the detector. It may be that higher dimensional quantities are needed,
such as posterior distributions for Bezier curves that track the development of the
signal in time-frequency. To illustrate the process of producing posterior distributions
for parameters that summarize the physical content of the waveforms, we can use the
“waveform moments” proposed by Patrick Sutton. The idea is to use the unit normalized
ρ(f) = |˜h+(f)|2 + |˜h×(f)|2
×(t)) dt =
0 (|˜h+(f)|2 + |˜h×(f)|2) df ,
to deﬁne moments:
−∞tnρ(t) dt,
f nρ(f) df .
The central time tc = ⟨t⟩and central frequency fc = ⟨f⟩are given by the ﬁrst moments,
while the duration and bandwidth are deﬁned in terms of the variance:
∆t = (⟨t2⟩−⟨t⟩2)1/2,
∆f = (⟨f 2⟩−⟨f⟩2)1/2 .
These quantities can be computed for both the whitened and un-whitened waveforms.
Similar expressions can be deﬁned for glitches.
Figure 12 shows posterior distributions for the central time, central frequency,
duration and bandwidth (computed using whitened waveforms) for a Gaussian enveloped
white noise burst and a black hole merger using a uniform time-frequency prior and the
proximity prior. In each case, the proximity prior improves the parameter estimation,
which is consistent with the improvements seen in the ﬁtting factors for these systems
shown in Figures 5 and 6.
These examples illustrate a general trend that we have
seen toward systematic biases in the recovery of certain parameters, most notably the
duration of the signal. In general we ﬁnd that BayesWave under-estimates the duration
and energy content of the signals. These biases are to be expected given that the match
between the recovered and simulated signals is always less than unity. It may be possible
to compensate for this bias since the cause is known. On the other hand, the waveform
moments are particularly susceptible to such biases, and we are probably better oﬀusing
more robust summary statistics, such as deﬁning the duration and bandwidth as the
intervals containing 90% of the energy.
8. Applications using LIGO/Virgo data
In addition to tests on simulated data, like those shown in the preceding sections,
BayesWave has been extensively tested on data from the S5/6 LIGO and VSR2/3 Virgo
science runs. These studies will be presented in full elsewhere, but as a prelude, we show
a few highlights from these studies here. For reference, the runs use a time frequency
volume with duration 4 s, and frequency range Hz. Typical wall-clock runs
times to complete 2 × 106 iterations for all three models (Gaussian noise, glitch and
signal model) was 24 hours on one processor core.
∆f = 512 Hz
∆f = 256 Hz
∆f = 128 Hz
∆f = 64 Hz
∆f = 32 Hz
∆f = 512 Hz
∆f = 256 Hz
∆f = 128 Hz
∆f = 64 Hz
∆f = 32 Hz
H1 residual
L1 residual
Figure 13. Histograms of wavelet amplitudes for whitened Hanford and Livingston
LIGO data. The diﬀerent colors in the histograms correspond to diﬀerent frequency
resolutions in a discrete binary Meyer wavelet decomposition. The black line is for
a reference N(0, 1) Gaussian distribution.
The non-Gaussian features in the data
are more apparent in some resolution levels than others. The upper panels are for
stretches of moderately glitchy data prior to the BayesWave analysis, while the lower
panels show the distributions after BayesWave glitch regression. The non-Gaussian
outliers seen in the raw data are absent in the BayesWave residuals.
One application of BayesWave/BayesLine is to use the noise spectrum and glitch
models in concert with standard gravitational wave template based searches and
parameter estimation studies in the hope that removing glitches from the data will
reduce the number of background events and lead to smaller biases in the extraction of
the signal parameters when a detection is made.
To illustrate the potential of this
approach, we took a stretch of moderately glitchy data from the LIGO S6 science
run and produced whitened scalograms with and without glitch ﬁtting.
Histograms
of the wavelet amplitudes at various discrete wavelet resolutions are shown in Figure 13
(here we used the binary Meyer wavelet transformation developed by S. Klimenko ).
The discrete wavelet transform has pixels with bandwidth ∆f, duration ∆t and area
∆f∆t = 1. The histograms are shown for a variety of resolutions ∆f as glitches come
with a variety of morphologies that are picked up more clearly in some resolutions than
others . Note that the BayesWave residuals, with glitches regressed, are Gaussian
distributed at all resolutions.
whitened h(t)
whitened h(t)
whitened h(t)
t - ttrigger
t - ttrigger
Figure 14. Snapshots of the signal and glitch model waveform reconstructions for
three of the most signiﬁcant events found in time-slides by the coherent Wave Burst
analysis running on the H1-L1 detector network during LIGO science run S6d.
In addition to performing parameter estimation for signals and glitches, BayesWave
can be used to help decide if candidate events are gravitational wave signals or
(un)lucky coincidences between noise events in diﬀerent detectors.
The main burst
search algorithm used by the LIGO/Virgo collaborations, coherent WaveBurst ,
performs a constrained maximum likelihood reconstruction of gravitational wave signals,
supplemented by additional cuts on the “network correlation coeﬃcient”, the “coherent
network amplitude” and the “network energy disbalance” (see equations (E23), (E27)
and (E21) of Ref. ), which are designed to reject accidental coincidences from glitches.
These cuts are tuned using simulated signals and time-slides of the data, the former to
measure the impact on the false dismissal rate, the latter to measure the the impact
on the false alarm rate.
The most signiﬁcant events found in time-slides after cuts
and data quality vetoes have been applied determine the overall sensitivity level for
the coherent WaveBurst search (note that cWB did not assume that the signals are
elliptically polarized). Figure 14 shows examples of the waveform reconstruction for the
4 km LIGO detectors at Hanford and Livingston taken from randomly chosen iterations
of the Markov chains.
In each case the signal and glitch reconstructions are very
similar, which is why these spurious coincidences masqueraded as signals in the coherent
WaveBurst analysis. Going from the top panel to the bottom panel, coherent WaveBurst
reported network signal-to-noise ratios and “network correlation coeﬃcients”: Upper –
SNR = 64.4, cc = 0.84; Middle – SNR = 20.4, cc = 0.93; Lower – SNR = 18.7,
cc = 0.88. The BayesWave algorithm does not compute quite the same quantities, so
instead we quote the maximum signal-to-noise ratios and Bayes Factors between the
signal, glitch and noise models: Upper – SNRmax = 88.7, ln BFs/n = 1872.9 ± 0.5,
ln BFg/s = 24.5±3; Middle – SNRmax = 19.5, ln BFs/n = 63.8±0.5, ln BFg/s = −6.9±2;
Lower – SNRmax = 18.9, ln BFs/n = 53.7 ± 0.8, ln BFg/s = −2.3 ± 3. In each case
BayesWave found overwhelming evidence for a non-Gaussian feature in the data. For
the event in the upper panel the evidence decisively favored the glitch model over the
signal model, while for the event in the middle panel the evidence slightly favored the
signal model over the glitch model. For the event in the lower panel the evidence is
inconclusive. The fact that BayesWave found the event in the middle panel to be most
signal-like is consistent with this event having the highest network correlation coeﬃcient
in the coherent WaveBurst analysis - sometimes suﬃciently similar coincident glitches
in two detectors can fool any Burst search.
Figure 15. Sky maps for the “Big Dog” blind injection. The panel on the left uses
waveform templates, while the panel on the right uses wavelets.
As a ﬁnal example, we show in Figure 15 sky maps for a notable blind (artiﬁcial)
signal injection made on September 16, 2010 , that has variously been dubbed
“gravitational wave100916” for the date of discovery or “the Big Dog”, as the
initial sky reconstruction placed the event in the direction of Canis Major. The panel
on the left shows the log posterior density derived using inspiral templates, while the
panel on the right used the BayesWave wavelet model. The two sky maps are broadly
consistent. The BayesWave sky map is more diﬀuse than the template derived sky map,
as is to be expected since the wavelet model captures less of the signal power than the
template model.
9. Conclusion and Outlook
We have presented a new approach to gravitational wave data analysis that puts as
much emphasis on modeling the instrument noise as it does on modeling the signals.
Our approach follows the motto “model everything and let the data sort it out”, where
crucially, the data gets to decide on the complexity of the model.
The BayesWave
algorithm provides a ﬂexible framework for analyzing gravitational wave data.
signal and glitch models can be changed by modifying the priors. Targeted analyses can
easily be developed for particular classes of signals that build in even partial knowledge
about the waveforms.
Work is currently underway to develop targeted analyses for
spinning binary mergers and high eccentricity binaries that use parameterized priors
based on the time-frequency evolution of these systems. As more detectors join the
world-wide network we will be able to do away with the restriction that the signals are
elliptically polarized and independently infer the two polarization states h+ and h×.
Currently, parameter estimation for gravitational wave bursts and instrument
glitches is in its infancy. There is much room for improvement in the development of
quantities that meaningfully summarize the physical characteristics of the reconstructed
waveforms and relate these to models for the astrophysical or electro-mechanical
processes that gave rise to the signals or glitches.
10. Acknowledgments
We have enjoyed many productive discussions with Will Farr, Vicky Kalogera, Jonah
Kanner and Reed Essick. We have also beneﬁtted from discussions with Sergei Klimenko
and Chris Pankow on the inner workings of the coherent WaveBurst algorithm. We
appreciated feedback on the draft from Laura Sampson, Tiﬀany Summerscales and
Jonathan Gair. We a grateful to the LIGO and Virgo collaborations for making available
the data used in Section 8 of the paper. NJC appreciates the support of NSF Award
PHY-1306702. TBL acknowledges the support of NSF Award PHY-1307020