J. EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING RESEARCH, Vol. 5(1) 51-68, 1989
COMPUTER-SUPPORTED INTENTIONAL LEARNING
ENVIRONMENTS
MARLENE SCARDAMALIA
CARL BEREITER
ROBERT S. McLEAN
JONATHAN SWALLOW
EARL WOODRUFF
Centre for Applied Cognitive Science
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education
CSILE, which stands for Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environments, is an
educational knowledge media system. CSILE allows information in several media (text,
drawings, graphs, timelines, etc.) to be entered into a common database where it is
available to be retrieved, linked, commented on, rated, and so forth. The environments
and operations of CSILE are designed of information. In this article eleven principles,
based on recent cognitive research, are suggested for designing computer environments
that support intentional learning. These principles include making knowledgeconstruction activities overt, maintaining attention to learning goals as opposed to other
goals of an activity, providing process-relevant feedback, and giving students
responsibility for contributing to each other’s learning. Applications of these principles in
CSILE are described, as well as observations from the first year of school try-out.
BACKGROUND
There has been a history of attempts in computer-assisted instruction to give
students more autonomy or more control over the course of instruction. Usually
these attempts have had disappointing results . But these attempts
presupposed a well developed repertoire of learning strategies, skills, and goals,
without providing means to foster them. When CAI emerged in the 1960s there
was not the scientific basis that would have made it possible to design programs
that actually helped students learn how to learn, learn how to set cognitive goals,
learn how to apply effective strategies for comprehension, self-monitoring, and
organization of knowledge. Cognitive research of the last fifteen years, however,
has made substantial progress in providing a basis for such programs.
The purpose of this article is to suggest principles for applying these
recent findings in designing computer environments, to describe an
implementation of these principles (called CSILE), and to report observations
from the first year’s trials of this implementation. We use the expression
computer-supported intentional learning environments to refer generically to
environments that foster rather than presuppose the ability of students to exert
intentional control over their own learning . We use the acronym CSILE to
refer to the particular computer-supported intentional learning environment
currently under development in our laboratory.
CSILE supports intentional learning by providing a means for a group of
students to build a collective database (knowledge-base) of their thoughts, in the
form of pictures and written notes. CSILE stores the thoughts entered by each
student and makes them available to everyone. Students use a color graphics
editor to create their pictures. CSILE encourages students to organize these
pictures to allow “zooming in” to a blow up of a section of a picture or “zooming
out” to see a broader picture. Written notes can be labelled in a variety of ways.
Students are asked to provide these labels in order to facilitate reflection and to
allow the notes to reappear in multiple contexts. In addition, written notes can be
placed on a timeline, or attached to a spot on a picture. The system is a form of
hypermedia that allows notes entered as text, drawings, graphs and timelines to
be retrieved, linked, commented on, rated, and so forth.
CSILE was initially developed for university and graduate level students.
Results of trials with early versions showed that students were being encouraged
to think more about how they process and reprocess thoughts on research
literature and class projects. The first-year implementation of CSILE focused on
two grade five-six classes. There were a total of sixty-four students using CSILE
three or more times each week. CSILE is being made available on sixteen
networked ICON microcomputers, eight in each classroom.
CSILE is being designed for eventual use at all grade levels and for all
school curricula. It will also act as an umbrella over a variety of computer-based
and conventional school activities, providing a second layer of problem solving
and learning activity.
One of the objectives of the CSILE project is to develop specifications that
are applicable to a wide range of educational software and that are concerned
with increasing the ability of the software to support reflection, problem solving,
and learning. One reason such specifications are needed is that there is a
potential conflict between the principles that inform most software development
and those that ought to guide development of educational software. In most
software design it is presumed desirable to make the software as intelligent as
possible and to demand as little intelligence as possible from the user.
Educational applications on the other hand, should be aimed at developing the
intelligence of the user. Educationally irrelevant burdens should be minimized,
but not in ways that deprive students of occasions to develop the planning,
monitoring, goal-setting, problem-solving and other higher-order abilities that are
important objectives of education.
RESEARCH ON HIGHER-ORDER ABILITIES IN THINKING AND
Unlike earlier research, which was concerned with the correlates of
academic performance recent cognitively oriented research is concerned with
what students actually know and do that makes them relatively successful or
unsuccessful. (A book edited by Chipman, Sega., and Glaser contains
reports by many of the contributors to this rapidly growing body of research.)
Successful learners are found to use a variety of cognitive strategies and selfmanagement procedures to pursue knowledge related goals, to relate new
knowledge to old, to monitor their understanding, to infer unstated information,
and to review, reorganize, and reconsider their knowledge. These active
learning processes are what need to be supported by computer-supported
intentional learning environments.
Of equal importance to the design of computer-supported intentional
learning environments, however, is an understanding of the strategies that
characterize more passive or immature learners. These characteristics include
1) the organization of mental activity around topics rather than goals, 2) a focus
on surface features. 3) the use of straight ahead rather than recursive
procedures, and 4) an additive rather than a transformational approach to
learning. These characteristics have been identified in a variety of curricular
areas, including mathematics , science , reading , and writing .
There is also evidence that these passive learning characteristics are implicated
in specific learning disabilities .
A very important finding related to these immature strategies is that they
have great persistence. They tend to be at least partially successful in school
situations, and so students tend to cling to them even though they are quite
inadequate for real world learning needs . However, there have been a
number of successful experiments in teaching more active learning strategies . The successful teaching efforts generally include a combination of
modeling and explanation of strategies, along with some form of support and
encouragement of students’ taking over greater responsibility for the learning
process. It seems clear from these findings that in order for a computer system
to provide maximal support for the development of higher-order abilities, it will
have to encourage active rather than passive learning strategies and give
students help in sustaining the more active approaches to learning.
The key question is how such support can be provided. At first thought it
might seem that the key requirement is a highly intelligent tutoring system,
capable of performing sophisticated diagnoses of students’ learning strategies,
providing sensitive coaching and instruction. Such a system, however, is not
only unrealistic, given the state of the art; it may also be heading in the wrong
direction . For it is not the computer that should be doing the diagnosing,
the goal-setting, and the planning, it is the student. The computer environment
should not be providing the knowledge and intelligence to guide learning, it
should be providing the facilitating structure and tools that enable students to
make maximum use of their own intelligence and knowledge. That is the idea
behind procedural facilitation.
Procedural facilitation is an instructional approach that grew
out of efforts to foster higher-order processes in written composition. It is a
theory based approach to providing learners with temporary supports while they
are trying to adopt more complex strategies. These supports include turning
normally covert processes into overt procedures; reducing potentially infinite sets
of choices to limited, developmentally appropriate sets; providing aids to
memory; and structuring procedures so as to make it easier to escape from
habitual patterns. A cardinal principle is that these supports should be designed
so that when they are withdrawn the learner is carrying out the mature process
independently. Thus it is essential that design of procedural facilitations be
based on adequate models of the mature process, and that it also be informed by
models of the immature process.
As Brown and Palinscar have pointed out , procedural facilitation is
akin to other kinds of support for learning, such as the support parents provide
for young children in the initial stages of mastering conversational discourse.
However, procedural facilitation has the distinctive advantage of being applicable
to computer-mediated learning. Most other kinds of support for learning require
mother/child interactions described by developmental linguists require a
degree of sensitivity far beyond that of the most intelligent of computer-based
tutoring systems. In procedural facilitation, however, the intelligence is all in the
learner. the supportive system need only be able to do the kinds of things that
computer systems are already well equipped to do-presenting knowledgestructuring environments, presenting formats and reminders, storing and
retrieving information, facilitating (through menus, for instance) the making of
choices, and monitoring the sequence of events. Thus the development of
procedural facilitation would appear to be crucial to making computer-supported
intentional learning environments a possibility.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR COMPUTER-SUPPORTED
INTENTIONAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
The following specifications grow out of the background research,
planning, and initial trials of CSILE. They should be regarded as provisional, to
be revised and augmented as CSILE development and formative evaluation
proceed. Each specification is presented first in terms applicable to a variety of
educational software: then the particular application of the principle to the
development of CSILE is described. This description includes examples of how
the principle is being realized.
Make Knowledge-Construction Activities Overt
Most of what intentional learners do is hidden from view, consisting of goal
setting, identifying and solving problems of understanding, connecting old and
new knowledge, and so on. Wherever possible, these activities should be made
overt and identifiable, so that students become aware of them and become better
able to carry them out deliberately. Instead of only providing menus of topics and
tasks, for instance, the computer might provide menus from which
TABLE 1 Examples of Notes Labelled via the Student-Designed
“Confusion” and “New Learning” Icons
I don’t understand how bacteria can help us digest our food. They’re too
small to have a mouth.
In a lake, why doesn’t the water just go through the sand and doesn’t leak
or anything?
Do germs in an African person resemble germs in an Antarctic person?
New Learning
Charles Darwin was born in 1809 in the town of Shrewsbury in England on
the same day as Abraham Lincoln.
It’s true that once in a blue moon the moon is really blue. The last time
the moon was blue was 1950. Scientists believe that it was caused by a thicker
coating of filtered dust that filtered out red light.
I have learned many things by reading this article....I would have thought
that your eye movement was controlled by the brain. One of the convincing parts
of the argument is when the eye is patched, the brain would not know the eye
position was changed but the eye did respond and that meant that the muscle
sent messages to the brain
students select the kind of mental activity they intend to engage in. as much as
possible, these overt mental activities should have consequences within the
functioning of the software so that they are not merely additional burdens placed
on the user. For instance, choice of a goal could determine which of several
specific choice menus is presented; discoveries or hypotheses could go into a file
that plays a role in other users’ progress through the same game or microworld.
CSILE application - Student-designed icons representing thinking types
are used as one way of identifying notes for subsequent retrieval by self and
others. Notes often clearly reflect the student’s selection of thinking type.
Examples of notes labelled via the student designed “confusion” and “new
learning” icons (to identify ideas they find confusing or novel, respectively) are
presented in Table 1. In some cases patterns can be seen where students begin
with some new learning, generate questions, and then produce plans for the
investigation of those questions.
Maintain Attention to Cognitive Goals
Students should be called on to state their goals, to anticipate what they
will learn and what they will do en route to attaining their goal, and possibly to
specify a time at which they think they will have reached their goal. As much as
possible these should be cognitive goals (learning, finding out, etc.) rather than
task goals (such as scoring a certain number of points, finding the treasure, etc.).
A course project by R. Lloyd compared an expert and student driver using a
driving simulator. The expert focused on goals relevant to real world driving (e.g.,
obtaining information, anticipating problems, informing other motorists of one’s
intentions) whereas the novice explicitly treated the simulation as an arcade
game and focused on game-related goals. Well-designed educational software
should encourage the type of goal orientation shown by the expert rather than
that shown by the novice.
CSILE application - Planning is one of the thinking types selected with the
help of student designed icons. It will be supported by prompts to indicate
cognitive goals, plans for pursuing them, and target dates. For example, the
following was entered by one child.
Goal: To Use the Timeline by February 19
1. Find out when World War 2 started and ended
2. Find out about 1920s.
3. Find out the date that William the Conqueror conquered England:
may be look under “The Tower of London.”
Students have begun to use the timeline facility to schedule deadlines for
following up on questions they’ve chosen to investigate. However, novice
abilities become evident when plans are not further addressed. In an attempt to
resolve this problem, we are planning to implement a calendar function that will
provide an overview of learning goals previously established by the student and
check for progress on goals scheduled for the current log-in date.
Treat Knowledge Lacks in a Positive Way
Typical school activities provide opportunities to display knowledge, but
knowledge lacks usually emerge as forms of failure. Yet knowing what one does
not know is a vital kind of metaknowledge, without which intentional learning is
severely limited. Wherever possible, educational software should provide means
for students to identify what they don’t know or need to find out or are curious
about. Wherever possible the accurate identification of knowledge lacks should
have positive consequences within the functioning of the program, resulting in
enhanced possibilities for achieving the goals that are motivating use of the
program in the first place. Identified knowledge lacks can also serve as valuable
material for analysis, both within computer-assisted activities and in related
classroom discussion.
CSILE application - Raising questions reflecting interests or curiosity
about material they are studying is one of the main things students do in CSILE
notes. Class activities, procedural facilitations, and feedback provisions within
CSILE are used to encourage serious question formulation and to help students
upgrade the quality of their questions. Already students have demonstrated their
willingness and ability to express what they are curious about, as indicated by the
brief sampling of their notes in Table 1. However, some students may still be
unwilling to share their uncertainty with others, and they either store their notes
anonymously, or they choose not to let CSILE pass their notes on to others.
Related research is seeking to identify ways in which students can pursue
matters of interest through peer interactions that engage all students.
Provide Process-Relevant Feedback
Although there is much talk at present about focusing on processes rather
than products in education, this is often difficult to do with educational software,
just as it is in ordinary classroom conditions. Intelligent tutoring systems aim to
provide such feedback. A possibly more fruitful educational approach, however,
is to design partner or team activities in which one member has the job of
monitoring processes and is provided with computer support for doing so-in the
form of cues, menus, recording formats, etc. side-by-side computers running
parallel programs provide one way to do this: simultaneously active windows
provide another.
CSILE application - In its present implementation CSILE provides processrelevant feedback only indirectly: Teachers can obtain reports of the number and
kinds of notes produced by each student, including the thinking types chosen,
and teachers can then provide feedback to students as they see fit. In
Table 2. Correspondence between Children’s Self-Reports
and Independent Assessments of Level of Mental Effort
Level of Mental
Self Reports
“They all said the same things in different ways. I didn’t
learn anything new.”
“I just do not have enough time so I copied some other
notes into my files.”
“I didn’t get any new ideas but I felt my ideas were on
the right track as the other notes confirmed and
supported my ideas.”
“I included these notes because the authors seemed to
more clearly express the role of the palisade endings
in describing how muscles send messages to the brain.”
Notes: Mental effort ratings are on a scale of 1 to 5.
future versions, however, students will be able to obtain reports directly. In
addition, there will be provision for a variety of self-ratings and ratings by others
(on how much effort they think went into a note, on how helpful they found it, and
so on), and the system will be able to summarize these data for the user.
Students’ self-ratings have demonstrated surprising insight. Table 2 presents
students’ justifications for ratings of the amount of mental effort they exerted
during a classroom exercise that required them to review peer notes and
construct a summary.
Independent assessments suggest that student self assessments conform
to assessments by readers who had not seen the student’s own rating.
Supportive contexts for self-evaluation will, we believe, allow us to create
increasingly effective conditions for process-relevant feedback. Another route for
process-relevant feedback currently being investigated supports partnership
activities using a parallel program. A split screen is used to provide a limited set
of CSILE facilities for a student to create notes, while at the same time providing
support to a second student who is giving feedback and support to the first
student. The supporting students provide feedback about the clarity, consistency
and completeness of their partners’ verbalizations. In addition, the supporting
students help to focus their partners’ thinking efforts toward the examination of
relevant prior knowledge.
Encourage Learning Strategies other than Rehearsal
Less successful students tend to rely on rehearsal and memorization
strategies, whereas more successful ones supplement these with strategies
aimed at understanding . Drill-and-practice approaches in educational
software naturally
Figure 1. Predictions of grade six students regarding
passage of messages between eye and brain.
emphasize rehearsal. These should be supplemented with approaches that
emphasize comprehension strategies. This does not mean just asking
comprehension questions. There are other approaches that use machineinterpretable data that elicit even more active use of comprehension strategies.
Examples are arrangement tasks (arranging the sentences in a scrambled text,
lines of program code, steps in a proof, etc.) and cloze procedures using
paraphrases rather than copies of material students have previously studied.
CSILE application - CSILE emphasizes understanding related strategies
by calling on students to identify and deal with confusions, problems, insights,
and critical judgments of information. Thus, for example, we see students
reviewing notes that they find in the database and compiling them under a
heading such as “Questions that I must answer.” We also see use of prediction.
Figure 1 shows three notes and accompanying illustrations that represent
different students’ hypotheses about the passage of messages between eyes
and brain. The issue of how messages travel arose in the course of grade five to
six students’ reading a difficult text about feedback from eye muscles to brain.
They posed questions that peers tried to answer, and this prediction making
activity was supported by the interactive environments and diagramming facilities
of the system. On the other hand, rehearsal will not be neglected. Planned
enhancements of the system enable students to schedule and create self-tests
and reviews and to cooperate in testing one another.
Encourage Multiple passes through Information
In contrast to experts, naive students show a strong tendency not to go
back over information. this is shown in their reluctance to revise compositions
and to check work in mathematics. Deeper experimental analyses have shown
naive reading and writing to be characterized by single-pass strategies, in
contrast to the recursive strategies of experts. Because computers make it easy
to retain and recall information, educational software has the potential to help
students develop multiple-pass strategies. Whether the software involves tames,
microworlds, subject matter learning, or tool use, ways should be sought to make
it worthwhile for students to call back information they have dealt with previously
and to reconsider it or to use it in a different context.
CSILE application - CSILE provides a variety of occasions for multiple
passes through information. Through database searches using different search
criteria, the same note may appear in different contexts and in different
knowledge structuring environments (for example, it might appear on a timeline
or on one or more charts). Scratchpad, note editing, and copying functions
encourage students to reprocess previously recorded information. Experience to
data suggests, however, that if students are to reprocess information to any great
extent, school assignments have to be structured in such a way as to encourage
it. A particularly powerful use of CSILE occurs when teachers assign a series of
activities that require students to call us information from sources they have used
before and employ it in increasingly sophisticated ways. for instance, at one point
students record new things they have learned from a unit of study. At another
point they must summarize the most important ideas of the unit, which involves
them in reviewing other students’ notes on new learning. At a still later point they
must formulate questions for further study, which involves them in going back
over the previously produced notes and summaries to look for gaps, unanswered
questions, and ideas worth pursuing. Student comments reported in Table 2
show students’ self-ratings during one such series of activities.
Support Varied Ways for Students
to Organize their Knowledge
This principle is stated in very general terms, because its application will
vary greatly depending on the nature of the educational software. The general
idea is that the easiest way to organize data via computer is in the form of
hierarchical lists (as is done with directories and subdirectories, for instance).
Thus it is natural, whenever students are required to deal with data in an
organized fashion, to present it and have them store it categorically. This
method of convenience is sometimes rationalized on the grounds that it teaches
“categorization skills” or something of that sort. The trouble is that for children of
age eight or beyond categorization is already their natural way of organizing
knowledge and what they need most is help in growing beyond that limited
structure. Immature learners, for instance, tend to store knowledge as discrete
details organized under topical headings and therefore fail to grasp arguments,
lines of thought, or major themes . there are many alternative ways of
structuring knowledge, such as timelines, graphs, maps, narrative sequences,
story grammar structures , concept nets , and causal chains. The
suggested principle, therefore, is that whenever software developers are about to
involve students in working with a hierarchical list structure they stop and give
thought to the possibility of using some other way of organizing information.
CSILE application - One of he most distinctive features of CSILE is the
provision of different ways of representing knowledge, all of which are accessible
in the same database. Currently implemented alternatives include maps and
other diagrams that are hierarchically embedded so that students can zoom in or
out to different levels of detail and attach notes at any level, and provision for
freely constructed pictorial as well as written notes, and a timeline to which
students can attach notes. For example, students used the “zoom-in” feature of
charts to illustrate what they saw as they dissected a frog (see Figure 2). Their
notes were attached to and organized by these charts, so that, for instance, a
note about the frog’s heart was accessible by taking the cursor to the letter over
the diagram of the heart and pressing the action key.
Figure 2. A grade six student’s use of CSILE’s zoom-feature
to illustrate (I) “External features,” (II) “veins/arteries,” and
(III) “organs” as she saw them while dissecting a frog.
Encourage Maximum Use and
Examination of Existing Knowledge
A serious shortcoming of most educational software is that the software
itself has access to a very limited body of knowledge (e.g., rules of the game,
results of arithmetic operations, answers to stored questions) and the student
must work within the confines of that limited knowledge base. Real world tasks,
on the other hand, tend to be wide open in the kinds of knowledge that may be
drawn on in handling the task. Educational software that draws on large
databases is one answer, of course. A less costly alternative is to use the
computer to support more open-ended tasks, in which students may draw on
knowledge from a variety of sources (including their own world knowledge), and
where feedback is not provided by the computer but by the teacher or other
CSILE application - CSILE pursues the less costly alternative, but in a way
that has many of the advantages of large knowledge-based systems. CSILE
does work with a large knowledge base, but the knowledge base is constructed
by the students. The students are not only responsible for putting knowledge into
the system, they are also responsible for evaluating it, interrelating it, labelling
and sorting it, and performing periodic reorganizations and house cleanings to
enhance the quality of the community knowledge base. Thus the students get
experience in many aspects of working with large knowledge bases. In later
versions of CSILE, prepackaged databases and video technology will be
incorporated.
Provide Opportunities for Reflectivity
and Individual Learning Styles
One of the oft cited advantages of computers in the classroom is that they
provide an alternative route to learning, which may be especially valuable for
students whose personal learning styles are not suited to the pace and
publicness and classroom learning. In order to support reflective thinking,
however, educational software must do more than permit private, self-paced
learning. The program must provide students time, opportunity, and peace in
which to think about what they are doing and why. This means the program
should not be so busy “motivating” the learner that it keeps up a bombardment of
stimulation, and it should not be so structured that it is always controlling what
the student thinks about.
CSILE application - CSILE is not so much an alternative to classroom
learning as it is an environment for quiet, reflective thinking that precedes class
discussion. It provides (if student so chooses) anonymity in posing and
answering questions and private, computer-managed interchanges during which
students can reflect on ideas based on their own and other students’ responses.
CSILE provides a scratch pad for making rough notes, a facility for placing notes
on hold while other ideas are pursued, and a feature which allows notes already
in the database to be edited.
Facilitate Transfer of Knowledge across Contexts
The compartmentalization of learning into school subject areas has long
been blamed for students’ failures to transfer knowledge to new contexts but
other curricular considerations make it difficult to eliminate compartmentalization.
Educational software has an opportunity, not enjoyed by textbooks, to cut across
curricular lines. Computer microworlds, for instance, may be designed to apply
knowledge from several disciplines-physical science and economics, for
instance; or biology and geography. Games, similarly, may be designed to cross
curriculum boundaries.
CSILE application - The databases of insights, problems, goals, etc., that
CSILE compiles are accessible to cross-subject searches, so that; for instance, a
keyword search on the world “energy” could bring together entries from social
studied, science, and perhaps science fiction. Below is an example of note
activity and groupings of information that successively incorporate more global
concepts. The following notes were entered on CSILE’s timeline during a unit on
eyeglasses.
1001 BC-Magnifying Glasses Invented; 1268 AD-Eyeglasses Invented;
1500 AD-Glasses for Nearsightedness; 1780 AD-Bifocals Invented; 1888
AD-Contact Lenses Invented.
The explanation that the Arabs used marbles for magnifying glasses was
attached to the “1001 BC note.”
After reading these notes a student wrote “Glasses for nearsightedness
invented in 1500. This came a long time after glasses for farsighted people.
While writing about “navigational instruments” a different student, working
months later, noted that in 1608 a dutch eyeglass maker used the idea of holding
two lenses a certain distance away and the telescope resulted from this idea.
Galileo was, she noted, the first-known user of the telescope.
Over time, the database serves to cluster notes due to common themes
(in this case “eyeglasses”) and knowledge-structuring environments (in this case
the timeline). Such clusterings lead to more powerful cross-domain
understandings than might occur otherwise.
Many students use keyword searching when writing a summary note, so
that they can see if others mentioned important information they might have
missed. In future developments, it is intended that CSILE will incorporate
intelligent database management that can display to students the
interconnections among various notes and that can detect and call the students’
attention to cross-subject relationships that the student might not otherwise be
Give Students More Responsibility for
Contributing to Each Other’s Learning
The emphasis here is on cooperative learning, which is not the same thing
as cooperative task performance. It is easy to implement the latter through
computer activities, but it takes dedicated planning to achieve the former. For
cooperative learning to occur, students must recognize what hey are trying to
learn, value it, and wish to share that value. It seems unlikely that computers can
foster cooperative learning on their own, but they could play a role in a classroom
culture where cooperative learning is encouraged. Educational software should
help students recognize what it is they are learning and provide aggregate data
that would allow them to monitor the learning progress of the class as a whole
and not just their own progress.
CSILE application - Shared responsibility is perhaps the most important
principle for achieving the overall objectives of computer-supported intentional
learning environments. It has three aspects: 1) direct contributions via the
system. Students respond to other students’ ideas, requests for information,
confusions, self-ratings, and so on. Teachers can base grades in part on the
helpfulness of such responses, and (in future versions of CSILE) students will be
able to rate how helpful they found other students’ contributions. While some
students rely on the privacy option, and search for only their own work, these
strategies are gradually being given up, in favor of more open strategies. 2)
Preparation for class contributions. Even in modern classrooms, where everyone
is expected to contribute to the learning enterprise, it is usually only the teacher
who gives prior thought to goals for a classroom session, to significant topics or
questions for discussion, to problems or misunderstandings that need to be dealt
with, and so on. Through CSILE activities, all the students can be involved in
such preparatory thinking and this should significantly enhance the quality of
classroom sessions. 3) Acquiring higher-level executive control of learning
processes. By getting students to participate in activities that have been
traditionally regarded as “teaching” rather than “learning” activities, CSILE can
promote the higher levels of knowledge that are associated with being able to
teach what one has learned .
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Students in grades five and six used CSILE daily for almost eight months.
Students used the system to elaborate models and hypotheses, to delve into
difficult texts, to seek deeper levels of explanation, to elaborate confusions, and
generally to engage in processes thought to be beyond their years. Their
veteran teachers thought their students would tire of the computer after the
novelty wore off, but this clearly was not the case. CSILE remained a motivator
for school work throughout the school term. CSILE is now in its second year of
operation, and students from the first year return and report how much they miss
it. For the teachers, CSILE is such an integral part of their instruction that they
feel they would have to take a substantial step backwards if the computers were
There is a great deal of development work needed before CSILE acts as
an umbrella to other software to other software and incorporates prepackaged
databases. It will be longer yet before it accomplishes its aim of fostering
intentional learning across the school curricula and for children at all grade
levels. Nonetheless, the core design seems to be appropriate and flexible
enough to accomplish long term goals. Ongoing research is aimed at continual
testing of the system with children and adults. Not all users, of course,
demonstrate the same sophistication in use. Continual refinements aim to take
its most significant uses and make them commonplace.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have contributed to the work reported in this article. first we
would like to thank the Ontario Ministry of Education for their generous support.
They have provided the funds for software design, as well as supplying the two
pilot classrooms with sixteen networked ICONS. The teachers who have
collaborated with us, Chuck Laver and Jim Webb, have provided invaluable
support and insights. They have, in turn, been supported by Ted Reinholdt, the
Principle of Huron St. Public School and sixty-four patient and enthusiastic
students from grade five and six. The project further has been made possible by
a talented team of systems analysts who have built CSILE. This team includes
Earl Fogel, Steve Hull, Alan Rosenthal, Peter Rowley, Orest Nahacziwec, and
Russell Owen. We also wish to thank our researchers: Maria Yau, Alister
Cumming, Anna Palamedes, Martin Ruck, Pam’la Ghent, Irene Rukavina, Clare
Brett: graduate students: Evelyn Ng, Patricia Probert, Rob Higins, Mary Bryson,
Carol Chan; and support staff: Mary Ann Potter, Carolyn Calhoun, Denise King.