The Importance of Skip Connections in
Biomedical Image Segmentation
Michal Drozdzal1,2,⋆, Eugene Vorontsov1,2,⋆, Gabriel Chartrand1,3,
Samuel Kadoury2,4, and Chris Pal2,5
1 Imagia Inc., Montr´eal, Canada
{michal, eugene, gabriel}@imagia.com
{samuel.kadoury, christopher.pal}@polymtl.ca
2 ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, Canada
3 Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, Canada
4 CHUM Research Center, Montr´eal, Canada
5 Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Montr´eal, Canada
Abstract. In this paper, we study the inﬂuence of both long and short
skip connections on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) for biomedical image segmentation. In standard FCNs, only long skip connections
are used to skip features from the contracting path to the expanding
path in order to recover spatial information lost during downsampling.
We extend FCNs by adding short skip connections, that are similar to
the ones introduced in residual networks, in order to build very deep
FCNs (of hundreds of layers). A review of the gradient ﬂow conﬁrms
that for a very deep FCN it is beneﬁcial to have both long and short
skip connections. Finally, we show that a very deep FCN can achieve
near-to-state-of-the-art results on the EM dataset without any further
post-processing.
Keywords: Semantic Segmentation, FCN, ResNet, Skip Connections
Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an active area of research in medical image analysis.
With the introduction of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), signiﬁcant improvements in performance have been achieved in many standard datasets. For
example, for the EM ISBI 2012 dataset , BRATS or MS lesions , the
top entries are built on CNNs .
All these methods are based on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) .
While CNNs are typically realized by a contracting path built from convolutional, pooling and fully connected layers, FCN adds an expanding path built
with deconvolutional or unpooling layers. The expanding path recovers spatial
information by merging features skipped from the various resolution levels on
the contracting path.
⋆Equal contribution
Accepted for DLMIA 2016
 
Variants of these skip connections are proposed in the literature. In , upsampled feature maps are summed with feature maps skipped from the contractive path while concatenate them and add convolutions and non-linearities
between each upsampling step. These skip connections have been shown to help
recover the full spatial resolution at the network output, making fully convolutional methods suitable for semantic segmentation. We refer to these skip connections as long skip connections.
Recently, signiﬁcant network depth has been shown to be helpful for image
classiﬁcation . The recent results suggest that depth can act as a regularizer . However, network depth is limited by the issue of vanishing gradients
when backpropagating the signal across many layers. In , this problem is
addressed with additional levels of supervision, while in skip connections
are added around non-linearities, thus creating shortcuts through which the gradient can ﬂow uninterrupted allowing parameters to be updated deep in the
network. Moreover, have shown that these skip connections allow for faster
convergence during training. We refer to these skip connections as short skip
connections.
In this paper, we explore deep, fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. We expand FCN by adding short skip connections that allow us to
build very deep FCNs. With this setup, we perform an analysis of short and
long skip connections on a standard biomedical dataset . We observe that short skip connections speed up the convergence
of the learning process; moreover, we show that a very deep architecture with
a relatively small number of parameters can reach near-state-of-the-art performance on this dataset. Thus, the contributions of the paper can be summarized
as follows:
– We extend Residual Networks to fully convolutional networks for semantic
image segmentation (see Section 2).
– We show that a very deep network without any post-processing achieves
performance comparable to the state of the art on EM data (see Section
– We show that long and short skip connections are beneﬁcial for convergence
of very deep networks (see Section 3.2)
Residual network for semantic image segmentation
Our approach extends Residual Networks to segmentation tasks by adding an
expanding (upsampling) path (Figure 1(a)). We perform spatial reduction along
the contracting path (left) and expansion along the expanding path (right). As
in and , spatial information lost along the contracting path is recovered
in the expanding path by skipping equal resolution features from the former
to the latter. Similarly to the short skip connections in Residual Networks, we
choose to sum the features on the expanding path with those skipped over the
long skip connections.
Fig. 1. An example of residual network for image segmentation. (a) Residual Network
with long skip connections built from bottleneck blocks, (b) bottleneck block, (c) basic
block and (d) simple block. Blue color indicates the blocks where an downsampling
is optionally performed, yellow color depicts the (optional) upsampling blocks, dashed
arrow in ﬁgures (b), (c) and (d) indicates possible long skip connections. Note that all
blocks (b), (c) and (d) can have a dropout layer (depicted with dashed line rectangle).
We consider three types of blocks, each containing at least one convolution
and activation function: bottleneck, basic block, simple block (Figure 1(b)-1(d)).
Each block is capable of performing batch normalization on its inputs as well
as spatial downsampling at the input (marked blue; used for the contracting
path) and spatial upsampling at the output (marked yellow; for the expanding
path). The bottleneck and basic block are based on those introduced in which
include short skip connections to skip the block input to its output with minimal
modiﬁcation, encouraging the path through the non-linearities to learn a residual
representation of the input data. To minimize the modiﬁcation of the input, we
apply no transformations along the short skip connections, except when the
number of ﬁlters or the spatial resolution needs to be adjusted to match the
block output. We use 1 × 1 convolutions to adjust the number of ﬁlters but for
spatial adjustment we rely on simple decimation or simple repetition of rows and
columns of the input so as not to increase the number of parameters. We add
an optional dropout layer to all blocks along the residual path.
We experimented with both binary cross-entropy and dice loss functions. Let
oi ∈ be the ith output of the last network layer passed through a sigmoid
non-linearity and let yi ∈{0, 1} be the corresponding label. The binary crossentropy is then deﬁned as follows:
yi log oi + (1 −yi) log (1 −oi)
The dice loss is:
Layer name block type output resolution output width repetition number
conv 3 × 3
simple block
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
simple block
conv 1 × 1
Table 1. Detailed model architecture used in the experiments. Repetition number
indicates the number of times the block is repeated.
We implemented the model in Keras using the Theano backend and trained
it using RMSprop (learning rate 0.001) with weight decay set to 0.001. We
also experimented with various levels of dropout.
Experiments
In this section, we test the model on electron microscopy (EM) data (Section 3.1) and perform an analysis on the importance of the long and short skip
connections (Section 3.2).
Segmenting EM data
EM training data consist of 30 images (512 × 512 pixels) assembled from serial
section transmission electron microscopy of the Drosophila ﬁrst instar larva ventral nerve cord. The test set is another set of 30 images for which labels are not
provided. Throughout the experiments, we used 25 images for training, leaving
5 images for validation.
During training, we augmented the input data using random ﬂipping, sheering, rotations, and spline warping. We used the same spline warping strategy as
 . We used full resolution (512 × 512) images as input without applying random cropping for data augmentation. For each training run, the model version
with the best validation loss was stored and evaluated. The detailed description
of the highest performing architecture used in the experiments is shown in Table
Interestingly, we found that while the predictions from models trained with
cross-entropy loss were of high quality, those produced by models trained with
the Dice loss appeared visually cleaner since they were almost binary (similar
observations were reported in a parallel work .); borders that would appear
Fig. 2. Qualitative results on the test set. (a) original image, (b) prediction for a model
trained with binary cross-entropy, (c) prediction of the model trained with dice loss
and (d) model trained with dice loss with 0.2 dropout at the test time.
Vrand Vinfo FCN post-processing average over parameters (M)
CUMedVision 
0.977 0.989 YES
0.973 0.987 YES
0.970 0.985 NO
motif 
0.972 0.985 NO
0.971 0.982 NO
optree-idsia 
0.970 0.985 NO
PyraMiD-LSTM 0.968 0.983 NO
Ours (LDice)
0.969 0.986 YES
Ours (Lbce)
0.957 0.980 YES
Table 2. Comparison to published entries for EM dataset. For full ranking of all
submitted methods please refer to challenge web page: 
isbi_challenge/leaders-board-new. We note the number of parameter, the use of
post-processing, and the use of model averaging only for FCNs.
fuzzy in the former (see Figure 2(b)) would be left as gaps in the latter (Figure
2(c)). However, we found that the border continuity can be improved for models
with the Dice loss by implicit model averaging over output samples drawn at
test time, using dropout (Figure 2(d)). This yields better performance on
the validation and test metrics than the output of models trained with binary
cross-entropy (see Table 2).
Two metrics used in this dataset are: Maximal foreground-restricted Rand
score after thinning (Vrand) and maximal foreground-restricted information theoretic score after thinning (Vinfo). For a detailed description of the metrics,
please refer to .
Our results are comparable to other published results that establish the state
of the art for the EM dataset (Table 2). Note that we did not do any postprocessing of the resulting segmentations. We match the performance of UNet,
for which predictions are averaged over seven rotations of the input images,
while using less parameters and without sophisticated class weighting. Note that
among other FCN available on the leader board, CUMedVision is using postprocessing in order to boost performance.
Fig. 3. Training and validation losses and accuracies for diﬀerent network setups: (a)
Model 1: long and short skip connections enabled, (b) Model 2: only short skip connections enabled and (c) Model 3: only long skip connections enabled.
training loss validation loss
Long and short skip connections
Only short skip connections
Only long skip connection
Table 3. Best validation loss and its corresponding training loss for each model.
On the importance of skip connections
The focus in the paper is to evaluate the utility of long and short skip connections for training fully convolutional networks for image segmentation. In this
section, we investigate the learning behavior of the model with short and with
long skip connections, paying speciﬁc attention to parameter updates at each
layer of the network. We ﬁrst explored variants of our best performing deep architecture (from Table 1), using binary cross-entropy loss. Maintaining the same
hyperparameters, we trained (Model 1) with long and short skip connections,
(Model 2) with only short skip connections and (Model 3) with only long skip
connections. Training curves are presented in Figure 3 and the ﬁnal loss and
accuracy values on the training and the validation data are presented in Table
We note that for our deep architecture, the variant with both long and short
skip connections is not only the one that performs best but also converges faster
than without short skip connections. This increase in convergence speed is consistent with the literature . Not surprisingly, the combination of both long
and short skip connections performed better than having only one type of skip
connection, both in terms of performance and convergence speed. At this depth,
a network could not be trained without any skip connections. Finally, short skip
connections appear to stabilize updates (note the smoothness of the validation
loss plots in Figures 3(a) and 3(b) as compared to Figure 3(c)).
We expect that layers closer to the center of the model can not be eﬀectively
updated due to the vanishing gradient problem which is alleviated by short skip
connections. This identity shortcut eﬀectively introduces shorter paths through
fewer non-linearities to the deep layers of our models. We validate this empirically
Fig. 4. Weight updates in diﬀerent network setups: (a) the best performing model with
long and short skip connections enabled, (b) only long skip connections enabled with
9 repetitions of simple block, (c) only long skip connections enabled with 3 repetitions
of simple block and (d) only long skip connections enabled with 7 repetitions of simple
block, without batch normalization. Note that due to a reduction in the learning rate
for Figure (d), the scale is diﬀerent compared to Figures (a), (b) and (c).
on a range of models of varying depth by visualizing the mean model parameter
updates at each layer for each epoch (see sample results in Figure 4). To simplify
the analysis and visualization, we used simple blocks instead of bottleneck blocks.
Parameter updates appear to be well distributed when short skip connections are present (Figure 4(a)). When the short skip connections are removed,
we ﬁnd that for deep models, the deep parts of the network (at the center, Figure
4(b)) get few updates, as expected. When long skip connections are retained, at
least the shallow parts of the model can be updated (see both sides of Figure
4(b)) as these connections provide shortcuts for gradient ﬂow. Interestingly, we
observed that model performance actually drops when using short skip connections in those models that are shallow enough for all layers to be well updated
(eg. Figure 4(c)). Moreover, batch normalization was observed to increase the
maximal updatable depth of the network. Networks without batch normalization
had diminishing updates toward the center of the network and with long skip
connections were less stable, requiring a lower learning rate (eg. Figure 4(d)).
It is also interesting to observe that the bulk of updates in all tested model
variations (also visible in those shown in Figure 4) were always initially near
or at the classiﬁcation layer. This follows the ﬁndings of , where it is shown
that even randomly initialized weights can confer a surprisingly large portion of
a model’s performance after training only the classiﬁer.
Conclusions
In this paper, we studied the inﬂuence of skip connections on FCN for biomedical
image segmentation. We showed that a very deep network can achieve results
near the state of the art on the EM dataset without any further post-processing.
We conﬁrm that although long skip connections provide a shortcut for gradient
ﬂow in shallow layers, they do not alleviate the vanishing gradient problem in
deep networks. Consequently, we apply short skip connections to FCNs and
conﬁrm that this increases convergence speed and allows training of very deep
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the developers of Theano and Keras for providing such
powerful frameworks. We gratefully acknowledge NVIDIA for GPU donation
to our lab at ´Ecole Polytechnique. The authors would like to thank Lisa di
Jorio, Adriana Romero and Nicolas Chapados for insightful discussions. This
work was partially funded by Imagia Inc., MITACS (grant number IT05356)
and MEDTEQ.