Molecular Graph Convolutions: Moving Beyond Fingerprints
Steven Kearnes
Stanford University
 
Kevin McCloskey
Google Inc.
 
Marc Berndl
Google Inc.
 
Vijay Pande
Stanford University
 
Patrick Riley
Google Inc.
 
Molecular “ﬁngerprints” encoding structural
information are the workhorse of cheminformatics and machine learning in drug discovery
applications. However, ﬁngerprint representations necessarily emphasize particular aspects
of the molecular structure while ignoring others,
rather than allowing the model to make datadriven decisions. We describe molecular graph
convolutions, a machine learning architecture
for learning from undirected graphs, speciﬁcally
small molecules. Graph convolutions use a simple encoding of the molecular graph—atoms,
bonds, distances, etc.—which allows the model
to take greater advantage of information in the
graph structure. Although graph convolutions
do not outperform all ﬁngerprint-based methods, they (along with other graph-based methods) represent a new paradigm in ligand-based
virtual screening with exciting opportunities for
future improvement.
Introduction
Computer-aided drug design requires representations
of molecules that can be related to biological activity or other experimental endpoints.
These representations encode structural features, physical properties, or activity in other assays [Todeschini and
Consonni, 2009; Petrone et al., 2012].
The recent
advent of “deep learning” has enabled the use of
very raw representations that are less applicationspeciﬁc when building machine learning models [Le-
Cun et al., 2015].
For instance, image recognition
models that were once based on complex features extracted from images are now trained exclusively on
the pixels themselves—deep architectures can “learn”
appropriate representations for input data.
Consequently, deep learning systems for drug screening or
Figure 1: Molecular graph for ibuprofen. Unmarked vertices represent carbon atoms, and bond order is indicated
by the number of lines used for each edge.
design should beneﬁt from molecular representations
that are as complete and general as possible rather
than relying on application-speciﬁc features or encodings.
First-year chemistry students quickly become familiar with a common representation for small
molecules:
the molecular graph.
Figure 1 gives
an example of the molecular graph for ibuprofen,
an over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drug. The atoms and bonds between atoms form the
nodes and edges, respectively, of the graph.
atoms and bonds have associated properties, such as
atom type and bond order. Although the basic molecular graph representation does not capture the quantum mechanical structure of molecules or necessarily
express all of the information that it might suggest to
an expert medicinal chemist, its ubiquity in academia
and industry makes it a desirable starting point for
machine learning on chemical information.
Here we describe molecular graph convolutions, a
deep learning system using a representation of small
molecules as undirected graphs of atoms. Graph con-
 
volutions extract meaningful features from simple descriptions of the graph structure—atom and bond
properties, and graph distances—to form moleculelevel representations that can be used in place of ﬁngerprint descriptors in conventional machine learning
applications.
Related Work
The history of molecular representation is extremely
diverse [Todeschini and Consonni, 2009] and a full
review is outside the scope of this report. Below we
describe examples from several major branches of the
ﬁeld to provide context for our work. Additionally,
we review several recent examples of graph-centric
approaches in cheminformatics.
Much of cheminformatics is based on so-called
“2D” molecular descriptors that attempt to capture
relevant structural features derived from the molecular graph. In general, 2D features are computationally inexpensive and easy to interpret and visualize.
One of the most common representations in this class
is extended-connectivity ﬁngerprints (ECFP), also referred to as circular or Morgan ﬁngerprints [Rogers
and Hahn, 2010]. Starting at each heavy atom, a “bag
of fragments” is constructed by iteratively expanding
outward along bonds (usually the algorithm is terminated after 2–3 steps). Each unique fragment is assigned an integer identiﬁer, which is often hashed into
a ﬁxed-length representation or “ﬁngerprint”. Additional descriptors in this class include decompositions
of the molecular graph into subtrees or ﬁxed-length
paths [OpenEye GraphSim Toolkit], as well as atom
pair (AP) descriptors that encode atom types and
graph distances (number of intervening bonds) for all
pairs of atoms in a molecule [Carhart et al., 1985].
Many representations encode 3D information, with
special emphasis on molecular shape and electrostatics as primary drivers of interactions in real-world systems. For example, rapid overlay of chemical structures (ROCS) aligns pairs of pre-generated conformers and calculates shape and chemical (“color”) similarity using Gaussian representations of atoms and
color features deﬁned by a simple force ﬁeld [Hawkins
et al., 2007].
ROCS can also be used to generate
alignments for calculation of electrostatic ﬁeld similarity [Muchmore et al., 2006]. Ultrafast shape recognition (USR) calculates alignment-free 3D similarity by comparing distributions of intramolecular distances [Ballester and Richards, 2007].
The Merck Molecular Activity Challenge [Dahl,
2012] catalyzed interest in deep neural networks
trained on ﬁngerprints and other molecular descriptors. In particular, multitask neural networks have
produced consistent gains relative to baseline models
such as random forest and logistic regression [Dahl
et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015; Mayr et al., 2015; Ramsundar et al., 2015].
Other approaches from both the cheminformatics
and the machine learning community directly operate on graphs in a way similar to how we do here.
The “molecular graph networks” of Merkwirth and
Lengauer iteratively update a state variable
on each atom with learned weights speciﬁc to each
atom type–bond type pair. Similarly, Micheli 
presents a more general formulation of the same
concept of iterated local information transfer across
edges and applies this method to predicting the boiling point of alkanes.
Scarselli et al. similarly deﬁnes a local operation on the graph. They demonstrate that a ﬁxed
point across all the local functions can be found and
calculate ﬁxed point solutions for graph nodes as part
of each training step. In another vein, Lusci et al.
 convert undirected molecular graphs to a directed recursive neural net and take an ensemble over
multiple conversions.
Recently, Duvenaud et al. presented an architecture trying to accomplish many of the same
goals as this work. The architecture was based on
generalizing the ﬁngerprint computation such that it
can be learned via backpropagation. They demonstrate that this architecture improves predictions of
solubility and photovoltaic eﬃciency but not binding
Bruna et al. introduce convolutional deep
networks on spectral representations of graphs. However, these methods apply when the graph structure is ﬁxed across examples and only the labeling/features on individual nodes varies.
Convolutional networks on non-Euclidean manifolds were described by Masci et al. .
problem addressed was to describe the shape of the
manifold (such as the surface of a human being) in
such a way that the shape descriptor of a particular
point was invariant to perturbations such as movement and deformation.
They also describe an approach for combining local shape descriptors into a
global descriptor and demonstrate its use in a shape
classiﬁcation task.
Deep neural networks
Neural networks are directed graphs of simulated
“neurons”. Each neuron has a set of inputs and com-
putes an output. The neurons in early neural nets
were inspired by biological neurons and computed an
aﬃne combination of the inputs followed by a nonlinear activation function. Mathematically, if the inputs are x1 . . . xN, weights w1 . . . wN and bias b are
parameters, and f is the activation function, the output is
Popular activation functions include the sigmoid
function (f(z) =
1+e−z ) and rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU) (f(z) = 0 if z ≤0 else z).
Any mostly diﬀerentiable function can be used as
the unit of computation for a neuron and in recent
years, many other functions have appeared in published networks, including max and sum.
Convolution in neural networks refers to using the
same parameters (such as the wi in Equation 1) for
diﬀerent neurons that are attached to diﬀerent parts
of the input (or previous neurons). In this way, the
same operation is computed for many diﬀerent subsets of the input.
At the “top” of the neural network you have
node(s) whose output is the value you are trying to
predict (e.g. the probability that this molecule binds
to a target or the binding aﬃnity).
Many output
nodes for diﬀerent tasks can be added and this is
commonly done [Ma et al., 2015; Ramsundar et al.,
2015]. In this way, diﬀerent output tasks can share
the computation and model parameters in lower parts
of the network before using their own parameters for
the ﬁnal output steps.
The architecture of a neural network refers to the
choice of the number of neurons, the type of computation each one does (including what learnable parameters they have), which parameters are shared across
neurons, and how the output of one neuron is connected to the input of another.
In order to train the network, you ﬁrst have to
choose a loss function describing the penalty for the
network producing a set of outputs which diﬀer from
the outputs in the training example. For example,
for regression problems, the L2 distance between the
predicted and actual values is commonly used. The
objective of training is then to ﬁnd a set of parameters for the network that minimizes the loss function.
Training is done with the well known technique of back-propagation [Rumelhart et al., 1986]
and stochastic gradient descent.
Desired invariants of a model
A primary goal of designing a deep learning architecture is to restrict the set of functions that can
be learned to ones that match the desired properties from the domain.
For example, in image understanding, spatial convolutions force the model to
learn functions that are invariant to translation.
For a deep learning architecture taking a molecular
graph as input, some arbitrary choice must be made
for the order that the various atoms and bonds are
presented to the model. Since that choice is arbitrary,
Property 1 (Order invariance). The output of the
model should be invariant to the order that the atom
and bond information is encoded in the input.
Note that many current procedures for ﬁngerprinting molecules achieve Property 1. We will now gradually construct an architecture which achieves Property 1 while making available a richer space of learnable parameters.
The ﬁrst basic unit of representation is an atom
layer which contains an n-dimensional vector associated with each atom. Therefore the atom layer is a
2 dimensional matrix indexed ﬁrst by atom. Part of
the original input will be encoded in such an atom
layer and the details of how we construct the original
input vector are discussed in Section 3.5. The next
basic unit of representation is a pair layer which contains an n-dimensional vector associated with each
pair of atoms.
Therefore, the pair layer is a 3 dimensional matrix where the ﬁrst two dimensions are
indexed by atom. Note that the pair input can contain information not just about edges but about any
arbitrary pair. Notably, we will encode the graph distance (length of shortest path from one atom to the
other) in the input pair layer. The order of the atom
indexing for the atom and pair layer inputs must be
We will describe various operations to compute
new atom and pair layers with learnable parameters
at every step. Notationally, let Ax be the value of a
particular atom layer x and P y be the value of a particular pair layer y. The inputs that produce those
values should be clear from the context. Ax
a refers to
the value of atom a in atom layer x and P y
(a,b) refers
to the value of pair (a, b) in pair layer y.
In order to achieve Property 1 for the overall architecture, we need a diﬀerent type of invariance for
each atom and pair layer.
Property 2 (Atom and pair permutation invariance). The values of an atom layer and pair permute
with the original input layer order. More precisely, if
the inputs are permuted with a permutation operator
Q, then for all layers x, y, Ax and P y are permuted
with operator Q as well.
In other words, Property 2 means that from a single
atom’s (or pair’s) perspective, its value in every layer
is invariant to the order of the other atoms (or pairs).
Since molecules are undirected graphs, we will also
maintain the following:
Property 3 (Pair order invariance). For all pair layers y, P y
(a,b) = P y
Property 3 is easy to achieve at the input layer and
the operations below will maintain this.
Properties 2 and 3 make it easy to construct a
molecule-level representation from an atom or pair
such that the molecule-level representation achieves
Property 1 (see Section 3.4).
Invariant-preserving operations
We now deﬁne a series of operations that maintain
the above properties.
Throughout, f represents an arbitrary function
and g represents an arbitrary commutative function
(g returns the same result regardless of the order the
arguments are presented). In this work, f is a learned
linear operator with a rectiﬁed linear (ReLU) activation function and g is a sum.
The most trivial operation is to combine one or
more layers of the same type by applying the same operation to every atom or pair. Precisely, this means if
you have layers x1, x2, . . . , xn and function f, you can
compute a new atom layer from the previous atom
layer (A →A) as
a , . . . , Axn
or pair layer from the previous pair layer (P →P) as
a,b = f(P x1
a,b, . . . , P xn
Since we apply the same function for every atom/pair,
we refer to this as a convolution.
All the transformations we develop below will have this convolution nature of applying the same operation to every
atom/pair, maintaining Property 2.
When operating on pairs of atoms, instead of
putting all pairs through this function, you could select a subset. In Section 4.3.3 we show experiments
for restricting the set of pairs to those that are less
than some graph distance away.
Next, consider an operation that takes a pair layer
x and constructs an atom layer y (P →A).
operation is depicted in Figure 2. Formally:
a = g(f(P x
(a,b)), f(P x
(a,c)), f(P x
(a,d)), ...)
In other words, take all pairs of which a is a part,
run them through f, and combine them with g. Note
g(v1,v2,v3,...)
Figure 2: P →A operation. P x is a matrix containing
features for atom pairs ab, ac, ad, etc. The vi are intermediate values obtained by applying f to features for a
given atom pair. Applying g to the intermediate representations for all atom pairs involving a given atom (e.g. a)
results in a new atom feature vector for that atom.
that Property 3 means we can choose an arbitrary
one of P x
(a,b) or P x
The most interesting construction is making a pair
layer from an atom layer (A →P). The operation is
graphically depicted in Figure 3 and formally as
ab = g(f(Ax
Note that just applying g to Ax
b would maintain Properties 2 and 3 but we use this more complex form.
While commutative operators (such as
max pooling) are common in neural networks, commutative operators with learnable parameters are not
common. Therefore, we use f to give learnable parameters while maintaining the desired properties.
Once we have all the primitive operations on atom
and pair layers (A →A, P →P, P →A, A →P), we
can combine these into one module. We call this the
Weave module (Figure 4) because the atoms and pair
layers cross back and forth to each other. The module can be stacked to an arbitrary depth similar to
the Inception module that inspired it [Szegedy et al.,
2015]. Deep neural networks with many layers (e.g.
for computer vision) learn progressively more general
features—combinations of lower-level features—in a
hierarchical manner [LeCun et al., 2015]. By analogy,
successive Weave modules can produce more informative representations of the original input. Additionally, stacked Weave modules with limited maximum
atom pair distance progressively incorporate longerrange information at each layer.
Figure 3: A →P operation. Ax is a matrix containing
features for atoms a, b, etc. The vi are intermediate values obtained by applying f to features for a given pair
of atoms concatenated in both possible orderings (ab and
ba). Applying g to these intermediate ordered pair features results in an order-independent feature vector for
atom pair ab.
Molecule-level features
The construction of the Weave module maintains
Properties 2 and 3. What about overall order invariance (Property 1)? At the end of a stack of Weave
modules we are left with an n-dimensional vector associated with every atom and an m-dimensional vector associated with every pair. We need to turn this
into a molecule-level representation with some commutative function of these vectors.
In related work [Merkwirth and Lengauer, 2005;
Duvenaud et al., 2015; Lusci et al., 2013], a simple unweighted sum is often used to combine orderdependent atom features into order-independent
molecule-level features. However, reduction to a single value does not capture the distribution of learned
features. We experimented with an alternative approach and created “fuzzy” histograms for each dimension of the feature vector.
A fuzzy histogram is described by a set of membership functions that are functions with range 
representing the membership of the point in each histogram bin [Zadeh, 1965]. A standard histogram has
membership functions which are 1 in the bin and 0
everywhere else. For each point, we normalize so that
the total contribution to all bins is 1. The value of a
bin in the histogram over all points is just the sum of
the normalized contributions for all the points.
Figure 5 gives an example of a fuzzy histogram
composed of three Gaussian bins.
A histogram is
constructed for each dimension of the feature vectors and the concatenation of those histograms is the
Figure 4: Weave module. This module takes matrices
Ak and P k (containing atom and pair features, respectively) and combines A →A, P →P, P →A, and
A →P operations to yield a new set of atom and pair
features (Ak+1 and P k+1, respectively). The output atom
and pair features can be used as input to a subsequent
Weave module, which allows these modules to be stacked
in series to an arbitrary depth.
molecule-level representation.
In this work we used Gaussian membership functions (which are unnormalized versions of the standard Gaussian PDF) with eleven bins spanning a
Gaussian distribution with mean of zero and unit
standard deviation, shown in Figure F.1. These bins
were chosen somewhat arbitrarily to cover the expected distribution of incoming features and were not
optimized further (note that the incoming features
were batch normalized; see Section 3.7).
Throughout this paper, we construct the moleculelevel features only from the top-level atom features
and not the pair features. This is to restrict the total number of feature vectors that must be summarized while still providing information about the entire molecule. Note, however, that the initial and intermediate pair features can inﬂuence the ﬁnal atom
features through Weave module operations.
Before the molecule-level featurization, we do one
ﬁnal convolution on the atoms. Since molecule-level
featurization can be a major bottleneck in the model,
this convolution expands the depth so that each dimension of the atom feature vector contains less information and therefore less information is lost during
the molecule-level featurization. On this convolution,
we do not use a ReLU activation function to avoid the
histogram having many points at zero.
Once you have a molecule-level representation, this
becomes a more standard multitask problem. We follow the common approach [Ramsundar et al., 2015;
Ma et al., 2015; Mayr et al., 2015] of a small number
Feature Value
Membership Fraction
Figure 5: Fuzzy histogram with three Gaussian “bins”.
Each curve represents the membership function for a different bin, indicating the degree to which a point contributes to that bin. The vertical blue line represents an
example point which contributes normalized densities of
< 0.01, ∼0.25, and ∼0.75 to the bins (from left to right).
of fully connected layers on top of the molecule-level
features followed by standard softmax classiﬁcation.
The overall architecture is depicted in Figure 6.
Table 1 lists hyperparameters and default values for
graph convolution models. In models with multiple
Weave modules it is conceivable to vary the convolution depths in a module-speciﬁc way. However, the
models in this work used the same settings for all
Weave modules.
Our current implementation imposes an upper
limit on the number of heavy atoms represented in the
initial featurization. For molecules that have more
than the maximum number of atoms, only a subset
of atoms (and therefore atom pairs) are represented
in the input encoding. This subset depends on the
order in which the atoms are traversed by the featurization code and should be considered arbitrary. In
this work we set the maximum number of atoms to
60, and only 814 of the 1 442 713 unique molecules in
our datasets (see Section 3.6) exceed this limit.
Input featurization
The initial atom and pair features are summarized in
Table 2 and Table 3, respectively. The features are a
mix of ﬂoating point, integer, and binary values (all
encoded as ﬂoating point numbers in the network).
The feature set is intended to be broad, but not necessarily exhaustive, and we recognize that some features can potentially be derived from or correlated
to a subset of the others (e.g.
atom hybridization
can be determined by inspecting the bonds that atom
makes). We performed experiments using a “simple”
subset of these features in an eﬀort to understand
Feature weave
Final convolution
Task-specific
Figure 6: Abstract graph convolution architecture. In
the current implementation, only the ﬁnal atom features
are used to generate molecule-level features.
their relative contributions to learning (Section 4.2),
but many other questions about speciﬁcs of the input
featurization are left to future work.
All features were generated with RDKit [Landrum, 2014],
including Gasteiger atomic partial
charges [Gasteiger and Marsili, 1980]. Although our
featurization includes space for hydrogen atoms, we
did not use explicit hydrogens in any of our experiments in order to conserve memory and emphasize
contributions from heavy atoms.
Other deep learning applications with more “natural” inputs such as computer vision and speech recognition still require some input engineering; for example, adjusting images to a speciﬁc size or scale, or
transforming audio into the frequency domain. Likewise, the initial values for the atom and pair layers
describe these primitives in terms of properties that
are often considered by medicinal chemists and other
experts in the ﬁeld, allowing the network to use or ignore them as needed for the task at hand. One of the
purposes of this work is to demonstrate that learning
can occur with as little preprocessing as possible. Accordingly, we favor simple descriptors that are more
or less “obvious”.
Table 1: Graph convolution model hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter
Default Value
Maximum number of atoms per molecule
Maximum atom pair graph distance
Number of Weave modules
(A →A)0 convolution depth
(A →P)0 convolution depth
(P →P)0 convolution depth
(P →A)0 convolution depth
(A →A)1 convolution depth
(P →P)1 convolution depth
Final atom layer convolution depth
Reduction to molecule-level features
Gaussian histogram
Post-reduction
Fully-connected layers (number of units per layer)
Batch size
Learning rate
Optimization method
Table 2: Atom features.
Description
Atom type∗
H, C, N, O, F, P, S, Cl, Br, I, or metal (one-hot or null).
R or S (one-hot or null).
Formal charge
Integer electronic charge.
Partial charge
Calculated partial charge.
Ring sizes
For each ring size (3–8), the number of rings that include this atom.
Hybridization
sp, sp2, or sp3 (one-hot or null).
Hydrogen bonding
Whether this atom is a hydrogen bond donor and/or acceptor (binary values).
Aromaticity
Whether this atom is part of an aromatic system.
* Included in the “simple” featurization (see Section 4.2).
Table 3: Atom pair features.
Description
Bond type∗
Single, double, triple, or aromatic (one-hot or null).
Graph distance∗
For each distance (1–7), whether the shortest path
between the atoms in the pair is less than or equal
to that number of bonds (binary values).
Whether the atoms in the pair are in the same ring.
* Included in the “simple” featurization (see Section 4.2).
We used a dataset collection nearly identical to the
one described by Ramsundar et al. except for
some changes to the data processing pipeline (including the duplicate merging process for the Tox21
dataset) and diﬀerent cross-validation fold divisions.
Brieﬂy, there are 259 datasets divided into four
groups indicating their source: PubChem BioAssay
[Wang et al., 2012] (PCBA, 128 datasets), the “maximum unbiased validation” datasets constructed by
Rohrer and Baumann [Rohrer and Baumann, 2009]
(MUV, 17 datasets), the enhanced directory of useful
decoys [Mysinger et al., 2012] (DUD-E, 102 datasets),
and the training set for the Tox21 challenge (see Mayr
et al. ) (Tox21, 12 datasets).
The combined
dataset contained over 38 M data points and included
targets from many diﬀerent biological classes.
Model training and evaluation
Graph convolution and traditional neural network
models were implemented with TensorFlow [Abadi
et al., 2015], an open-source library for machine
Models were evaluated by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC
AUC, or simply AUC) as recommended by Jain
and Nicholls . We used 5-fold stratiﬁed crossvalidation, where each fold-speciﬁc model used 60% of
the data for training, 20% for validation (early stopping/model selection), and 20% as a test set.
Graph convolution models were trained for 10–
20 M steps using the Adagrad optimizer [Duchi et al.,
2011] with learning rate 0.003 and batch size 96, with
periodic checkpointing.
All convolution and fullyconnected layer outputs were batch normalized [Ioﬀe
and Szegedy, 2015] prior to applying the ReLU nonlinearity. Training was parallelized over 96 CPUs (or
96 GPUs in the case of the W4N2 model) and required several days for each model.
Adding additional Weave modules signiﬁcantly increased training
time. However, models trained on smaller datasets
(see Section 3.8) trained much faster.
To establish a baseline, we also trained pyramidal
[Ramsundar
forest (RF), and logistic regression (LR) models
using Morgan ﬁngerprints with radius 2 (essentially
equivalent to ECFP4) generated with RDKit [Landrum, 2014].
As a very simple baseline, we also
computed Tanimoto similarity to all training set
actives and used the maximum similarity score as
the active class probability (MaxSim).
The PMTNN had two hidden layers with rectiﬁed linear activations, and each fold-speciﬁc model was trained for
40–50 M steps using the SGD optimizer with batch
size 128 and a learning rate of 0.0003, with periodic
checkpointing.
Additionally, this model used 0.25
dropout [Srivastava et al., 2014], initial weight standard deviations of 0.01 and 0.04 and initial biases
of 0.5 and 3.0 in the respective hidden layers. This
model did not use batch normalization.
Logistic regression (LR) models were trained with
the LogisticRegression class in scikit-learn [Pedregosa et al., 2011] using the ‘lbfgs’ solver and
a maximum of 10 000 iterations. Values for the regularization strength (C) parameter were chosen by grid
search, using the held-out validation set for model
selection. Random forest (RF) models were trained
using the scikit-learn RandomForestClassifier with
100 trees.
In graph convolution and PMTNN models, active
compounds were weighted in the cost function such
that the total active weight equalled the total inactive weight within each dataset (logistic regression
and random forest models also used these weights as
the sample_weight argument to their fit methods).
Furthermore, graph convolution and PMTNN models
were evaluated in a task-speciﬁc manner by choosing
the training checkpoint with the best validation set
AUC for each task. We note that some fold-speciﬁc
models had a small number of tasks were not “converged” in the sense that their validation set AUC
scores were still increasing when training was halted,
and that the speciﬁc tasks that were not converged
varied from model to model.
To statistically compare graph convolution and
baseline models, we report three values for each
dataset group: (1) median 5-fold mean AUC over all
datasets, (2) median diﬀerence in per-dataset 5-fold
mean AUC (∆AUC) relative to the PMTNN baseline, and (3) a 95% Wilson score interval for the sign
test statistic relative to the PMTNN baseline. The
sign test estimates the probability that a model will
achieve a higher 5-fold mean AUC than the PMTNN
baseline; models with sign test conﬁdence intervals
that do not include 0.5 are considered signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent in their performance (the median ∆AUC can
be used as a measure of eﬀect size). To calculate these
intervals, we used the proportion_confint function
in statsmodels [Seabold and Perktold, 2010] version
0.6.1 with method=‘wilson’ and alpha=0.05, counting only non-zero diﬀerences in the sign test. We do
not report values for the DUD-E dataset group since
all models achieved > 0.98 median 5-fold mean AUC.
As a general note, conﬁdence intervals for box plot
medians were computed as ±1.57 × IQR/
et al., 1978] and do not necessarily correspond to sign
test conﬁdence intervals.
Comparisons to other methods
In addition to the baseline models described in Section 3.7, there are many other methods that would be
interesting to compare to our graph convolution models. In particular, Duvenaud et al. described
“neural ﬁngerprints” (NFP), a related graph-based
method. The original publication describing NFP reported mean squared errors (MSE) on datasets for
aqueous solubility, drug eﬃcacy, and photovoltaic
We trained multitask graph convolution
models on these datasets using 5-fold cross-validation
(note that the published NFP models were singletask).
Additionally, we report results on a dataset used to
validate the inﬂuence relevance voter (IRV) method
of Swamidass et al. , which is a hybrid of neural
networks and k-nearest neighbors. The original publication reported results for two datasets, HIV and
DHFR, but the latter was no longer available from its
original source. We trained graph convolution models on the HIV dataset using 10-fold stratiﬁed crossvalidation. In each cross-validation round, one fold
each was used for testing and validation (early stopping), and the remaining folds were used for training.
We note that RDKit was only able to process 41 476
of the 42 678 SMILES strings in the HIV dataset. We
report performance on this dataset using both ROC
AUC and BEDROC [Truchon and Bayly, 2007] with
Although we expect our results on these datasets
to provide reasonable comparisons to published data,
diﬀerences in fold assignments and variations in
dataset composition due to featurization failures
mean that the comparisons are not perfect.
Proof of concept
With so many hyperparameters to adjust, we sought
to establish a centerpoint from which to investigate
speciﬁc questions.
After several experiments, we
settled on a simple model with two Weave modules, a maximum atom pair distance of 2, Gaussian
histogram molecule-level reductions, and two fullyconnected layers of size 2000 and 100, respectively.
Notationally, we refer to this model as W2N2. Table 4 shows the performance of the W2N2 model
and related models derived from this centerpoint
by varying a single hyperparameter.
Additionally,
Table 4 includes results for several baseline models: MaxSim, logistic regression (LR), random forest (RF), and pyramidal multitask neural
network (PMTNN) models trained on Morgan ﬁngerprints.
Several graph convolution models achieved performance comparable to the baseline PMTNN on the
classiﬁcation tasks in our dataset collection, which
is a remarkable result considering the simplicity of
our input representation. For example, the centerpoint W2N2 model is statistically indistinguishable
from the PMTNN for the PCBA, MUV, and Tox21
dataset groups (we do not report results for the
DUD-E dataset group because all models achieved
extremely high median AUC scores).
Additionally,
many of the graph convolution models with worse
performance than the PMTNN (i.e. sign test conﬁdence intervals excluding 0.5) had very small eﬀective
diﬀerences as measured by median ∆AUC.
As an additional measure of model performance, we
also calculated ROC enrichment [Jain and Nicholls,
2008] scores at the following false positive rates: 1%,
5%, 10%, and 20%. Enrichment scores are reported
in Section B and show that graph convolution models
generally performed worse than or comparable to the
PMTNN. We note that the analysis of model performance and hyperparameter optimization that follows
is based only on ROC AUC scores.
We also trained graph convolution models on some
additional datasets in order to compare to the “neural ﬁngerprints” (NFP) of Duvenaud et al. 
and the inﬂuence relevance voter (IRV) method of
Swamidass et al. (see Section 3.8).
compares graph convolution models to published results on these datasets under similar cross-validation
conditions. Graph convolution results were comparable to published NFP models, with signiﬁcant improvement on the photovoltaic eﬃciency task (note
that the graph convolution results are from multitask
models trained on all three NFP datasets while Duvenaud et al. report values for single-task models). The 10-fold mean AUC and BEDROC scores
on the HIV dataset were slightly lower than the published IRV values. However, we held out 10% of the
data (one fold) in each cross-validation round as a
validation set for checkpoint selection, meaning that
the graph convolution models were trained with fewer
examples than the published IRV models.
Input featurization
As a further proof of concept and to address the
importance of the initial featurization, we trained a
model using a subset of features that match typical
Median 5-fold mean AUC values for reported models.
Graph convolution models are labeled as WxNy, where x and y denote the number of
Weave modules and the maximum atom pair distance, respectively (see the text for descriptions of the simple, sum, and RMS models). All graph convolution
models fed into a Pyramidal MTNN after the molecule-level feature reduction step. MaxSim, logistic regression (LR), random forest (RF), and
pyramidal multitask neural network (PMTNN) baselines used Morgan ﬁngerprints as input. For each model, we report the median ∆AUC and the
95% Wilson score interval for a sign test estimating the probability that a given model will outperform the PMTNN baseline (see Section 3.7). Bold values
indicate sign test conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0.5.
PCBA (n = 128)
MUV (n = 17)
Tox21 (n = 12)
(0.00, 0.04)
(0.01, 0.27)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.04, 0.13)
(0.10, 0.47)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.02, 0.10)
(0.01, 0.27)
(0.01, 0.35)
W2N2-simple
(0.27, 0.44)
(0.36, 0.78)
(0.39, 0.86)
(0.16, 0.31)
(0.17, 0.59)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.20, 0.35)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.20, 0.35)
(0.26, 0.69)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.30, 0.46)
(0.17, 0.59)
(0.19, 0.68)
(0.42, 0.59)
(0.22, 0.64)
(0.32, 0.81)
(0.38, 0.55)
(0.26, 0.69)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.37, 0.54)
(0.17, 0.59)
(0.39, 0.86)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.10, 0.47)
(0.14, 0.61)
(0.44, 0.61)
(0.31, 0.74)
(0.47, 0.91)
(0.33, 0.50)
(0.22, 0.64)
(0.32, 0.81)
Dataset group
5-fold mean AUC
Comparison of models with “simple” and
“full” input featurizations.
The simple featurization
only encodes atom type, bond type, and graph distance.
The full featurization includes additional features such
as aromaticity and hydrogen bonding propensity (see
Section 3.4 for more details).
Conﬁdence intervals for
box plot medians were computed as ±1.57 × IQR/
[McGill et al., 1978].
2D structural diagrams seen in chemistry textbooks:
only atom type, bond type, and graph distance are
provided to the network. Figure 7 compares a model
trained with this “simple” input featurization to the
“full” featurization containing all features from Table 2 and Table 3. Both featurizations achieve similar median 5-fold mean AUC scores, suggesting that
the additional features in the “full” representation
are either mostly ignored during training or can be
derived from a simpler representation of the molecular graph. Further work is required to understand
the importance of individual features, perhaps with
datasets that are sensitive to particular components
of the input representation (such as hydrogen bonding or formal charge).
Figure 8 gives examples of how the initial atom features for a single molecule (ibuprofen) evolve as they
progress through graph convolution Weave modules.
The initial atom and pair feature encodings for the
“full” featurization are depicted in Panel A. Comparing the initial atom features to their source molecular graph, the aromatic carbons in the central ring
are clearly visible (and nearly identical in the featurization). The pair features are more diﬃcult to
interpret visually, and mostly encode graph distance.
As the atom features are transformed by the Weave
modules (Panel B), they become more heterogeneous
and reﬂective of their unique chemical environments.
“Simple” features behave similarly, beginning with
rather sterile initial values and quickly diverging as
neighborhood information is included by Weave module operations (Panel C). Comparison of the “full”
and “simple” atom features after the second Weave
module shows that both featurizations lead to similarly diverse feature distributions. Figure E.1 and
Figure E.2 show similar behavior for pair features.
Hyperparameter sensitivity
Number of Weave modules
In relatively “local” models with limited atom pair
distance, successive Weave modules update atom features with information from progressively larger regions of the molecule. This suggests that the number
of Weave modules is a critical hyperparameter to optimize, analogous to the number of hidden layers in
traditional neural networks. Figure 9 compares models with 2–4 Weave modules to a model with a single
Weave module. As expected, models with a single
Weave layer were outperformed by deeper architectures. For the PCBA and Tox21 datasets, there was
not much beneﬁt to using more than two Weave modules (Figure D.1), but using three Weave modules
gave the best median AUC for the MUV datasets (in
exchange for signiﬁcantly increased training time).
Alternative feature reductions
The reduction of atom features from the ﬁnal Weave
module to an order-invariant, molecule-level representation is a major information bottleneck in graph
convolution models.
In related work, a simple unweighted sum [Duvenaud et al., 2015; Merkwirth and
Lengauer, 2005; Lusci et al., 2013] or root-meansquare (RMS) [Dieleman, March 17, 2015] reduction
Using a consistent base architecture with
two Weave modules and a maximum atom pair distance of 2, we compared these traditional reduction
strategies with our Gaussian histogram approach.
Figure 10 shows that Gaussian histogram models
had consistently improved scores relative to sum reductions.
RMS reductions were not as robust as
Gaussian histograms in terms of per-dataset diﬀerences relative to sum reductions, although RMS and
Gaussian histogram reductions had similar distributions of absolute AUC values (Figure D.2).
Additionally, RMS reductions achieved a slightly higher
median AUC than Gaussian histogram reductions on
the MUV datasets.
Table 5: Comparison of graph convolution to neural ﬁngerprint (NFP) and inﬂuence relevance voter (IRV) models.
Section 3.8 provides details for datasets and experimental procedures. Note that the NFP comparisons were performed
using multitask graph convolution models, and that graph convolution models for the HIV dataset were trained with
fewer examples than IRV since one cross-validation fold was used as a held-out validation set.
Convolution
Solubility (log M)
0.52 ± 0.07
0.46 ± 0.08
Drug eﬃcacy (nM EC50)
1.16 ± 0.03
1.07 ± 0.06
Photovoltaic eﬃciency (%)
1.43 ± 0.09
1.10 ± 0.06
0.838 ± 0.027
BEDROC (α = 20)
0.613 ± 0.048
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. W1
Figure 9: Comparison of models with diﬀerent numbers
of Weave modules with a model containing a single Weave
module. All models used a maximum atom pair distance
The y-axis is cropped to emphasize diﬀerences
near zero.
Distance-dependent pair features
In Weave modules, atoms are informed about their
chemical environment by mixing with pair features in
the P →A operation. Recall that during this operation, pair features are combined for pairs that contain
a given atom, yielding a new representation for that
atom. A critical parameter for this operation is the
maximum distance (in bonds) allowed between the
atoms of the pairs that are combined. If only adjacent atoms are combined, the resulting atom features
will reﬂect the local chemical environment. As an alternative to increasing the number of Weave modules,
longer-range interactions can be captured by increasing the maximum atom pair distance. However, our
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. sum
Figure 10: Comparison of root-mean-square (RMS) and
Gaussian histogram reductions vs. sum reduction. The
y-axis reports diﬀerence in 5-fold mean AUC relative to
sum reduction. All models used two Weave modules and
a maximum atom pair distance of two.
The y-axis is
cropped to emphasize diﬀerences near zero.
implementation of the P →A operation uses a simple sum to combine pair features, such that a large
amount of information (possibly including every pair
of atoms in the molecule) is combined in a way that
could prevent useful information from being available
in later stages of the network.
Figure 11 shows the performance of several models
with diﬀerent maximum pair distances relative to a
model that used only adjacent atom pairs (N1). For
the PCBA datasets, a maximum distance of 2 (N2)
improves performance relative to the N1 model, and
N∞(no maximum distance) is clearly worse. However, the N1 model achieves the best median AUC
Figure 8: Graph convolution feature evolution. Atoms or pairs are displayed on the y-axis and the dimensions of
the feature vectors are on the x-axis. (A) Conversion of the molecular graph for ibuprofen into atom and (unique)
atom pair features. (B) Evolution of atom features after successive Weave modules in a graph convolution model
with a W3N2 architecture and depth 50 convolutions in Weave modules. (C) Evolution of “simple” atom features
(see Section 4.2) starting from initial encoding and progressing through the Weave modules of a W2N2 architecture.
The color bar applies to all panels.
score for the MUV and Tox21 datasets (Table 4 and
Figure D.3). These results suggest that graph convolution models do not eﬀectively make use of the
initial graph distance features to preserve or emphasize distance-dependent information.
To further investigate the eﬀect of distance information in Weave modules, we experimented with
models that use distance-speciﬁc weights for operations involving pair features in order to maintain distance information explicitly throughout the network.
However, results for these models are preliminary and
were not included in this report.
Discussion
Graph convolutions are a deep learning architecture
for learning directly from undirected graphs.
this work, we emphasize their application to small
molecules—undirected graphs of atoms connected by
bonds—for virtual screening.
Starting from simple descriptions of atoms, bonds between atoms,
and pairwise relationships in a molecular graph, we
have demonstrated performance that is comparable
to state of the art multitask neural networks trained
on traditional molecular ﬁngerprint representations,
as well as alternative methods including “neural ﬁngerprints” [Duvenaud et al., 2015] and inﬂuence relevance voter [Swamidass et al., 2009].
Our experiments with the adjustable parameters
in graph convolution models indicate a relatively
minor sensitivity to the number of Weave modules
and the maximum distance between atom pairs (at
least for our datasets). These results suggest that a
model with two Weave modules, a maximum atom
pair distance of 2, and Gaussian histogram reductions is a good starting point for further optimization. Remarkably, graph convolution models perform
well with a “simple” input featurization containing
only atom type, bond type, and graph distances—
essentially the information available from looking at
Flexibility is a highlight of the graph convolution
architecture: because we begin with a representation
that encodes the complete molecular graph, graph
convolution models are free to use any of the available information for the task at hand.
In a sense,
every possible molecular “ﬁngerprint” is available to
the model. Said another way, graph convolutions and
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. N1
Figure 11: Comparison of models with diﬀerent maximum atom pair distances to a model with a maximum
pair distance of one (bonded atoms).
All models have
two Weave modules. The y-axis is cropped to emphasize
diﬀerences near zero.
other graph-based approaches purposefully blur the
distinction between molecular features and predictive
models. As has been pointed out elsewhere [Duvenaud et al., 2015], the ability to use backpropagation
to tune parameters at every stage of the network provides greater representational power than traditional
descriptors, which are inﬂexible in the features they
encode from the initial representation. Accordingly,
it is not appropriate to think of graph-based methods as alternative descriptors; rather, they should
be viewed as fully integrated approaches to virtual
screening (although future work could investigate the
utility of the learned molecule-level features for additional tasks or other applications such as molecular
similarity).
Looking forward, graph convolutions (and related
graph-based methods; see Section 2) present a “new
hill to climb” in computer-aided drug design and
cheminformatics. Although our current graph convolution models do not consistently outperform stateof-the-art ﬁngerprint-based models, we emphasize
their ﬂexibility and potential for further optimization and development. In particular, we are aware
of several speciﬁc opportunities for improvement, including (1) additional optimization of model hyperparameters such as Weave module convolution depths;
(2) ﬁne-tuning of architectural decisions, such as the
choice of reduction in the P →A operation (currently a sum, but perhaps a Gaussian histogram or
distance-dependent function); and (3) improvements
in memory usage and training performance, such as
not handling all pairs of atoms or implementing more
eﬃcient versions of Weave module operations. With
these and other optimizations, we expect that graph
convolutions could exceed the performance of the best
available ﬁngerprint-based methods.
Finally, we note that much (or most) of the information required to represent biological systems and
the interactions responsible for small molecule activity is not encapsulated in the molecular graph. Biology takes place in a three-dimensional world, and
is sensitive to shape, electrostatics, quantum eﬀects,
and other properties that emerge from—but are not
necessarily unique to—the molecular graph (see, for
example, Nicholls et al. ). Additionally, most
small molecules exhibit 3D conformational ﬂexibility
that our graph representation does not even attempt
to describe. The extension of deep learning methods
(including graph convolutions) to three-dimensional
biology is an active area of research (e.g. Wallach
et al. ) that requires special attention to the
added complexities of multiple-instance learning in a
relatively small-data regime.
Acknowledgments
We thank Bharath Ramsundar, Brian Goldman, and
Robert McGibbon for helpful discussion. We also acknowledge Manjunath Kudlur, Derek Murray, and
Rajat Monga for assistance with TensorFlow. S.K.
was supported by internships at Google Inc.
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Additionally, we acknowledge use of the Stanford BioX3 cluster supported by NIH S10 Shared Instrumentation Grant
1S10RR02664701.
S.K. and V.P. also acknowledge
support from from NIH 5U19AI109662-02.
Version information
Submitted to the Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design. Comments on arXiv versions:
v2: Changed cross-validation scheme to use a heldout validation set and made other changes in response
to reviewer comments, such as including comparisons
to additional models and adding more background for
the methods.
v3: Added ROC enrichment metrics and changed
baseline model training strategy to use sample
weights. Added BEDROC comparison to IRV models.
Corrected an error in the logistic regression
model training protocol and updated the method
used to calculate the number of unique molecules in
our datasets. Some AUC values changed slightly due
to model retraining and/or reevaluation.
References
Martın Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S
Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu
Devin, et al.
TensorFlow:
Large-scale machine
learning on heterogeneous systems. Software available from tensorﬂow.org, 2015.
Pedro J Ballester and W Graham Richards. Ultrafast
shape recognition to search compound databases
for similar molecular shapes. Journal of computational chemistry, 28(10):1711–1723, 2007.
Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and
Yann LeCun.
Spectral networks and locally
connected networks on graphs.
arXiv preprint
 
R Venkataraghavan. Atom pairs as molecular features in structure-activity studies: deﬁnition and
applications. Journal of Chemical Information and
Computer Sciences, 25(2):64–73, 1985.
George Dahl.
Deep learning how I did it: Merck
1st place interview.
Online article available
 
George E Dahl, Navdeep Jaitly, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Multi-task neural networks for QSAR predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1231, 2014.
Classifying
 
plankton.html.
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
stochastic optimization. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2121–2159, 2011.
David K Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Iparraguirre, Rafael Bombarell, Timothy Hirzel, Alán
Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P Adams. Convolutional
networks on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2215–2223, 2015.
Johann Gasteiger and Mario Marsili. Iterative partial
equalization of orbital electronegativity—a rapid
access to atomic charges.
Tetrahedron, 36(22):
3219–3228, 1980.
Paul CD Hawkins, A Geoﬀrey Skillman, and Anthony
Nicholls. Comparison of shape-matching and docking as virtual screening tools. Journal of medicinal
chemistry, 50(1):74–82, 2007.
Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization:
Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift.
arXiv preprint
 
Ajay N Jain and Anthony Nicholls.
Recommendations for evaluation of computational methods.
Journal of computer-aided molecular design, 22(3-
4):133–139, 2008.
Greg Landrum.
Open-source cheminformatics; 2014. URL http:
//www.rdkit.org.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.
Alessandro Lusci, Gianluca Pollastri, and Pierre
Deep architectures and deep learning in
chemoinformatics: the prediction of aqueous solubility for drug-like molecules. Journal of chemical
information and modeling, 53(7):1563–1575, 2013.
George E Dahl, and Vladimir Svetnik. Deep neural nets as a method for quantitative structure–
activity relationships. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 55(2):263–274, 2015.
Jonathan Masci, Davide Boscaini, Michael Bronstein,
and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geodesic convolutional
neural networks on riemannian manifolds. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops, pages 37–45, 2015.
Andreas Mayr, Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Deeptox: Toxicity
prediction using deep learning. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 3:80, 2015.
Robert McGill, John W Tukey, and Wayne A Larsen.
Variations of box plots. The American Statistician,
32(1):12–16, 1978.
Christian Merkwirth and Thomas Lengauer.
Automatic generation of complementary descriptors
with molecular graph networks. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 45(5):1159–1168,
Alessio Micheli. Neural network for graphs: A contextual constructive approach. Neural Networks,
IEEE Transactions on, 20(3):498–511, 2009.
Steven W Muchmore, Andrew J Souers, and Irini
Akritopoulou-Zanze. The use of three-dimensional
shape and electrostatic similarity searching in the
identiﬁcation of a melanin-concentrating hormone
receptor 1 antagonist. Chemical biology & drug design, 67(2):174–176, 2006.
Michael M Mysinger, Michael Carchia, John J Irwin,
and Brian K Shoichet. Directory of useful decoys,
enhanced (DUD-E): better ligands and decoys for
better benchmarking. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 55(14):6582–6594, 2012.
Anthony Nicholls, Georgia B McGaughey, Robert P
Sheridan, Andrew C Good, Gregory Warren, Magali Mathieu, Steven W Muchmore, Scott P Brown,
J Andrew Grant, James A Haigh, et al. Molecular shape and medicinal chemistry: a perspective.
Journal of medicinal chemistry, 53(10):3862–3886,
OpenEye GraphSim Toolkit.
URL 
eyesopen.com. OpenEye Scientiﬁc Software, Santa
Pedregosa,
Varoquaux,
Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikitlearn: Machine learning in python. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Paula M Petrone, Benjamin Simms, Florian Nigsch,
Eugen Lounkine, Peter Kutchukian, Allen Cornett,
Zhan Deng, John W Davies, Jeremy L Jenkins, and
Meir Glick. Rethinking molecular similarity: comparing compounds on the basis of biological activity. ACS chemical biology, 7(8):1399–1409, 2012.
Bharath Ramsundar, Steven Kearnes, Patrick Riley,
Dale Webster, David Konerding, and Vijay Pande.
Massively multitask networks for drug discovery.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02072, 2015.
Extendedconnectivity ﬁngerprints. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 50(5):742–754, 2010.
Sebastian G Rohrer and Knut Baumann.
Maximum unbiased validation (MUV) data sets for virtual screening based on pubchem bioactivity data.
Journal of chemical information and modeling, 49
(2):169–184, 2009.
David E Rumelhart, Geoﬀrey E Hinton, and Ronald J
Learning representations by backpropagating errors. Nature, 323:533–536, 1986.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus
Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
graph neural network model.
Neural Networks,
IEEE Transactions on, 20(1):61–80, 2009.
Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold.
Statsmodels:
Econometric and statistical modeling with python.
In Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pages 57–61, 2010.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoﬀrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Sutskever,
Salakhutdinov.
A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting.
The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
S Joshua Swamidass, Chloé-Agathe Azencott, Ting-
Wan Lin, Hugo Gramajo, Shiou-Chuan Tsai, and
Pierre Baldi.
Inﬂuence relevance voting: an accurate and interpretable virtual high throughput
screening method.
Journal of chemical information and modeling, 49(4):756–766, 2009.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre
Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich.
Going deeper with convolutions.
CVPR 2015, 2015. URL 
1409.4842.
Roberto Todeschini and Viviana Consonni. Molecular
Descriptors for Chemoinformatics, Volume 41 (2
Volume Set), volume 41. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Jean-François Truchon and Christopher I Bayly.
Evaluating virtual screening methods: good and
bad metrics for the âĂĲearly recognitionâĂİ problem. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 47(2):488–508, 2007.
Izhar Wallach,
Michael Dzamba,
and Abraham
Heifets. Atomnet: A deep convolutional neural network for bioactivity prediction in structure-based
drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.02855,
Yanli Wang, Jewen Xiao, Tugba O Suzek, Jian
Zhang, Jiyao Wang, Zhigang Zhou, Lianyi Han,
Karapetyan,
Benjamin A Shoemaker, et al. PubChem’s BioAssay
Nucleic acids research, 40(D1):D400–
D412, 2012.
LotﬁA Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Information and control,
8(3):338–353, 1965.
Appendix: Model comparison
The following ﬁgures are box plot representations of the data summarized in Table 4, organized by dataset
group. We provide (a) box plots for absolute 5-fold mean AUC scores for each model and (b) diﬀerence
box plots showing diﬀerences in 5-fold mean AUC scores against the pyramidal multitask neural
network (PMTNN) baseline model. The diﬀerence box plots are visual analogs of the sign test conﬁdence
intervals reported in Table 4. Note, however, that the conﬁdence intervals on box plot medians do not necessarily correspond to the sign test conﬁdence intervals.
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. PMTNN
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. PMTNN.
Figure A.1: Model performance on PCBA datasets.
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. PMTNN
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. PMTNN.
Figure A.2: Model performance on MUV datasets.
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. PMTNN
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. PMTNN.
Figure A.3: Model performance on Tox21 datasets.
Appendix: ROC enrichment
The following tables report ROC enrichment [Jain and Nicholls, 2008] scores for baseline and graph convolution models. Each metric was optimized separately using the held-out validation set for each model, such
that ROC AUC or ROC enrichment scores at diﬀerent false positive rates (FPRs) are not necessarily derived
from predictions using the same set of model training checkpoints.
Table B.1: Median 5-fold mean ROC enrichment values for reported models at 1% FPR (E1%). For each model, we report the median ∆E1% and the 95%
Wilson score interval for a sign test estimating the probability that a given model will outperform the PMTNN baseline (see Section 3.7). Bold values indicate
sign test conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0.5.
PCBA (n = 128)
MUV (n = 17)
Tox21 (n = 12)
(0.04, 0.13)
(0.22, 0.64)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.01, 0.08)
(0.28, 0.72)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.23, 0.67)
(0.25, 0.75)
W2N2-simple
(0.15, 0.29)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.19, 0.68)
(0.05, 0.15)
(0.03, 0.36)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.04, 0.14)
(0.01, 0.30)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.05, 0.15)
(0.08, 0.48)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.17, 0.31)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.30, 0.46)
(0.07, 0.45)
(0.47, 0.91)
(0.18, 0.33)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.39, 0.86)
(0.23, 0.39)
(0.08, 0.48)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.06, 0.17)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.19, 0.34)
(0.25, 0.70)
(0.32, 0.81)
(0.22, 0.38)
(0.08, 0.48)
(0.09, 0.53)
Table B.2: Median 5-fold mean ROC enrichment values for reported models at 5% FPR (E5%). For each model, we report the median ∆E5% and the 95%
Wilson score interval for a sign test estimating the probability that a given model will outperform the PMTNN baseline (see Section 3.7). Bold values indicate
sign test conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0.5.
PCBA (n = 128)
MUV (n = 17)
Tox21 (n = 12)
(0.01, 0.08)
(0.03, 0.34)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.02, 0.09)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.06, 0.17)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.05, 0.45)
W2N2-simple
(0.19, 0.34)
(0.22, 0.64)
(0.19, 0.68)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.04, 0.38)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.06, 0.41)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.13, 0.27)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.20, 0.35)
(0.01, 0.33)
(0.14, 0.61)
(0.30, 0.47)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.28, 0.79)
(0.24, 0.40)
(0.12, 0.55)
(0.19, 0.68)
(0.25, 0.41)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.14, 0.61)
(0.06, 0.16)
(0.03, 0.34)
(0.15, 0.65)
(0.26, 0.43)
(0.16, 0.61)
(0.14, 0.61)
(0.29, 0.46)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.25, 0.75)
Table B.3: Median 5-fold mean ROC enrichment values for reported models at 10% FPR (E10%). For each model, we report the median ∆E10% and the 95%
Wilson score interval for a sign test estimating the probability that a given model will outperform the PMTNN baseline (see Section 3.7). Bold values indicate
sign test conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0.5.
PCBA (n = 128)
MUV (n = 17)
Tox21 (n = 12)
(0.00, 0.06)
(0.04, 0.38)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.01, 0.08)
(0.26, 0.69)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.04, 0.14)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.05, 0.45)
W2N2-simple
(0.26, 0.42)
(0.15, 0.58)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.13, 0.26)
(0.07, 0.45)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.05, 0.45)
(0.21, 0.37)
(0.11, 0.52)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.28, 0.44)
(0.18, 0.61)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.28, 0.45)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.35, 0.85)
(0.25, 0.41)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.09, 0.20)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.34, 0.51)
(0.17, 0.59)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.29, 0.46)
(0.13, 0.53)
(0.32, 0.81)
Table B.4: Median 5-fold mean ROC enrichment values for reported models at 20% FPR (E20%). For each model, we report the median ∆E20% and the 95%
Wilson score interval for a sign test estimating the probability that a given model will outperform the PMTNN baseline (see Section 3.7). Bold values indicate
sign test conﬁdence intervals that do not include 0.5.
PCBA (n = 128)
MUV (n = 17)
Tox21 (n = 12)
(0.00, 0.03)
(0.03, 0.34)
(0.00, 0.24)
(0.03, 0.11)
(0.18, 0.61)
(0.01, 0.35)
(0.03, 0.11)
(0.03, 0.36)
(0.01, 0.35)
W2N2-simple
(0.30, 0.46)
(0.10, 0.49)
(0.32, 0.81)
(0.17, 0.31)
(0.07, 0.43)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.19, 0.34)
(0.11, 0.52)
(0.09, 0.53)
(0.19, 0.34)
(0.14, 0.56)
(0.14, 0.61)
(0.32, 0.49)
(0.23, 0.67)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.38, 0.55)
(0.17, 0.59)
(0.35, 0.85)
(0.35, 0.52)
(0.26, 0.69)
(0.32, 0.81)
(0.28, 0.45)
(0.10, 0.47)
(0.25, 0.75)
(0.12, 0.25)
(0.07, 0.43)
(0.19, 0.68)
(0.37, 0.54)
(0.23, 0.67)
(0.32, 0.81)
(0.34, 0.51)
(0.16, 0.61)
(0.47, 0.91)
Appendix: Input featurization
For each of the experiments described in Section 4.2, we provide ﬁgures showing (a) box plots for absolute
5-fold mean AUC scores for each model and (b) diﬀerence box plots showing diﬀerences in 5-fold mean AUC
scores against a baseline model (without any y-axis cropping).
Dataset group
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. Simple
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. “simple” featurization.
Figure C.1: Comparison of models with “simple” and “full” input featurizations.
Appendix: Hyperparameter sensitivity
For each of the experiments described in Section 4.3, we provide ﬁgures showing (a) box plots for absolute
5-fold mean AUC scores for each model and (b) diﬀerence box plots showing diﬀerences in 5-fold mean AUC
scores against a baseline model (without any y-axis cropping).
Number of Weave modules
Dataset group
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. W1
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. W1 model.
Figure D.1: Comparison of models with diﬀerent numbers of Weave modules.
Alternative feature reductions
Dataset group
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. sum
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. sum reduction.
Figure D.2: Comparison of models with diﬀerent feature reduction methods.
Distance-dependent pair features
Dataset group
5-fold mean AUC
(a) Full box plot.
Dataset group
∆ 5-fold mean AUC vs. N1
(b) Diﬀerence box plot vs. N1 model.
Figure D.3: Comparison of models with diﬀerent maximum atom pair distances.
Appendix: Atom pair feature evolution
Figure 8 showed the evolution of atom features at diﬀerent stages of a graph convolution model (after
subsequent Weave modules). The following ﬁgures show the evolution of atom pair features from the same
models, using both the “full” and “simple” input featurization. As in Figure 8, the initial pair features
describe ibuprofen. Most of the initial featurization describes the graph distance between the atoms in the
pair (see Table 3). There are many blank rows since pairs separated by more than the maximum atom
pair distance are masked. Note that only unique pairs are represented (i.e. (a, b) but not (b, a)). As the
pair features move through the graph convolution network, it can be seen that similar initial featurizations
diverge as a consequence of Weave module operations.
Figure E.1: Graph convolution atom pair feature evolution using the “full” featurization in a W3N2 architecture.
Unique atom pairs are on the y-axis (one atom pair per row).
Initial pair features are shown on the left, with
whitespace separating subsequent Weave module outputs.
Figure E.2: Graph convolution atom pair feature evolution using the “simple” featurization in a W2N2 architecture.
Unique atom pairs are on the y-axis (one atom pair per row).
Initial pair features are shown on the left, with
whitespace separating subsequent Weave module outputs.
Appendix: Gaussian histogram membership functions
Table F.1: Gaussian membership functions.
Figure F.1: Visualization of the Gaussian membership functions.