In terms of numbers, morbidity burden, and
health care costs, asthma is the most important chronic disease of childhood, with estimated medical care costs over $1 billion in
2005 . Based on its recent
review of data on ozone-related health effects,
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has once again concluded that children
with asthma constitute a group that is susceptible to O3-associated adverse effects on their
disease . Hospitalization and
visits to emergency departments are major
contributors to childhood asthma-related
health care costs and account for approximately 12% of care costs for asthma in children 5–17 years of age .
Despite the large number of studies on various
asthma-related outcomes (symptoms, lung
function) in relation to ambient O3, there are
relatively few studies on O3-related hospital
discharges and emergency department (ED)
visits in children with asthma; and the results
of these studies have not been consistent [U.S.
EPA 2006 (Figures 7-8, 7-9)]. Moreover,
these studies have been concerned with associations between pollutant exposures over a few
days before hospital admission and over relatively short periods of calendar time.
Several studies illustrate ﬁndings based on
short lag periods. White and colleagues
 reported that ED visits for asthma
(1–16 years of age) to an Atlanta, Georgia,
hospital increased by 37% on the 6 days in
the summer of 1990 when the maximum
1-hr O3 concentrations exceeded 110 ppb. A
subsequent Atlanta-based ecologic study
reported that Medicaid claims for hospital
admissions for asthma decreased during the
time of the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in
parallel with reductions of ambient O3 concentrations . The
decline in O3 was attributed to the marked
decline in city traffic during the games, but
associations with other mobile source emissions were not evaluated in the regression
models. A third study from Atlanta for the
summers of 1993–1995 found similar associations with ED visits, but these investigators
could not separate effects due to particulate
matter with aerodynamic diameter ≤10 µm
(PM10) . An approximate
33% increase in ED visits for childhood
asthma was reported from eastern Canada on
days when the 1-hr maximum exceeded
75 ppb over the years 1984–1992, an association that was independent of concentrations
of sulfate and total suspended particulates
(TSP) . Data from
Washington, DC; Mexico City, Mexico; and
Madrid, Spain, support these findings of
O3-associated increases in ED visits, independent of pollens and PM10 .
In contrast to the above results, several relatively recent European studies have not found
these associations. Data from the APHEA (Air
Pollution and Health: A European Approach)
study from the period 1986–1992 from
Barcelona, Spain; Helsinki, Finland; Paris,
France; and London, UK, failed to find any
association between ED visits and ambient O3
in children < 15 years of age . However, these results were based on
O3 concentrations throughout all months of
the year. Similarly, a study in London, based
on year-long data for 12 EDs over the years
1992–1994, also failed to ﬁnd any association
between ED visits and hospitalizations for
asthma and ambient O3 concentrations for
children from birth to 14 years of age
 .
California’s South Coast Air Basin
(SoCAB) has some of the highest concentrations of O3 in the U.S. [South Coast Air
Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
2006] and will continue to be a major area of
noncompliance under proposed new O3 standards . Mobile source emissions are the main source of precursors for O3
generation . Because O3 and
other pollutant levels, in general, have been
declining over the past 25 years , this area offers an excellent opportunity
to study the relation between warm-season
ambient O3 concentrations and hospitalizations
for asthma in a large population that spans
urban and rural areas. Therefore, we undertook
an ecologic study of hospital discharges for
asthma in children from 0 (birth) to 19 years of
age over the period 1983–2000 in the SoCAB
to evaluate the effect of population-level O3
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 116 | NUMBER 8 | August 2008
Research | Children’s Health
Address correspondence to I.B. Tager, Department
of Epidemiology, University of California, Berkeley,
101 Haviland Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-7358 USA.
Telephone: (510) 642-9533. Fax: (425) 988-7868.
E-mail: 
Supplemental Material is available online at
 
We thank H. Qin, J. Bullard, and L. Cockerill for
programming and data management assistance.
This work was funded by contract 01-346 from
the California Air Resources Board.
The authors declare they have no competing
ﬁnancial interests.
Received 23 May 2007; accepted 5 March 2008.
Ambient Ozone Concentrations Cause Increased Hospitalizations
for Asthma in Children: An 18-Year Study in Southern California
Kelly Moore,1 Romain Neugebauer,1 Fred Lurmann,2 Jane Hall,3 Vic Brajer,3 Sianna Alcorn,2 and Ira Tager4
1Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Heath, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA; 2Sonoma Technology, Inc., Petaluma,
California, USA; 3Department of Economics and Institute for Economic and Environmental Studies, California State University, Fullerton,
California, USA; 4Division of Epidemiology, School of Public Heath, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA
BACKGROUND: Asthma is the most important chronic disease of childhood. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency has concluded that children with asthma continue to be susceptible to ozone-associated adverse effects on their disease.
OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to evaluate time trends in associations between declining
warm-season O3 concentrations and hospitalization for asthma in children.
METHODS: We undertook an ecologic study of hospital discharges for asthma during the high O3
seasons in California’s South Coast Air Basin (SoCAB) in children who ranged in age from birth to
19 years from 1983 to 2000. We used standard association and causal statistical analysis methods.
Hospital discharge data were obtained from the State of California; air pollution data were
obtained from the California Air Resources Board, and demographic data from the 1980, 1990,
and 2000 U.S. Census. SoCAB was divided into 195 spatial grids, and quarterly average O3, sulfur
dioxide, particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter ≤10 µm, nitrogen dioxide, and carbon
monoxide were assigned to each unit for 3-month periods along with demographic variables.
RESULTS: O3 was the only pollutant associated with increased hospital admissions over the study
period. Inclusion of a variety of demographic and weather variables accounted for all of the non-O3
temporal changes in hospitalizations. We found a time-independent, constant effect of ambient
levels of O3 and quarterly hospital discharge rates for asthma. We estimate that the average effect of
a 10-ppb mean increase in any given mean quarterly 1-hr maximum O3 over the 18-year median of
87.7 ppb was a 4.6% increase in the same quarterly outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that at current levels of O3 experienced in Southern California,
O3 contributes to an increased risk of hospitalization for children with asthma.
KEY WORDS: air pollution, asthma, children, epidemiology, ozone. Environ Health Perspect
116:1063–1070 . doi:10.1289/ehp.10497 available via [Online 6 March 2008]
exposure on asthma-related hospital discharge
over time. Our approach is based on conventional linear modeling with adjustment for temporal factors that could confound the causal
effect of interest. Our approach has several
novel features: a) We used a very ﬂexible, dataadaptive model ﬁtting program that is based on
multiple cross-validations ; b) pollutants other than O3
could enter our modeling at equivalent levels of
complexity, as for O3; and c) we used marginal
structural models (MSM) to support the interpretation of population-level effects of O3 on
the outcomes .
Study area. The study area was the portion of
California’s SoCAB covered by the grids
shown in Figure 1. The 20,000-km2 area
extends from 34.6° latitude at its most northern reach to 33.2° latitude at its most southern extent. It is bounded on the west by
–118.9° longitude and the Paciﬁc Ocean, and
extends to –116.8° longitude at its eastern
end. We selected this location because it contained many areas that consistently exceeded
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for
O3 during the 1980–2000 study period . Nonetheless, the area also experienced marked reductions in 1-hr and 8-hr
maximum O3 concentrations over this time.
Ambient pollutant data and exposure
methods. We estimated the population’s exposure to O3, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide,
carbon monoxide, PM with aerodynamic diameter ≤2.5 µm (PM2.5), and PM10 from ambient air quality measurements obtained from a
network of stations that began monitoring for
most of the pollutants before 1980. The number and locations of air monitoring stations
(Figure 1) varied over the study period. The
number of stations with valid air quality data in
or near the grid in a given year varied from 45
to 55 for O3, 33 to 41 for NO2, 28 to 39 for
CO, and 9 to 56 for PM10. We compiled quarterly average concentrations of the 1-hr daily
maximum O3 and 24-hr average NO2, SO2,
and CO from hourly measurements of gases.
We compiled quarterly average concentrations
of the 24-hr average PM10 and PM2.5 from
monthly averages of every sixth day PM10 measurements and daily, every third day, and 2-week
average PM2.5 measurements . The air quality data were
complemented with quarterly average daily
1-hr minimum and 24-hr average temperature
and relative humidity data obtained from the
SoCAB and National Weather Service measurements (National Climatic Data Center,
NOAA Satellite and Information Service:
 
California PM10 data are not widely available before 1988. Special study PM10 mass
data available in Burbank, downtown Los
Angeles, Long Beach, Los Alamitos, Costa
Mesa, Azusa, Rubidoux, Perris, and Banning
were used for 1985–1987 . Collocated PM10 and TSP data for
1988 through 1992 in Los Angeles, Orange,
San Bernardino, and Riverside Counties indicated that daily PM10 concentrations were correlated with daily TSP and, on average, were
54% of TSP concentrations. The PM10 concentrations for 1980–1984 were estimated
from the TSP data based on this relation.
PM2.5 data were available for only 1994–2000.
The study domain was divided into twohundred 10 km × 10 km spatial grids that covered the populated portion of the SoCAB, of
which 195 were used. The population, other
demographic, and health outcome data were
aggregated into the grid cells [Supplemental
Material, Figure S1 ]. The air quality and meteorologic data
were interpolated spatially from the monitoring stations to the grid cell centroids based on
inverse distance-squared weighting. Maximum
interpolation radii of 50 and 100 km were
used for pollutants and meteorologic parameters, respectively. Although 100% of the grids
had an O3 air quality station within 50 km,
73% of the grids had a station within 5–25 km
of the grid centroids and 13% of grids had a
station located within the grid on average [see
Supplemental Material for other pollutant interpolation distances]. This interpolation approach worked
reasonably well in this application, because the
spatial coverage in the SOCAB monitoring
network is good (typically, stations located
20–30 km apart); and spatial gradients in
monthly average concentrations are modest.
Our principal exposure of interest was
1-hr daily, maximum O3. We chose this
measure, because the same 1-hr maximum
standard was in place for most of the study
period; and the 1-hr maximum is the most
commonly used metric in O3 epidemiologic
studies. Quarterly, average O3 concentrations
were low and showed little variability from
October through March [see Supplemental
Material, Figure S6 for sample quarters]. Therefore, we confined our analyses to April–June (quarter 2)
and July–September (quarter 3), which constitute all months with the highest and most
variable O3 concentrations.
Hospital discharge and demographic data.
Since 1983, hospital discharges (diagnoses,
demographic data and medical payments) have
been reported semiannually by all hospitals
licensed in California. Patient-level data were
extracted from a CD-ROM (Healthcare
Information Resource Center, Sacramento,
CA) and included: patient age category, county
of residence and 5-digit ZIP Code, ethnicity,
sex, major diagnostic category (plus four secondary), major procedure (plus four secondary), quarter admitted, length of stay, and
hospital ID number . We focused on quarterly
hospital discharges for asthma [International
Classiﬁcation of Diseases, 9th Revision code 493,
ICD-10 
code J45/46] listed as the first discharge
Moore et al.
VOLUME 116 | NUMBER 8 | August 2008 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 1. Study domain grid system with location of pollutant monitors and population density. AQ, air quality.
AQ monitor stations
People/sq. km
1,001– 3,000
3,001– 5,000
5,001– 7,000
7,001– 9,000
9,001– 12,000
12,001– 25,000
Kilometers
diagnosis for children and adolescents from
birth through 19 years of age. We included discharges in which the ﬁrst listed diagnoses were
acute sinusitis (ICD-9 461; ICD-10 J01) or
pneumonia (ICD-9 480–483, 485–487; ICD-
10 J10–J18) and asthma was the second listed
diagnosis, because we could not be sure of the
extent to which the presence of asthma actually
led to the hospitalization [see Supplemental
Material ].
We obtained data from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s decadal surveys for years 1980, 1990,
and 2000 [see Supplemental Material ]. We reviewed all income,
demographic, and residential data and selected
covariates that were considered likely to affect
asthma morbidity and were likely to show spatial clustering and temporo-spatial trends
(graphs available on request from authors).
We selected 57 sociodemographic variables.
The finest spatial resolution for which
hospital discharge data were available was the
5-digit postal ZIP code of the patient’s residence; the patient’s street address, 9-digit ZIP
code, or census block were not available.
Population-weighted ZIP-to-grid allocation
factors were developed with geographic information system (GIS) tools for 1980–1984,
1995–1994, and 1995–2000. Separate allocations factors were developed for males and
females for < 1 year and 1–19 years of age.
[see Supplemental Material for details ].
Spatial allocation of demographic data to
exposure grids was based on the smallest geographic unit for which census data were available. We used GIS software (ArcGIS9; ESRI,
Redlands, CA) to map the demographic data
to grids. Eight population variables from
1980 and one population variable from 1990
and 2000 were renormalized after the spatial
allocation to insure consistency across census
topics (e.g., population by race was normalized by the total population; population by
sex, age, and race was normalized for consistency with population by race and population
by sex). Population and other demographic
parameters were estimated for the intracensus
years by linear interpolation of the gridded
data for 1980, 1990, and 2000.
Data analysis. Data structure. The data
consist of 195 geographic units (grids) with
quarterly measurements from 1983 through
2001 that include 14,040 records and 72
quarters for children birth to 19 years of age.
We calculated the proportion of asthmarelated hospital discharges as the number of
asthma-related hospital discharges in each
grid in each quarter divided by the total
population birth to 19 years of age in the corresponding grid and quarter. After removal of
nine outliers, we used data for quarters 2 and
3 only (7,011 observations).
There were no missing values for the proportion of asthma-related discharges or quarterly O3. Among the 47 covariates considered,
35 had no missing values. Among the
12 remaining covariates, the proportion of
missing values ranged from 0.4% to 6.2%.
Statistical models. We denote the observed
data structure by O = [W—(71),A–(71,Y–(72)]
representing quarterly measurements from
time 0 to 72 of the confounders, O3 levels and
proportion of asthma-related hospital discharges: a) The history of O3 is denoted by
A–(71) = [A(0),…,A(71)], and A(t) represents
the O3 level measured at time t; b) the history
of asthma-related hospital discharges as a percentage of the total area-speciﬁc population is
denoted by Y–(72) = [Y(1),…,Y(72)], and Y(t)
represents the proportion of asthma discharges
measured at time t; and c) the history of potential time-dependent confounders of the effect
of O3 on asthma-related hospital discharges is
denoted by W—(K ) = [W(0),…,W(K )], where
W(t) is a multivariate vector of potential confounders measured at time t: socioeconomic
and demographic variables, co-pollutants, and
meteorologic variables.
Our modeling approach aims at the investigation of the effect of A(t – 1) on Y(t). In
this study, the outcome at time t [Y(t)] and
exposure at time t – 1 [A(t – 1)] are actually
measured during the same quarter, which
does not violate the time-ordering assumption
on which are based valid causal inferences
(the exposure precedes the outcome). Because
we consider the effect of O3 on asthmarelated hospital discharges collected during
quarters 2 and 3 only, we thus have 36 outcomes of interest rather than 72.
A typical assumption that is often not
stated explicitly is that the observed data consist of n independent and identically distributed observations from the random variable O
with distribution P. In this analysis, we make
the assumption that the observed data consist
of n = 195 random variables Oi that describe
each spatial/geographic unit i, i = 1,…,n, each
with distribution Pi. Under this assumption, it
follows that mutual independence between the
random variables Oi, conditional on the exposure regimen, is a reasonable approximation
[see Supplemental Material for additional
details ].
We chose to investigate the effect of O3
on the asthma-related hospital discharge proportion for quarterly exposure to O3 only;
that is, we did not consider the effect of an
O3 history over multiple quarters. This decision was motivated by our view that most of
the effect of O3 could be captured by the
exposure period of only one quarter—by estimation of the effect of O3 during a given
quarter on the outcome during that same
quarter in the seasons with the highest levels
of O3. Because the experimental units are
geographic areas rather than individuals, the
population in the units was constantly changing over the 18-year study period; however,
within a given quarter, the population was
relatively stable. Another reason for selection
of the short exposure period relates to power
(sample size, n = 195) for identification of
effects that extend over a longer exposure
period .
We estimated this effect of O3 on the proportion of asthma-related hospital discharges
with two approaches: the traditional method of
regression of the proportion of asthma-related
hospital discharges on O3 and confounder; and
a method based on history-restricted marginal
structural models (HRMSMs) . In contrast to the usual MSM
approach, HRMSMs allow the investigator to
specify the time interval over which the history
of exposure is to be considered—a critical issue
for this analysis.
For both approaches, working models
considered were semiparametric linear models.
The rationale for use of linear models is presented in the Supplemental Material .
The deletion/substitution/addition (DSA)
algorithm was used for all model selections
required for the traditional approach and the
nuisance parameters in the HRMSM approach
 . This is a dataadaptive model selection procedure based on
cross-validation that relies on deletion, substitution, and addition moves to search through a
large space of possible polynomial models. The
criterion for model selection is based not on
p-values but on a loss function (empirical and
cross-validated residual sum of squares). The
DSA procedure is publicly available as an
R package ( 
~laan/Software/). All 7,011 observations were
provided to all DSA runs. The DSA assumes
that data are missing at random when searching
for the best predictive linear model of the proportion of asthma-related hospital discharges.
Traditional regression approach. The traditional approach to estimate the effect of
A(t – 1) on Y(t) is to regress the outcome,
Y(t), on the exposure, A(t – 1), and all confounders. Potential confounders are: W—
(t – 1) = [W(1), …,W(t – 1)]), Y–(t – 1), and
A–(t – 1). Under the assumption of no unobserved confounders, this approach allows the
investigation of the effects of O3 at each quarter, A(t – 1), on Y(t), conditional on the past
confounders in the regression model. It is realistic to assume that O3 levels before quarter t
[i.e., A–(t – 1)] do not affect the outcome in
quarter t; thus, we did not consider them as
confounders. Similarly, we did not consider
Ozone and hospitalization for asthma
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 116 | NUMBER 8 | August 2008
past quarter discharges [i.e., Y–(t – 1)]. Among
all potential covariates W
—(t – 1), we only considered as potential confounders all same-quarter covariates W(t – 1) and only copollutants
and meteorologic variables from the previous
quarter and previous year included in W(t – 2)
and W(t – 5). This allowed us to maximize
control of possible long-term trends in other
pollutants on the current quarter’s outcome.
Forty-seven remaining covariates were identified as potential confounders of the effect of
O3 at quarter t – 1 on the proportion of
asthma-related hospital discharges at quarter t.
Among these 47 covariates, only 29 were considered in the analysis, based on their univariate association with the proportion of
asthma-related hospital discharges and O3 levels
[see Supplemental Material, Table S1 ]; this subset of 29 potential
confounders is denoted with W
— × (t – 1).
We selected a pooled model for E[Y(t)|
A(t – 1),W— × (t – 1)] across time with the
DSA [see Supplemental Material ]. The standard errors for the
coefficients in the selected model were
obtained with the generalized estimation equation procedure (semiparametric modeling with
the independence correlation structure).
This traditional approach does not answer
directly our original question of interest: the
population-level effect of A(t – 1) on Y(t);
indeed, this method provides the estimate of
the effect conditional on confounders W— ×
(t – 1) which only correspond with the population-level effect estimate of interest when
confounders are not effect modiﬁers.
HRMSM. To obtain an estimate of the
population-level, causal effect of O3 on the
proportion of asthma-related hospital discharges, we applied an HRMSM . HRMSMs have been developed
to address situations where only part of the
exposure history is relevant [for details, see
Supplemental Material ]. The exposure period considered is a
single quarter as opposed to the entire
exposure history.
We implemented two estimators of
HRMSM causal parameters: the inverse probability of treatment weighted (IPTW) and
G-computation. Conﬁdence intervals (CIs) and
p-values for the two estimates were obtained
with 10,000 bootstrap iterations, where resampling was based on the 195 independent grids.
Characteristics of the total population who
resided in the study domain (Figure 1) over the
84 quarters are summarized in
Table 1. For a summary of the characteristics
of the population of asthma discharges from
birth to 19 years of age for quarters 2 and 3 for
1983–2000, see Supplemental Material,
Table S4 .
O3 concentrations declined steadily over
the entire study period [Supplemental Material,
Figure S8_a ]. Median
1-hr maximum and 8-hr average median O3 for
quarters 2–3 declined across all grids (Figure 2).
Median 1-hr maxima also declined in
quarters 1 and 4 [Supplemental Material, Table
S5 ]. Substantial
declines were seen for the other pollutants as
well [see Supplemental Material, Table S5,
Figure S8_b ]. The
distribution of the quarterly population was
skewed toward areas at the lower two-thirds
of the quarterly O3 distributions [see
Supplemental Material, Figure S9 ]. During 1980–2000, 25.7%
of the gridded, quarterly, average 1-hr maximum O3 concentrations exceeded the level of
California’s daily 1-hr standard (90 ppb), and
8.2% exceeded the federal daily 1-hr standard
of 0.12 ppm. For quarters 2 and 3 and years
1983 through 2000, 47.5% and 13.2% of the
quarterly, average, 1-hr maximum O3 concentrations exceeded the California and federal
Moore et al.
VOLUME 116 | NUMBER 8 | August 2008 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 1. Selected demographic variables, all ages: 1980–2000.
Spatial grid values for 84 quarters [median (IQR); range]
Total population (no.)
13,209,192 (11,847,989–14,047,041; 10,572,161–14,785,147)
14.8 (9.2–23.7; 0–78.8)
75.9 (61.8–84.4; 1.9–100)
African American
2.1 (0.9–4.9; 0–55.4)
2.9 (1–6.2; 0–31.6)
1.5 (0.8–2.6; 0–71.7)
Residence (%)
Same house entire period
43.3 (36.5–49.5; 0–100)
Different house, same county
30.2 (24.7–35; 0–61.2)
Different California county
15.1 (6.5–25.5; 0–100)
Different state
9.3 (6.8–12.1; 0–58.5)
Unemployed (all ages)
35.3 (30.5–42.6; 17.8–72.8)
Below poverty level
9.4 (6–13.1; 0–100)
IQR, interquartile range. Range is 25th–75th percentile.
Figure 2. Distribution of population number by 400 quantiles of quarterly 1-hr maximum O3 over quarters 2
and 3, 1983–2000.
Mean no. of individuals
daily 1-hr standard, respectively .
The median 1-hr and 8-hr maximum
average O3 levels were highly correlated (r =
0.99) (Table 2). During 1980–2000, O3 concentrations showed moderate correlation with
PM10 and little correlation with the other
pollutants. O3 and PM10 are correlated on a
quarterly averaging time, because wind-blown
dust and resuspended road-dust emissions
cause relatively high PM10 levels during the
dry season when O3 levels also are high.
In the conventional regression model, the
identical model was selected when O3 was
forced into the model or when the DSA was
free to choose any variable (Table 3). Of the
seven [of 29; see Supplemental Material,
Table S1 ] other
variables selected into the models, none was
another pollutant (Table 3) [see Supplemental
Material for details of model selection ]. Thus, it is unlikely that
the association is confounded by other pollutants. In addition, time was not selected as a
main effect or interaction variable—an observation indicating that the unit effect of O3 on
the proportion of asthma-related discharges
was constant over the study period, despite the
decline in the levels of O3 and all other pollutants measured. The estimated effect of a
10-ppb increase in the quarterly average 1-hr
maximum O3 was 1.4 discharges per 105 ageeligible population (95% CI, 0.71–2.09 per
105 population). The ﬁnal model was used to
predict the proportion of discharges at the
median O3 concentration (87.7 ppb) over all
grids and all quarters (3.12 × 10–4). A 10-ppb
increase above this level is estimated to lead to
a 4.6% increase in the proportion of discharges (3.26 × 10–4).
To determine the extent to which time
contributed to confounding, the DSA was
run first only with time variables. When the
time variables selected by the DSA were
forced into a model that also forced in O3
into the same model, no other variables were
selected by the DSA. This indicates that the
demographic variables included in the models
in Table 3 were capturing the overall temporal confounding related to population demographic and other unmeasured time-varying
factors. This is seen clearly in Figure 3. The
model with only time variables shows a clear
temporal trend in hospital discharges. In contrast, the model with O3 and demographic
variables shows a nearly constant proportion
of hospital discharges over the study quarters.
To provide population-level estimates of
pollutant effects, we used G-computation and
IPTW to ﬁt an HRMSM. Treatment models
(models that relate cofounders to quarterly O3
concentrations and include other confounding
variables) on which IPTW estimation relies
[Supplemental Material ] demonstrated that the experimental treatment assignment assumption was not tenable.
We applied a diagnostic tool to assess the bias
in the IPTW estimator due to the experimental
treatment assignment (ETA) violation and showed a 76% bias in comparison to the G-computation estimate (Table 4).
Therefore, we relied on the G-computation
estimator. The interpretation of the MSM
parameter estimate is as follows: If, contrary to
fact, the population experienced a 10-ppb
increase in quarterly O3, then hospital admissions would increase by 1.4 × 105 age-eligible
population at any given quarter. This would
represent the same effect estimated by the conventional regression analysis. In other words,
the results from the MSM and conventional
analyses, in this particular analysis, give identical parameter estimates because there are no
interaction terms in the conventional model.
Discussion
The most recent U.S. EPA synthesis of
ambient O3 health effects concludes that children with asthma suffer acute adverse health
consequences at current ambient levels of O3
 . Among these adverse outcomes, asthma-related hospital discharges are
based on some of the least consistent data and hospital discharges for asthma, birth to 19 years of age: SoCAB 1983–2000.
Regressiona
O3 parameter estimate
O3 forced into regressionb
1.4 × 10–6
3.5 × 10–7
5.0 × 10–5
O3 not forced into regression
1.4 × 10–6
3.5 × 10–7
5.0 × 10–5
aThe DSA was run with 29 candidate variables that were marginally associated with the outcome and O3 (p-value < 0.05).
The DSA was run with 10 different random data splits and selected the same model for all 10 runs for the forced model
and 8 times for the unforced model. The two models that differed included an O3 term. PM10 was not selected into the
analyses when either all measurements were used or when measurements were restricted to those directly measured
 . To convert 1-hr maximum O3 to 8-hr (0100–1800 hours) mean, divide the 1-hr maximum by the following conversion factor: 1.3279 (± 9.97 × 10-4). For example, an 8-hr maximum of 70 ppb corresponds to a 1-hr maximum of 93 ppb in
our data. The conversion factor is based on the linear regression of 1-hr maximum on the 8-hr maximum (t-value, 1330.58).
bThe DSA selected 7 other terms in addition to O3: white race, white race3 (cubed), income = $20,000–$39,999, average
temperature for the quarter, relative humidity3, median income as a continuous variable, foreign born. Units are increases
in discharges in total age-speciﬁc population per ppb (see Supplemental Material for details).
Figure 3. Predicted proportions of quarterly hospital discharges based on a model that included only time
variables (triangles) and the model in Table 4 that includes O3 and the demographic variables (squares) for
quarters 2 (A) and 3 (B).
Predicted outcome
Predicted outcome
Table 4. Marginal structural model analysis of causal association between quarterly 1-hr maximum O3
concentrations (ppb) and hospital discharges for asthma, birth to 19 years of age: SoCAB 1983–2000.
MSM estimator
Parameter estimate
G-computation
1.4 × 10–6
3.6 × 10–7
5.5 × 10–5
2.9 × 10–7
3.5 × 10–7
Bias due to ETA violation (%)a
aETA bias estimated using a diagnostic tool based on parametric bootstrap sampling from an estimated data-generating
distribution to Wang et al. .
Figure 7-9, U.S. EPA 2006). In some studies,
asthma discharges are not separated from
other respiratory diseases of childhood . Although some of the
inconsistency likely relates to differences in
populations and pollutant mixtures, some of
it also could relate to the relatively short time
periods and
special circumstances 
under which the data were collected and the
inability to separate O3 effects from those of
other pollutants The
present ecologic study addresses these problems through evaluation of the relation
between hospital discharges for asthma for
infants, children, and adolescents and changes
in warm-season ambient O3 concentrations in
a large, ethnically/racially diverse region
of Southern California over 18 years
 . This region has seen changing
pollutant levels and population structure over
both time and space during the study period.
Of note is the decline in the percentage of
native-born residents, from 40% in 1980 to
30% in 2000, and the decline in the percentage who listed their primary race/ethnicity as
Caucasian, from approximately 80% in
1980 to approximately 60% in 2000 [see
Supplemental Material for additional details
 ].
Our data indicate that, despite consistent
and substantial declines in ambient warm-season O3 concentrations in the area of study
(Figure 3A), there has been a time-independent, constant effect of ambient levels of O3
on quarterly hospital discharge rates for
asthma. For example, we estimate that the
average effect of a 10-ppb mean increase in
mean quarterly 1-hr maximum O3 over the
18-year median of 87.7 ppb was a 4.6%
increase (point estimate) in quarterly hospital
discharges for asthma (increase from 3.12 to
3.26 × 10–4 age-eligible population) over a
time period in which the median age-eligible
population was approximately 4 million persons. Moreover, from a regulatory policy perspective, if the national 8-hr maximum were
set at 75 ppb instead of 70 ppb (~ 6.6 ppb difference in the 1-hr max), our results suggest
that there could be an excess of O3-season,
asthma-related hospital admissions for children in the study area of approximately 3.0%
(point estimate) above what could be expected
at a more protective standard. Further, our
data indicate that the O3-related asthma discharges (the pollutant mixture remaining the
same) would be affected by changes in demography that likely will occur; and caution needs
to be exercised in terms of extrapolation into
the future.
Several features of our analysis strengthen
the quantitative estimates and the apparent
lack of time dependence of the O3 effect:
First, we used a very flexible, multiple
cross-validation model fitting algorithm in
which the constraints on the model were as follows: a) maximum model size of 10 variables;
b) maximum power of any individual variable
(includes time) of 3; and c) a maximum of
two-way interactions between the 29 covariates
considered, such that the sum of powers of
each covariate in the interaction term is ≤3.
Thus, the ﬂexibility of the models allowed the
description of complex associations between
changing demography, meteorologic conditions, and all temporal confounders for which
time was a surrogate. A direct by-product of
this ﬂexible model ﬁtting is that the form of
the O3–hospital discharge relation was free to
take any polynomial form over time. This
approach is similar in flexibility to model
ﬁtting with spline functions.
Second, the 24-hr concentrations of PM10,
NO2, and CO could enter the model at equivalent levels of complexity as O3 and any other
covariate and in interaction with time. Thus,
we did not start with the a priori assumption
that warm-season O3 would be the only or the
most important component of the four pollutants for which we warm-season data.
Third, we ran our analysis 10 separate
times, each time with a different split for cross
validation (equivalent to 50 splits of the data).
All model runs selected O3 and no other pollutant, and the identical model with covariates was selected 8 of 10 times (Table 3).
Fourth, we used an MSM approach to
investigate the marginal (population-level)
effects of O3 on the outcome . This approach approximates what
would have been observed if we could have
randomized all of the spatial units at each time
point to a quarterly mean O3 concentration.
The results of this analysis indicated that the
conventional statistical association model, in
this particular analysis, was equivalent to the
G-computation estimates of the HRMSM
parameters—an observation that is not surprising, given that there were no interactions
in the association model. Therefore, under
certain assumptions noted above, the O3 parameter (Table 3) can be interpreted as a causal,
unconditional (i.e., not stratum speciﬁc) population-level effect estimate. In other words, if,
contrary to fact, the median quarterly average
1-hr maximum increased by 10 ppb in all geographic units, the quarterly average hospital
discharge rate would be expected to increase by
1.4 discharges/105 age-eligible population.
This causal interpretation relies on the counterfactual framework embodied in HRMSMs
 , particularly the
assumption of no unmeasured confounders.
The fact that, in our analyses, the association
between O3 hospital discharges can be interpreted further as the population-level effect
estimate of O3 based on the G-computation
estimator of an HRMSM relies on the critical
assumption that the conventional associational
model selected with the DSA algorithm is correctly specified (particularly the absence of
interaction terms between O3 and covariates),
the assumption of correct model speciﬁcation
is embodied in all analyses of observational
data. The inference for this causal effect estimate was obtained by bootstrap (without consideration of additional variability introduced
by the model selection procedure as is the case
with virtually all reports of conventional analyses). We are exploring alternate causal estimators of causal parameters that do not rely on
the ETA assumption to validate the results
presented in this paper to further verify the
validity of the inference, and a preliminary
assessment of this latter analysis is supportive.
The full results of this alternative analysis are
the subject of a subsequent paper.
Finally, the results demonstrate that the
addition of O3 and demographic variables to
our analyses removed all of the time trend in
the hospital discharge data (Figure 3). Finally,
although we included discharges with a primary diagnosis of pneumonia or acute sinusitis, we do not think that this has biased our
results. Our estimate of the median quarterly
discharge rate for asthma is at the lower end of
such estimates for all or part of the age range
that we included .
It is difﬁcult to compare our results with
other studies because we used a different time
reference—3-month intervals—in contrast to
a daily time metric in most other studies
 .
The most important factor that governed the
choice of the time metric related to the fact
that, for practical purposes, O3 is an outdoor
pollutant whose indoor concentrations are
determined by household ventilation (open
windows, use of air conditioners) . Because people of all ages spend
most of their days indoors , we reasoned that a 3-month interval,
based on typical patterns of O3 concentrations
to which people would be exposed during
their times out of doors, would provide a
more stable population-level estimate than
would be the case for shorter time intervals,
such as days or weeks. Several consequences
stemmed from this choice. Because most studies of the health effects of short-term exposures
to O3 indicate that O3 impacts on health
occur within a few days after exposures , we did not
feel that it was justified to lag population
exposure by 3 months (i.e., one quarter).
Therefore, we related O3 concentration in a
given quarter to hospital discharges in that
quarter. On its face, this would appear to violate the requirement for preservation of temporal sequence. However, given that we used
Moore et al.
VOLUME 116 | NUMBER 8 | August 2008 • Environmental Health Perspectives
average hospital discharges at the end of a
quarter, this choice is valid. Furthermore, each
of the 195 spatial units was assigned its spatially speciﬁc average quarterly discharge rate
and O3 concentration, and the data were
treated as a repeated-measures problem over
the 36 quarters; we have accounted for differences in the mean exposure over space and
time. In this regard, some daily time-series
studies may have violated the temporality
assumption in that their designation of lag 0
often includes the day of hospital admission.
To be sure that longer-term trends for other
pollutants did not confound our O3 exposure
estimates, we considered previous quarter and
previous year PM10, NO2, and CO.
The potential for spatial correlation to
result in incorrect variance estimates for exposure outcome measures in time series studies
of health effects of air pollutants has been
noted . Although
we did not perform a time-series analysis, we
did address the issue of spatial correlation by
not assuming that the data for each unit are
obtained from independent draws from a
common distribution but rather from each of
195 distributions whose similarity can be
explained by close geographic proximity, conditional on the exposure regimen, and thus the
independence assumption is reasonable.
Although we report the results as “O3related effects,” O3 is likely to be the best
marker (of the pollutants available for analysis) for the gaseous oxidant species produced
by the complex photochemistry that occurs in
the SoCAB during the warm months of the
year and involves oxides of nitrogen and
hydrocarbons, largely from mobile source
emissions. O3 is the most abundant oxidant
in the urban atmosphere; however, the mixture also includes peroxyacetylnitrate, hydrogen peroxide, organic peroxides, and the
hydroxyl, hydroperoxy, and many organic
peroxy radicals . Several epidemiologic studies have shown that the oxidant properties of ambient air contribute to
adverse health outcomes in persons with and
without asthma . For example, Romieu et al. studied asthmatics
in Mexico City and demonstrated that among
the pollutant measurements for SO2, PM10,
NO2, and O3, O3 was most closely associated
with decrements in lung function in children
and were reversed by antioxidant vitamin supplementation. Relevant to our study, the
effects were most marked in those with severe
asthma—the pool of subjects out of which
hospital admissions are most likely to occur.
The ﬁndings in these studies have been supported by controlled O3 exposure studies in
which subjects were placed on diets supplemented with antioxidant vitamins and vegetable oils and studies of
airways reactivity after controlled O3 exposure
 .
In summary, we conducted exhaustive
analyses to address many of the outstanding
issues related to reported associations between
O3 and use of hospital services for asthma.
Although additional work is ongoing to buttress the causal interpretation that we have
given to our results, our data support and
extend other observations that ambient O3
(highly oxidant, ambient, warm-season environments) causes increases in hospital admissions in children with asthma. Moreover, the
linearity of the relation that we observed indicates that these excess asthma hospital discharges can be expected to continue at levels of
air quality experienced in southern California.