ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 12 November 2014
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01278
Face-to-face or face-to-screen? Undergraduates’ opinions
and test performance in classroom vs. online learning
Nenagh Kemp* and Rachel Grieve
Discipline of Psychology, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia
Edited by:
Nicola Pitchford, University of
Nottingham, UK
Reviewed by:
Jessica S. Dunn, University of
Nottingham, Malaysia
Michelle Drouin, Indiana
University-Purdue University Fort
Wayne, USA
*Correspondence:
Nenagh Kemp, Division of
Psychology, School of Medicine,
University of Tasmania, Locked Bag
30, Hobart 7001, TAS, Australia
e-mail: 
As electronic communication becomes increasingly common, and as students juggle
study, work, and family life, many universities are offering their students more ﬂexible
learning opportunities. Classes once delivered face-to-face are often replaced by
online activities and discussions. However, there is little research comparing students’
experience and learning in these two modalities. The aim of this study was to compare
undergraduates’ preference for, and academic performance on, class material and
assessment presented online vs. in traditional classrooms. Psychology students (N = 67)
at an Australian university completed written exercises, a class discussion, and a written
test on two academic topics. The activities for one topic were conducted face-to-face,
and the other online, with topics counterbalanced across two groups. The results showed
that students preferred to complete activities face-to-face rather than online, but there
was no signiﬁcant difference in their test performance in the two modalities. In their
written responses, students expressed a strong preference for class discussions to
be conducted face-to-face, reporting that they felt more engaged, and received more
immediate feedback, than in online discussion. A follow-up study with a separate group
(N = 37) conﬁrmed that although students appreciated the convenience of completing
written activities online in their own time, they also strongly preferred to discuss course
content with peers in the classroom rather than online. It is concluded that online and
face-to-face activities can lead to similar levels of academic performance, but that students
would rather do written activities online but engage in discussion in person. Course
developers could aim to structure classes so that students can beneﬁt from both the
ﬂexibility of online learning, and the greater engagement experienced in face-to-face
discussion.
Keywords: online learning, e-learning, face-to-face learning, university, discussion forums
INTRODUCTION
With changing student lifestyles and fast-developing technology, universities are increasingly offering more “ﬂexible” learning
environments. Commensurate with the opportunities that technological advances afford, for over a decade the
provision of online, e-learning experiences has undergone rapid
expansion in the higher education sector. Today, online learning
is part of the student experience for a substantial proportion of
university students in a variety of countries . The current study aimed
to compare students’ experience and performance in both online
and traditional face-to-face learning experiences.
The rise of e-learning has helped to encourage students to
take on more responsibility for their own acquisition of knowledge . In a traditional, teacher-centered model of
teaching, the lecturer transmits knowledge to students, with little input from those students . However, the shift to less traditional classes has coincided with a greater focus on more student-centered learning,
with the lecturer facilitating or managing the students’ learning, rather than simply transmitting information . Because of the more self-directed learning assumed to
occur in online environments, online learning may have the
potential to produce more in-depth discussions and to improve
the quality of learning, as well as having the practical bene-
ﬁts of encouraging wider student participation and increasing
the cost-effectiveness of education, compared to traditional faceto-face learning .
A timely example is that of ﬂipped classrooms, whereby the students engage in active learning (often via vodcasts or in online
discussions) and the instructor provides support and scaffolding
 .
Given the potential pedagogical advantages of online learning, there is a pressing need to formulate an evidence-based
understanding of best practice in this area. However, despite the
increasing research interest in e-learning, there seems to be little consistency in the training that lecturers receive in developing
online materials. This may be an artifact of a diverse research
base. For example, many studies have focused on the efﬁciency,
content and delivery method that teaching staff have developed
 , while
the perceptions and experiences of the students themselves have
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 1
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
been largely neglected . Some teaching staff seem to perceive web-based
platforms simply as an alternative method for presenting the traditional content, whereas others might look for more innovative
ways of using such platforms to improve students’ engagement
and thus their learning outcomes . Much of the initial experience of e-learning failed to live up
to learners’ expectations , partly because of technological constraints, and partly because of the early instructional
approaches taken . Even today, students in different courses can have quite different experiences of
online learning. There is a clear need for more research into what
does and does not work in online learning, but also for a focus
on the student experience in the increasingly digital landscape of
tertiary education.
The worldwide trend toward online learning provision has
resulted in numerous online-only courses, and universities in
Australia are no exception . However, the student experience in online classes is a different one from in traditional face-to-face classes, and patterns
of engagement seem to differ between the two . For example, Otter et al. found that students in online-only classes felt more disconnected from their
peers and lecturers, more obliged to be self-directed in their studies, and less aided by their lecturer, than their lecturers believe
them to be. Students can also feel daunted by the technological
expectations of online study, especially if they start off without sufﬁcient technical knowledge or support .
Most of the research to date has focused on courses offered
entirely online. Yet, an increasing number of face-to-face courses
are beginning to incorporate some online components, in which
traditional in-class activities are supplemented, rather than
replaced, with online activities . However, very little is known how students respond to this kind of “blended
e-learning,” especially when they have enrolled in a face-to-face
class, rather than one which they expect in advance to be completed online. This represents a substantial gap in the educational
literature, as there are potentially important implications for student engagement, performance, and attrition. In general, student
engagement in traditional classes is positively associated with
student engagement and academic performance, although the
magnitude of these effects may be small .
Some research suggests that participation in learning technology
can itself increase engagement and learning ,
and ﬂipped classrooms are emerging as a promising studentcentered paradigm . However, a deeper
consideration of these positive outcomes is warranted, as outcomes seem to depend on the nature of the online activities, and
the way that students interact with them. For example, Davies
and Graff found that students who interacted and participated more in online discussion did not show signiﬁcantly better
academic performance than students who were less involved in
that discussion. In contrast, Evans et al. showed that students performed much better when their online course material
was accessible via an interactive, navigable format than via a series
of scrollable web-pages. Thus, there is mixed evidence about the
extent to which some online activities might help or hinder students’ marks, compared to more traditional, face-to-face classes.
There are various reasons to expect that students might prefer at least some aspects of online learning to traditional classes.
Previous researchers have suggested that in contrast to the faster,
real-time pace of face-to-face classes, the extra time available
for online activities might allow students to think about course
material more critically and reﬂectively, leading to deeper understanding of the course content . Others have suggested that the less confrontational or personal nature of e-learning might encourage
shyer students to engage more, or to feel less pressure than in
face-to-face interactions .
However, there are also reasons for which students might
prefer more traditional, in-class activities. Although social connectedness can be derived online , most
students feel that face-to-face contact is essential for building
a sense of community . Even when classes
are only partially online, students may feel that online discussion detracts from this feeling of community with their peers
and tutor. Further, at a practical level, students need to exercise
more self-motivation to complete activities online, compared to
in-class, where that role of motivator is taken on by the lecturer
 . Thus, it is important to explore students’ perceptions of both online and face-to-face learning experiences, rather
than just one or the other.
At our university, there is currently a focus on incorporating more online material into face-to-face units, by replacing
some weekly practical classes with self-directed, online activities. The primary motivation is a ﬁnancial one, as online classes
do not require paid tutors, and lecturing staff are not paid any
more for developing online material than in-class material. A secondary motivation is the general assumption that students prefer
the ﬂexibility and opportunity for self-directed learning provided
by online activities. However, there does not seem to have been
any assessment of students’ academic outcomes, or their overall
experience, in terms of online learning within this context.
The current research was therefore designed to examine the
performance and perceptions, in both face-to-face and online
learning experiences, of Australian undergraduate students who
were enrolled in traditional face-to-face units which incorporated
some online components. We took a two-fold approach, with
the aim of providing an integrated picture of both objective and
subjective outcomes. To this end, we compared both students’
academic performance and their qualitative comments on their
learning experience, between ofﬂine and online modalities, as
described below.
In order to control for individual differences and thus increase
the statistical power of the study, we tested the same students
on both ofﬂine and online tasks, rather than having separate
groups for each modality. Alongside the empirical rigor of this
within-groups design, we wished to maintain the authenticity of
the measures, and thus chose to embed the tasks within the students’ actual class learning experience, rather than in an artiﬁcial,
lab-based study. We also wanted to ensure that instead of just
observing students’ behavior (e.g., counting their discussion contributions), we assessed both objective and subjective measures
Frontiers in Psychology | Educational Psychology
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 2
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
of their learning. The speciﬁc research questions were thus as
After having engaged with course content either face-to-face
or online, would students differ in:
1. Their academic marks on a short test of the concepts just
2. Their preference ratings for online and face-to-face modalities?
3. The themes emerging in their justiﬁcations of these ratings?
In the ﬁrst study, undergraduate psychology studied two carefully matched topics, one in a face-to-face class and the other
online, with the order counterbalanced between two groups. We
compared marks on the two topics, and examined the students’
comments on their experience of completing the activities, one
in-class and one online.
Participants
Participants were 67 third-year (advanced level) undergraduate
students at an Australian university, 13 male and 54 female. Their
mean age was 24 years (SD 7.1 years), and all spoke English as
a ﬁrst language. The students took part in the study as part of
their unit on developmental psychology, but gave consent for
their data also to be used for research purposes. All were familiar
and conﬁdent with the web-based platform used for delivering the
online activities. The study received approval from the university’s
Human Research Ethics Committee.
Materials and Procedure
Participants completed written exercises, a class discussion, and
a written test (worth 5% of their overall mark) on two academic
topics, one week apart. The ﬁrst topic concerned children’s stages
of cognitive development, and the second, children’s stages of
drawing development. Three classes of students participated. The
classes were allocated to two groups (as described in the next
paragraph), with the larger class allocated to Group 1 (n = 27),
and the two smaller classes to Group 2 (n = 40). This meant that
the two groups differed in size. However, there were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of age [M =
23.2 years (SD 6.2) and M = 26.0 years (SD 8.2), respectively],
sex distribution (80 and 82% female), or overall performance in
this unit [M = 62.4% (SD 11.6%) and M = 65.0% (SD 10.0%)],
all ps > 0.1.
In Week 1, both groups of participants completed the faceto-face activities in their weekly practical class. Group 1 students
discussed their recent experience of observing a child completing
several tasks of conservation of matter . The previous week,
each student had individually administered these tasks to a 5- to
12-year-old child of their acquaintance. The few students who did
not know a child to visit had viewed multiple online videos of
children being administered these tasks and chosen the one on
which they would like to answer the test questions. There were
no differences in performance between these two sets of students.
Group 2 students were given a series of self-portraits drawn by
children aged 2–16 years, and a copy of Lowenfeld’s stages
of drawing development.
In class, the tutor initiated the discussion with more general questions, for example (for conservation, Group 1): “What
did you ﬁnd most difﬁcult about giving the task, and how did
you overcome this difﬁculty?,” and (for drawing, Group 2) “Do
you think it would be easy or difﬁcult to persuade a child
of this age to produce a self-portrait? Do you think it would
be easier with older or younger children?.” The questions later
narrowed in on theory, with the tutor asking the students in
Group 1 to discuss which cognitive stage they thought the child
was in (in terms of Piaget’s stage model of cognitive development, e.g., pre-operations or concrete operations), and how the
wording of the adult’s instructions could inﬂuence the child’s performance. In Group 2, the tutor asked the students to decide
which developmental stage each self-portrait seemed to represent (e.g., pre-schematic drawing, schematic drawing), and why.
They also talked about the motor skills required for drawing.
For both groups, discussions took place ﬁrst in small groups
and then as a whole class, over a 1-h period, with the questions provided by the tutor but the discussion structured by
the students themselves. At the end of the class, both groups
were then given a half-hour, in-class, written test on the topic
that they had just studied (i.e., development of conservation or
1. Participants answered six short-answer questions structured
as similarly as possible for the two topics (e.g., Conservation:
Based on your observation, which Piagetian stage do you think
this child is in, and why? Drawing: Based on the drawing,
which of Lowenfeld’s stages do you think this child is in, and
2. Participants rated their preference for completing these activities face-to-face vs. online, on a ﬁve-point scale ranging from
1 (“much prefer to do in class”) to 5 (“much prefer to do
online”), and were asked to identify “one thing that was good
about doing the activities in class, not online,” and “one thing
that would have been good about doing the activities online,
not in class.”
During the following week (Week 2), both groups of participants
completed the online activities at a time of their own choosing, for
the topic that they had not covered in the previous week. Group 1
scrolled through the series of children’s self-portraits, presented in
PDF form, and were provided with an online copy of Lowenfeld’s
 stages of drawing development. Group 2 were asked to
think about the conservation tasks they had observed.
Both groups were asked to consider the same questions that
had been considered in the face-to-face classes as described above,
for drawing development (Group 1) and for cognitive development (Group 2). Students were then instructed to go to the online
discussion board. They did not have to transcribe their answers
for all of the questions that they had considered, but were asked
to contribute their answers to the questions that they “had found
most interesting,” or to explain any questions that they “had
found particularly difﬁcult, and why.” Students were also asked
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 3
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
to read others’ contributions, and to respond to them, “linking
their experiences and answers with yours if you can.”
The opportunity to reﬂect on the materials and questions, and
to contribute to the online discussion, was available for 5 days,
with each participant contributing at least once. Each participant
contributed to the discussion, as required (with at least one discussion post that covered several questions). The day after the
online discussion board was closed, the online version of the test
was made available, with the same questions as in the face-to-face
1. Participants responded in writing to the same six short-answer
questions answered in class the week before.
2. Participants rated their preference for completing these activities face-to-face or online, and were asked to identify “one
thing that was good about doing the activities online, not in
class,” and “one thing that would have been good about doing
the activities in class, not online.”
Students had 4 days in which to do the test, which was open for
30 min once it was begun. It is possible that the students completing the test online could have accessed extra information (from
the internet) than the students completing the test in class (without internet access). However, trying to ﬁnd further information
during the limited time available for writing the test answers
would not have been very helpful. The questions were focused
on discussing the conservation or drawing performance of “their”
child, and all students (in class and online) had access to a copy of
Lowenfeld’s stages, and all had been aware that they would need
to revise the basics of Piaget’s cognitive stage theory for the test.
In summary, both groups completed the same activities, discussion and tests, but in Week 1 both groups did so in face-to-face
classes (on cognitive development for Group 1 and on drawing
development for Group 2) and in Week 2 both groups did so
online (on drawing development for Group 2 and on cognitive
development for Group 1).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Class marks and preferences
Participants’ marks on the two tests, as well as their stated
preferences for studying each topic face-to-face or online, were
calculated. Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations on
each of these factors, for participants in the two groups. As seen
in the table, students showed an overall preference for studying
topics face-to-face rather than online, with their average preferences of around 2 hovering much closer to the “much prefer to
do in class” end of the 5-point scale than the “much prefer to do
online” end of the scale.
A series of repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVAs)
showed that there were no signiﬁcant differences between the
groups on any of the comparisons made. The two groups did
not differ signiﬁcantly in the marks they gained, in terms of
either the topic they were tested on [F(1, 65) = 0.67, p = 0.42,
partial η2 = 0.01] or modality in which this test was presented
[F(1, 65) = 0.31, p = 0.58, partial η2 = 0.01]. Nor did they differ signiﬁcantly in their modality preference, in terms of either
the topic about which they were asked [F(1, 65) = 0.42, p = 0.52,
partial η2 = 0.01] or the modality in which they were asked
it [F(1, 65) = 0.05, p = 0.82, partial η2 = 0.001]. We followed
up this signiﬁcant group difference in modality preference by
also considering whether there was a signiﬁcant difference in
terms of the number of students who (much) preferred to do
the tasks in class and those who (much) preferred to do them
online/did not mind either way. A chi-squared analysis conﬁrmed
that signiﬁcantly more students preferred to complete the tasks in
class (n = 47) than online/didn’t mind (n = 20), χ2
(1) = 10.89,
p < 0.001.
Pearson correlations were calculated to see if there was
any association between participants’ academic performance
and their preference for learning face-to-face vs. online. We
ﬁrst considered participants’ scores on the two topic-speciﬁc
tests and their reported modality preference for each topic.
The correlations were not signiﬁcant for either the topic done
online (r = −0.02, p = 0.85), or the topic done in class (r =
0.01, p = 0.95). This suggests that students did not simply prefer a modality because they felt they had performed better on
the task in that modality, and nor did they perform better in
the modality that they already preferred. We then looked at participants’ ﬁnal mark on this entire academic unit (M = 64.0%,
SD = 10.7%), and calculated the correlation between this mark
and their modality preference averaged over the face-to-face and
online tasks (M = 2.09, SD = 0.92). The correlation was not
signiﬁcant (r = −0.11, p = 0.40), suggesting no consistent relationship between overall academic performance and preference
for learning online or in class. Finally, we conﬁrmed that there was
no signiﬁcant correlation between participant age and modality preference (r = 0.01, p = 0.97), nor between age and overall
marks (r = 0.05, p = 0.69).
Table 1 | Study 1: Mean Marks and Modality Preferences across Task and Modality.
Class modality
Test mark (%)
Face-to-face
13.07 (2.72)
14.51 (2.25)
13.92 (2.53)
14.03 (2.20)
13.19 (2.60)
13.69 (2.39)
13.64 (2.45)
13.97 (2.47)
Modality pref. (1–5)
Face-to-face
1.96 (0.78)
2.22 (1.28)
2.15 (1.07)
2.25 (1.24)
1.77 (0.65)
2.06 (1.07)
2.13 (1.07)
2.04 (1.09)
For modality preference, 1 = much prefer to do in class (face-to-face), 5 = much prefer to do online.
Frontiers in Psychology | Educational Psychology
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 4
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
Qualitative comments
We also asked participants to note one thing that they liked better about completing the activities (exercises, discussion, and
test) face-to-face, and one thing about what they liked better
about completing them online. Participants provided their own
freeform answers, which we then subjected to thematic analysis
 . We chose thematic analysis rather than
a more speciﬁc approach such as Interpretive Phenomenological
Analysis (IPA) or Discourse Analysis, as we wished to identify
repeated patterns of meaning, or themes, in the responses, but
without attaching our analysis to any pre-existing theoretical
framework. We followed Braun and Clarke’s six phases
to identify the themes as they emerged from an analysis of students’ responses, rather than pre-existing themes being imposed
on a grouping of the responses. Speciﬁcally, we (1) familiarized
ourselves with the scope and nature of the students’ responses to
both the “in-class” and “online” questions, and (2) generated initial codes on the basis of a subset of 25 participants’ responses,
by identifying the overall point made in each response with a 2to 4-word summary code, which we (3) collated into tentative
themes and modiﬁed as we reviewed another 25 responses. These
potential themes were then (4) reviewed to check how they ﬁtted
with the entire data set, and (5) the themes were reﬁned into an
exhaustive set of ﬁnal themes for all responses, which were named
and clearly deﬁned. Finally, (6) the most representative example
for each theme was selected, and the ﬁnal analysis related back to
the research questions. Although participants had been asked to
provide only one reason for liking something about each modality, many provided two or even more reasons. We included the
ﬁrst one or two reasons given in our thematic analysis. Table 2
shows the proportion of responses that were categorized into each
them, for face-to-face and online learning, for the whole sample,
In justifying their modality preferences about completing the
activities face-to-face, the 67 participants provided 102 reasons
overall. The themes that emerged were as follows:
• More engagement: This was the theme with the most responses,
with students noting that they felt more engaged when the
activities were completed in the social environment of a classroom setting, rather than online. Most also commented that
they felt this greater engagement led to more meaningful discussion, for example, I think that discussion face to face really
allows you to think more deeply and bounce ideas of other people.
Writing it online, felt like your answers had to be more formal and
exact, whereas in class discussion I felt you could really bounce
more possible ideas off each other before coming to a conclusion.
• Immediate feedback: The next most common theme was that
participants appreciated the fact that each comment they made
in class immediately elicited a related comment from a peer, or
a clariﬁcation from the tutor in real time, rather than having to
wait hours for a response to their particular comment online.
An illustrative example is, You are able to directly discuss with
tutor and peers and therefore directly receive feedback for your
questions and others questions.
Overall, 80% of the ﬁrst reasons (and 37% of second reasons)
that participants gave to illustrate the beneﬁts of in-class activities
ﬁtted these themes of “more engagement” and “immediate feedback.” Some of remaining responses referred to more practical
considerations:
• No wish to read comments: Some students noted that they
had no wish to read the comments of their classmates online,
although they were happy to listen to and interact with their
classmates in real life.
• Easier to review paper documents: Others noted it was easier to review material in class, because they could spread out
the pages in front of them on a table rather than scrolling
through on screen. The other remaining responses ﬁtted the
more pedagogically motivated themes that in-class interaction
• Deeper understanding and a
• Better ﬂow of argument.
When explaining their preferred modality for online activities, the
67 participants provided 78 reasons, rather fewer than the 102
that they had given about face-to-face classes.
• Convenience: The most common theme was a practical one;
the greater convenience of being able to complete the online
activities in their own time (within the given week), and/or
Table 2 | Study 1: Proportion of Responses per Theme, for Face-to-Face and Online Learning.
FACE-TO-FACE
No wish to
Better ﬂow
engagement
read comments
understanding
of argument
review material
Reason 1 (n = 63)
Reason 2 (n = 39)
More detailed
Faster to type
Less judgment
convenient
contributions
Reason 1(n = 62)
Reason 2 (n = 16)
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 5
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
at any location, as in the comment, Can do it at anytime, and
Wider contributions: The second most common theme was
that the online discussion allowed contributions from a greater
range of people than a class discussion, in which shyer students
sometimes stayed quiet in the presence of their more outspoken
peers, for example, Discussion not dominated by loud, conﬁdent
More detailed responses: Students also noted that the online
discussion forum encouraged more detailed responses than
in-class discussion (where conversational turns were typically
shorter, but more frequent, than in writing), as in the response,
I thought it was good to be able to read everyone’s experiences
with full details, as time restraints in class don’t allow for each
individual to thoroughly go through their task.
Together, 84% of ﬁrst reasons (and 69% of second reasons) ﬁtted these three themes. The remaining responses were categorized
into smaller themes; speciﬁcally:
• More time to think: Some students noted that providing
responses online gave them more time to consider their
answers than having to speak spontaneously in class.
• Faster to type: It was noted that it was faster to provide answers
to the test when it was typed online than handwritten in the
classroom.
• Less judgment: Finally, some students felt less judged by their
tutor and peers when answers could be written than spoken.
Overall, many of the reasons that students gave for each modality
differed from those seen in previous literature, as is taken up again
in the General Discussion.
In Study 1, students had been asked to reﬂect on their preferences
and perceptions of several different activities simultaneously:
written exercises, class discussion, and a short test. However, the
study was not set up to allow students to rate whether they would
prefer to do some of these activities in one modality and others in
another (these preferences emerged only in the qualitative comments). Further, participants also had to come up with “one good
thing” about both face-to-face and online learning, even though
some responses suggested that students had simply felt obliged
to come up with beneﬁts that they did not really see as an advantage, for example, [Online activity] can be done in the students own
time...but since there is a dedicated time each week for a practical
class, this kind of negates this advantage.
In order to assess students’ ratings of the activities separately,
and to ask them only for the reasons why they preferred one
modality to another, we conducted a second study. In this followup, we asked a new group of undergraduates to reﬂect on their
preferences for doing two separate activity types face-to-face or
online: short written exercises to get students thinking about the
topic (which would traditionally have been done in class but
could just as well be done alone, in students’ own time), and class
discussions.
Participants
Participants were 37 third-year undergraduate psychology students (10 male) at the same Australian university, who had not
participated in Study 1. Their mean age was 25 years (SD 8.9
years). All but one spoke English as their ﬁrst language, and they
participated as part of their course requirements. As in Study 1, all
were competent and familiar with the technical requirements of
the online learning activities. Ethics approval was provided by the
university’s Human Research Ethics Committee, and participants
gave consent for their data to be included in the research.
Materials and Procedure
Participants were completing an undergraduate unit which
included both face-to-face and online practical classes, and so
they were accustomed to both modalities. In this particular unit
(Psychology of Language), students had participated in each type
of practical class in the last 2 weeks. In both the ﬁrst week (class
conducted face-to-face) and the second week (class conducted
online), students had completed written activities, and participated in a discussion, and so the experience of both should
have been relatively fresh in their minds. Speciﬁcally, in the second week’s online practical class, students had completed written
activities on language and gender (writing down the best word
to address unknown people of varying age/sex, e.g., sir, mate,
miss), language in the digital age (responding to ﬁctitious text
messages), and language as a marketing tool (comparing two university courses on the basis of the universities’ self-descriptions).
That same week, students then contributed to an online discussion about their responses to these tasks. The following week, in
a face-to-face class, participants discussed their responses to the
previous week’s tasks. They were then asked to take a few minutes
to consider the advantages and disadvantages of completing the
written activities online, rather than in a face-to-face class. Even
though the students had not done these particular written activities in class, only online, we considered that they would be easily
able to make this judgment, because they had previous experience
with doing similar kinds of written activities in class on multiple
occasions. Students were also asked to consider the advantages
and disadvantages of engaging in discussion of these particular
language-based issues in class, and online (both of which they had
experienced).
Finally, students were asked to:
1. Rate, on a scale of 1 (“much prefer to do in class”) to 5 (“much
prefer to do online”), how they would prefer to complete these
written activities, and to write down their main reason for this
2. Rate, on the same scale, how they would prefer to engage in
this class discussion, and to write down their meaning reason
for this rating.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Preferences
Overall, participants showed a mean preference for written activities that was close to the middle of the 5-point scale, 3.54 (SD =
1.37). In contrast, their mean preference for discussions was
Frontiers in Psychology | Educational Psychology
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 6
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
closer to the “much prefer to do in class” end of the scale, 1.62
(SD = 1.01). The difference between the two ratings was significant, F(1, 36) = 59.3, p < 0.001. It might be expected that some
students simply preferred to do all activities in class or online, but
this did not appear to be the case: there was no signiﬁcant correlation between modality preferences for written activities and
discussion, r = 0.21, p = 0.21. Nor was there any signiﬁcant correlation with age and either of the modality preferences, written
activities r = 0.17, p = 0.31 or discussion, r = 0.06, p = 0.71.
Thus, it was clear that students had different preferences according to the nature of the task, preferring to do written activities
online but discussions face-to-face.
Qualitative comments
We also asked participants to note the main reason for their
ratings. Using the same process as in Study 1, we conducted
a thematic analysis on the responses. Again, some participants
provided two reasons, and we coded both of these.
Table 3 shows the themes which came out of the responses
about preferences for written activities. As shown in the top panel,
only 9 participants (much) preferred doing the written activities
in class, while 21 (much) preferred doing the written activities
online, as shown in the bottom panel. (The responses from the
5 participants who didn’t mind either way were omitted.) As in
Study 1, we conducted a chi-square analysis, and conﬁrmed that
signiﬁcantly more participants preferred to do written activities
online (or did not mind either way) than to do them in class,
(1) = 8.26, p < 0.005.
The themes emerging from the responses of the relatively small
group of participants who preferred doing written activities in
class were:
• Interaction encourages learning: The students noted that the
interaction of face-to-face classes encouraged learning, in a way
that could not be achieved via the solitary completion of the
activities, for example, Because if feels like more active learning
in class, interacting and talking with others.
• Class time already allocated: A second theme was that since the
class time was already allocated for doing activities, students
would rather do the work in class, with others, rather than have
to force themselves to do it in their own time, as in, Because I
ﬁnd it hard to make time for non-attending pracs and when I do
I rush through them as fast as I can. Whereas if I have to come
to class I’m more likely to concentrate and understand what I’m
Finally, some students valued the
• Immediate feedback offered in response to any comments they
• Deeper learning that occurred in class, where they felt more
focused on the activities.
The larger group of participants who preferred doing written
activities online overwhelmingly reported the following theme:
• Convenience: Students noted the convenience of being able to
complete the work at a time and place that suited them, as in,
If its online I can do it in bed.
Other responses ﬁtted the themes of ﬁnding that doing the
activities online provided:
• More time to think
• Less distraction
Finally, some students noted that it depended on the nature of
the written activities—but when they were reasonably challenging
but not really difﬁcult (as the current activities were perceived),
they were the
• Right level for doing online, and
• Would waste time if done in class as individual work.
The themes which emerged from participants’ preferences about
class discussions are summarized in Table 4. Almost all participants (much) preferred discussions in class (n = 26, top panel),
with very few (much) preferring them online (n = 3). (The 6
participants who didn’t mind either way were not included in
this analysis.) A chi-square analysis conﬁrmed that signiﬁcantly
more students preferred to engage in discussions in the classroom
than online (or did not mind either way), χ2
(1) = 8.26, p < 0.005.
There was a range of reasons for preferring in-class discussion,
with the following themes:
Table 3 | Study 2: Proportion of Responses per Theme for Written Activities, for those who Preferred these Face-to-Face vs. Online.
FACE-TO-FACE
Interaction
Class time
encourages learning
already allocated
Reason 1 (n = 9)
Reason 2 (n = 7)
Right level
Would waste
Less distraction
convenient
for online
time in class
Reason 1 (n = 21)
Reason 2 (n = 3)
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 7
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
Table 4 | Study 2: Proportion of Responses per Theme for Discussion, for those who Preferred Discussion Face-to-Face vs. Online.
FACE-TO-FACE
Better ﬂow of
No wish to
engagement
discussion
read others’
Reason 1 (n = 26)
Reason 2 (n = 17)
Wastes class
Reason 1 (n = 3)
More engagement: The most common theme to emerge was
that it allowed more engagement than online discussion, for
example, I would rather be in a classroom talking to actual people
and engaging more.
• Better ﬂow of discussion: Another popular theme was that discussion ﬂowed better in person than online, as in, Can actually
have a free ﬂowing conversation.
• Personal setting: Some participants noted that the personal
setting of the classroom encouraged better discussion than
the more impersonal online environment, for example, The
discussion in person is more beneﬁcial for learning. Easier to
communicate and express ideas in a personal setting.
• Greater range of opinions: Students expressed that in-class discussion exposed them to more opinions, for example, Get more
opinions and discussion of them in class.
The remaining comments expressed the themes of:
• No wish to read others’ comments (although they were happy to
listen to them)
• Immediate feedback of face-to-face discussion
• Deeper learning facilitated by in-class discussion
• Time already allocated in class, so students were happy to do the
discussion then.
As shown in Table 4, only three participants said that they preferred discussions online, each with a separate reason.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The goal of this research was to explore whether students’ academic marks and their preferences for learning varied as a function of online or ofﬂine delivery. A further aim was to illuminate
the “active ingredients” contributing to students’ experiences in
these modalities, using a qualitative methodology. In two studies,
undergraduate students engaged in practical class activities in two
modalities: in a face-to-face class, and online. We assessed students’ academic performance on tests of class content and asked
students which modality they preferred for learning, and why.
Overall, we saw no clear differences in academic performance in
online vs. in-class learning, but students had a general preference
for in-class activities, speciﬁcally when discussion of academic
topics was required.
In terms of academic performance, our ﬁrst study showed
that there were no signiﬁcant differences in test performance
whether class material, and the subsequent test, was presented
face-to-face or online. This ﬁnding adds to previous evidence
that simply participating in online activities does not necessarily lead to signiﬁcantly improved test scores . On the surface, these ﬁndings are difﬁcult to explain using
student-centered models of e-learning: it is assumed that the selfdirected learning that occurs in in online environments should
result in deeper learning. However, an alternative explanation
comes from Garrison , who notes that the community
of inquiry created by e-learning is not synonymous with the
collaborative and constructivist approaches that can foster deep
learning. If so, perhaps the current ﬁndings reﬂect collaboration and constructivism in both modalities, but in regards to
different aspects of the learner experience. Overall, performance
across the two modalities is convergent, but the electronic and
face-to-face pathways to that performance may be divergent. For
example, the beneﬁts obtained a student who has “more time
to think” when working asynchronously online may be similar
to the beneﬁts obtained by another student “exposed to more
opinions” within a classroom discussion. Future research could
aim to unpack such beneﬁts and their relationship with student
characteristics: this could potentially results in truly studentcentered approaches through the creation of bespoke learning
activities.
There was also no signiﬁcant link between the academic mark
achieved on the unit overall and preference for either face-toface or online learning activities. The lack of relationship between
preference and performance is a notable one. At least in the
current study, it seems that a liking for a particular modality does not beneﬁt performance in that modality. Importantly,
these ﬁndings also suggest that asking students to engage in
their non-preferred modality does not mean that poor performance will ensue. The implication is that educators can select
delivery modality based solely on pedagogical reasons with conﬁdence, rather than being concerned that a certain delivery method
may disadvantage students who hold negative perceptions of that
The participants in our ﬁrst study preferred, on average,
to complete activities in class rather than online. In the second study, participants had the opportunity to be more speciﬁc
about their preferences. Their responses indicated that although
Frontiers in Psychology | Educational Psychology
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 8
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
they were happy to complete individual written exercises online
(especially if these were of a reasonable level of difﬁculty), students much preferred to participate in discussions in face-to-face
classes. Thematic analysis of participants’ qualitative comments in both Studies 1 and 2 revealed
that students most liked the greater sense of engagement provided by face-to-face vs. online activities. Since there appears
to be no previous direct comparison of students’ perceptions
of learning in these two modalities, it is difﬁcult to link these
responses with those in the literature concerning only online
learning. However, it is interesting to note that the most common
theme emerging in both studies was about the stronger feeling
of engagement in the subject matter that these activities provided, with many students noting the deeper learning to come
from this greater engagement. Although this result in no way
negates previous ﬁndings that e-learning can also encourage deep
learning ,
it should be borne in mind that the beneﬁts of e-learning do
not diminish any pre-existing beneﬁts of traditional classroom
In Study 1, the immediate feedback from peers and tutor was
also noted as an important advantage of in-class activities in general. In contrast, the immediacy of feedback available from online
activities can vary greatly, depending on the nature of the activities and the way a unit is run. In the current study, students
had 5 days in which to conduct their on-line discussion with
peers. Thus, some students had to wait hours or even days for a
peer to comment on their particular contribution, a situation that
could not arise in an in-class discussion. In other units or courses,
online discussions could be organized to occur at a set time, or as
a “chat” function, in real time. This would allow contributions
to be responded to more rapidly, and would presumably alleviate
some of the frustrations that our participants experienced with
more drawn-out discussions. In Study 2, in addition to preferring
in-class discussion because of the greater engagement it offered,
students also expressed the themes that face-to-face discussion
allowed better ﬂow of conversation, provided a more personal setting in which to enjoy the discussion, and encouraged a greater
range of opinions from the group. These ﬁndings highlight the
importance of facilitating collaboration and constructivism in
When students were asked to note “one good thing” about
online learning (Study 1), or to explain why they preferred to do
written exercises online (the majority of participants in Study 2),
thematic analysis revealed an important common theme: convenience. Students in both studies noted for online learning; they
could do the work at a time of their own choosing, without having to travel to the university. This pragmatic reason emphasizes
the advantages of online activities for many students, but does
not ﬁt with the more pedagogically driven reasons seen in previous research . Nevertheless, it does
suggest that at least some students appreciate the ﬂexibility in
time and location afforded by online activities, especially as part
of an otherwise face-to-face unit.
A number of participants in the ﬁrst study also noted that
online work encouraged contributions from a wider range of
students, speciﬁcally, those who might be shy about face-to-face
interaction. This reason has been noted in previous work . Nevertheless, on its own, this point
does not provide a strong justiﬁcation to adopt online learning,
as many universities now consider oral communication skills as
an important graduate attribute . Only a few students provided an academically oriented beneﬁt of online learning, noting that it encouraged
more detailed answers, and that contributors had more time to
think before responding, compared to in a face-to-face class.
These reasons thus seemed to be less important to our participants than to participants in other studies .
Another ﬁnding to emerge from Study 1 was that students’
preference for one modality over the other was not related to
their marks on the related tests, nor to their age. Much of the
extant research on online learning has focused on students who
might begin at a disadvantage because they do not have the
skills to interact conﬁdently with the technology . Further, as noted by Ituma , it seems that
when students do not struggle with the technical requirements
of online learning, age is no barrier to the value that they can gain
from this modality of study. However, with the increased use of
e-learning in mainstream education, online components are part
of the university experience for more and more students from a
diverse range of backgrounds , and appropriate technological skills should not be
The present results serve as a reminder that it is rather simplistic to consider “online learning” as a unitary concept, to
be examined on its own or compared wholesale to face-to-face
learning. Both modalities of education have multiple aspects,
and research focusing on one particular aspect or combination of aspects might reach very different conclusions from
research focusing on another aspect or combination of aspects.
Our participants liked completing individual written activities
online, but preferred to engage in class discussions in person.
As noted earlier, this view may have been strongly inﬂuenced by
the stilted and drawn-out nature of the online discussion that
the current participants experienced, which took place mostly
asynchronously, rather than in real time. It is clear that the
developers of online content need to consider a range of issues
in designing the best way to deliver this content to students.
Simply providing materials or a discussion
forum online does not automatically aid learning , making more contributions to an
online discussion does not necessarily lead to better academic
performance.
In addition to some of the limitations already mentioned,
it should be noted that our sample sizes were modest. The
participants were all advanced level undergraduates in psychology, who were enrolled in a face-to-face course but who were
also accustomed to doing some of their learning online, in a
self-directed way. Thus, further work with a wider range of participants would help to ascertain the generalizability of these
ﬁndings. It should also be noted that we asked students about
only a few aspects of online vs. face-to-face learning, in a unit
which provided online materials in a relatively limited range
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 1278 | 9
Kemp and Grieve
Undergraduates’ classroom vs. online learning
of ways (e.g., asynchronous discussion forum, scrollable written
exercises). This speciﬁcity is both a strength and a limitation of
the current research. Although they provide good experimental
control and strong ecological validity, the focused nature of these
tasks and their context means that it is important not to overgeneralize our ﬁndings. Future research should aim to extend
questions about online learning to a wider range of disciplines,
using online activities in a more varied range of ways, in order
to build up a broader picture of students’ preferences and performance in terms of online and in-class learning. Extending
research in a number of dimensions will become increasingly
important for understanding how blended learning and ﬂipped
classrooms can progress along with the technology that underpins
these paradigms.
The provision of online units, and of online components to
face-to-face units, is continuing to expand worldwide. Those
who are responsible for creating online material for blended
units would do well to consider carefully the nature and type
of activities they allocate to each modality. In directly comparing the same students’ performance and perceptions on in-class
vs. online learning, this study conﬁrmed that in these groups, at
least, online activities led to similar levels of academic achievement as face-to-face activities. It seems that although students
appreciate the ﬂexibility of choosing the time and place to do
some activities, they also value the greater engagement provided
by discussions that take place face-to-face, rather than face-toscreen. Rather than being seen simply as an alternative modality
for delivering academic content, the beneﬁts of online technology should be adapted not only to offer greater ﬂexibility, but
to inspire students’ engagement and success at university and