ANISOTROPY, INHOMOGENEITY, AND TENSION-
COMPRESSION NONLINEARITY OF HUMAN GLENOHUMERAL
CARTILAGE IN FINITE DEFORMATION
Chun-Yuh Huang, Ph.D., Anna Stankiewicz, M.D., Gerard A. Ateshian, Ph.D., and Van C.
Mow, Ph.D.
Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New
The tensile and compressive properties of human glenohumeral cartilage were determined by
testing 120 rectangular strips in uniaxial tension and 70 cylindrical plugs in confined compression,
obtained from five human glenohumeral joints. Specimens were harvested from five regions
across the articular surface of the humeral head and two regions on the glenoid. Tensile strips were
obtained along two orientations, parallel and perpendicular to the split-line directions. Two serial
slices through the thickness, corresponding to the superficial and middle zones of the cartilage
layers, were prepared from each tensile strip and each compressive plug. The equilibrium tensile
modulus and compressive aggregate modulus of cartilage were determined from the uniaxial
tensile and confined compression tests, respectively. Significant differences in the tensile moduli
were found with depth and orientation relative to the local split line direction. Articular cartilage
of the humeral head was significantly stiffer in tension than that of the glenoid. There were
significant differences in the aggregate compressive moduli of articular cartilage between
superficial and middle zones in the humeral head. Furthermore, tensile and compressive stressstrain responses exhibited nonlinearity under finite strain while the tensile modulus differed by up
to two orders of magnitude from the compressive aggregate modulus at 0% strain, demonstrating a
high degree of tension-compression nonlinearity. The complexity of the mechanical properties of
human glenohumeral cartilage was exposed in this study, showing anisotropy, inhomogeneity, and
tension-compression nonlinearity within the same joint. The observed differences in the tensile
properties of human glenohumeral cartilage suggest that the glenoid may be more susceptible to
cartilage degeneration than the humeral head.
articular cartilage; glenohumeral joint; mechanical properties; inhomogeneity; anisotropy; tensioncompression nonlinearity
INTRODUCTION
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative disease of diarthrodial joints which usually begins with
focal surface lesions on articular cartilage, and is accompanied by degradation of the tissue
material properties. Previous studies of OA in the glenohumeral joint (GHJ) have indicated
that cartilage lesions usually initiate on the glenoid and are often located in the central
Address All Correspondence and Reprint Requests to: Gerard A. Ateshian, Ph.D., Columbia University, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, 500 West 120th St, 220 S.W. Mudd, MC4703, New York, NY 10027, 212-854-8602, 212-854-3304 (fax),
 .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
 
J Biomech. 2005 April ; 38(4): 799–809. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2004.05.006.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
region . Focal areas of GHJ cartilage
degeneration have been observed to develop at the articular contact region when the arm
elevation is between 60° and 100° , where maximal joint forces of 44% to 90%
of body weight may occur according to theoretical predictions , and
anatomic measurements during static or dynamic abduction. Conzen and Eckstein measured GHJ articular contact pressure
and found that the maximum pressure of 5.1 MPa was recorded at the 90° of abduction with
90° external rotation. Furthermore, the surface area disparity (1:3 surface area ratio) between
the glenoid and humeral head results in substantial differences in the duration of loading
(duty cycle), with the glenoid cartilage subjected to a greater duty cycle during daily joint
function . Thus it has been hypothesized that degenerative changes
are due to more frequent high contact stresses acting on the glenoid cartilage.
With the progress made in the determination of GHJ contact area 
and constitutive relations for characterizing the mechanical behavior of articular cartilage
 , as well as the
implementation of finite element contact analyses , it remains
necessary to obtain the material properties of glenohumeral cartilage for the determination
of the state of stress within the articular layers during contact, and to investigate the
potential disparity between properties of the humeral head and glenoid.
Experimental studies have demonstrated that the mechanical response of articular cartilage
may vary as a function of duration and rate of loading or deformation (i.e. viscoelasticity)
 ; the tensile
stiffness of articular cartilage differs when testing the tissue parallel and perpendicular to the
split line directions (i.e. anisotropy) ; the measured properties in tension or compression may vary from the
superficial to the deep zone of cartilage or among regions of a given articular surface (i.e.
inhomogeneity) ; the material properties of articular cartilage may differ
between two mating articular surfaces . Furthermore, material
properties of cartilage measured from various joints of different species have also indicated
that the stiffness of cartilage in compression may be one to two orders of magnitude smaller
than in tension (i.e. tension-compression nonlinearity). The depth dependence and tensioncompression nonlinearity of cartilage material properties has been shown to significantly
influence the mechanical behavior of the tissue in recent analyses .
The complex material properties of articular cartilage have been recognized in the literature.
However, no single study has investigated the wide range of mechanical properties within
cartilage from the same joint of a given species; this has prevented a direct confirmation that
the wide spectrum of material properties observed in previous studies is due to the intrinsic
complexity of the tissue rather than interspecies or joint-specific variations. Furthermore,
since finite element analyses can accommodate complex material behavior and precise joint
anatomy, an extensive set of cartilage material properties is essential for such analyses in the
effort to accurately assess the state of stress within articular cartilage of a given joint.
Therefore, the objective of the current study was to extensively assess the mechanical
properties of human GHJ cartilage to provide the most detailed measurements to date of
such properties from this joint. These measurements can serve to advance our understanding
of GHJ biomechanics and, in the longer term, the pathomechanics of OA in this joint.
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
MATERIALS AND METHODS
One hundred and twenty rectangular strips and seventy cylindrical plugs were prepared from
five fresh-frozen human GHJs (average age 57, range 51-66, 3 males, 2 females). Upon
dissection, these joints exhibited no visual evidence of OA. For each joint, seven fullthickness compressive plugs (6.36 mm in diameter) were harvested from five regions on the
humeral head and two regions on the glenoid (Figure 1). Twelve full-thickness rectangular
tensile strips (4 mm × 9 mm) were obtained in two orientations, parallel and perpendicular
to the split-line directions, from each of the regions of the humeral head and the glenoid
(Figure 1). The overall pattern of split lines was determined on two extra GHJs using the
technique described in previous studies and the split
line pattern outside the harvest site was also examined individually for each specimen. Two
serial slices (250 μm thick for tensile testing and 350 μm thick for compressive testing),
corresponding to the superficial and middle zones of the cartilage layers, were obtained from
each tensile strip and each compressive plug using a freezing stage sledge microtome. All
specimens were stored in physiological saline solution and kept frozen at −80°C until the
day of testing. Since recent studies have shown that the collagen network of meniscal
cartilage and the biomechanical response of intervertebral disc remain unchanged after
frozen storage , the effects of freezing were assumed
to be minimal in this study.
Tensile testing
Preparation and dimensional measurements of each tensile testing specimen were performed
using a previously reported method . Tensile specimens were trimmed
down to the typical dimensions of 250 μm thick, 1.5 mm wide, and 8 mm long. To avoid
slippage during tensile testing, sandpaper (400 grid) were affixed to both ends of the
specimen with a very small amount of Permabond Industrial Grade 240 plastic bonding
adhesive. Typically, the length of the specimen held in the sandpaper was 1.5 mm on each
side, and the initial grip-to-grip length of the specimen was 5 mm. Each tensile specimen
was mounted in an Automated Tensile Apparatus and subjected to a
tare load of 0.02 N for 1000 seconds. In the ensuing tensile stress-relaxation test, the
specimen was stretched using an increasing sequence of step strains (ε1=change in length/
initial length= 2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10%, 12%, 14%, 16%, 20%, and 25%), and held for 20
minutes at each strain increment (Figure 2). The amount of stretch was predetermined by a
micrometer (Oriel Instruments, Stratford, CT, 1 μm accuracy) while force was measured by
a load cell (model 31, Sensotec, Columbus, OH, 0.01 N accuracy). The specimen was
bathed in physiological saline solution with protease inhibitors (2mM Ethylenediamine
tetra-acetic acid, 5mM Benzamidine, 10mM N-Ethylmaleimide, 1mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) during testing. In addition, the measurements of Poisson’s ratio (ν) in the
plane parallel to the articular surface were performed on specimens from four of the five
joints. The lateral strains (ε2=change in width/ initial width) for each tensile strain level was
measured at the center and quarter length from the fixed end using a video dimensional
analyzer (VDA) , and ν was calculated (ν=−ε2/ε1). Poisson’s ratio was
found to remain approximately constant within the range of 6% to 12% strain, hence for
each specimen this study reports a single value of ν in tension, averaged from the results at
6%, 8%, 10%, and 12%, at both measuring locations.
To assess the strain-dependent modulus of the tissue in tension, the equilibrium tensile stress
σe achieved at equilibrium for each strain increment was curvefitted with the exponential
function ,
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In this equation, the parameters A and B represent material constants for this constitutive
model. Since the load response of some specimens did not reach equilibrium within 20
minutes at higher strain levels (> 14%), the equilibrium load was extrapolated by
curvefitting the experimental transient relaxation data using Eq.(2):
where t represents time during each loading step, and C2-C6 are stress-relaxation parameters,
and C1 is the extrapolated equilibrium load. This empirical equation was found to produce
successful fits of the transient data in all cases. The validity of this approach was verified
using the response at lower strain levels, by comparing the equilibrium load extrapolated
from half of the relaxation response with the actual equilibrium load achieved in the
experiment. This was done on six specimens and the agreement was found to be 97.7±1.6%.
The tensile modulus was obtained by differentiating the expression in Eq.(1) to produce a
strain-dependent modulus, E = ABeBε. Since no failure of specimens was observed at or
below 16%, the tensile modulus at 0% (E0=AB) and at 16% (E0.16=ABe0.16B) strain were
determined as two representative measures of the strain-dependent modulus.
Confined compression testing
Each thawed cylindrical specimen was placed in a confined compression specimen chamber
submerged in physiological saline with protease inhibitors, and loaded between two porous
filters on a custom-designed testing apparatus . Before the stressrelaxation test, a pre-conditioning load of 4.9 N was applied to the plug for 60 sec to ensure
proper specimen confinement, and removed, followed with a tare load of 0.2 N for 900
seconds . During the stress-relaxation test, the specimen was subjected
to five sequential increments of ramp-and-hold surface displacements, achieving 10 % strain
at each increment, at a displacement rate of 0.25 μm sec-1 (Figure 3). The load response was
recorded for the calculation of the compressive stress. The strain-dependent compressive
modulus was evaluated by fitting the following equation to the equilibrium stress-stretch
response :
In this equation, λ represents the stretch, and HA0 and β represent material constants. The
compressive modulus HA is defined as:
The strain-dependent compressive modulus can be derived by differentiating Eq.(3) to
produce the compressive aggregate modulus at any strain, including the representative
values employed in this study at 0% strain (λ=1) which corresponds to HA0, and at 16%
compressive strain (at λ=0.84, denoted by HA0.16). The choice of HA0.16 was motivated by
analogy to the choice of the strain-dependent tensile modulus E0.16, even though no failure
was observed in compression even up to 50% compressive strains.
Following the determination of HA0 and β, the transient stress-relaxation data were
curvefitted to determine the permeability coefficients which appear in the strain-dependent
permeability function, Eq.(5), proposed in the study of Holmes and Mow :
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where ϕ0 is the volume fraction of the solid phase at unity stretch (zero strain), k0 is the
permeability of cartilage at zero strain, and M is the nonlinear permeability coefficient. In
this study, ϕ0 was assumed to be equal to 0.2. The details of the curvefitting methodology
have been described in a previous study .
Statistical analysis
The tensile and compressive moduli, Poisson’s ratio, and permeability were analyzed
statistically using multi-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) when assessing the factors of
region, orientation, and zone. In addition, a one-way ANOVA was used to investigate
differences in properties between the glenoid and the humeral head. Significance was
assumed for p<0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (SAS Institute
Inc.) on a personal computer.
E0 for the humeral head (4.23 ± 2.88 MPa) was found to be significantly greater than that
for the glenoid (2.24 ± 2.93 MPa) (p<0.01) (Figure 4, the details of GHJ cartilage tensile
properties were shown in Table 1). There were significant differences in the tensile modulus
of the superficial and middle zone specimens at 0% (E0, p<0.01) and 16% (E0.16, p<0.01)
for the humeral head, with the specimens from the superficial zone stiffer than those from
the middle zone (Figure 5). Zonal differences were not significant in the glenoid (E0,
p=0.17; E0.16, p=0.08). E0 and E0.16 of specimens taken parallel to the split lines were found
to be significantly greater than those of the specimens taken perpendicular to the split lines
in the humeral head (E0, p<0.01; E0.16, p<0.01) (Figure 6) and glenoid (E0, p=0.03; E0.16,
p<0.01). However, no significant regional differences were found for either E0 (p=0.44) or
E0.16 (p=0.37) in the humeral head.
Significant differences were found in HA0.16 (p=0.02) (Figure 7) but not in HA0 (p=0.07)
between the superficial and middle zones in the humeral head (the details of GHJ cartilage
compressive properties were shown in Table 2). There were no significant regional
differences in the compressive aggregate modulus either in the humeral head (p=0.68) or
glenoid (p=0.63). Furthermore, no significant differences were found in the compressive
aggregate modulus between the two joint surfaces (p=0.54 for HA0, p=0.07 for HA0.16)
although the trend observed for HA0.16 indicated a higher compressive modulus in the
glenoid (0.19±0.09 MPa versus 0.15±0.05 MPa).
It can be noted that the tensile stress response exhibits a nonlinear behavior under finite
strain (Figure 8), with E0.16 four to eight times greater than E0 (Table 1). The tensile
modulus substantially differs by up to two orders of magnitude from the compressive
aggregate modulus even at 0% strain (Tables 1 and 2), demonstrating a high degree of
tension-compression nonlinearity or “bimodular” response (Figure 8).
Poisson’s ratio, ν for the humeral head was significantly greater than for the glenoid
(p=0.01; H:1.16±0.28, G:0.95±0.31). For the humeral head, ν of specimens from the
superficial zone tended to be greater than those from the middle zone (p=0.051; surface:
1.21±0.29, middle: 1.1±0.26), while there were no significant differences in ν between
specimens from two orientations relative to the split lines (p=0.65; parallel: 1.17±0.26,
perpendicular: 1.14±0.3) or from the five regions (p=0.65, anterior: 1.17±0.32, posterior:
1.18±0.31, superior: 1.12±0.36, inferior: 1.22±0.29, central: 1.08±0.27). For the glenoid, no
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
significant zonal (p=0.67; surface: 0.92±0.35, middle: 0.99±0.29) and directional (p=0.83;
parallel: 0.97±0.34, perpendicular: 0.94±0.31) differences were found in ν.
The statistical analysis yielded significant regional differences (p<0.01) for k0 of the
humeral head with the center region exhibiting the highest permeability (the details of GHJ
cartilage permeability coefficients were shown in Table 3). An interactive effect of zone and
region was also observed (p=0.043), with the superficial zone at the central region exhibiting
greater permeability than the middle zone. Significant differences were found in M between
the humeral head and glenoid with the glenoid having a greater value of M (p=0.028).
However, there were no significant differences in k0 between the humeral head and glenoid,
or between the superficial and middle zones in either the glenoid or humeral head, and no
significant regional and zonal differences were found in M for the humeral head or glenoid.
No failure occurred to specimens in any of the compressive tests, even though specimens
were subjected to a compressive strain of up to 50%. However, in 30 of the 120 tensile tests,
failure of specimens occurred at the strain level of 20% or 25%. For all specimens of both
surfaces, tensile failure occurred in 35% of specimens from the superficial zone and 15% of
specimens from the middle zone. It should be noted that failure occurred in specimens from
the superficial zone of the glenoid (50%) more than those from the superficial zone of the
humeral head (32%).
DISCUSSION
The complexity of the mechanical properties of human GHJ articular cartilage was
investigated in this study that addressed the anisotropy, inhomogeneity, and nonlinearity of
the equilibrium elastic properties, as well as the inhomogeneity and nonlinearity of the tissue
permeability. Tissue anisotropy was exhibited in tensile stiffness when measured parallel
and perpendicular to the local split line direction. These results are consistent with several
prior studies of human and animal articular cartilage . The precise nature of the anisotropy (e.g., triclinic,
monoclinic, orthotropic, etc.) cannot be fully characterized from these tests alone, since only
two directions of loading were employed in tension. However, as the tensile properties differ
when tested along two mutually perpendicular directions, each of these directions may
indeed represent a plane of symmetry; since two orthogonal planes of symmetry
automatically define a third mutually orthogonal plane, it is plausible to suggest that the
material symmetry of cartilage in tension is no higher than orthotropic symmetry. This
anisotropy is further emphasized by the measurements of Poisson’s ratio which were found
to be close to or in excess of unity. This finding is also consistent with the studies of bovine
humeral head cartilage and human patella cartilage .
It was found that the tensile stiffness of humeral head cartilage decreased from the
superficial zone to the middle zone whereas the compressive aggregate modulus at 16% of
compression was lower in the superficial zone than the middle zone. Similar depthdependent behavior of the tensile and compressive properties of articular cartilage has been
demonstrated in previous studies .
The anisotropy and depth-dependent inhomogeneity of the mechanical properties of articular
cartilage have been suggested to result from the variations of its microstructure and
biochemical composition . Interstitial water and electrolytes compose the fluid phase of articular
cartilage, while its solid phase is composed of chondrocytes and an extracellular matrix,
mainly consisting of collagen fibers and proteoglycans . Collagen
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
fibrils in the superficial zone are densely packed parallel to the articular surface and splitline patterns are believed to align with their predominant orientation. In the middle zone,
these fibers are randomly oriented and homogeneously dispersed . Such
microstructural differences may explain the variation in tensile properties of articular
cartilage with zone and orientation. Similarly, the proteoglycan content exhibits an
inhomogeneous distribution through depth (highest in the middle zone and lowest in the
superficial zone) , causing a non-homogenous Donnan osmotic swelling
effect which may contribute to the observed differences in the
compressive behavior of cartilage among the zones.
The permeability of humeral head cartilage was found to exhibit a regional difference, with
the permeability being greater at the center than the other regions. Previous studies have
shown that the highest compressive GHJ force and stress occurred near 90 degrees of arm
elevation, with the corresponding contact area in the humeral head mainly located in the
central region , indicating
that the central region of the humeral head may be a high weight bearing area relative to the
other regions. These results support the clinical finding that, in patients with OA, the
greatest wear and erosion of cartilage was found in regions of the humeral head which were
in contact with the glenoid during arm elevation between 60 and 100 degrees .
Nevertheless, the finding that the material properties of normal human glenohumeral
cartilage were regionally homogeneous in general is consistent with similar observations of
the compressive aggregate modulus and permeability of human patellofemoral joint
cartilage . For the purpose of performing engineering analyses of
normal human glenohumeral cartilage, using finite element modeling for example, it is
therefore reasonable to adopt regionally homogeneous properties .
It was found that the tensile stiffness and Poisson’s ratio of the humeral head cartilage were
greater than those of the glenoid cartilage, whereas the compressive modulus and nonlinear
permeability coefficient exhibited an opposite trend. It was also observed that the glenoid
cartilage exhibited a higher incidence of failure in the tensile tests. These differences are
interesting in light of clinical observations that the earliest visible signs of GHJ OA occur on
the glenoid . In addition, the glenoid
cartilage was found to be loaded more frequently and longer than humeral head cartilage
during normal shoulder motion . Though the mating articular
surfaces of normal GHJ have been shown to be closely conforming with small translations of the humeral head center of curvature during arm elevation,
increased translations of the humeral head may result from decreased joint congruence,
leading to the alteration of contact areas and stresses on the mating articular surfaces . If OA lesions develop at least partly as a result of excessive cartilage stresses
or strains, as is the prevailing hypothesis, the differences in material coefficients and duty
cycle may produce a differential state of stress or strain within cartilage between the
humeral head and glenoid which may explain the earlier onset of OA in the glenoid. The
precise differences in the state of stress and strain within cartilage between two mating
surfaces can be determined using finite element contact analyses that
employ the results of the current study.
With regard to the equilibrium stress-strain response of humeral head and glenoid cartilage,
nonlinearity was observed over the tensile range, over the compressive range, and across the
tensile and compressive ranges. The nonlinearity in tension has been reported in several
studies ; in
human glenohumeral cartilage, it was found that, on average, the tensile modulus at 16%
strain was up to 4.7 times greater than at 0% strain in the humeral head, and 6.4 times
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
greater in the glenoid. The nonlinearity in compression has been less extensively
investigated ; for the human
GHJ, it was observed that the compressive aggregate modulus of cartilage changes only by a
small amount from 0% to 16% compressive strain and that cartilage can sustain much
greater strains in pure compression (with no failure at 50%) than in tension. This finding
suggests that failure in tension is much more likely than in compression, and that failure
criteria may have to consider peak tissue strains, not just tissue stresses (Atkinson et al.,
Most interestingly is the observation that on average, the tensile modulus of GHJ cartilage
(E0=3.90±2.97 MPa) was 27 times greater than the compressive modulus at 0% strain
(HA0=0.145±0.092 MPa), dramatically emphasizing the tension-compression nonlinearity
characteristic of this tissue. Though the tensile modulus was measured along directions
tangential to the articular surface while the compressive modulus was measured normal to it,
no evidence suggested that the observed disparity was due solely to the direction of loading;
indeed, our own recent studies on bovine wrist cartilage have
demonstrated that the compressive modulus was on the same order of magnitude when
measured along directions tangential and normal to the articular surface. This nonlinearity at
the strain origin was shown to significantly influence the mechanical response of the tissue
in recent studies of cartilage mechanics . Our recent
findings also suggested that the chondroprotective contribution of cartilage interstitial fluid
pressurization to its load support mechanism was significantly enhanced with higher ratio of
the tensile and compressive moduli .
Interestingly, the greatest ratio was observed in the superficial zone (Humeral head:
E0=5.56±3.00 MPa vs. HA0=0.116±0.043 MPa; Glenoid: E0=3.08±3.89 MPa vs.
HA0=0.138±0.062 MPa), which is also the site of fibrillation in the early process of tissue
degeneration; since fibrillation is likely to reduce the tensile stiffness of the tissue , the loss of disparity between tensile and compressive
moduli leads to a loss of interstitial fluid load support, which can further exacerbate the
degenerative process.
The strain-dependent permeability found in this study confirmed previous studies that
observed a nonlinear dependence between tissue permeability and the magnitude of tissue
dilatation . In normal articular cartilage,
a low permeability allows the tissue to maintain high interstitial fluid pressurization for
physiologic loading durations. Because the collagen-proteoglycan matrix and interstitial
water are intrinsically incompressible , instantaneous cartilage
deformations under any loading configuration are isochoric (the tissue volume does not
change); thus, there is no change in the permeability of cartilage immediately upon loading,
since the tissue dilatation is initially nearly at zero. Dilatation-dependent changes in
permeability occur only after relatively long durations of loading as the interstitial water
exudes from the matrix (i.e. dilatation increase), and thus it acts to retard the loss of fluid
pressurization.
In summary, this study reports an extensive set of material properties of human
glenohumeral cartilage. Articular cartilage is anisotropic in tension, exhibiting greater
stiffness along the local split line directions and Poisson’s ratio near or in excess of unity.
The cartilage mechanical behaviors are nonlinear in tension and in compression, and also
exhibit significant tension-compression nonlinearity even near 0% strain. The material
properties of human glenohumeral cartilage are inhomogeneous through the depth, but
generally homogeneous across the respective articular layers. Differences in certain
properties of cartilage are also observed between the humeral head and glenoid. Knowledge
Huang et al.
J Biomech. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
of the material responses reported in this study can help advance our understanding of the
state of stress and pathomechanics of human GHJ OA.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH Grants AR42850, AR43628 and AR46532.