NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT EXPLAINS THE COVID-19 STOCK MARKET?
Daniel L. Greenwald
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Working Paper 27784
 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020
Ludvigson is grateful to the CV Starr Center for Applied Economics, at NYU for financial
support. We are grateful to Aleksandra Alferova for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Josue Cox, Daniel L. Greenwald, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Explains the COVID-19 Stock Market?
Josue Cox, Daniel L. Greenwald, and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 27784
September 2020
JEL No. G12,G28
What explains stock market behavior in the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic? Estimates
from a dynamic asset pricing model point to wild fluctuations in the pricing of stock market risk,
driven by shifts in risk aversion or sentiment. We find further evidence that the Federal Reserve
played a role in these fluctuations, via a series of announcements outlining unprecedented steps to
provide several trillion dollars in loans to support the economy. As of July 31 of 2020, however,
only a tiny fraction of the credit that the central bank announced it stood ready to provide in early
April had been extended, reinforcing the conclusion that market movements during COVID-19
have been more reflective of sentiment than substance.
Department of Economics
New York University
 
Daniel L. Greenwald
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-641
Cambridge, MA 02142
 
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
 
Introduction
By February of 2020, the coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic had set in motion a worldwide disruption in economic activity, causing the U.S. unemployment rate to reach 14.7%
in April. The S&P 500 stock market index initially reacted to news of the disease by losing
33.7% of its value between February 19 and March 23 of 2020. But the market abruptly
regained the vast majority of this lost value, rising 29% between March 24 and April 17, a
surge that left the index back where it stood in August of 2019 when the U.S. economy was
booming and the unemployment rate was 3.7%.
What explains this sharp V-shaped trajectory of the U.S. stock market that took place
over a matter of weeks in the early stages of COVID-19? The objective of this study is to
address this question. The investigation consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part employs the
theoretical model of Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson (GLL), along with updated
estimates of that model, to decompose the market’s changes into distinct component sources
attributable to ﬂuctuations in aggregate economic fundamentals, interest rates, corporate
earnings shares, and/or discount rate ﬂuctuations driven by the pricing of stock market risk.
Estimates of this model imply that it is diﬃcult if not impossible to explain the market’s
V-shaped trajectory during the COVID-19 crisis with plausible ﬂuctuations in aggregate
economic activity, corporate proﬁt shares, or short-term interest rates. Instead, the estimates
point toward wild volatility in the pricing of stock market risk, driven by ﬂuctuations in risk
aversion or beliefs/sentiment.1
The second part of this study investigates what role, if any, Federal Reserve actions
might have played in these ﬂuctuations.2 Speciﬁcally, we use a high-frequency event study
to explore the role of central bank communications during March and April of 2020. We ﬁnd
no evidence that “conventional”monetary policy announcements promulgating decisions to
lower the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero or to increase the Federal
1Gormsen and Koijen reach a similar conclusion by studying S&P dividend futures to compute a
lower bound on growth expectations.
2A widely shared belief among investment professionals is that the stock market is highly sensitive to
the actions of the Federal Reserve. See Baker, Bloom, Davis, and Sammon who conduct systematic
analysis of newspaper articles on the days after major stock market jumps.
Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS were a contributing factor in the
market rebound. Conversely, we do ﬁnd evidence that several “unconventional”monetary
policy announcements outlining the central bank’s unprecedented steps to provide several
trillion dollars in loans to support the economy played a role in the market turnabout.
Speciﬁcally, the 30-minute windows bracketing ﬁve of these announcements are collectively
associated with gains of approximately 8% in the S&P 500 stock market index and 12% in
the Russell 2000 index.
However, as of July 31 of 2020, only a tiny fraction of the credit that the central bank
announced it stood ready to provide in early April had been extended. And as of August 19
of 2020, the market had yet to give up any of the gains it made starting in late March; indeed
several indexes had reached record highs. Taken together, this evidence suggests that Federal
Reserve communications during the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic inﬂuenced
markets mainly by altering risk tolerance, reinforcing the model-based conclusion that market
movements during COVID-19 have been more reﬂective of sentiment than substance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
The next section describes the GLL
asset pricing model, its estimation, and model results pertaining to the COVID-19 economic
shock. Section 3 discusses the event study of Federal Reserve announcements during March
and April of 2020. Section 4 concludes.
Modeling Market Movements
This section provides an adumbrated description of the GLL model and its estimation, along
with how its modiﬁed to study the COVID-19 shock to the economy. We refer the reader to
GLL for the full model details.
The GLL model is designed to address the question: What are the economic foundations
of stock market ﬂuctuations? The framework is set up so that it can answer the question
regarding ﬂuctuations over any desired horizon. It is therefore straightfoward to focus on
speciﬁc episodes. To translate raw data into a quantitative decomposition of the sources of
growth in stocks, GLL construct and estimate a ﬂexible parametric model of the U.S. equity
market that allows for inﬂuence from a number of mutually uncorrelated latent factors,
including not only factors driving overall economic output and corporate proﬁt shares, but
also independent factors driving risk premia and risk-free interest rates.
Equity in GLL is priced, not by a representative household, but by a representative shareholder, akin in the data to a wealthy household or large institutional investor. Shareholder
preferences are subject to shocks that alter their patience and appetite for risk, driving variation in both risk-free interest rates and the equity risk premium. Shareholders understand
the laws of motion for these shocks and internalize them when forming expectations. The
representative shareholder consumes cash ﬂows from ﬁrms, the variation of which is driven
by shocks to the total rewards generated by productive activity, but also by shocks to how
those rewards are divided between shareholders and other claimants.
The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of shareholder consumption, Ct, is the
stochastic discount factor (SDF) and takes the form
ln Mt+1 = −1′δt −dt −xt∆ln Ct+1
where the subjective time discount factor βt ≡exp (−[δt + dt]).
The stochastic process
δt = 1′δt, where δt is a bivariate vector containing low- and high-frequency components, is a
latent shock to the subjective time-discount factor that moves the risk-free rate independently
of the aggregate economic state. The parameter dt is a compensating factor chosen to ensure
that the log risk-free rate rf,t = −ln Et exp (mt+1) obeys an empirically accurate process
that exactly matches an observed proxy for the risk-free rate of interest. The parameter xt
is a latent state variable that governs the pricing of stock market risk. Since an SDF always
reﬂects both preferences and beliefs, an increase in xt may be thought of as either an increase
in eﬀective risk aversion or an increase in pessimism about shareholder payout. The GLL
model allows this variable to contain a component that is correlated with the earnings share
of output, and a component that is uncorrelated with all other economic state variables. The
mutually uncorrelated latent risk price shock is denoted x⊥,t ≡1′x⊥,t, and is modeled as the
sum of estimated low- and high-frequency components contained in the 2 × 1 vector x⊥,t.
In equilibrium, shareholder consumption Ct+1 is equal to equity payout, which we refer
to simply as “cash ﬂow.”Let lowercase letters denote log variables, e.g., ln (Ct) = ct. Denote
the log stock price pt. The log diﬀerence of cash ﬂows in the model obeys
∆ct = ξ′∆st + ∆yt,
where yt is log of aggregate economic output. The vector st contains low- and high-frequency
components of the after-tax corporate earnings share, while ξ′ ≡(ξ, ξ)′ is a constant vector
that contains an “operating leverage”parameter ξ > 1 that arises from the need for ﬁrms in
aggregate to retain part of their earnings for reinvestment before making any payout.
Although the estimates of output growth in GLL suggest that their autocorrelations
hover around zero, thereby suggesting a near i.i.d. process for ∆yt, the Covid-19 economic
crisis might reasonably be interpreted as having a large transitory component to it.
accommodate a transitory drop in output, we augment the GLL model with a transitory
component, denoted zt, that follows
zt+1 = φzzt + εz,t+1,
εz,t+1 ∼N(0, σ2
which implies
∆zt+1 = −(1 −φz)zt + εz,t+1.
Total output growth is deﬁned by
∆yt+1 = g + ∆zt+1 + εa,t+1
= g −(1 −φz)zt + εz,t+1 + εa,t+1.
The transitory εz,t+1 shock is designed to capture any temporary output drop attributable
to the Covid-19 event, which, although sharp, may be short-lived due to the temporary
nature of lockdowns and the possibility of a vaccine arriving in the relatively near future. To
incorporate the unexpected nature of this shock without adjusting our previous estimates,
we assume that agents perceive σz = 0, and are completely surprised by a nonzero realization
of this shock in 2020:Q1. For simplicity, we assume that agents maintain their belief σz = 0
going forward, and interpret the drop in output following the arrival of Covid-19 as a one-time
Solving the model under these assumptions yields the solution for the log price-payout
ratio pt −ct, denoted pct:
pct = A0 + A′
x⊥˜x⊥,t + A′
δ ˜δt + Azzt
where tildes denote demeaned variables,
Az = −1 −φz
and where all other coeﬃcients are unchanged from the baseline model of GLL.
The state space representation of the model takes the form
Fβt−1 + εt,
where Yt ≡(eyt, rft, pyt, rpt, ∆yt)′ is an observation vector that contains observations on
the corporate earnings share of output, the risk-free rate, the price-output ratio, a measure
of the equity risk premium implied by options data due to Martin , and corporate
output growth. The latent state vector is βt ≡
. If we let Hi denote the
row/element of Ht corresponding to the log ratio of the stock price to output (pyt), then the
log diﬀerence in the stock price according to the model is given by
∆pt+1 = ∆pyt+1 + ∆yt+1
i∆βt+1 + g −(1 −φz)zt + εz,t+1 + εa,t+1
−(I −F)βt + εt+1
−(1 −φz)zt + εz,t+1 + εa,t+1.
GLL estimate the full dynamic model in (2) and (3) using state space methods, allowing us
to precisely decompose the market’s observed growth into these distinct component sources.
The model is ﬂexible enough to explain 100% of the change in equity values over the sample
and at each point in time. To capture the inﬂuence of primitive shocks to latent variables at
diﬀerent horizons, we model each as a mixture of multiple stochastic processes driven by lowand high-frequency variation. GLL apply and estimate the model using data on the U.S.
corporate sector over the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4, where their focus is on understanding
why stocks relative to measures of aggregate economic activity have risen so much over the
post-war period.
Here we are interested understanding stock market behavior in the COVID-19 economic
crisis. To address this episode, we ﬁrst update the data with observations through 2019:Q4.
We then decompose the growth in the market equity values for the corporate sector into
sources attributable to diﬀerent latent components. This is accomplished by either ﬁxing
one component during a particular period, or by allowing only one component to vary.
We begin by asking what factors could have plausibly driven the sharp decline in stock
market values ∆pt+1 in 2020:Q1.
For this we need to ﬁll in the terms of (4).
accomplished by replacing the the time-t latent state vector βt with its estimated value βt|t
for 2019:Q4 assuming that zt = 0 prior to the arrival of the COVID-19 shock, yielding
∆pt+1 = g −H′
i(I −F)βt|t + H′
iεt+1 + εz,t+1 + εa,t+1.
Since the model decomposition is expressed in logs, the observed decline in the stock
market between February 19 and March 23 of 33.7% in levels converts to log market equity
growth of ∆pt+1 = log(1−0.337) = −0.414. We may then ask which combinations of shocks
could plausibly explain this sharp decline, where our candidate set includes the transitory
COVID-19 output shock εz,t+1, the permanent output shock εa,t+1, and the remaining shocks
contained in εt+1, which include shocks to both low- and high-frequency components of the
corporate earnings share, st, of real interest rates, rf,t, and of the orthogonal price of stock
market risk x⊥,t.
Unlike the other elements of εt+1, we specify the transitory COVID-19 output shock
εz,t+1 as a one-time event rather than estimating it from the data in each period. We do
this to account for the fact that this shock to the macroeconomy appears to be of a unique
scale following the outbreak of COVID-19, and therefore would not be well approximated
by a Gaussian process with constant volatility in all periods. We therefore need to calibrate,
rather than estimate, the size of this shock to output, as perceived by market participants
in real time.
To obtain a measure of this object, we consult the Survey of Professional
Forecasters (SPF). The May 2020 wave of this survey indicates a median forecast of -32.2%
annualized growth in 2020:Q2, which is quite close to what the Bureau of Economic Analysis
“advance”estimate of -32.9% turned out to be when it was released on July 30, 2020. The
annualized decline of 32.2%, once converted to a quarterly growth rate in logs is
εz,t+1 = 0.25 · log(1 −0.322) = −0.0972.
Because asset prices are forward looking, the impact of this shock on the value of the
stock market depends not only on this shock size, but also its persistence, governed by φz.
Since zt is modeled as an AR(1) process, the expected growth rate in the period following
the shock is given by
Et+1∆zt+2 = −(1 −φz)εz,t+1.
Since the May 2020 wave of the SPF indicates a median forecast of 10.2% annualized growth
in 2020:Q3, equivalent to a quarterly log growth rate of 0.0243, we can substitute from (6)
into (7) and solve to obtain φz = 0.741. This serves as our baseline value for φz.
With the model now fully speciﬁed, we compute model estimates of the implied decline
in the market that can be attributed to various sources, displayed in Table 1. To start,
we consider the possible role of a transitory COVID-19 output shock εz,t+1 of size -0.0972,
holding ﬁxed all other shock elements in εt+1. The results for the baseline value of φz are
presented in the ﬁrst column of the table, and show that a transitory shock of this magnitude
and persistence implies log market equity growth of ∆pt+1 = −0.0015, explaining a mere
0.37% of the actual log growth ∆pt+1 = −0.411. Despite the extreme severity of the projected
decline in aggregate economic activity by a magnitude that would eclipse any quarter of the
Great Depression in the United States, it is just too transitory to be an impetus for a major
decline in stock market values.
Even if we assume that the an initial shock of the same magnitude were far more persistent, this mechanism is still unable to explain much of the observed decline in the market.
For example, if instead of φz = 0.74 we assume φz = 0.99, the decline in output alone implies
log market equity growth of ∆pt+1 = −0.0347, explaining only 8.4% of the observed decline.
Even in the limit, a fully permanent shock (φz = 1), would yield quarterly market equity
growth of ∆pt+1 = −0.0972, which is just 23.7% of the observed decline. These small contributions can be understood because, even under permanent output shocks where shareholder
payout falls proportionally with output, once we ﬁx the required rate of return on stocks,
the growth in the value of market equity can be at most as large as the output growth shock
εz,t+1. Since the observed decline in the market between February 19 and March 23rd was
33.7% while the expected quarterly decline in output for 2020:Q2 was only 9.7%, the direct
contribution of changes in output alone to the observed market decline is quite limited.
Next we consider what can be explained when the same baseline transitory (φz = 0.74)
output drop is accompanied by a decline in the corporate earnings share of various magnitudes, as measured by the standard deviation of the shock to either the low- or high-frequency
component of the corporate proﬁt share. The combined eﬀects when the decline in the proﬁt
share ranges from one to ﬁve standard deviations are reported in columns 2 through 6 of
Table 2, with those for the low-frequency component reported in the ﬁrst row, and those for
the high-frequency component reported in the second row. The table shows that combining
a large transitory output drop with a drop in the corporate earnings share of output can
explain a larger market drop, but the magnitudes are still much smaller than the observed
log growth of -0.411. Explaining the full drop with these combined sources of variation would
require either a 0.231 (14.2 standard deviation) decline in the log low-frequency component
of the earnings share on top of the transitory drop in output, or a 1.445 (27.0 standard
deviation) decline in the log high-frequency component.
While log declines on the order of 0.231 have occurred in the total log earnings share
over our sample, such as a decline of 0.234 in 2008:Q4, these declines occur during economic
downturns and result in highly transitory movements in the earnings share. In particular,
they typically revert quickly. For example, Figure 1 shows that the level of the earnings
share dropped precipitously early on in the Great Recession, but quickly reversed itself and
exceeded its pre-recession level before the recession had ended. (The labor share exhibits
the mirror image of this trajectory.) This suggests that the only credible source of variation
in the corporate earnings share in the COVID-19 recession would need to be a shock to
the high-frequency component of the earnings share, which is far more transitory than the
trend-like movements captured by the low-frequency component. But explaining the market
decline using this high-frequency component would require a 1.445 log drop in the earnings
share, more than six times larger than any decline observed in post-war U.S. data.
Taken together, these results suggest that economic fundamentals alone, in the form
of a large drop in aggregate output, even if accompanied by a substantial decline in the
corporate earnings share of output, are an unlikely force for explaining the early declines in
the stock market during the COVID-19 recession. Given that interest rates did not move
by large magnitudes in a direction that would be commensurate with a drop in stock prices
 , that leaves only
the pricing of equity market risk, driven by the orthogonal risk-price factor x⊥,t, as the
compensating variable to explain the market decline.
It is even more challenging to explain the market turnabout that began on March 24th
without appealing to large ﬂuctuations in discount rates, driven by changes in how risk was
priced. Neither expected fundamentals nor the quantity of risk appear to have improved in
late March and early April. If anything, market expectations of future cash ﬂows further
deteriorated around that time ), and macroeconomic uncertainty
sharply increased between March and April.3
While risk-free interest rates are not plausible candidates for explaining the drop in stock
prices, they move in a direction that could in principle explain the rebound. On March
3, 2020 the Federal Reserve lowered its target range for the federal funds rate by half a
percentage point to 1 to 1.25 percent, and then on March 15, 2020 lowered it again to a
range of 0 to 0.25 percent. Since our model incorporates interest rates as a driver of the
value of market equity, we can quantify the direct eﬀect of this drop in rates.
Although our model is based on changes in the real rate, we can conservatively approximate the eﬀect of policy through changes in the nominal 3-month treasury rate, since
inﬂation is typically low in recessions, and appears to be so again in this episode.4 This
rate dropped from an average of 1.53% over the period November 2019 to February 2020,
to an average of 0.14% over the period April 2020 to July 2020. At the same time, it is not
clear how much of this drop should be attributed to the high-frequency versus low-frequency
component of interest rates. We therefore bound the explanatory power by considering the
response if 100% of the drop in interest rates occurred in one component or the other. Attributing all of the drop to the high-frequency component would imply a rise in log market
equity of ∆pt+1 = 0.0078, undoing only 1.91% of the market’s initial crash. Attributing all
of the drop to the low-frequency component would imply ∆pt+1 = 0.0439, undoing a larger
3See the June vintage of the JLN macroeconomic uncertainty ) at
www.sydneyludvigson.com.
4PCE inﬂation fell at a 1.89% annual rate in 2020:Q2.
10.6% of the original market crash, but still falling far short of explaining the full recovery
in equity values.
To summarize, neither the staggering quarterly decline in economic output for 2020:Q2,
nor reasonable expectations for the corporate proﬁt share of output or short-term interest
rates are plausible candidates for explaining the V-shaped trajectory of the stock market
between February and April of 2020 according to the model estimates. We are left with only
one other major factor that could explain the market behavior, namely independent variation
in the stock market risk premium resulting from sharp ﬂuctuations in the pricing of stock
market risk x⊥,t. This may seem surprising given that many commentators have attributed
the market busts in recessionary episodes to the shrinking economy, and the booms to sharp
declines in risk-free interest rates.
Yet the timing and magnitude of ﬂuctuations in the
market during this episode do not align with the ﬂuctuations in economic fundamentals,
leaving an important role for rapidly ﬂuctuating attitudes toward risk or investor sentiment
in driving the pricing of stock market risk early in 2020. The question then becomes, why did
attitudes shift so abruptly? The next section explores the possible role of the Federal Reserve
actions in response to the coronavirus in possibly shoring up risk tolerance and contributing
to strong stock market rebound in late March and April of 2020.
The Role of the Fed: An Event Study
This section describes the high-frequency event study of the stock market’s behavior in the
U.S., in the minutes surrounding Federal Reserve (Fed) communications in March and April
We are particularly interested in how announcements pertaining to new credit
facilities, unprecedented in both scope and magnitude, may have aﬀected the stock market.
We are also interested in contrasting the eﬀects of announcements regarding the creation of
new credit facilities with more traditional FOMC announcements on target ranges for the
federal funds rate and large scale asset purchases, since the latter are more directly related
to the risk-free rate component of the discount rate used for stock market valuation. This
5For a related study of Federal Reserve actions on the corporate bond market, see Haddad, Moreira, and
Muir .
separation will help us distinguish the roles of short rates versus risk premia in driving the
market rebound.
Federal Reserve Actions in Response to COVID-19
In a series of announcements in March and April of 2020, the Fed outlined the parameters
of several new credit facilities created to address the economic fallout from the coronavirus
pandemic, in addition to communicating about the expansion of credit provided by existing
facilities ﬁrst created during 2008 ﬁnancial crisis.
In addition, there were several more
conventional Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announcements giving the outlook
for the economy, new target ranges for the federal funds rate, or new large scale asset
purchases. A complete summary of these announcements and their main content can be
found in the Appendix.
On March 3 at 10:00am and March 15 at 5pm, the Federal Reserve released FOMC
statements outlining conventional monetary policy steps to address the slowing economy by
lowering the target range for the federal funds rate, and increasing its holdings of Treasuries
and agency mortgage backed securities (MBS). On April 29 at 2:00pm, the Fed released
an FOMC statement declaring that it would continue to purchase Treasury securities and
agency MBS. We refer to these as “conventional”monetary policy announcements.
Next came a series of announcements stating that the Fed would revive and/or expand
credit facilities similar to those created during the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis. These include a
commercial paper funding facility (CPFF, announced March 17 at 10:45am) a primary dealer
credit facility (PDCF, announced March 17 at 6:00pm), a Money Market Mutual Fund
Liquidity Facility (MMLF, announced March 18 at 11:30pm), and facilities to support dollar
swap lines with other Central Banks (March 19 at 9:00am and March 20 at 10:00am). With
the exception of the PDCF, we shall refer to these events as “unconventional” monetary
policy announcements, albeit using pre-existing facilities. The PDCF was created to support
funding to primary dealers, who are trading counterparties of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York in its implementation of conventional monetary policies to alter or maintain target
ranges for the federal funds rate.6 For this reason, we classify it as a “conventional”monetary
policy announcement.
On March 23 of 2020 the Federal Reserve began the ﬁrst of several communications on
the creation more credit facilities that were entirely new to the COVID-19 crisis. These
include the creation of the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF, March
23 at 8:00am), the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF, March 23 at
8:00am), the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF, March 23 at 8:00am), as
well as expanding the scope of the MMLF and CPFF (March 23 at 8:00am). These were
followed by announcements foreshadowing the creation of the Paycheck Protection Program
Loan Facility (PPPLF, April 6 at 2:00pm), an announcement on April 9 at 8:30am that
the Fed would take additional action to provide up to $2.3 trillion in loans to support the
The April 9 communication also announced measures to bolster the PPPLF,
to create the Main Street Lending Program (MSLP) and the Municipal Liquidity Facility
(MLF), and to expand the size and scope of the PMCCF, SMCCF, and TALF. On April 23
at 5:45pm, the Fed announced the future expansion of the PPPLF; on April 27 at 4:30pm it
announced an expansion of the scope and duration of the MLF; and on April 30 at 10:00am
it announced the expansion of the scope and eligibility of the MSLP. We shall classify all of
these announcements as “unconventional”monetary policy announcements.
The months of March and April of 2020 were clearly characterized by a tremendous
volume of fast-evolving news about the coronavirus disease 2019 and the resulting economic
fallout. The minutes bracketing at least some of Federal Reserve policy announcements are
therefore likely to have coincided with other pieces of news about the pandemic that could
have predominated as a causal factor in market ﬂuctuations, especially if the announcement
occurred outside of U.S. trading hours. We address this in two ways. First, where possible,
we focus on narrow 30-minute windows around a Fed announcement to measure the market
6The Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) is a loan facility that will provide credit to primary dealers
in exchange for a broad range of collateral for term funding with maturities up to 90 days. The stated
purpose of the PDCF is to support the credit needs of American households and businesses by fostering the
functioning of ﬁnancial markets more generally and to expand the ability of primary dealers to gain access
to term funding.
impact of the announcement, and otherwise—if the announcement occurred outside of trading
hours—we use the most recent closing price and the 20-minutes after the subsequent opening
price. Second, we augment our understanding of the most important pieces of market news
surrounding a given announcement by conducting a systematic analysis of a newspaper
reports from FACTIVA.
Figures 3 and 4 display the intra-day movements in the S&P 500 stock market index in
30-minute windows around a given Fed announcement, where Figure 3 shows the movements
for the conventional monetary policy announcements, and Figure 4 shows those for what we
have deﬁned as unconventional monetary policy announcements.7
What is immediately clear from examining both ﬁgures is that not all announcements
of Fed actions to address the economic costs of COVID-19 were associated with a rise in
the stock market. For the conventional monetary policy announcements, Figure 3 shows
that, with the exception of the March 3 FOMC statement, all of those announcements
are associated with a decline the market in the minutes immediately subsequent to it. In
the case of the March 15 announcement, the lowering of the target range for the federal
funds rate to 0 to 1/4 percent seems to only have ampliﬁed worries over the extent of the
damage from the pandemic, according to news reports. The action to create the PDCF to
support liquidity to the New York Federal Reserve Bank’s trading counterparties, announced
March 17 at 6:00pm, seems to have been largely ignored by market commentators in news
reports. Finally, the FOMC statement on April 29th at 2pm that the Fed would continue
to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS is associated with a brief increase in the
market immediately thereafter, but it failed to sustain, with all the gains being lost within
20 minutes. Of course, if the expectation of the March 15th rate cut to zero had already
been priced in at the time of that announcement, the market turnabout on March 23 is all
the more puzzling, since in that case lower risk-free rates cannot be oﬀered to help explain
Among the unconventional monetary policy announcements, there are at least four for
which there is little to no evidence that they either were the impetus for a market rally. Two
7A spreadsheet tracking the news around the announcements is available upon request.
of these appear to have been preponderated by bad news about the virus. Figure 4 shows that
neither news of the creation of the MMLF on March 18 at 11:30pm, nor news of the creation
of three new facilities and the expansion of two others on March 23 at 8:00am, are associated
with a signiﬁcantly higher opening price for the S&P 500 subsequently. For the March 18th
event, news reports hinted at a disappointment over the eligibility of assets under the MMLF
and restrictions on their maturity. For the March 23rd event, news reports on the market
reaction expressed a belief that the Fed’s actions would be insuﬃcient in the absence of
additional ﬁscal support.8 Figure 4 shows that the announcement at 2pm on April 6th of the
creation of a facility to provide term ﬁnancing backed by paycheck protection program (PPP)
loans was likewise not associated with a rise in the market. News reports here suggested that
the PPP program had been functioning poorly and that this step by the Federal Reserve had
been widely anticipated prior to the announcement. The poor functioning of the program
could also explain why the two subsequent announcements related to the PPP, one on the
future expansion of the PPPLF (April 23 at 5:45pm) and the announcement inaugurating
that expansion (April 30 at 5:15pm), also failed to spark a sustained market rise. In the
case of the announcement on April 23, the market was higher at the opening bell on the
24th, but the increase failed to sustain. The April 30th announcement appears not to have
contained any real news, given that the future expansion of the PPPLF had previously been
announced on April 23rd.
So which announcements of actions taken to support the economy, if any, aided the stock
market? To gauge the eﬀect of an announcement, we follow prior research ) and consider a measurement window that begins 10 minutes
prior to a Fed announcement and ends 20 minutes after the announcement, unless the announcement occurred outside of trading hours, in which case we use the most recent closing
price and the price 20 minutes after the opening bell on the next day. Given windows of
this length, Figure 4 suggests that ﬁve separate announcements in March and April are
candidates for bolstering the stock market: March 17 at 10:45am, March 20th at 10:00am,
April 9th at 8:30am, April 27th at 4:30pm, and April 30th at 10:00am. While the ﬁgure is
8In contrast to the stock market reaction, Haddad, Moreira, and Muir ﬁnd that the March 23rd
announcement generated a 6% return on investment grade corporate debt at the time of the announcement.
suggestive, it is unclear how much quantitative support for the market these announcements
actually provided. To address this question, we turn to a regression analysis.
Regression Analysis
We consider a data sampling interval of 10 minutes and examine stock market changes in
30-minute windows surrounding a Fed announcement, or “event.” We then formally test
whether stock market price changes in these 30-minute announcement windows are diﬀerent
from those in non-announcement windows. Speciﬁcally, let t denote a 10-minute interval
during the trading day. We construct 30-minute returns as follow
∆pt−1,t+2 = ln
where Pt is measured as the beginning of interval price, i.e., if the interval spans 9:30am to
9:40am, the price is measured at 9:30am.
Let N denote the total number of Fed events in our sample and let j index a particular
event, i.e., j = 1, ..., N. Then Dj
t denotes a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if event j
occurred at time t and 0 otherwise. We regress the 30-minute changes in the stock market
price on the sum of 2N dummies:
∆Pt−1,t+2 = β0 +
In the above, Dj
t is a dummy that selects the 10-minute interval in which the announcement
occurred, while Dj
t+1 is a dummy that selects the 10-minute interval immediately after the
announcement interval. For events that occur during market trading hours, the left-handside variable is the log diﬀerence between the price 20 minutes after and 10 minutes before
the event. For events that occur outside of trading hours, the left-hand-side variable is the
log diﬀerence between the price 20 minutes after the market opens on the ﬁrst trading day
after the announcement, and the most recent closing price.
The regression is estimated
on 10-minute data from January 1 to May 5 of 2020 using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
with heteroskedasticity robust standard errors. F-statistics for testing whether the sum of
coeﬃcients on the two dummies for a given event j, i.e. P2
k, and for all events j, i.e.,
k are diﬀerent from zero, are reported below.
Table 3 presents the results of regression 8 on dummies for the unconventional and
conventional monetary policy announcements separately. The table reports the sum of the
coeﬃcients on the two dummies for each event j in individual rows, as well as for all j at
the bottom of the table. In this table we report results for a speciﬁcation that uses nine
unconventional monetary policy announcements (left panel), listed by their day and time,
including the four discussed above that are associated with a decline in the market over
the 30-minute window surrounding the announcement. The right panel reports results for a
speciﬁcation on the four conventional monetary policy announcements discussed above.
The right panel shows that there is no evidence that the conventional monetary policy
announcements were collectively a source of support for the stock market.
Indeed, the
sum of the coeﬃcients on the dummies for conventional monetary policy actions is -17 in a
regression where the dependent variable is the log diﬀerence in the S&P 500 stock market
index. This implies that the conventional announcements are collectively associated with a
decline of approximately 17% in the stock market. A reading of news reports suggests that
these negative “eﬀects” likely reﬂect the market participants’asessment that conventional
monetary policy actions would be inadequate by themselves, rather than an asessment that
the actions per se would be harmful.
The left panel of Table 3 quantiﬁes the market’s reaction in the 30-minute windows surrounding the unconventional monetary policy announcements, with the total eﬀect summing
across events that were both supportive and unsupportive. The sum across all coeﬃcients
on the unconventional policy announcement dummies is 1.53 for the S&P 500, implying
that when taken together, these events provided only modest support for the market. The
numbers for the Nasdaq and Russell 2000 are larger, equal to 3.64 and 6.98 respectively. As
discussed above, however, there is reason to believe that four of these announcements were
either overshadowed by other negative related to the pandemic, or instead their content was
widely anticipated and not an important piece of news. In order better isolate the eﬀects of
announcements that could have sparked a stock market gain, we run a separate speciﬁcation
in which dummies are included only for the ﬁve events discussed above that appear to have
contributed to a market rebound in the S&P 500 index.
Table 4 presents these results. Collectively, these ﬁve announcements are associated with
gains of approximately 8.3% in the S&P 500 stock market index and 12% in the Russell
2000 index. Among all these unconventional policy announcements, the communication on
April 9th at 8:30am, in which the Fed announced it would take additional steps to provide
up to $2.3 trillion in loans to support the economy, is estimated to have the largest eﬀect,
followed closely by the announcement on March 17 at 10:45am on the creation of the CPFF.
The former is associated with an approximately 3% increase in the market, and the latter a
2.65% increase.
To summarize, while still leaving a large portion of the market recovery that began on
March 24th of 2020 to be explained by other factors, points to a substantial role for the
Federal Reserve, especially with its creation of new lending facilities, in pushing the stock
market upward. By the third week of August of 2020, the market had risen further and
several indexes had risen to all-time highs. With the beneﬁt of hindsight, we can now observe
how much credit the Federal Reserve has actually extended under these new facilities. In
particular, we can assess how much of the $2.3 trillion in loans to support the economy
that the Federal Reserve announced on April 9 that it stood ready to provide has actually
been extended. If that amount is close to the $2.3 trillion amount pledged, then the role
these announcements appear to have played in the market turn-around might reasonbly be
described as a rational response to an important piece of good news.
How Much Credit Has Been Extended?
One piece of information on the credit actually extended is the Federal Reserve’s balance
This information turns out to be noisy, for reasons discussed below.
Still, it is
useful to consider it as part of the picture. In particular, the Fed resports updates every
Wednesday on the value of its total assets (less eliminations from consolidation). Figure 4
shows how those assets have changed from the beginning of 2020 to early August of 2020.
The top panel gives a break-down of total assets into two categories: (i) assets associated
with both the expanded and new (circa COVID-19) credit facilities, and (ii) all other assets.
The latter are primarily comprised of Treasuries and agency MBS. We observe that total
assets have increased sharply starting in March 2020 and continue to rise through July 2020.
They totaled around seven trillion dollars by August. But that the vast bulk of the increase
starting in March came in the form of Federal Reserve holdings of Treasuries, MBS and other
traditional balance sheet items. Assets held under new and existing facilities increased by a
comparitively small amount.
Next, the middle panel of Figure 4 breaks down the change in assets associated with
the expanded and new credit facilities. We see that the vast bulk of the increase in these
items is attributable to repos, currency swamps, and other Fed assets acquired in their dollar
liquidity arrangements with other central banks. The third panel of Figure 4 breaks down the
change in assets associated with only the new credit facilities created this year in response
to COVID-19. Here the biggest increases have been in the PPPLF, the PMCCF, and the
SMCCF. By August, total assets held under all new credit facilities was approximately $200
The assets on the Federal Reserve Balance sheet for a given lending facility are not,
however, the same as the dollar value of credit actually extended to the public under the
facility. That’s because the Treasury puts up capital in a ﬁrst-loss position in a special
purpose vehicle, which gets reported as a liability of the Federal Reserve even if no loan is
made. The corresponding asset on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet is the cash deposited
by the Treasury as the capital injection.9 To see the actual amount of credit extended under
the each new facility, we refer to the Federal Reserve’s periodic report to Congress delivered
on August 8, 2020.10 From this report we observe that, as of July 31 of 2020, the MSLP, for
example, had total outstanding loans of only $87.6 million, even though the total value of the
collateral pledged to secure these loans—the number that appears on the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet for this facility—was $37.6 billion.
Figure 5 decomposes the value of credit actually extended to the public as of July 31
of 2020 by lending facility.
The total dollar value of loans extended across all facilities
established in response to COVID-19 sums to $101 billion, with the vast majority of that
9We are grateful to Seth Carpenter for help interpreting the accounting of the Federal Reserve’s balance
10The report is online at 
($70.7 billion) attributable to the PPPLF. This is followed by the MMLF ($13.7 billion),
the PMCCF+SMCCF ($12 billion), TALF ($1.6 billion), MLF ($1.2 billion), the PDCF
($0.3 billion), the CPFF ($0.1 billion), and ﬁnally the MSLF ($0.087 billion). These dollar
amounts are tiny when compared to a roughly $19 trillion dollar real GDP ﬂow in 2019, but
are even small relative to the several trillion in loans that the Federal Reserve announced it
stood ready to provide on April 9th.
Overall, these results suggest that the Federal Reserve played a direct role in the market
turnabout. But it did so not with a substantive extension of dollars to support the economy.
Moreover, there is little evidence that traditional monetary policy steps were the impetus
for a market rally, at least initially. This evidence suggests that the Federal Reserve has
important eﬀects the stock market by altering market participants’willingness to bear stock
market risk, independently of any role it plays in macroeconomic dynamics. The ﬁndings
reinforce the conclusions of our estimated asset pricing model, which point to a major role for
ﬂuctuations in eﬀective risk aversion or sentiment in driving stock market volatility between
February and April of 2020.
Conclusion
This study investigates the role of diﬀerent causal factors in driving the sharp V-shaped
trajectory of the U.S. stock market in the early stages of COVID-19. The S&P 500 stock
market index lost 33.7% of its value between February 19 and March 23rd of 2020, but
abruptly regained the vast majority of this lost value, rising 29% between March 24th and
April 17. At the time of this writing, most market indexes have now surpassed their previous
records set in the pre-COVID-19 era.
We ﬁnd that the most likely candidate for explaining the market’s volatility during the
early months of the pandemic is the pricing of stock market risk, driven by big ﬂuctuations
in risk aversion or sentiment unrelated to economic fundamentals or interest rates. Our
conclusions are based both on an estimated asest pricing model and empirical evidence on
the role of Federal Reserve communications in March and April of 2020.
We ﬁrst use the estimated asset pricing model to decompose the market’s sharp decline
into component causal forces. According to the model estimates, neither the highly anticipated staggering quarterly decline in economic output for 2020:Q2, nor reasonable expectations for the corporate proﬁt share of output or short-term interest rates can explain the
V-shaped trajectory of the stock market between February and April of 2020. These estimates further imply that the decline to near-zero interest rates in mid-March could explain
at most a third of the market rebound. This leaves the most important causal role for rapidly
ﬂuctuating attitudes twoard risk or investor sentiment that are independent of the aggregate
economic state.
We then explore the possible role of Federal Reserve actions in response to COVID-19
in shoring up risk tolerance and contributing to stock market rebound in late March and
April of 2020. Using a high-frequency event study, we ﬁnd no evidence that “conventional”
monetary policy announcements promulgating decisions to lower the target range for the
federal funds rate to near zero, or to increase the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury
securities and agency MBS were a contributing factor in the market rebound. Conversely,
we ﬁnd that ﬁve “unconventional”policy announcements between March 17 and April 30th
about new credit facilities collectively contributed to an approximately 8% higher value for
the S&P 500 index and an approximately 12% higher value for the Russell 2000. As of July 31
of 2020, however, the dollar value of loans actually extended under the new facilities falls far
short of what the Federal Reserve announced it stood ready to provide on April 9th. These
results therefore serve to reinforce the conclusion from the estimated asset pricing model,
namely that stock market volatility during the coronavirus pandemic has been driven more
by sentiment than substance.