HAL Id: inria-00394212
 
Submitted on 23 Mar 2012
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Evaluation of GIST descriptors for web-scale image
Matthijs Douze, Hervé Jégou, Sandhawalia Harsimrat, Laurent Amsaleg,
Cordelia Schmid
To cite this version:
Matthijs Douze, Hervé Jégou, Sandhawalia Harsimrat, Laurent Amsaleg, Cordelia Schmid. Evaluation
of GIST descriptors for web-scale image search. CIVR 2009 - International Conference on Image and
Video Retrieval, Jul 2009, Santorini, Greece. pp.19:1-8, ￿10.1145/1646396.1646421￿. ￿inria-00394212￿
Evaluation of GIST descriptors for web-scale
image search
Matthijs Douze
Herv´e J´egou
Harsimrat Sandhawalia
Laurent Amsaleg
Cordelia Schmidt
The GIST descriptor has recently received increasing attention in the
context of scene recognition. In this paper we evaluate the search accuracy and complexity of the global GIST descriptor for two applications,
for which a local description is usually preferred: same location/object
recognition and copy detection. We identify the cases in which a global
description can reasonably be used.
The comparison is performed against a state-of-the-art bag-of-features
representation. To evaluate the impact of GIST’s spatial grid, we compare
GIST with a bag-of-features restricted to the same spatial grid as in GIST.
Finally, we propose an indexing strategy for global descriptors that optimizes the trade-oﬀbetween memory usage and precision. Our scheme
provides a reasonable accuracy in some widespread application cases together with very high eﬃciency: In our experiments, querying an image
database of 110 million images takes 0.18 second per image on a single machine. For common copyright attacks, this eﬃciency is obtained without
noticeably sacriﬁcing the search accuracy compared with state-of-the-art
approaches.
Introduction
Web-scale image indexing requires the description and storage of billions of
images. It is, therefore, important to describe an image as compactly as possible
and to develop eﬃcient indexing strategies. There exists a trade-oﬀbetween
the precision of an image description and its size. Storing all the information
contained in an image eﬃciently is impossible for a large image collection. On
the other hand, storing just a few bits is not suﬃcient to distinguish between a
large number of images.
Currently, two types of approaches are popular for web-scale image indexing.
The ﬁrst one uses global descriptors, in particular GIST , and the second
one is based on a bag-of-features (BOF) . In the following we brieﬂy review
these two approaches and discuss their advantages and drawbacks.
The GIST descriptor was initially proposed in . The idea is to develop
a low dimensional representation of the scene, which does not require any form
of segmentation. The authors propose a set of perceptual dimensions (naturalness, openness, roughness, expansion, ruggedness) that represent the dominant
spatial structure of a scene. They show that these dimensions may be reliably
estimated using spectral and coarsely localized information. The image is divided into a 4-by-4 grid for which orientation histograms are extracted. Note
that the descriptor is similar in spirit to the local SIFT descriptor .
The GIST descriptor has recently shown good results for image search. In Li
et al. GIST is used to retrieve an initial set of images of the same landmarks,
for example the statue of liberty, and then image point based matching is used
to reﬁne the results and to build a 3D model of the landmark. In Hayes and
Efros it is used for image completion. Given a huge database of photographs
gathered from the web the algorithm patches up holes in images by ﬁnding
similar image regions in the database based on the GIST descriptor. Torralba
et al. developed diﬀerent strategies to compress the GIST descriptor.
BOF image search systems ﬁrst extract a set of local descriptors for each
image, such as the popular SIFT descriptor . Combined with appropriate
region detectors , these descriptors are very discriminant and invariant to
local transformations. Furthermore, image comparison based on local description is robust to cropping, clutter, change in viewpoint, illumination change,
etc. The BOF representation is built from such a set of local descriptors. The
key idea of using this representation is to mimic state-of-the-art text retrieval
systems, and in particular to exploit the inverted ﬁle indexing structure .
This structure eﬃciently computes any Minkowski distance between sparse
vectors, which is especially of interest for a document representation based on
term frequencies and its variants . For this purpose, a visual vocabulary is
required to transform the continuous feature space into a discrete word space.
This step consists in learning a vector quantizer, typically by k-means clustering, and in using it to map the descriptors into visual words (forming a visual
vocabulary): descriptors are quantized by ﬁnding their nearest centroid.
Diﬀerent strategies have been proposed to improve BOF-based image search.
For instance introduces a hierarchical visual vocabulary that improves the
search eﬃciency. Re-ranking based on the estimation of a geometrical transform , as well as query expansion –inspired by text retrieval–, improves the
accuracy. However, these methods can be used for a limited number of images
only, because of the high cost of estimating complex geometrical transformations
with individual database images. Using a richer descriptor representation and
geometrical consistency improves search accuracy while maintaining similar
query times.
The BOF representation of images was proved be very discriminant and
eﬃcient for image search on millions of images .
However, web-scale
indexing based on this approach suﬀers from two limitations: complexity and
memory usage. Diﬀerent strategies have been proposed to overcome the ﬁrst
one. The vocabulary size can be increased , but only to some extent, as the
accuracy decreases for very large vocabularies . Another strategy is to use
approximate search, as done in by using a two-level inverted ﬁle structure
or in using min-Hash. However, it is not clear how to use these schemes on
scales ranging from 100 million to 10 billion images. Memory usage is the other
problem, as the BOF indexing structure does not ﬁt into memory for web-scale
datasets. Using hard-drives instead of RAM would severely damage eﬃciency,
so only a few approaches have addressed image indexing in this context .
For very large datasets, it is therefore appropriate to consider a global image
description, which is much faster and compact. Global descriptions suﬀer from
well-known limitations, in particular they are not invariant to signiﬁcant transformations (crops,...). However, for some applications, such as copy detection,
most of the illegal copies are very similar to the original: they have only suﬀered
from compression, scaling or limited cropping.
In this paper, we compare the global GIST descriptor with the BOF image
representations in diﬀerent application scenarios. To our knowledge, these descriptions have not been compared in a similar setup. Clearly, one would not
expect a global descriptor to outperform BOF representations. One of the problems of GIST description being the ﬁxed spatial layout, we evaluate the impact
on the accuracy resulting from this ﬁxed spatial image partitioning. Finally,
we propose an indexing strategy for GIST that improves the eﬃciency without
signiﬁcantly penalizing search accuracy. The advantage over the binary codes
proposed in is that only a small fraction of the database has to be visited.
The idea is to ﬁrst apply the Hamming Embedding technique proposed in to
the GIST descriptor. This selects most of the potentially correct images. Then
we apply ﬁltering and re-ranking steps to further improve the quality of the
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the diﬀerent image
representations evaluated in this paper. Our eﬃcient image search system is
introduced in Section 3. The datasets representing the application cases and
the evaluation protocol are introduced in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 provides
experimental results comparing the performance of GIST descriptors and of the
BOF representation.
Image representation
In this section, we brieﬂy present the image descriptions that are compared.
Each method is represented by an acronym given in the subsection title.
GIST global description
To compute the color GIST description the image is segmented by a 4 by 4 grid
for which orientation histograms are extracted. Our implementation1 takes as
input a square image of ﬁxed size and produces a vector of dimension 960. Most
of the works using the GIST descriptor resize the image in a preliminary
stage, producing a small square image. Its width typically ranges from 32 to
128 pixels. This is suﬃcient due to the low dimensionality of the descriptor, i.e.,
it does not represent the details of an image. We choose a size of 32×32 pixels.
The images are rescaled to that size irrespective of their aspect ratio. GISTs
are compared using the L2 distance. In the following, image search consisting
in exhaustively computing the L2 distances between the GIST representation
of a query and of a set of GIST descriptors is simply called “GIST”.
Bag-of-features representation
The BOF framework is based on local invariant descriptors extracted
at invariant regions of interest. It matches small parts of images and can cope
with global transformations, such as scaling, local changes in illumination or
combined transformations.
The feature extraction is performed in two steps: detecting regions of interest
with the Hessian-Aﬃne detector , and computing SIFT descriptors for these
regions . These steps are performed using the software available at .
The ﬁngerprint of an image is obtained by quantizing the local descriptors
using a nearest-neighbor quantizer. The image is then represented by a histogram of visual word occurrences, which is normalized, here with the L2 norm.
The visual vocabulary of the quantizer is produced using k-means. It contains a large number of visual words (in this paper, k = 200, 000, as in ).
Therefore, the ﬁngerprint histograms are very sparse, making queries in the
inverted ﬁle eﬃcient.
Hamming embedding
We also compare GIST with the state-of-the-art image indexing system of .
This technique was successfully used in the video copy detection task of the
TRECVID’08 evaluation campaign . This work, shows that a richer representation of the images is obtained by adding a short signature that reﬁnes
the representation of each descriptor within its quantizer cell. The signature
is obtained by a function locally mapping the Euclidean space associated with
a particular Voronoi cell to the space of binary sequences, or Hamming space
(hence the name “Hamming embedding”). More precisely, a descriptor x is represented by a tuple (q(x), b(x)), where q(x) is the visual word resulting from the
1A re-implementation in C of the Matlab code available on Antonio Torralba’s web page.
k-means quantizer q(.), and b(.) is the HE mapping function. Two descriptors
are assumed to match if
q(x) = q(y)
h (b(x), b(y)) ≤ht
where h(b0, b1) is the Hamming distance between binary vectors b0 and b1, and
ht is a ﬁxed threshold. The binary vectors are typically of length 64 and ht = 24.
The score of an image is ﬁrst obtained as the weighted sum of the distances
of the matches satisfying (1), then normalized.
BOF with a spatial grid
One of the drawbacks of GIST compared to BOF is the spatial grid partitioning
the images. This arbitrary segmentation does not allow the recognition of images
that have suﬀered strong cropping, or images of the same objects shot from
diﬀerent viewpoints, etc. In order to evaluate the impact of this segmentation
on the search quality, we deﬁne a BOF representation that partitions the images
as in GIST, i.e., using a 4 × 4 regular spatial grid (see Fig. 1). Only interest
points from the same grid cell may be matched.
Note that using image partitioning with BOF is not new and may be useful
for some applications, such as object class recognition . For object/location
recognition and copy detection, such a partitioning is expected to decrease the
accuracy. Besides, using a grid improves the eﬃciency, as the grid artiﬁcially
creates a larger visual vocabulary: the lists in the inverted ﬁle are indexed by
tuples of the form (q(x), r(x)) (instead of only q(x) in standard BOF), where
r(x) is the region associated with descriptor x. For a 4 × 4 grid and a 200, 000visual word vocabulary, the resulting number of lists in the inverted ﬁle becomes
3, 200, 000. This increased size of the vocabulary (by a factor 16) results in a
reduction of the average length of the lists and of the number of entries to be
visited during a query. This spatial grid can be used with standard BOF (then
denoted GBOF), or with the Hamming Embedding described in section 2.3
Spatial veriﬁcation
We also provide results obtained with a full spatial geometrical veriﬁcation
(SV) between images. We use the same method as in , i.e., we estimate
the aﬃne 2D transformation in two steps. First, a Hough scheme estimates
a similarity transformation with 4 degrees of freedom. Each pair of matching
regions generates a set of parameters that “votes” in a 4D histogram. In the
second step, the sets of matches from the largest bins are used to estimate a
ﬁner 2D aﬃne transformation. Images are similar if such a transformation can
be estimated and results in a number of inliers, i.e., matching points which are
consistent with the transformation.
Figure 1: BOF with grid. The regions of interest, here localized by the crosses,
are represented by both their visual words (texture) and the grid region where
they are localized.
Image indexing strategy
In this section, we propose an image search system that handles image collections
on a very large scale. Our scheme, illustrated in Fig. 2, operates in three steps
that rank and ﬁlter the images. The role of each step is to ﬁlter most of the
images so that the next and more accurate image ranking method becomes
tractable.
GIST indexing structure
The ﬁrst ﬁltering step of our image search system, (Fig. 2, left) relies on an
eﬃcient GIST indexing structure: GISTIS. It is derived from , which employs
an inverted ﬁle . In this structure, a quantized index identiﬁes the descriptor
lists that are likely to contain the nearest descriptors. GISTIS is constructed as
follows (notations are the same as in section 2.3):
• A k-means algorithm is run on a set of GIST descriptors, to produce a
codebook {c1, . . . , ck} of k centroids. Here k = 20, 000. This clustering is
performed only once on an independent image dataset, i.e., not using the
GIST image descriptors to be indexed.
32bits 512bits
quantizer q(.)
retrieve the m
nearest centroids
re-ranking
based on full
GIST comparison
images filtered by
the Hamming test
re-ranking
based on affine
geometrical
verification
(SIFT based)
GISTIS+L2+SV
Figure 2: Overview of the image search system. Left to right: ﬁltering based on
GIST using GISTIS, ﬁltering based on GIST with exact distance computation,
ﬁnal ﬁltering based on SIFT-based geometrical veriﬁcation.
• Each database descriptor x is assigned to the nearest centroid q(x) of the
quantizer codebook.
• A binary signature is computed using Hamming Embedding, i.e., the signature generation procedure of . Because of the high dimensionality of
GIST descriptors, the length of the signature is set to 512 bits.
• The image identiﬁer and its signature b(x) are stored in an entry of GIS-
TIS. Like in section 2.3, the entries are indexed by q(x).
Retrieving similar signatures from the structure is performed by
• ﬁnding the m nearest centroids of the query descriptor x, producing quantized indexes q1(x), . . . , qm(x). We set m = 200 for the experimental results. Note that the ﬁngerprint generation is not symmetric, as on the
query side we produce several quantized indexes. Multiple assignment to
centroids on the database side would use too much memory.
• computing binary signatures b1(x), . . . , bm(x) associated with descriptor
x for all the quantized indexes.
• visiting the entries associated with the quantized indexes. Images which
binary signatures are below a pre-deﬁned threshold ht = 220 of the query
signature are kept.
Memory usage: an image is represented by 68 bytes using our structure: 4
bytes for the image identiﬁer and 64 bytes for the binary signature. Note that
the quantized index is implicitly encoded by the list where the considered image
entry is stored.
The structure ﬁlters most of the images. Only 200 inverted lists are visited
out of 20, 000. As a ﬁrst approximation, we can expect to visit 200/20000 =
1% of the image entries. It turns out that, because the inverted lists are not
balanced, on average about 2.3% of the entries are visited. Second, the Hamming
distance test further ﬁlters 94% of the remaining images (for a threshold ht =
220). Finally, the structure typically returns 0.13% of the images (only 0.01% for
ht = 200), which are ranked according the Hamming distance between binary
signatures.
Two-stage re-ranking
The indexing structure proposed above dramatically reduces the number of
images assumed to be relevant. For a billion image dataset, it would typically
return one million images.
Having ﬁltered the majority of the images using
GISTIS, we can now apply more precise image comparison methods. Here, we
propose two strategies that are used either independently or jointly to reﬁne the
ranking provided by our eﬃcient structure.
• GISTIS+L2: The ﬁrst consists in re-ranking the images based on the
comparison of the full GIST descriptors. producing a list of images ranked
according to the Euclidean distance.
• GISTIS+L2+SV: In addition to the two pre-ﬁltering stages, a full geometrical veriﬁcation is performed to keep only the images that are consistent in terms of an aﬃne transformation.
For this purpose, we use
the spatial veriﬁcation described in the subsection 2.5. This scheme is
illustrated by Fig. 2.
For both these re-rankings steps, the image representation (i.e., either full GIST
or the set of local descriptors used in SV) is read from a mechanical hard drive.
That is why we only re-rank the top 200 images returned by GISTIS. Using
solid-state drives would certainly increase the eﬃciency, as the bottleneck in
our case is the disk latency.
Datasets and measures
This section introduces the datasets used in our experiments, as well as the
measures of accuracy used to evaluate the diﬀerent methods.
We have used two evaluation datasets, namely the INRIA Holidays dataset and
the INRIA Copydays dataset2. In addition, we have used a set of “distracting
images”, referred to as distractors. These images are merged with those of the
evaluation datasets to evaluate the impact of the large scale on complexity and
Holidays: object/location recognition. This dataset is mainly composed
of personal holiday photos. The remaining ones were taken on purpose to test
2Both datasets are available at 
original image
Figure 3: Sample images from INRIA Copydays and corresponding transformed
The number is the rank of the original image when submitting the
attacked image to a database of 110 million images using the GISTIS method
introduced in Section 3. NR means that the image is not returned by GISTIS.
the robustness to various transformations: rotations, viewpoint and illumination changes, blurring, etc. The dataset includes a large variety of scene types
(natural, man-made, water and ﬁre eﬀects, etc) and images are of high resolution. The dataset contains 1491 images partitioned into 500 groups, each of
which represents a distinct scene, location or object. The ﬁrst image of each
group is the query image and the correct retrieval results are the other images of
the group. Because of the signiﬁcant variations in viewpoint, one would expect
global description to perform poorly on this dataset.
Copydays: near-duplicate detection. We have created this dataset to evaluate our system for images that have been synthetically attacked. The dataset
contains 157 original images. To represent typical transformations performed
on images in a copy detection application, each image of the dataset has been
transformed with three kinds of transformations:
◦image resizing (by a factor of 4 in dimension = 16 in surface), followed
by JPEG compression ranging from JPEG3 (very low quality) to JPEG75
(typical web quality).
◦cropping ranging from 5% to 80% of the image surface.
◦strong transformations: print and scan, paint, change in contrast, perspective eﬀect, blur, very strong crop, etc. We have produced 229 transformed
images using such strong transformations.
The transformations are illustrated in Fig. 3. The ﬁrst two types of transformations are easy, but of practical interest: most copyright violations occur
with these transformations, producing near-duplicate images. The transformations from the last category strongly degrade the images, compromising their
commercial value. For this reason, this class of transformations can be seen as
the worst case of copy detection.
Distractors. We have retrieved 32.7 million high resolution images from Flickr.
The subsample of one million images built for , Flickr1M, is used for most
experiments.
In addition to these images, we use the “tiny image” dataset
of Torralba and Fergus . This dataset contains 79 million images of size
Due to their small size, they have only been used to evaluate the
behavior of GIST and of GISTIS on a large scale. Note, however, that this size
is consistent with the pre-processing we apply to all images when computing
GIST, see subsection 2.1.
Evaluation protocol
In order to evaluate the methods described in section 2 and the image search
system presented in section 3, we have used two standard evaluation measures,
namely the mean average precision (mAP) and the recall at particular ranks.
mAP. For each query image we obtain a precision/recall curve, and compute
its average precision (the area under the curve). The mAP is then the mean for
a set of queries .
recall@R. Measuring the recall at a particular rank R, i.e., the ratio of relevant images ranked in top R positions, is a very good measure of the ﬁltering
capability of an image search system. For a system involving several ﬁltering
steps, such as ours or the one proposed in , curves for varying value of R
allow to optimize short-list sizes.
Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the diﬀerent image matching methods introduced
in Section 2 and the eﬃcient image search system introduced in Section 3. For
local description, we only report results for up to one million images, due to the
large storage volume of local descriptors.
Complexity analysis
Table 1 summarizes the memory usage and the query times we measured by
making 500 queries on the Flickr1M dataset. As a general observation, more
accurate representations yield higher memory usages and query times.
Memory usage. The spatial veriﬁcation SV typically requires 500KB per image, which does not ﬁt into memory. Considering a powerful machine with 64GB
of main memory, the BOF approach and the method of can typically index
bytes (RAM)
time per query image
ﬁngerprint
Table 1: Memory usage and computing speed for the various methods on a
64-bit 8-core computer.
Timings were measured on the Flick1M dataset (1
million images) by performing 500 queries, except for SV, where the timing is
extrapolated from queries in the Holidays dataset (1491 images). The two query
times for GISTIS+L2 are for full GISTs stored in main memory and on disk,
respectively.
5 and 1.5 million images respectively, a bit more if using less local descriptors.
GISTIS allows the storage of about 850 million images, a large improvement
over the 15 million raw GIST descriptors that can be stored in memory. GIS-
TIS is therefore able to store two orders of magnitude more images than local
description-based approaches.
Eﬃciency. One can see in Table 1 that global GIST descriptors are one to two
orders of magnitude more eﬃcient than approaches based on local description.
The time measurements are given separately for 1) the ﬁngerprint extraction,
which does not depend on the dataset size, and 2) search in the indexing structure. Note that in all the schemes we consider, the query time of the structure
is linear in the number of images. The ﬁngerprint extraction time is slightly
higher for GISTIS compared with GIST, as the descriptor quantization and the
computation of the corresponding binary signature take about 1 ms. Here again,
the results are appealing: the schemes based on global description are at least
one order of magnitude more eﬃcient that those using local descriptors.
The re-ranking methods would highly beneﬁt from the recent solid-state
drives, which are not penalized by the latency of disks (here, the limiting factor
is the storage’s seek time, not its throughput). Depending on whether GISTs
are read from memory or from a hard disk, the query time of GIST+L2 is of
6 ms and 192 ms, respectively. As expected (see subsection 2.4), the GBOF and
GHE variants are faster than the corresponding BOF and HE methods.
Complexity on a large scale. The average query time per image measured on
our largest dataset of 110 million images is 0.18 s (36 ms for the ﬁngerprint and
Figure 4: Holidays+Flickr1M: rate of relevant images found in the top R images.
143 ms for the search using GISTIS). This is a large improvement over the result
given in , where a query time of 0.75 s is reported for querying a dataset of
12.9 million images. The memory usage is also very reasonable: about 7GB to
index all the images. To our knowledge, this is the best result reported on that
scale on a single computer.
Search quality
Object/location recognition. Fig. 4 shows how the diﬀerent systems rank
the relevant images in a scene or object recognition setup. One can observe the
better accuracy obtained by local approaches. Fig. 6(a) shows the mAP measure
as a function of the number of distractors. Our GISTIS structure only slightly
reduces the accuracy compared with the GIST exhaustive search, so given its
much higher eﬃciency, it is worth using it in this context. Moreover, by reranking the images (GISTIS+L2), the accuracy is nearly the same as for the
GIST exhaustive search, which shows the relevance of the two-stage algorithm
in this context.
Near-duplicate detection. The tolerance of the methods to near-duplicate
attacks is illustrated in Fig. 5, which gives the mAP values for the Copydays
dataset merged with the one million images of Flickr1M. One can ﬁrst observe
the excellent behavior of GIST descriptors for the SCALE+JPEG attack, which
(a) SCALE (1/16) + JPEG
JPEG quality factor
GISTIS+L2+SV
crop (% of surface)
GISTIS+L2+SV
Figure 5: Attacks on Copydays + Flickr1M.
is better than local descriptors for all quality factors. The conclusion is reversed
for the severe image cropping transformation. However, there is no clear advantage of using local descriptors for moderate crops, i.e., if less than 20% of the
image surface is removed.
The GISTIS structure slightly reduces the quality compared with exhaustive
GIST search. However, by re-ranking the results (GISTIS+L2) the performance
we obtain is similar to that of exhaustive GIST distance computation.
Reranking based on spatial veriﬁcation (GISTIS+L2+SV) further improves the
results, providing better results than those of GIST. This is because the SV
technique is complementary with global descriptors.
Impact of the spatial segmentation. Fig 4 shows that the GBOF approach
is only slightly better than GIST, which reﬂects the penalization resulting from
the spatial grid in the context of object and scene recognition. Interestingly,
in Fig. 5, depending on the transformation, the spatial grid used in GBOF
and GHE has diﬀerent eﬀects on the mAP accuracy values.
The accuracy
decreases for the cropping, but this segmentation improves the results for the
SCALE+JPEG transformation.
Search quality on a large scale. Fig. 6 shows the mAP values we obtained
by increasing the number of images up to 110 millions. One can observe that for
the strong attacks (Holidays and Copydays-STRONG) depicted in Fig. 6(a) and
Fig. 6(b), it is worth using local descriptors if this choice is tractable. Besides,
for usual transformations such as scaling and compression, see Fig. 6(c), or
limited cropping, see Fig. 6(d), the results are comparable with those of the
state-of-the-art approach of . On 110 million images, the ranking obtained
by GISTIS is perfect without re-ranking even for a JPEG quality factor of 15.
Fig. 3 shows typical results with their rank when querying the largest dataset.
(a) Holidays: scene or object recognition
(b) Copydays: STRONG
database size
GISTIS+L2+SV
database size
GISTIS+L2+SV
(c) Copydays: SCALE (1/16) + JPEG20
(d) Copydays: CROP20
database size
GISTIS+L2+SV
database size
GISTIS+L2+SV
Figure 6: Accuracy (mAP) as a function of the number of database images (up
to 110 million images).
Conclusions
We have evaluated the GIST descriptor for two diﬀerent applications and compared it to state-of-the-art methods based on local descriptors. Local representations obtain signiﬁcantly better results for object and location recognition.
However, the global GIST descriptor is shown to ﬁnd part of the relevant images
even in large datasets.
For near-duplicate detection the GIST descriptor provides very high accuracy, in some cases outperforming the state-of-the-art local approaches, namely
for transformations such as scaling, JPEG compression and limited cropping.
Overall, the results obtained with GIST are compelling given its much higher
eﬃciency and smaller memory usage, allowing to scale up to very large datasets.
We have also introduced an eﬃcient indexing strategy for the GIST descriptor.
It provides results similar to those of exhaustive search, while providing very
high eﬃciency.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Rob Fergus, Antonio Torralba and William Freeman
for kindly providing the entire tiny image dataset of 80 million images. This
work was supported by the French multimedia engine project QUAERO and
the ANR project GAIA.