Recommending Citations for Academic Papers
Trevor Strohman, W. Bruce Croft, and David Jensen
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Abstract. Substantial eﬀort is wasted in scientiﬁc circles by researchers
who rediscover ideas that have already been published in the literature.
This problem has been alleviated somewhat by the availability of recent
academic work online. However, the kinds of text search systems in popular use today are poor at handling vocabulary mismatch, so a researcher
must know the words used in relevant documents in order to ﬁnd them.
This makes serendipitous results unlikely.
We approach the problem of literature search by considering an unpublished manuscript as a query to a search system. With this approach, the
entire text content of the paper can be used in the search process. We use
the text of previous literature as well as the citation graph that connects
it to ﬁnd relevant related material. We evaluate our technique with manual and automatic evaluation methods, and ﬁnd an order of magnitude
improvement in mean average precision as compared to a text similarity
Introduction
Science continues to grow in both numbers of practitioners and depth of knowledge. Unlike the scientiﬁc landscape of even a hundred years ago, it is no longer
possible for one researcher to understand everything about even a small corner of science. As science continues down this path of specialization, the role
of the scientiﬁc literature becomes even more important. The scientiﬁc paper
is the most eﬀective tool that we have for disseminating scientiﬁc discovery. It
allows specialized, geographically disparate scientists to work together in the
process of discovery. In order to maintain the pace of scientiﬁc discovery, it is
critical that researchers have easy access to past discoveries. Unfortunately, the
constant growth of the scientiﬁc ﬁeld makes literature access an increasingly
diﬃcult problem.
Searching the scientiﬁc literature by computer is not a new idea. The modern computer science researcher has access to general literature search engines
like Google Scholar , CiteSeer and Rexa , as well as publisher-speciﬁc
engines like those oﬀered by the ACM and IEEE. The best of these engines
incorporate not just query text but also some citation features into the document ranking process. The bibliometrics literature provides a series of ideas for
ranking the importance and similarity of scientiﬁc works.
Most current literature search systems concentrate on short queries that are
unlikely to describe the nuance of the user’s true information need. In this work,
we instead suppose that the user is able to provide the system with a very long
query; we assume that the user has already written a few pages about the topic,
and is able to submit this document to the search system as the query. With
this additional information, we suppose that we can improve the eﬀectiveness of
the ranked list of documents.
In this recasting of the problem, we no longer assume that the user wants documents that are topically similar to the query; instead, we assume the user wants
documents that the query document might cite. The distinction is important,
because relevant citations may take many diﬀerent forms. Some relevant citations are for recent, topically related work. Other citations are for seminal works
or survey articles; these papers show a weaker topical similarity, but provide
context about the ﬁeld to the reader. Finally, authors sometimes cite textbooks
and other reference materials as sources of information about algorithms and
standard methods.
We have built a system to explore this citation recommendation problem.
In the process, we have found that simple text similarity computation is not
enough to excel at this task. We show that it is necessary to use graph-based
features in the retrieval process to achieve high quality retrieval results, although
many seemingly useful features oﬀer little beneﬁt. Our evaluation and results are
preliminary, but we provide both automatic and manual evaluations to show the
eﬀectiveness of our model. In conclusion, we call for a fresh look at this task by
the information retrieval community.
Related Work
This work depends on the idea that there is some notion of a correct or optimal
set of citations for a paper, or at least there is some partial ordering among
bibliographies. Wouters cites evidence that scientists are intensely personal
about their referencing behavior, and that the accepted model of citation may
change drastically between disciplines. For example, Wouters notes that mathematicians are known for very brief citation lists, while biologists are not afraid
to cite exhaustively. Wouters shows how the process of academic citation has
resisted many attempts to build a comprehensive theory explaining it.
If citing references is a matter of personal taste, then perhaps we can determine something about the author of a paper from the references they cite. Hill
and Provost prove that this is true; they ﬁnd that a classiﬁer can determine the
author of a paper with as much as 60% accuracy using only the list of references
at the end of the paper . As may be expected, accuracy rates improve with
more training data, so more proliﬁc authors tend to be easier to identify.
Our goal is to represent the scientiﬁc process of citation just well enough that
we can attempt to inﬂuence it. Wouters approaches citation as an anthropologist, trying to deﬁne what people do and why. Hill and Provost take a diﬀerent
approach and show that the citation behavior of diﬀerent authors is diﬀerent
enough to act as a kind of ﬁngerprint. We do not attempt to understand or
model this kind of personal behavior in citation. Our ultimate goal is to aﬀect
some kind of change in the scientiﬁc process, which we believe may be an easier
task than fully understanding the present state of scientiﬁc writing.
The ﬁrst step toward emulating the citation process is analysis, and the pioneer of citation analysis is Garﬁeld and the Science Citation Index . Garﬁeld’s
Science Citation Index was, in eﬀect, a paper version of the publication graph
that our system uses. This index linked authors and their papers, and papers
with the papers they cite. Once this data was made available, the next logical
step was to analyze patterns in the data and to make inferences from that data.
In the article we cite here, Garﬁeld discusses the use of citation analysis to judge
the quality of academic journals. Garﬁeld suggests that citations per work published is a reasonable measure of the quality of a journal, and that inﬂuence in
science is concentrated in a few highly inﬂuential journals. This work is not so
diﬀerent from what we attempt to do; we want to use this citation data to help
us determine what documents might be cited by a query document. Inﬂuence is
clearly an important latent variable in that equation.
This is not to say that citation data has not been used before; in fact, the
ﬁeld of bibliometrics continues to thrive. White and McCain write that
“Bibliometrics is the study of literatures as they are reﬂected in bibliographies.”
In bibliometrics, scientiﬁc literature is seen as a graph that connects authors,
journals, conferences, schools, companies and papers together. By analyzing this
graph, researchers hope to determine which authors and journals are most inﬂuential, which scientiﬁc ﬁelds are segregated from one another, and which papers
seem to be similar. It is this last category that interests us most.
Much of the recent work on link-based features in retrieval has been focused
on web pages. PageRank is the best known link-based web retrieval feature .
Page et al. consider a mythical web surfer, randomly moving through the web
graph by either following links, or jumping directly to other pages (presumably
by typing the address of a page into a web browser). Since this random walk is
an ergodic Markov chain, it has a unique stationary distribution; the probability
mass of each page in this stationary distribution is its PageRank.
PageRank is a global metric; it does not depend on the query. In contrast,
Kleinberg proposes a query-dependent measure known as HITS. The algorithm starts with an initial set of supposed relevant documents, then searches
the document graph to ﬁnd those papers that point to the document set, and
those documents that the document set points to. After doing this, the algorithm
iterates to determine which papers are hubs, and which are authorities. The authority scores generated are analogous to PageRank, but are query-dependent.
The task we consider can be considered a traditional retrieval task, in which
case the link metrics shown above are directly applicable. Another way to consider our task is as a link prediction task; we ask the whether the query document
will cite documents in the collection in the future.
Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg consider a variety of graph-based measures
in order to predict new links in a social network. Like us, they focus on the graph
of academic publications. However, instead of predicting the bibliography of a
new document, they try to predict collaborations between existing researchers.
The authors consider a variety of known measures, including PageRank, common
neighbors (similar to bibliographic coupling) and the Katz measure. The authors
ﬁnd that while their best algorithms perform far better than their baselines, it
is diﬃcult to achieve high accuracy on this collaboration task.
The closest system to the one we describe is CiteSeer . The primary focus of
the CiteSeer research was the automatic extraction of citation information from
research papers found on the web. However, CiteSeer is a successful academic
search engine, and as such is related to our work. The initial query processing
done by CiteSeer is a traditional Boolean search. However, CiteSeer also offers a similar documents search, which can either use textual similarity (cosine
similarity of TF-IDF vectors), header similarity, or a citation similarity (cosine
similarity of TF-IDF vectors of citations, with each citation treated as a term).
These diﬀerent metrics are distinct searches in the CiteSeer interface, and are
not combined to form one single ranking metric. The authors do not attempt to
evaluate the eﬀectiveness of their similarity searches.
Salton and Buckley survey spreading activation methods for information
retrieval. The spreading activation idea comes from models of cognition, where
concepts occur on a graph, which are proxies for linked neurons. If one graph
node is activated, that activation spreads through graph connections to activate
other nearby nodes. In the document retrieval case, if one document is assumed
to be relevant, documents similar to that document are also assumed to be
A diﬀerent take on the same general idea comes from recent work by Diaz
 . While Salton and Buckley envision document scores propagating through a
graph structure, Diaz instead considers the problem of smoothing a function on
a graph. The result is similar; a high score at one graph node is smoothed to its
neighboring nodes.
Text similarity is the basis of our retrieval model, as in most text retrieval
systems. Matching the term distribution between two documents is the basis of
document clustering and classiﬁcation methods, and therefore gives us a strong
base to build from. However, we hypothesize that text similarity will not be
enough to perform well in this task for two reasons. First, authors are known to
create new terminology when writing about new ideas. It stands to reason that
two researchers working independently on the same idea will describe that idea
using diﬀerent words and concepts. In order for this kind of search system to be
successful, we need to account for this potential change in terminology between
papers. Second, text similarity cannot adequately account for important paper
attributes like quality and authority.
Because of this, our model also exploits the citation information between
papers in the collection. We can think of the papers in the collection as nodes in
a directed graph, where the edges are citations of one paper by another. Since
we assume the query consists of only text and not citations, it is natural to think
of it as a node with no incoming or outgoing edges. We use the text similarity
measure as a proxy for actual citation information only for this node; this allows
us to approximately place the query in the citation graph.
To do this, our system uses a two stage process to ﬁnd a set of documents
to rank. Let R be the initially empty set of documents to rank. In the ﬁrst step,
the system retrieves the top 100 most similar papers to the query document and
adds them to R. In the second step, all papers cited by any paper in R are added
to R. In general, this process concludes with a set R that contains 1000 to 3000
documents. Initial experimentation with real academic papers suggested that
over 90% of papers that researchers actually cite would be in R at this point.
Expanding R with a third step (again adding all papers that are cited by some
paper in R) did not appear improve recall.
Publication Year
The year the document was published 
Text Similarity
The similarity of the text of this candidate with the
query, as measured by the multinomial diﬀusion kernel
Co-citation Coupling The fraction of documents that cite this candidate that
also cite documents in the base set
Same Author
Binary feature; true if this document is written by the
same author that wrote the query
The Katz graph distance measure
Citation Count
Number of citations of this document from all documents
in the corpus
Table 1. A list of the features used in our experimental model
We then rank the documents in R by the features shown in Table 1. Neither
text-based nor citation-based features performed well in isolation. Text-based
features are good for ﬁnding recent related work, since papers will use the same
sort of vocabulary. However, text features are not as good at ﬁnding conceptually related work that uses diﬀerent vocabulary. Textual features are also poor
at establishing authority of documents. Citation features are useful for these
things, but may do a poor job at coverage (since recent documents may have no
citations).
The features are combined linearly to provide a ﬁnal document score. As
shown in both Joachims and Metzler , maximizing data likelihood is not
an eﬀective way to train a model for high performance on the mean average
precision measure. Instead, we use coordinate ascent to ﬁnd feature weights for
our model.
We use two diﬀerent evaluations to show the eﬀectiveness of our technique. In
the manual evaluation, we show that the system is capable of ﬁnding reasonable
citations for a sample paper from our collection. In the automatic evaluation,
we use real research papers with their citation lists stripped, and evaluate our
system based on its ability to ﬁnd the true citation list using the mean average
precision metric.
Model Features
We use publication year as a feature since academic citation tends to focus on
recent literature. There is a legitimate debate about whether this is good or
not; a focus on recent literature allows a discipline to move forward quickly, but
this focus can turn to myopia if important discoveries from older literature are
Citation count is also used as a feature in our model. Here we use the total
count of documents that cite a particular document. This is very similar to an
inlink count feature that might be used for web retrieval. Here we are assuming
that heavily cited pages are likely to be cited again.
In the bibliometrics literature, bibliographic coupling and co-citation coupling are used as indicators that two documents are similar. Traditionally these
are compared using Pearson’s r to ﬁnd a correlation score between the two
documents. We instead use the multinomial diﬀusion kernel recommended by
Laﬀerty and Lebanon . In using this kernel, we assume that bibliographies
are generated by multinomial distributions of citations, and then ask whether
the bibliographies of two papers are generated by the same distribution. The
probability of this is the multinomial diﬀusion kernel:
K(θi, θj) = (4πt)−|V |
t arccos2(<√θi,√
We use this kernel to measure the textual similarity between two documents
as well, as done in Diaz . Our decision for using this feature was motivated
both by arguments from Laﬀerty and Lebanon and the availability of code
to generate this feature.
The Katz measure is a measure of distance on a graph. Under the Katz
measure, two graph nodes are considered close if there are many short paths
between them. This gives the following formula:
where Ni is the number of unique paths of length i between the two nodes,
and β is a decay parameter between 0 and 1. In this work, we train both the β
parameter and the weight of this feature on the document score. All paths are
assumed to start from the query document, then go through one of the base set
of textually similar documents, then on to documents that those base documents
We chose the Katz measure because Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg found it to
be the most useful of the measures they tested. It also gives us some intuition
about what the inﬂuential works in a discipline are. The citation count metric is
useful, but perhaps too coarse. For instance, computer science textbooks may be
highly cited sources by students, but are less important sources to researchers.
The Katz measure is computed within the retrieved set of documents, and can
be seen as measuring the authority that this set of documents place on each
Experimental Platform
We built a retrieval system to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our approach. We
created a custom parser for the Indri indexing and retrieval system in order
to parse the Rexa corpus, which is described in the next section. All documents were stemmed with the Krovetz stemmer . As documents were indexed
by Indri, the system also extracted citation data from the corpus and stored it
in a MySQL database.
We computed the text similarity feature using the data stored in the Indri
index, and stored these similarity values in the database. The citation count and
publication year features were also stored in the database for eﬃcient retrieval
by the ranking component. The rest of the features, such as the Katz measure,
author feature, and co-citation coupling were computed at system runtime.
All ranking experiments were performed on a 3GHz Pentium 4 desktop running Linux. Training a model on 900 documents takes about an hour, while
running an average query takes about a second.
This research is dependent on a corpus of data collected by the Rexa project at
the University of Massachusetts . The public face of Rexa is a search engine
of scientiﬁc literature, like CiteSeer or Google Scholar . Like both of these
systems, Rexa ﬁnds literature on the Internet in the form of PDF or PostScript
documents, and uses probabilistic parsing techniques to extract metadata from
these documents, such as title, author and citation information . The result
of the extraction process is a database of papers with extracted metadata, as well
as automatically extracted author and citation graphs. While most research in
the Rexa project has focused on the metadata extraction process, the metadataenhanced corpus is an important data source for further research in relational
learning and information retrieval.
Total paper entries
Papers with text
Total number of citations (X cites Y) 1.46 million
Total number of cited papers
Table 2. Statistics from the Rexa collection used in our experiments
The Rexa corpus continues to grow as new papers are crawled. For this research, we use a snapshot of the data from the middle of 2005, as detailed in
Table 2. At this point, approximately 100,000 papers had been processed. The
processing was augmented by bibliographic information from DBLP . This
information provides a canonical version of references. This additional data gives
the collection an interesting composition; it contains almost 1 million paper references, but only about 100,000 of these papers contain full text and a references
list. However, almost 700,000 papers are cited by some paper in the collection,
so the citation information in the collection is quite rich.
In both the manual and automatic evaluations, we treated an actual research
paper as a query. In the manual evaluation, we manually check papers retrieved
for relevance. In the automatic evaluation, we match the papers retrieved with
the actual papers cited by the query paper.
Manual Evaluation
One possible problem with our automatic evaluation is that it is circular; our
system is attempting to improve the citing ability of authors, but we evaluate
with the papers that authors actually cite. The documents that we hope our
system will ﬁnd are those that the paper author would not have considered
otherwise; but it is precisely these documents that our automatic evaluation
strategy will consider not relevant.
A full manual evaluation of retrieval accuracy was not possible, but we did
analyze a single retrieval to understand the types of papers our experimental
system returns.
The paper we consider in this publication is “Extensible Kernels are leading
OS Research Astray,” by Druschel, et al. . This paper is a position paper
describing why the authors believe that extensible operating systems are an
important research tool, but that better alternatives exist for end users. The
nature of this paper’s argument means that it will necessarily cite a diverse set
of papers in systems research, and it does; it cites work on extensible kernels,
network stacks, the BSD operating system, and caching systems.
Our system manages to ﬁnd one of its citations in the top 10 papers retrieved, another 8 in the top 100, and 5 more in the top 500. It does not return
3 of the citations. The resulting retrieval has an average precision of 0.052. By
contrast, using the text similarity feature alone ﬁnds none of the citations. These
numbers are somewhat incomplete in that they ignore the possibility that the
system found excellent citations that were simply not used by the original paper’s authors. Therefore, we analyzed the top 50 papers retrieved by both our
experimental system and the baseline system. Space constraints keep us from
printing the titles of the papers retrieved, but we summarize our ﬁndings here.
Of the top 10 papers retrieved by our experimental model, four are almost
certainly not relevant. The other six are possibly relevant. The top-ranked paper
is about a modular network infrastructure that has some parallels to extensible
operating system kernels. The fourth, seventh and ninth papers are explicitly
about extensible operating systems. The sixth and tenth papers discuss process
fault isolation, which is an important component of the author’s paper.
The top 10 from the baseline system are vaguely on topic, but the quality
appears to be lower than in the experimental model results. Surprisingly, there
is no overlap between this top 10 list and the one retrieved by the experimental model. Upon evaluating these documents, we believe only three could be
considered relevant to the query.
In the top 50 papers retrieved by the experimental model, we ﬁnd other
possibly good references. We see some common themes in these papers that are
shared by the query. For example, seven papers discuss speciﬁc modiﬁcations to
operating systems in order to support speciﬁc workloads, which has been a key
driving force in extensible kernel research. Five papers discuss virtualization or
ways that traditional kernel-level computations can be executed in some kind of
protected mode, which is a concept the query paper advocates.
The baseline system retrieves some of the same documents as the experimental model does, but misses some of them as well. In all, we ﬁnd 12 usable
documents in the baseline system results versus 18 from the experimental system.
The ﬁndings in this section are merely qualitative, but they serve to support
our automatic experimental methodology shown in the next section.
Automatic Evaluation
In order to have an objective evaluation of the system, we used an automatic
evaluation. To do this, we considered a particular paper from the collection as
a query and its citations as the relevant documents. In order to have the best
possible generalization to full text collections, we chose the 1000 documents that
had the highest percentage of citations with full text as well.
We evaluate a text similarity baseline, which returns the top 100 most similar documents to the query using the multinomial diﬀusion kernel mentioned
earlier. Since other models may return more than 100 documents, we also perform a truncated evaluation for each model, where only the top 100 documents
are considered. The numbers in the truncated column allow a fair comparison
between the text similarity baseline and the other models.
The results we show here are the result of a 10-fold cross validation experiment. We trained 10 models, each using 900 query documents and a test set of
100 documents. Each document was used as a test document exactly once, and
as a training document exactly nine times. The reported results show the mean
average precision over all 10 experiments, and also the maximum and minimum
value seen.
In order to assess the usefulness of particular features, we performed experiments that removed each feature from the model in isolation. We expect that
if a feature is very useful, the retrieval eﬀectiveness of the system will drop dramatically when a feature is removed; if it is not useful, we expect eﬀectiveness to
stay the same. Note that we did not re-train the model for these tests; we only
set the weight of the removed feature to zero.
Text Similarity 0.0079 0.0055 0.0103 0.0079 0.0055 0.0103
Experimental All Features
0.1016 0.0781 0.1251 0.0940 0.0727 0.1153
0.0675 0.0539 0.0811 0.0612 0.0469 0.0754
0.0983 0.0747 0.1219 0.0917 0.0701 0.1132
0.0335 0.0256 0.0414 0.0257 0.0194 0.0320
No Cite Count 0.1005 0.0771 0.1238 0.0931 0.0718 0.1144
0.1052 0.0834 0.1269 0.0979 0.0784 0.1174
0.1016 0.0781 0.1251 0.0940 0.0727 0.1153
Table 3. Results of 10-fold cross validation experiments on a 1000 query set. Results are
reported using the mean average precision metric. Full results represent mean average
precision over the entire retrieved set, while the truncated results reﬂect mean average
precision computed over the ﬁrst hundred retrieved documents. Conﬁdence intervals
are based on the t distribution over all 10-folds. All experimental models signiﬁcantly
outperform text similarity (Wilcoxon, p = 0.01). All experimental models with the
Katz measure signiﬁcantly outperform the “No Katz” method (Wilcoxon, p = 0.01)
The results of our experiments are shown in Table 3.
Our experimental results show the eﬀectiveness of our system in various
modes against a text similarity baseline. The conﬁdence intervals come from the
t distribution, which makes a mild normal assumption about our data which
may not be true. However, we also performed the distribution-free Wilcoxon
signed rank test (p < 0.01), which makes no such assumptions. From this, we
ﬁnd that all experimental models signiﬁcantly outperform the text similarity
baseline. Also, we ﬁnd that the “No Katz” experimental model is signiﬁcantly
outperformed by all other experimental models (p < 0.01). The truncated “No
Text” is signiﬁcantly outperformed by all models with both the Katz feature
and Text (p < 0.05), although we can conclude nothing about the “No Text”
non-truncated model.
Perhaps surprisingly, text similarity on its own appears to be a poor way
to succeed in this evaluation. The citation metrics play a major role in quality
document ranking.
A second surprise is how little many of the features we used matter in the
ﬁnal ranking of documents. The author, citation count, publication date and
title text features add little to nothing to the eﬀectiveness of the system. This is
not to say that these features are not correlated with citation, but they appear
to be dominated by the full text and Katz features. Notice that the “No Title”
line of the table is identical to the “All Features” line; this is because the training
process assigned the title a weight of zero in every model we trained.
The Katz measure shows itself to be crucial to the performance of our model.
Without the Katz feature, model performance drops by over half. One way to
interpret this result is that the Katz measure, among all features we use, is the
one that is closest in capturing what actual scientists actually cite.
The “No Text” model relies entirely on author information to ﬁnd related
documents. This means that the authors of the query are used to ﬁnd other
documents written by those authors, and then those documents are ranked. No
documents not written by the query’s authors are considered. The performance
here suggests that authors often cite papers twice in successive publications. If
the author feature is removed, the eﬀectiveness of this approach drops to zero
(no documents are retrieved).
Conclusion
We ﬁnd that ranking academic documents is a diﬃcult problem. We ﬁnd that
using text similarity alone as a retrieval feature is not enough for high quality
retrieval for this task, and that many features that might seem to be useful
are not helpful in increasing retrieval performance. However, we ﬁnd that using
citation information is critical for ranking documents in a way that reﬂects how
scientists actually cite.
Further progress in this area will require new evaluation strategies. In this
paper, we have considered only binary relevance, as is used in traditional TREC
tasks. In this task, we must contend with potentially hundreds of papers that
could be relevant, while most conference papers cite only twenty. Assessing different levels of relevance may be necessary to address this distinction.
We hope that this work will spark new interest in the academic literature
search problem. Unlike other tasks, the academic literature search task oﬀers a
real world task where we might expect a user to input an extremely long query,
wait an hour for a result, or wade through hundreds of results in search of the
perfect document. In addition, these documents contain rich citation information
that can be leveraged to ﬁnd the structure in the corpus. All of these attributes
let us consider approaches to the academic literature retrieval task that would
not be considered practical for a traditional ad hoc task.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval, in part by NSF grant #CNS-0454018 , and in part by The Central
Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and National Science Foundation under NSF grant #IIS-0326249. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are the author(s) and do not
necessarily reﬂect those of the sponsor.