Dynamical mean-ﬁeld studies of
metal-insulator transitions
B y V. Dobrosavljevi´c1 and Gabriel Kotliar2
1Department of Physics and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32306, USA
2Serin Physics Laboratory, Rutgers University,
PO Box 849, Piscataway, NJ 08855, USA
We discuss the successes of the dynamical mean ﬁeld (DMF) approach to metal
insulator transitions in both the clean and the disordered limit. In the latter
case, standard DMF equations are generalized in order to incorporate both the
physics of strong correlation and Anderson localization eﬀects. The results give
new insights into the puzzling features of doped semiconductors.
1. Introduction
How a substance evolves from a metallic to a non metallic state is one of the
most fundamental and richest problems in condensed matter physics.
In general, there are several mechanisms at play. Electron-electron interactions
can drive a metal to insulator transition in a pure substance . This
transition is named after Sir Nevill Mott who laid down the foundations for the
physical understanding of this phenomenon. Another route was discovered by
Anderson who realized that suﬃciently strong disorder can drive a metalinsulator transition even in systems of non interacting electrons. The theoretical
description of the situation when both eﬀects are present is a central unsolved
problem. For recent reviews see Lee & Ramakrishnan and Belitz & Kirkpatrick .
Early treatments used direct analogies from the theory of magnetism
and the scaling approach to critical phenomena. The technical apparatus of the
approach was a ﬁeld theoretical non linear sigma model and an expansion near
two dimensions. The physical content of such theories was expressed concisely
in terms of an extension of the Fermi liquid approach
to disordered systems. These ideas were very successful in the description of
the transport and thermodynamic properties of weakly disordered metals. The
approach, however, encounter several diﬃculties in accounting for experimental
observations in many systems. The origin of these diﬃculties can be traced to (1)
strong interaction eﬀects, and (2) strong statistical ﬂuctuations. One important
manifestation of this eﬀect was the formation of local magnetic moments, objects
which can not be understood from a weak correlation perspective. This aspect
of the problem and its theoretical treatment were addressed in Paalanen et al.
 and Milovanovi´c et al. .
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A (Submitted)
1996 Royal Society Typescript
Printed in Great Britain
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
In the last few years, a new dynamical mean ﬁeld approach to the strong
correlation problem has been developed . It has explained many puzzling features of clean three dimensional
transition metal oxides . Very recently, it
was extended to incorporate the interplay of
Anderson localization and correlations eﬀects.
The mean ﬁeld method is largely complementary to the scaling approach. While
the latter concentrates on the long wavelength modes which presumably govern
the immediate vicinity of the transition, the former focuses on the local charge
and spin dynamics of the electrons. The latter is based on an expansion around
the lower critical dimension, the former being formally valid in large dimensions.
It is our view that a good mean ﬁeld understanding of the metal to insulator
transition problem is a necessary ﬁrst step towards a comprehensive theory.
In this talk we will not focus on the technical aspects of the method which are
thoroughly reviewed elsewhere. Instead we will attempt to give a simple description of the physical content of the approach, and of the results obtained by this
method. Section 2 introduces the essential idea of the mean ﬁeld method for a
general periodic solid. It is our hope that its generality and local character will be
of interested to the chemistry community which has stressed the importance of
local bonding and correlations through the years. Section 5 discussed the extension to the disordered case. We stress the importance of statistical ﬂuctuations
and how they are captured by the mean ﬁeld method. In section 3 we discuss
the physics of the density driven Mott transition and explain why the mean ﬁeld
approach works so well for three dimensional compounds, stressing the role of orbital degeneracy. We then move to the physics of disordered interacting systems
which was the focus of many years of Mott’s research. Section 4 discusses our
views on the puzzle posed by the diﬀerences between uncompensated semiconductors and disordered alloys. In section 5, 6 and 7 we elaborate on the physical
content of the mean ﬁeld approach and argue it captures some essential elements
needed to resolve this puzzle. We conclude in section 8 with a comparison to
other approaches and outline some directions for further work.
2. Dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory (DMF) theory - the clean limit
To motivate the dynamical mean ﬁeld (DMF) approach, it is useful to draw
some analogies with a well established approach to the electronic structure problem, the density functional theory (DFT). The basic physical quantity in DFT
is the density ρ(r), and the free energy of a system is written as a functional of
the density FDF T [ρ(r)]. Its minimum gives the physical density of the system in
question. In practice, the form of the functional FDF T is unknown and various
approximations such as the LDA (local density approximation) are used instead
of the exact density functional.
The dynamical mean ﬁeld approach is very similar in spirit, except that it
adopts the local spectral function A(ω, r) ≡−1
πImG(r, r; ω + iδ) as the basic
quantity. One then writes the free energy as a functional of this quantity, and
its minimization leads to the dynamical mean ﬁeld equations which give the one
particle spectral function for the system of interest. One can motivate the extension from the density to the spectral function 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
as a kind of energy-resolved density ) in the context of strongly correlated electron systems, by thinking about their photoemission (and inverse photoemission)
spectra which demonstrate the existence of bands which have the character of
atomic conﬁgurations (Hubbard bands), in addition to the ordinary quasiparticle
bands which are analogous to those of the non interacting system. One can incorporate quasiparticle bands and Hubbard bands naturally in a single theoretical
framework by resolving in energy, the local density, i.e. the local density is the
integral of the local spectral function over frequency. By resolving in energy the
localized and itinerant component of the electron, DMF approach treats coherent
(quasiparticle like) and incoherent (Hubbard bands like) excitations on the same
footing. It is a uniﬁed framework for the description of localized and itinerant
electrons.
To illustrate the generality of the method let us start from a Hamiltonian
containing several orbitals per unit cell. We use a compact notation where the
index α = (m, σ) combines the orbital m and the spin σ.
Hlattice = −
iα tiα,jβ cjβ +
(Eαβ −µδαβ) c+
We now focus on a single unit cell, and integrate out all degrees of freedom
except for those which reside in the selected unit cell. These are described by
operators cα and no longer carry a site index. The dynamics of the resulting
problem is described by an impurity model which describes an impurity (cα)
coupled to a bath of fermions (abµ)
(Eαβ −µ δαβ) c+
bµcα + h.c.
From the impurity model we can obtain all the local correlation functions, since
by construction the local lattice Green’s functions are identical to the impurity
Green’s function ˆG = (Gα,β) . We use a matrix notation so that the local Green’s
function is given by
Gα,β(τ −τ ′) = −⟨Tτ cα(τ)c+
This should be viewed as a functional of the parameters ǫbµ and Vbµ,α. To
determine these parameters we construct the “Weiss ﬁeld” which describes the
eﬀect of the rest of the electrons on the selected cell, ˆG−1
0 (iωn) = (iωn + µ) ˆI −
Vbµ,α Vbµ,β
, and the self energy of the impurity, ˆΣ(iωn) = ˆG−1
ˆG−1(iωn), viewed as a functional of ǫbµ and Vbµ. These parameters are determined
by requiring that the bath and the local degrees of freedom describe the electrons
in the original lattice problem. Namely we can construct the local Green’s function
from the lattice Green’s function obtained by adding a k independent self energy
to the non interacting lattice Green’s function (obtained from 2.1 by setting the
interaction terms to zero) or from the impurity model.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
(iωn + µ)ˆI −ˆt(k) −ˆΣ(iωn) −ˆE
The reader will notice many common features between DMFT and the Bragg
Williams theory of magnetism. However in fermionic problems a new feature
emerges–the cavity ﬁeld acquires nontrivial time dependence, allowing a nonperturbative treatment of local dynamics, which proves to be of crucial importance
for strongly correlated electrons. In particular, the approach incorporates incoherent (inelastic) processes even on this mean-ﬁeld level, as opposed to most other
treatments. As a result, the formulation can be used even in the study of non-
Fermi liquid metallic phases, for example in extended Hubbard models .
3. Dynamical Mean Field Theory of the Density Driven Mott
Transition in Pure Systems
The Mott transition in transition metal oxides has received renewed theoretical
and experimental attention. On the experimental side, new compounds have been
synthesized and known compounds such
as V2O3 and NiSe1−xSx have been studied. On the theoretical side, new insights
have been obtained from studying the one band Hubbard model in the limit of
large lattice coordination. In this limit the pressure and temperature driven Mott
transition as well as the density driven transition can be thoroughly analyzed.
Several quantitative comparisons between the physics of three dimensional
transition metal oxides and the one band Hubbard model have already been
performed . For example, the
doping dependence of the electronic speciﬁc heat, the resistivity and the Hall
coeﬃcient in LaxSr1−xTiO3 can be explained by the one band Hubbard model
without adjustable parameters after the values of U and D have been extracted
from photoemission data . Similarly, the single band Hubbard model can describe the temperature dependence of both, the optical and
the DC-conductivity in V2O3 .
The Mott transition with integer occupation has been the subject of extensive
reviews . Here we focus on some qualitative aspects of the
physics of the density driven Mott transition, the emphasis will be on the question:
why does the mean ﬁeld theory work so well for three dimensional transition metal
We start with a brief discussion of the qualitative content of the mean ﬁeld
theory of the doped Mott insulator. At low temperatures the mean ﬁeld theory
describes a Fermi liquid with a an energy scale (renormalized Fermi energy ǫF ∗)
which is proportional to the doping (i.e. deviation from half ﬁlling) δ. In inﬁnite
dimensions, the renormalized Fermi energy is proportional to the quasiparticle
residue Z which also vanishes linearly in doping, i.e.ǫF ∗= ZD . In this regime,
the linear term of the speciﬁc heat is inversely proportional to δ and the Hall
coeﬃcient is unrenormalized from its band structure value. The Fermi liquid
description is valid up to a temperature scale T0 that surprisingly scales as δ
and is therefore quite small very close to the Mott transition 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
The qualitative success of the mean ﬁeld approach when applied to three dimensional transition metal oxides is due to the orbital degeneracy of three dimensional
transition metal oxides. Orbital degeneracy causes a close competition between
ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic tendencies. The net spin-spin interaction is
a sum of antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic terms which tend to largely cancel.
An illuminating example that can be studied exactly is a two site system was described by Kajueter and Kotliar mimicking a Ti ion in LaTiO3. The basic
scale of the problem is a bandwidth which is of order of 1 eV, but the splitting
between diﬀerent spin conﬁgurations turns out to be a much smaller ( between
10−3 and 10−4 eV).
If we insist on using a one band model which ignores the orbital degeneracy, to
reproduce the gross features of transition metal oxides, one must introduce in the
model terms that suppress the tendency towards magnetic order. In inﬁnite dimension, this can be accomplished by choosing lattices with longer range hopping
matrix elements which induce magnetic frustration or by adding and additional
ferromagnetic interactions to the Hamiltonian to compensate for the antiferromagnetic exchange which is inherent to the Hubbard model on the hyper-cubic
lattice. A Hamiltonian of the form:
with an additional ferromagnetic interaction J increasing as a function of x, can
serve as a crude caricature of the La1−xYxTiO3 system. This compound is ferromagnetic for x near 1 but becomes antiferromangetic at small values of x.
 .
While this approach is certainly too crude to describe details of the magnetic
ordering, it expresses the fact that the localization tendencies in this system are
not caused by, and are largely independent of, the magnetic ordering (which can
be either ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic). In the limit of large dimensions
the J term does not aﬀect the one particle properties, so the calculations of the
eﬀective mass performed in the absence of this term apply to this model as well.
The Hamiltonian (3.1 ) was used by A. Georges & L. Laloux to model
the Wilson ratio of liquid He3, and by Obermeier et. al. to model the
magnetic response of cuprate superconductors.
To summarize, the mean ﬁeld theory works very well in systems where the
charge and spin ﬂuctuations are reasonably local. This is the situation in three
dimensional transition metal oxides (as a result of orbital degeneracy) and in the
disordered systems described in the next section.
While the qualitative success of dynamical mean ﬁeld theory is easy to understand, the surprising quantitative agreement of this approach as applied to
orbital degenerate systems was clariﬁed only recently . It was shown that: the quantitative value of physical
quantities such as the eﬀective mass, and the optical gap, near the Mott insulating state with one electron per site which had previously been compared with
experiments depend weakly on the band degeneracy (the diﬀerences are of less
than 10 percent). On the other hand the high energy behavior of the spectral
functions have a sizable dependence on the number of orbitals per site.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
4. The metal to insulator transition in disordered systems: some
outstanding puzzles
The presence of disorder adds a new dimension to the metal to insulator transition problem. The continuous nature of the metal to insulator transition was
ﬁrst demonstrated in this class of systems ). As a result of a series of intensive experimental
studies a basic picture of the behavior of physical quantities near the transition
has emerged. In this section we describe brieﬂy some aspects of the experimental
picture which we regard as well established, but which still remain a challenge
for the microscopic theory. For more comprehensive reviews of the experimental situation in this ﬁeld see Paalanen & Bhatt Sarachik and v.
Lohneyesen .
It is well established the T = 0 conductivity vanishes as the transition (i.e.
critical dopant concentration in doped semiconductors) is approached from the
metallic side. We leave the immediate vicinity of the metal to insulator transition
out of this analysis because the extrapolation to zero temperature is problematic ). In the region
where this extrapolation is unambiguous, the conductivity vanishes in a power
law fashion. σ ≈(n −nc)µ. In uncompensated materials (one electron or hole
per dopant ion), the conductivity exponent takes an anomalously small value
µ ≈1/2 . Such a small value of the conductivity exponent proved to be notoriously diﬃcult to explain by any known theory. On the
other hand, well compensated doped semiconductors (only partial ﬁlling of the
impurity band) behave very diﬀerently; their conductivity vanishes with an exponent µ ≈1. Amorphous alloys behave the same way. In the presence of a strong
magnetic ﬁeld the conductivity vanishes with an exponent µ ≈1, in both compensated an uncompensated semiconductors . The presence
of spin-orbit (SO) coupling does not seem to be a determining factor for the behavior of the conductivity. Both Si:B (where SO coupling
is strong) and Si:P (where SO coupling is weak) behave qualitatively in the same
way. Uncompensated doped semiconductors also display an anomalous temperature dependence. In the metallic phase for concentrations not too close to the
transition the conductivity increases as the temperature is lowered. This behavior can be reversed by applying strong magnetic ﬁelds, resulting in a decreasing
conductivity at low T.
In our view these anomalies occur over a wide range of concentrations and
are not restricted to a tiny critical region in the vicinity of the transition. For
example, the anomalously small value of the conductivity exponent µ ≈1/2
describes the data all the way to n ≈4nc ! It is then natural to conclude that the
observed behavior should not be identiﬁed with an asymptotic critical behavior
associated with a narrow critical region. Rather, it should be described by an
appropriate equation of state, that is expected to follow from a relevant mean-ﬁeld
description of the problem. We also emphasize that the anomalies are associated
with uncompensated systems, where we expect the eﬀects of electronic correlation
to be the strongest. It is thus natural to approach the problem from a DMF
perspective. In this picture, many of the above features, but in particular the
compensation (ﬁlling) dependence follow naturally.
In contrast to the transport properties, the thermodynamic quantities χ and
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
γ vary smoothly as a function of concentration across the
transition, and seem to diverge at low temperatures both on the insulating and
on the metallic side of the transition. The NMR experiments portray a strongly inhomogeneous picture. There
is a wide distributions of Knight shifts on the Phosphorus sites. As the transition
is approached a large number of sites acquire knight shifts that are larger than
the measurable range indicating the formation of local moments. The knight shift
on Si is a smoother function of concentration suggesting
that the metal insulator transition takes place in the phosphorus impurity band.
Underlying this experimental picture is a broad distribution of energy scales
which makes the metal-insulator transition in disordered systems very diﬀerent
than in the clean case. In addition, this behavior reﬂects unusually developed spatial ﬂuctuations of the electronic system. While such behavior does not normally
occur in ordinary metals, it is a natural consequence of the incipient localization
of the electronic states – which by deﬁnition cannot happen in a uniform fashion.
5. Statistical DMF theory
We have argued that in presence of disorder, the situation is qualitatively more
complex than in the clean limit. Clearly, it is necessary to extend the DMF ideas
in order to capture the crucial eﬀects of disorder – the spatial ﬂuctuations of the
order parameter. In the following we present a simple pedagogical derivation of
the statistical DMF theory, and discuss some of its main features.
We follow an approach very similar to the Thouless-Anderson-Palmer 
formulation of the mean ﬁeld theory of spin glasses. Speciﬁcally, we treat the
correlation aspects of the problem in a dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory fashion, but
allow spatial variations of the order parameter in order to allow for Anderson
localization eﬀects. The theory is then exact in the noninteracting limit, and
reduces to the standard dynamical mean ﬁeld theory in absence of disorder.
The approach can be applied to any lattice model of interacting fermions. For
simplicity, we consider a simple single-band Hubbard model with random site
energies given by the Hamiltonian
(−tij + εiδij)c†
i,σcj,σ + U
Following the general spirit of the DMF theory, we focus on a particular site
i of the lattice, and integrate all the other sites. This procedure is formally exact, but the resulting local eﬀective action takes an arbitrarily complicated form
 , containing n-point vertices of all orders. However, within the DMF approach, one retains only the contributions quadratic in
Fermion ﬁelds, and the local eﬀective action assumes the form
i,σ(τ)(δ(τ −τ ′) (∂τ + εi −µ)
+∆i,σ(τ, τ ′))ci,σ(τ ′) + U
dτni,↑(τ)ni,↓(τ).
Here, we have used functional integration over Grassmann ﬁelds ci,σ(τ) that rep-
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
resent electrons of spin σ on site i, and ni,σ(τ) = c†
i,σ(τ)ci,σ(τ). The “hybridization
function” ∆i(τ, τ ′) is given by
The sums over j and k runs over the z neighbors of the site i, and
jk (ωn) =< c†
j(ωn)ck(ωn) >(i)
are the lattice Green’s functions evaluated with the site i removed. In general,
these objects can be expressed through ordinary lattice Green’s function as
jk = Gjk −GjiGjk
We emphasize that the above construction is carried out for a ﬁxed realization of
disorder deﬁned by a given set of random site energies {εi}. The DMF truncation,
which keeps only the quadratic contributions to the eﬀective action is exact for:
(A) inﬁnite coordination (z →∞) , or
(B) non-interacting electrons for arbitrary coordination .
Note that in the case (A) the sum in the deﬁnition of ∆i(ωn) runs over in-
ﬁnitely many neighboring sites, so that the hybridization function is replaced by
its average value. As a result, the all the spatial ﬂuctuations in the “cavity” representing the environment of a given site are suppressed, prohibiting Anderson
localization eﬀects. For noninteracting electrons, the resulting theory reduces to
the well known “coherent potential approximation” .
Since one of the main goals of the statistical DMF theory is to incorporate
Anderson localization eﬀects, we concentrate on ﬁnite coordination lattices. In
this case, ∆i can be considered to be a functional of the lattice Green’s functions
Gjk, evaluated for ﬁxed disorder, i. e.
∆i = ∆i [Gjk].
At strong disorder, ∆i will exhibit pronounced ﬂuctuations from site to site,
reﬂecting a distribution of local environments “seen” by the electrons.
Finally, in order to obtain a closed set of DMF self-consistency conditions, we
need to specify a procedure that relates the lattice Green’s functions Gjk to the
solution of the local dynamical problem, as deﬁned by the local eﬀective action
Seff(i). We ﬁrst note that the local action Seff(i) is identical to that describing
an Anderson impurity (AI) model embedded in
a sea of conduction electrons described by a hybridization function ∆i(ωn). The
solution of this AI model then uniquely deﬁnes the corresponding self energy Σi,
which is given by
Σi(ωn) = iωn + µ −εi −∆i(ωn) −(Gloc
ii (ωn))−1,
where the local Green’s function
ii (ωn) =< c†
i(ωn)ci(ωn) >loc,
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
is evaluated with respect to the local eﬀective action Seff(i).
Next, we follow an “exact eigenstate” strategy, and deﬁne the “bare” lattice
Green’s functions Go
ij as the exact lattice Green’s functions evaluated for the same
realization of disorder {εi}, in absence of interactions. The “full”, i. e. interactionrenormalized lattice Green’s functions are within statistical DMF theory then
ij[εi →εi + Σi(ωn)],
closing the set of DMF self-consistency conditions.
We emphasize that a similar relationship relates the exact interaction-renormalized
lattice Green’s functions to their noninteracting counterparts. However, in the exact formulation, the self energies describing the interaction renormalizations are
in general nonlocal in space, as well as in frequency. Having this in mind, we
can describe the statistical DMF theory as a requirement for these interaction
dependent self energies to assume a strictly local character.
For an arbitrary lattice, an iterative procedure for solving the above set of
statistical DMF equations could be obtained by
(i) making an initial guess for the form of ∆i(ωn),
(ii) solving the corresponding AI models on every lattice site,
(iii) use the resulting Σi-s to calculate the full lattice Green’s functions,
(iv) calculate the new values of ∆i(ωn) and go back to step (ii).
This procedure can be carried out for an arbitrary lattice in any dimension,
but the procedure can be fairly time consuming due to the need to compute all
the oﬀ-diagonal components of the lattice Green’s functions Gij. However, similar
computations have already been carried out to study the interplay of correlations
and disorder in a Hartree-Fock (HF) approach . Interestingly, such a lattice HF treatment for a ﬁxed disorder realization can be
obtained as a further simpliﬁcation of the statistical DMF theory, if the local
Anderson impurity models are themselves solved at the same level. Of course,
an exact solution of the statistical DMF equations goes well beyond such a HF
treatment, since it can describe inelastic processes, which are expected to be
of particular importance at ﬁnite temperature and in metallic non Fermi liquid
In practical terms, it is important to identify speciﬁc models where the solution
of the statistical DMF equations can be simpliﬁed. The situation is particularly
simple in the case of a Bethe lattice (Cayley tree). Because the absence of loops
on such lattices, only local Green’s functions G(i)
jj (ωn) appear in the expression
for ∆i(ωn). Furthermore, in this case the objects G(i)
jj (ωn) can be computed from
a local action of the form identical as in Eq. (5.2), except that in the expression
for ∆j(ωn), the sum now runs over z −1 neighbors, excluding the site i. We thus
conclude that the objects G(i)
jj (ωn) are related by a stochastic recursion relation,
that involves solving Anderson impurity models with random on-site energies εi.
In the non-interacting limit, the recursion relations can be written in close form,
and reduce to the exact solution of the disordered electrons on a Bethe lattice
 .
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
6. Order parameters for the metal to insulator transition: the
disordered case
In attempting to describe any phase transition, a crucial step is to identify
appropriate order parameters that can characterize the qualitative diﬀerences
between the diﬀerent phases of the system.
Since the basic focus of the dynamical mean ﬁeld approach is the one particle
Green’s function, it is useful to write down an explicit expression for the Greens
function of a lattice system with a one body Hamiltonian Hij and a general two
body interaction term in terms of a self energy Σij(iω).
[G−1(ωn)]ij = [δijiωn −Hij −Σij(ωn)].
Here, we have used a matrix notation, for a ﬁxed realization of disorder, so that
the self energy Σij(ω) describes the interaction induced renormalizations of the
Green’s function. A quasiparticle picture emerges under a fairly general assumptions of regularity of the interaction self energy at low frequencies. In this case
Σij(ω) ≈Σij(0) + ([Z−1]ij −1)ωn + O(ω2
and the Greens function at low frequencies assumes a very transparent form
with the quasiparticle Green’s function deﬁned as
[GQP ]−1 = ωnI −
Z(H + Σ(0))
Introducing the low energy eigenvalues of the quasiparticle Hamiltonian En and
their corresponding eigenvector |n >, we can write
G(x, x′) ≈
So far we have just repeated the derivation of the disordered Fermi liquid framework of dirty metals . In that reference those concepts
were used to interpret the ﬁeld theoretical coupling constants of Finkelshtein’s
non linear sigma model in terms of Fermi liquid parameters. Implicit in that
framework was the assumption that the spatial ﬂuctuations, or the sample to
sample ﬂuctuations were not too large. This assumption is valid for weak disorder. The main advance of the dynamical mean ﬁeld approach is the ability to
deal with strong spatial ﬂuctuations.
The results of the next section indicate very diﬀerent behavior for typical and
average quantities, reﬂecting large spatial ﬂuctuations. These diﬀerences may
be the source of the ﬁnite scale divergences that were encountered in the ﬁeld
theoretical approach which, from the very begining,
carries out an average over the disorder.
We now use the previous developments to introduce the order parameters which
are relevant to the DMF theory. We begin with deﬁning the local density of states
at zero frequency
πImGii(0+),
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
and the corresponding local quasiparticle density of states
Their ratio deﬁnes the second order parameter
which could be dubbed the local quasiparticle weight. In the DMF framework,
all the previous equations simplify because the self energy is local (Σij(ωn) =
δijΣi(ωn)) and Zi can directly be calculated from the expression
∂ωRe[Σi(ωn)]|ωn=0+
When these parameters are mostly uniform, i.e. site independent their averages
are precisely two of the coupling constants in the ﬁeld theoretical approach of
Finkelshtein. In the statistical mean ﬁeld approach we focus instead on whole
distributions (or on typical values) of these parameters.
We now turn to the physical interpretation of the order parameters, or more
precisely their statistical distribution. The low energy physics is described by two
parameters, ρi and Zi, which are associated with the height and the width of
the resonance in the spectra of the local impurity problem. Physically, ρi can be
interpreted as a the density of states for adding or removing and electron from
a speciﬁc site; Zi is related to the energy scale (or timescale) over which the
quasiparticle picture applies. On the metallic side of the transition, the electron
behaves as a local magnetic moment up to a time scale proportional Z−1
a delocalized quasiparticle over longer timescales. The vanishing of Zi signals the
conversion of quasiparticle degrees of freedom into local moments, which takes
place at the Mott transition.
To gain further insight into the physical content of these order parameters, we
concentrate on transport properties. The fundamental diﬀerence between a metal
and an insulator is deﬁned by the ability of the electron to leave a given lattice
site – to delocalize. In early work Anderson pointed out that, at
least for noninteracting electrons, this property could be examined by evaluating
the lifetime of an electron on a given site. Very generally, the inverse lifetime
simply measures the width of the the local resonance level. We thus expect
∼Im(Gii(0+))−1.
Within DMF, the local Green’s function takes the form
Gii(ωn) = [iωn + µ −εi −∆i(ωn) −Σi(ωn)]−1,
and since for Anderson impurity models Im Σi(0+) =
0, we conclude that the desired local lifetime can be directly related to the local
hybridization function as
∼Im ∆i(0+).
We thus expect Im ∆i(0) to vanish whenever the system is insulating, but to
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
remain ﬁnite in a metallic regime. We emphasizing that the same qualitative
behavior should be expected for the local density of states (LDOS) ρi as can be
readily seen from Eq. (5.3). We can thus use the LDOS as an order parameter that
discriminates a metal from an insulator. In a random system, ρi will ﬂuctuate
from site to site, and we need a whole distribution function to fully characterize
the approach to the transition.
In particular, in the Mott insulator, there is a “hard” gap of order U on every
lattice site, so even the average DOS discriminates the Mott insulator from the
metal. The situation is more complex as the Anderson insulator is approached.
Here, the local spectrum is composed of a few delta-functions (discrete, bound
states), separated by gaps, but the average DOS remains ﬁnite. In contrast to
the Mott insulator, in the Anderson insulator the sizes and positions of the local
gaps ﬂuctuate, but in both cases a typical site has a gap at the Fermi energy. A
natural order parameter is therefore the typical DOS, that is represented by the
geometric average
ρtyp =< ρ >geom= exp{< ln ρi >}.
This quantity is found to vanish at the Anderson transition, in contrast to the
average DOS, which is not critical.
On the metallic side of the transition, the distribution function of a second
quantity, the local quasiparticle (QP) weight, is necessary to characterized the
low energy behavior near the transition. Important information is obtained from
the typical value of the random variable Zi, deﬁned as
Ztyp = exp{< ln Zi >},
which emerges as a natural order parameter from previous studies of the Mott
transition.
Finally, we deﬁne the averaged QP DOS by
This object is very important for thermodynamics, since it is directly related
to quantities such as the speciﬁc heat coeﬃcient γ = C/T, or the local spin
susceptibility χloc. Note that in absence of interactions, ρQP
av reduces to the usual
(algebraic) average DOS, which is not critical at a U = 0 Anderson transition,
but it is strongly enhanced in the vicinity of the Mott transition.
It is instructive to discuss the behavior of these order parameters in the previously studied limiting cases. In the limit of large lattice coordination, the spatial
ﬂuctuations of the bath function ∆i(ωn) are unimportant, and there is no qualitative diﬀerence between typical and average quantities. In the Mott insulating
phase of a periodic solid, there is a gap in the density of states, while there is
a ﬁnite density of states on the metallic side of the transition. As the MIT is
approached from the metallic side, ρtyp remains ﬁnite, but Ztyp is found to linearly go to zero.
Another well studied limit is that of noninteracting electrons on the Bethe
lattice, which is known to display an Anderson transition. The average DOS is ﬁnite both in the
insulating and in the metallic phase, and is non critical at the transition. Similarly,
by deﬁnition Ztyp = 1 in this noninteracting limit, so it also remains non critical.
On the other hand, the typical density of states ρtyp is ﬁnite in the metal and
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
zero in the Anderson insulator. This quantity is critical, and is found to vanishes
exponentially with the distance to the transition.
The deﬁnitions of the the order parameters that we have proposed are not
restricted to the statistical DMF framework, which is simply used as a speciﬁc
calculational scheme. The same deﬁnitions can in principle be used in other approaches that can calculate local unaveraged values of the local DOS ρi(ωn) or the
local part of the frequency dependent self energy Σii(ωn) due to the interactions.
7. Results
The dynamical mean ﬁeld theory maps the insulating phase of the model onto
a collection of Anderson impurity models each one of them is embedded in an
insulating bath. An Anderson impurity in an insulator, away from particle hole
symmetry, can either have a doublet ground state when the coupling to the
enviroment is weak or a singlet ground state when the coupling to the bath
exceeds a critical value. In this strong coupling limit , a bound state is pulled from the continuum formed by the bands of the
insulator. From these general consideration, we obtain a two ﬂuid picture of
the insulating phase: there are sites which have a local moment down to zero
temperature while other sites quenched their spin by exchanging it with a strongly
coupled neighbor.
The number of sites in a doublet state, in the insulating phase of the system
form “Mott droplets” . Based on our experience on the Mott transition in clean
systems, we expect a larger density of states when the system undergoes a metal
to insulator transition into an insulating phase with a large number of doublets.
This result in at least two diﬀerent regimes depending on whether the insulating
phase has a high or low concentration of sites in doublet states.
We have considered a z = 3 . Bethe lattice,
in the limit of inﬁnite on-site repulsion U at T = 0 and ﬁxed average density n
in the presence of a uniform distribution of random site energies εi of width W.
To calculate the probability distributions of ρj and Zj we used a simulation approach, where the probability distribution for the stochastic quantity G(i)
sampled from an ensemble of N sites, as originally suggested by Abou-Chacra et
al. . In order to solve Anderson impurity models for given bath functions
∆j(ωn) we use the slave boson (SB) mean-ﬁeld theory , which is known to be qualitatively and even semiquantitatively correct at low temperature and at low energies. In agreement with
heuristic arguments, we expect the results to be a strong function of the density
n. In order to illustrate this behavior, we have carried out explicit calculations
for both low electron density n = 0.3, and high electron density n = 0.7 (i.e.
close to half ﬁlling). We emphasize that in the clean limit (W = 0) the behavior
is qualitatively identical for the two values of the density, and the system remains
metallic, with only the value of the eﬀective quasiparticle mass m∗∼Z−1 being a function of n. Qualitatively diﬀerent behavior is found as the disorder is
introduced.
We ﬁrst describe the evolution of the probability distribution of the local quasiparticle weights Zi, as the disorder is increased. The sites with Zi ≪1 represent
 disorder-induced
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
High Doping Regime
Figure 1. DOS statistics in the low ﬁlling (high doping) regime. The full distributions P(ln ρ) are
presented for increasing amounts of disorder. We ﬁnd that the maximum, i. e. < ln ρ > shifts,
as the transition is approached. Note also the extremely large width of the distribution, so that
ρ now spans many orders of magnitude.
local magnetic moments, and as such will dominate the thermodynamic response
(see the deﬁnition of ρQP). For weak disorder we expect relatively few local moments and the quasiparticle weight distribution is peaked at a ﬁnite value. As
the disorder is increased, the distribution of Zi-s broadens. At a critical value of
the disorder W = Wnfl, the form of this distribution assumes a singular form
 ,
leading to anomalous thermodynamic response characterized by a diverging magnetic susceptibility χ and speciﬁc heat coeﬃcient γ. This behavior was found both
for high and low density, in remarkable agreement with experiments carried out
on for uncompensated and compensated doped semiconductors. Interestingly, a
similar transition to a non Fermi liquid metallic phase, well before the MIT, has
been found from the ﬁeld-theoretical approaches in 2+ε dimensions ).
As the level of disorder is increased further, a metal insulator transition is
reached at the second critical value of disorder W = Wc. At this point, the
typical quasiparticle weight Ztyp vanishes, a behavior reminiscent of the clean
Mott transition. While this behavior is found at both high and low density, the
examination of the second order parameter ρi reveals striking density dependence
in the vicinity of the transition. The diﬀerence are most clearly displayed by
plotting the evolution of the distribution function P(ρi) as a function of doping.
At low ﬁlling n = 0.3, we ﬁnd that the with of this distribution becomes extremely
large, spanning many decades, reﬂecting huge spatial ﬂuctuations of the electronic
wave-functions, as shown in Fig. 1. At the same time, the most probable value
ρtyp is found to dramatically decrease, vanishing linearly with the distance to
the transition. In contrast to this result, a very diﬀerent behavior is found at
high density n = 0.7. As we can see from Fig. 2, in this case the distribution
width again broadens, albeit in a somewhat slower fashion, as the transition is
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
Low Doping Regime
Figure 2. DOS statistics in the high ﬁlling (low doping) regime. W show the probability distribution for ln ρ, as a function of disorder. We clearly see that while the distribution broadens,
< ln q >≈cons.
approached. However, in this case the most probable value ρtyp is only weakly
modiﬁed with increasing disorder, and is found to approach a ﬁnite value at the
transition. Recalling that the statistics of ρi are intimately related to transport,
our results strongly suggest that kinetic coeﬃcients such as the conductivity will
strongly depend electron ﬁlling, as the MIT is approached. These expectations
should be conﬁrmed by explicitly calculating the critical behavior conductivity
at diﬀerent values of the density.
Finally, we mention an important feature of the insulating state in presence
of both the strong electronic correlation and disorder. By explicit calculations of
both the average and the typical density of states we have demonstrated that
the introduction of disorder, ﬁlls the Mott gap with localized electronic states.
The average DOS is therefore ﬁnite in the insulator. Nevertheless, the MIT still
retains a deﬁnite Mott character, with a ﬁnite fraction of electrons turning into
localized magnetic moments, and the typical quasiparticle weight Ztyp vanishing
at the transition. Our results explicitly show that the metal insulator transition in
presence of both interactions and disorder is a qualitatively new type of transition,
having well deﬁned signatures of both
the Anderson and the Mott route to
localization.
8. Conclusions
The metal to insulator transition continues to be one of the central problem
in condensed matter physics. Building on the fundamental concepts introduced
by Mott and Anderson there have been several attempts at the construction of
a microscopic theory. We have summarized in this contribution some aspects of
the dynamical mean ﬁeld approach to this problem.
Deeply rooted in local physics, it combines the chemical and physical aspects
of the problem. We regard the construction of a mean ﬁeld theory as an essential
ﬁrst step before a more complete treatment including Gaussian and non linear
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dobrosavljevi´c & Kotliar
ﬂuctuations is carried out. In the clan limit the DMF description of the Mott
transition has already given insights into puzzling aspects of transition metal
oxide physics.
Since the approach emphasizes the local environment, it has a conceptually
very simple extension to the disorder case: the statistical dynamical mean ﬁeld
theory. The theory explicitly incorporates both the Mott and the Anderson route
to localization, and thus provides a consistent description of the transition, interpolating between the respective limits of no disorder and no interaction. This
key feature seems to be missing in a recent ﬁeld theoretical formulation of the
Anderson-Mott transition .
The statistical mean ﬁeld theory reproduces many remarkable features of doped
semiconductors. A transition to a Griﬃths phase where local moments coexist with
conduction electrons down to arbitrary low temperature precedes the true metal
to insulator transition. The local properties such as the density of states depend
in a distinct fashion on the level of doping (compensation). The metal to insulator
transition in the low doping region (uncompensated) has a larger typical density
of states and is closer to a Mott transition than the corresponding transition
at larger doping levels (compensated situation). The latter contains ingredients
from both the Anderson and the Mott transition.
There are several issues that deserve further investigation. A detailed study
of the transport properties has to be carried out. One should also elucidate the
interplay of the short wavelength ﬂuctuations with long wavelength modes. The
latter are presumably described by the non linear sigma model approaches that
have been investigated near two and six dimensions. A second element still missing
form the mean ﬁeld theory is the inclusion of short range magnetic correlations.
In our view these are the most pressing problems that need to be address on the
road to a comprehensive theory of the Mott-Anderson transition.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 
Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approach
Acknowledgements:
We are grateful to E. Abrahams, R. Bhatt, N. Bonesteel, L. Gorkov, E. Miranda, D. Popovi´c, M. P. Sarachik, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and G. Thomas for useful
discussions. VD was supported by the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. GK was
supported by NSF DMR 95-29138.