QIN “Radiomics: The Process and the Challenges”
Virendra Kumar1, Yuhua Gu1, Satrajit Basu2, Anders Berglund3, Steven A. Eschrich3,
Matthew B. Schabath4, Kenneth Forster5, Hugo J.W.L. Aerts6,8, Andre Dekker6, David
Fenstermacher3, Dmitry B Goldgof2, Lawrence O Hall2, Philippe Lambin6, Yoganand
Balagurunathan1, Robert A Gatenby7, and Robert J Gillies*,1,7
1Department of Cancer Imaging and Metabolism, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA 3Department of Bioinformatics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA 4Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA 5Department of Radiation Oncology,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA 6Department of
Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO), GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 7Department of Radiology, H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA 8Computational Biology
and Functional Genomics Laboratory, Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
“Radiomics” refers to the extraction and analysis of large amounts of advanced quantitative
imaging features with high throughput from medical images obtained with computed tomography
(CT), positron emission tomography (PET) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Importantly,
these data are designed to be extracted from standard-of-care images, leading to a very large
potential subject pool. Radiomic data are in a mineable form that can be used to build descriptive
and predictive models relating image features to phenotypes or gene-protein signatures. The core
hypothesis of radiomics is that these models, which can include biological or medical data, can
provide valuable diagnostic, prognostic or predictive information. The radiomics enterprise can be
divided into distinct processes, each with its own challenges that need to be overcome: (i) image
acquisition and reconstruction (ii) image segmentation and rendering (iii) feature extraction and
feature qualification (iv) databases and data sharing for eventual (v) ad hoc informatic analyses.
Each of these individual processes poses unique challenges. For example, optimum protocols for
image acquisition and reconstruction have to be identified and harmonized. Also, segmentations
have to be robust and involve minimal operator input. Features have to be generated that robustly
reflect the complexity of the individual volumes, but cannot be overly complex or redundant.
Furthermore, informatics databases that allow incorporation of image features and image
annotations, along with medical and genetic data have to be generated. Finally, the statistical
approaches to analyze these data have to be optimized, as radiomics is not a mature field of study.
Each of these processes will be discussed in turn, as well as some of their unique challenges and
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*Corresponding Author Chair, Cancer Imaging and Metabolism Vice-chair, Radiology H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute 12902 Magnolia Drive, SRB-4, Tampa, FL 33612. USA Tel: 813-745-8355; Fax: 813-745-7265; .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2012 November ; 30(9): 1234–1248. doi:10.1016/j.mri.2012.06.010.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
proposed approaches to solve them. The focus of this article will be on images of non-small cell
lung cancer, NSCLC.
Radiomics; Imaging; Image features; Tumor; Segmentation
1. Introduction
“Radiomics” involves the high throughput extraction of quantitative imaging features with
the intent of creating mineable databases from radiological images . It is proposed that such
profound analyses and mining of image feature data will reveal quantitative predictive or
prognostic associations between images and medical outcomes. In cancer, current
radiological practice is generally qualitative; e.g. “a peripherally enhancing spiculated mass
in the lower left lobe”. When quantitative, measurements are commonly limited to
dimensional measurements of tumor size via one (RECIST) or two (WHO) dimensional
long axis measures . These measures do not reflect the complexity of tumor morphology or
behavior, nor, in many cases, are changes in these measures predictive of therapeutic
benefit . When additional quantitative measures are obtained, they generally average values
over an entire region of interest (ROI).
There are efforts to develop a standardized lexicon for the description of such lesions , and
to include these descriptors via annotated Image Markup (AIM) into quantitative, mineable
data . However, such approaches do not completely cover the range of quantitative features
that can be extracted from images, such as texture, shape or margin gradients. In focused
studies, texture features have been shown to provide significantly higher prognostic power
than ROI-based methods . The modern re-birth of radiomics (or radiogenomics) was
articulated in two papers by Kuo and colleagues. Following a complete manual extraction of
numerous (>100) image features; a subset of 14 features was able to predict 80% of the gene
expression pattern in hepatocellular carcinoma using computed tomographic (CT) images .
A similar extraction of features from contrast enhanced (CE) magnetic resonance images
(MRI) of glioblastoma was able to predict immunohistochemically identified protein
expression patterns . Although paradigm shifting, these analyses were performed manually
and the studies were consequently underpowered. In the current iteration of radiomics,
image features have to be extracted automatically and with high throughput, putting a high
premium on novel machine learning algorithm development.
The goal of radiomics is to convert images into mineable data, with high fidelity and high
throughput. The radiomics enterprise can be divided into five processes with definable
inputs and outputs, each with its own challenges that need to be overcome: (i) image
acquisition and reconstruction; (ii) image segmentation and rendering (iii) feature extraction
and feature qualification (iv) databases and data sharing; and (v) ad hoc informatic analyses.
Each of these steps must be developed de novo and, as such, poses discrete challenges that
have to be met (Figure 1). For example, optimum protocols for image acquisition and
reconstruction have to be identified and harmonized. Segmentations have to be robust and
involve minimal operator input. Features have to be generated that robustly reflect the
complexity of the individual volumes, but cannot be overly complex or redundant.
Informatics databases that allow for incorporation of image features and image annotations,
along with medical and genetic data have to be generated. Finally, the statistical approaches
to analyze these data have to be optimized, as radiomics is not a mature field of study.
Variation in results may come from variations in any of these individual processes. Thus,
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
after optimization, another level of challenge is to harmonize and standardize the entire
process, while still allowing for improvement and process evolution.
2. Image Acquisition and Reconstruction Challenges
In routine clinical image acquisition there is wide variation in imaging parameters such as
image resolution (pixel size or matrix size and slice thickness), washout period in the case of
PET imaging, patient position, and the variations introduced by different reconstruction
algorithms and slice thickness, which are different for each scanner vendor. Even this simple
set of imaging issues can create difficulty in comparing results obtained across institutions
with different scanners and patient populations. In addition, it is a challenge to identify and
curate a large number of image data examples with similar clinical parameters such as
disease stage.
2.1 Image Acquisition and Reconstruction
CT—Of all the imaging modalities, CT appears to be the most straightforward and perhaps
the easiest to compare across institutions and vendors. Standard phantoms such as the CAT
phantom have become the standard of the industry (Figure 2). The phantom is based on the
American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) task group report-1 and has
several sections to evaluate imaging performance. There are sections (a) to evaluated the
true slice thickness and variation of Hounsfield Units (HUs) with electron density, (b) to
look at the ability to visualize small variations in density (low contract delectability), and
another for (c) detecting special resolution, high contrast detectability, and a region of
uniform medium to examine variation in HUs. The imaging performance of a scanner will
depend also on the imaging technique. As the slice thickness is reduced, the photon statistics
within a slice are reduced unless the mA or kVp is increased. The axial field of view will
also change the voxel size within a slice, and the reconstruction matrix size can also be
varied from 512 × 512 up to 1024 × 1024 which also changes the voxel size.
Pitch is a parameter that is frequently optimized by each scanner manufacturer, so that only
certain pitches are allowed for an image acquisition. These pitches are unique to each
scanner and as a result comparing noise between scanners can only be performed by
investigating images acquired using axial, as opposed to helical or spiral, acquisitions.
However, helical image acquisitions are used most often in a clinical setting. HUs can also
vary with reconstruction algorithm. A single acquisition of a thoracic tumor is shown in
Figures 3 A and B, using two different reconstruction algorithms. While this is a single data
acquisition, there are significant variations in tumor texture between the two images. The
variation in HUs or texture along the vertical paths in Figures 3A and 3B are shown on the
graphs (Figures 3C and 3D, respectively).
For clinical trials, significant effort will be required to match reconstruction protocols and
image noise between scanners. While the CAT phantom is a reasonable initial step to
compare different scanners, more sophisticated phantoms may be required to match the
effects of reconstruction algorithms. Although there can be some variation, different vendors
have algorithms that are similar enough to be quantitatively comparable. Indeed the focus of
our approach is to use features with a) sufficient dynamic range between patients b) intrapatient reproducibility and c) insensitivity to image acquisition and reconstructions protocol.
PET-CT—Quantitative imaging with 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose (18-FDG) PET
scans is a challenge not only because it requires calibration of the scanner and
standardization of the scan protocol but also requires the patient and staff to adhere to a
strict patient protocol . From a technical viewpoint the main challenges are the dose
calibration and the metabolic volume or VOI reconstruction that depends heavily on the scan
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
protocol and source-to-background ratio . Before a scanner is used in a quantitative manner,
inter-institution cross-calibration and quality control such as proposed recently is necessary
(Figure 4). From a patient protocol perspective, administration issues (residual activity in
syringe, paravenous administration), blood glucose level , uptake period, breathing, patient
comfort and inflammation all influence the quantitation of the standardized uptake value
(SUV) of 18-FDG. Complying with a strict protocol such as been proposed by the Society of
Nuclear Medicine and the European Association of Nuclear Medicine is another prerequisite
to quantitative PET imaging.
MRI—The signal intensities in MR images arise from a complex interplay of inherent
properties of the tissue, such as relaxation times and acquisition parameters. Therefore, it is
difficult to derive information about the physical properties of tissue from MR image signal
intensities alone. This is in contrast to CT images where signal intensity can be correlated
with the density of the tissue. However, certain techniques, such as diffusion weighted
imaging (DWI) and dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI allow assessment of
physiological properties of tissue. For example, the apparent water diffusion coefficient
(ADC) determined using DWI varies inversely with tissue cellularity. DCE can be used to
extract vascular flow, permeability and volume fractions. Although both of these techniques
provide quantitative information, their reliability and reproducibility remain dependent on
acquisition parameters and conditions. DWI images can be of low spatial resolution and are
sensitive to motion and magnetic susceptibility and the quantitation is dependent on k-space
trajectory, gradient strengths, and b-values. DWI has been proposed as a cancer imaging
biomarker and there are efforts to develop quality control protocols . Results of the DCE-
MRI depend on the contrast agent dose, method of administration, pulse sequence used,
field strength of the scanner and the analysis method used . Different investigators use
different methods to convert DCE MRI signal intensities to contrast agent concentration .
Recently, a group of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) known as the
Quantitative Imaging Biomarker Alliance (QIBA) initiated a standardization of the protocol
for DCEMRI .
Ideally, MR images will all have the same field of view, field strength and slice thickness.
Where possible, e.g. brain tumors, multiple sequences with contrast enhancement such as
T1-weighted, T2-weighted and FLAIR can be very useful. In magnetic resonance images of
human brain tumors, radiomics has the potential to play an important role in categorizing the
tumor. It is possible to view the tumor as having different regions using image features,
including texture, wavelets, etc. For example, there will be areas of enhancement and
potentially necrosis. The tumor bed can be extracted as an expanded region around the post
contrast T1 weighted image, for example. Unsupervised clustering can be used to group the
data into regions using data from multiple registered sequences. The extraction of image
features from those regions, including such things as their location within the tumor bed, can
allow for new types of tumor characterization. It has been observed that enhancement in
individual tumors can be heterogeneous, and that analysis of this heterogeneity has
prognostic value . The location and characteristics of such regions has the potential to
provide new insights into tumor prognosis and how well it is likely to respond to targeted
treatments. The opportunity to acquire images over time will allow for comparisons and
contrasts between regions.
2.2 Need for Large Image Data Sets
The acquisition of images is time-consuming and costly. Because of this, our approach is to
focus on standard-of-care images, with the expectation that this will generate large data sets
and have more clinical impact, compared to more controlled and dedicated prospective
image acquisitions. Radiomics requires large image datasets with the expectation that large
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
numbers may be able to overcome some of the inherent heterogeneities inherent in clinical
imaging. Image data sharing across sites will be important to make large datasets available
for radiomics analysis.
Various online repositories are available that host image data. The image data contains the
image series for each patient and each series containing image slices. One of the largest
online CT image repositories is the national biomedical image archive (NBIA) hosted by
NCI. Apart from the images, image annotations and outcomes data are also important
components to share. There should be a uniform image annotation format which could be
read by other users to compare with their own segmentations. This format should support
multiple annotations from alternative image analysis algorithms to support higher level
processing and prediction. The image data are linked to the metadata in DICOM format
images, the metadata contains information about the acquisition, scanner and other details of
the images. Currently available clinical image data, which may be used for radiomics study
includes LIDC, RIDER and others . Radiomic analyses require refined image data, based on
image characteristics (resolution, reconstruction, and acquisition parameters) and clinical
parameters (stage of disease, type of disease and outcomes).
A major use of the information extracted from CT scan images and clinical data is the
development of automated prediction models. A challenge in modeling any classifier is
making it robust enough for clinical use. Development of robust models requires a
sufficiently robust training set. The lack of standardization in imaging makes it difficult to
determine the effectiveness of image features being developed and prediction models built
to work on those feature values. A snapshot of the extent of the lack of standardization in
image acquisition and reconstruction can be seen in the Figure 5. This figure represents the
variation in slice thickness and pixel size (in mm) for a dataset of CT-scan images from 74
patients used by Basu et al to develop prediction models for classifying non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) tumor types using image features. This variation affects the information
being extracted by image feature algorithms, which in turn affects classifier performance. In
this scenario, without the presence of a large standardized repository, setting performance
benchmarks for effectiveness of image feature algorithms and classifier models built upon
those features becomes difficult.
3. Segmentation Challenges
Segmentation of images into volumes-of-interest (VOI) such as tumor, normal tissue and
other anatomical structures is a crucial step for subsequent informatic analyses. Manual
segmentation by expert readers is often treated as ground truth; however, it suffers from high
inter-reader variability and is labor–intensive; thus not feasible for radiomic analysis
requiring very large data sets. Many automatic and semi-automatic segmentation methods
have been developed across various image modalities like CT, PET and MRI and also for
different anatomical regions like brain, breast, lung, liver etc. Though different image
modalities and organ systems require ad hoc segmentation approaches, all share a few
common requirements. The segmentation method should be as automatic as possible with
minimum operator interaction, time efficient and should provide accurate and reproducible
boundaries. Most common segmentation algorithms used for medical images include regiongrowing based (click- and-grow), level sets and graph cuts. Region growing methods require
an operator to select a seed point within the VOI. While these methods are most suitable for
relatively homogenous regions, they can be user-dependent and often introduce significant
inter-observer variation in the segmentations. We describe here some major challenges came
across while developing segmentation methods for NSCLC.
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
3.1 Challenges in Segmentation of Lung Tumors
The segmentation of CT thorax images usually requires segmentation of lung fields for
successive segmentation of lung nodules. Right and left lungs should be automatically
segmented which may serve as a preprocessing step. This has been achieved relatively
successfully, however, in cases where high intensity tumors are attached to the pleural wall
or mediastinum, automatic segmentation often underperforms (Figure 6). In our experience,
while using rule-based methods, automatic segmentations often failed in such cases, as
evidenced by extension of lung boundaries into the mediastinum or heart.
A majority of Stage I and Stage II NSCLC nodules present as homogenous, high-intensity
lesions on a background of low-intensity lung parenchyma. These can be segmented with
high reproducibility and accuracy. However, partially solid, ground glass opacities (GGOs),
nodules attached to vessels and nodules attached to the pleural wall remain difficult to
segment automatically and show low reproducibility, especially for Stage III and Stage IV
disease. Work is in progress to improve the automatic segmentation and reproducibility in
these cases.
A possible solution may come from “crowd-sourcing” the solutions via “segmentation
challenges”: public databases for comparing segmentation results via standard metrics.
However, there are intellectual property issues that arise from this type of approach. The
patentability of an invention stemming from a public database is complicated matter that
depends upon a number of factors, including inventorship and the source of funding. In the
context of a crowd-sourced development, it may be difficult to identify the “inventors.” It
should be noted, however, that there are multiple forms of patent protection– e.g. method
patents protecting a particular way of achieving a given result (e.g. an algorithm) or patents
covering the particular use of a method. The potential for commercial development may
depend only on the resourcefulness of inventors, and the type and scope of the potential
patent granted.
Manually traced segmentations are often used as gold standard or ground truth against which
the accuracy of the automatic segmentation is evaluated. However, manually traced
boundaries themselves suffer from significant inter-reader bias and the reproducibility is
low. In a large image dataset, and especially, with slices thickness 3.0 mm or less where
number of slices may be higher than 200 per patient, the option of tracing manual
boundaries is time prohibitive. Therefore, it is important to have a segmentation algorithm
which is automatic and reproducible. The reproducibility of a manual or automatic
segmentation of tumors is a known issue. Inter-reader and intra-reader reproducibility
significantly varies. As discussed earlier, in radiomics, sources of variations come from
acquisition of images, segmentation and analysis, and should be minimized.
3.2 Segmentation Algorithms
Many popular segmentation algorithms have been applied in medical imaging studies within
the last 20 years, the most popular ones include region growing methods , level set methods ,
graph cut methods , active contours (snake) algorithms and semi-automatic segmentations
such as livewires , etc.
Region growing algorithms are rapid, but undesired “regions” will be produced if the image
contains too much noise. The level set method was initially proposed by Osher and Sethian
in 1988 to track moving interfaces and it was subsequently applied across various imaging
applications in the late 1990s . By representing a contour as the zero level set of a higher
dimensional function (level set function), level set method formulate the motion of the
contour as the evolution of the level set function. The graph cut method is relatively new in
the area of image segmentation, which constructs an image-based graph and achieves a
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
globally optimal solution of energy minimization functions. Since graph cut algorithms try
to identify a global optimum, it is computationally expensive. Another problem for graph cut
is the over segmentation.
The active contours (snake) algorithm works like a stretched elastic band being released.
The start points are defined around the object which needs to be extracted. The points then
move through an iterative process to a point with the lowest energy function value. The
active contours requires a good initialization, it is also sensitive to noise, which may lead the
snake to undesired locations. The live wire (intelligent scissor) method is motivated by the
general paradigm of the active contour algorithm: it converts the segmentation problem into
an optimal graph search problem via local active contour analysis and its cost function is
minimized by using dynamic programming. A problem with the live wire approach is that it
is semi-automatic, requiring multiple human interactions.
There is no universal segmentation algorithm that can work for all medical image
applications. With proper parameters settings, each segmentation could segment the region
of interest automatically or semi-automatically. However, the result of each segmentation
will be quite different and, even for the same algorithm performed multiple times with
different initializations, results may be variable. Hence, it is very important to develop
agreed-upon metrics to evaluate segmentation algorithms.
3.3. Performance Metrics
Accuracy, reproducibility and consistency are three of the most important factors to evaluate
a segmentation algorithm for medical images. However, conventional evaluation metrics
normally utilize the manual segmentation provided by radiologists, which is subjective,
error-prone and time-consuming. In the majority of cases, manual segmentation tends to
overestimate the lesion volume to ensure the entire lesion is identified and the process is
highly variable . In other words, “ground truth” segmentation does not exist. Hence, we
believe that reproducibility and consistency are more important than accuracy. That is, for a
given a tumor, an algorithm must reproducibly provide the same segmentation results that
are user-independent.
There is no consensus on the metrics for evaluation of image segmentation algorithms. The
metric should address the particular characteristic of the algorithm to be compared, as
automated as possible, quantitative and easily computed. Many metrics have been used like
volume, center of volume and maximum surface distance, to compare characteristics like
robustness and accuracy .
The Jaccard Similarity Index (SI) is the measure of the overlap of two or more volumes and
is calculated as the ratio of voxel-wise intersection to union of target and reference images :
Where, Sa and Sb are segmentations of target and reference images, respectively. An SI of
1.0 represents complete overlap (volume, location and shape) and 0 means no overlap. In
our current project, we have calculated SI between each pair of 20 independent computergenerated segmentations of individual lung tumors and report the average SI for each lesion,
calculated using following equation:
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Where i ∈ [1, # of cases] is the case index, SIim,in is from Eq. (1). For manual
segmentations, the average SI was 0.73. For automated segmentations, the average SI was
4. Feature Extraction and Qualification
Once tumor regions are defined, imaging features can be extracted. These features describe
characteristics of the tumor intensity histogram (e.g. high or low contrast), tumor shape (e.g.
round or spiculated), texture patterns (e.g. homogeneous or heterogeneous), as well as
descriptors of tumor location and relations with the surrounding tissues (e.g. near the heart).
4.1. Tumor Intensity Histogram
Tumor intensity histogram-based features reduce the 3-dimensional data of a tumor volume
in to a single histogram. This histogram describes the fractional volume for a selected
structure for the range of voxel values (e.g. Hounsfield units for a CT scan, or standardized
uptake values (SUV) for a FDG-PET scan). From this histogram, common statistics can be
calculated (e.g. mean, median, min, max, range, skewness, kurtosis), but also more complex
values, such as metabolic volume above an absolute SUV of 5 or the fraction of high density
tissue measured with CT . Such threshold values have shown promise in developing
classifier models, and optimum thresholds for a given task can be identified with receiver
operator characteristic (ROC) analyses. As the outcome (e.g. time to recurrence) to which
the threshold is being compared can also have a variable threshold, 3-D ROC approaches
have been developed to represent a surface to optimize both the biomarker and the outcome
thresholds.
4.2. Shape Based Features
Quantitative features describing the geometric shape of a tumor can also be extracted from
the 3-dimensional surface of the rendered volumes . For example the total volume or surface
area can be an important characteristic. Also, the surface to volume ratio can be determined,
where a speculated tumor has a higher value than a round tumor with a similar volume.
Furthermore, descriptors of tumor compactness and shape (spherecity etc.) can also be
calculated .
4.3. Texture Based Features
Second order statistics or co-occurrence matrix features can be used for texture
classification , and are widely applied in medical pattern recognition tasks . The basis of the
co-occurrence features lies on the second-order joint conditional probability density function
P(i,j;a,d) of a given texture image. The elements (i,j) of the co-occurrence matrix for the
structure of interest represents the number of times that intensity levels i and j occur in two
voxels separated by the distance (d) in the direction (a). Here, a matrix can be selected to
cover the 26-connected directions of neighboring voxels in 3D space. The matrix size is
dependent on the intensity levels within the 3D structure. Subsequently, from this
conditional probability density function features can be extracted, e.g. describing
autocorrelation, contrast, correlation, cluster prominence, cluster shade, cluster tendency,
dissimilarity, energy, homogeneity, maximum probability, sum of squares, sum average,
sum variance, sum entropy, or difference entropy, etc. Furthermore, gray level run length
features, derived from run length matrices and using run length metrics as proposed by
Galloway can be extracted. A gray level run is the length, in number of pixels, of
consecutive pixels that have the same gray level value. From the gray level run length
matrix features can be extracted describing short and long run emphasis, gray level nonuniformity, run length non uniformity, run percentage, low gray level run emphasis, high
gray level run emphasis. As expected, such analyses can generate hundreds of variables,
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
some of which may be redundant. Thus it is important to assess the redundancy of these data
using co-variance.
4.4. Feature Qualification
As described above, a dauntingly large number of image features may be computed.
However, all these extracted features may not be useful for a particular task. In addition, the
numbers of extracted features can be higher than the number of samples in a study, reducing
power and increasing the probability of over-fitting the data. Therefore, dimensionality
reduction and selection of task-specific features for best performance is a necessary step.
Different feature selection methods can be used for this purpose and may exploit machine
learning or statistical approaches . Dimensionality reduction can also be achieved by
combining or transforming the original features to obtain new set of features by using
methods like principal component analysis . In addition to feature selection for informative
and non-redundant features, high reproducibility of the features is important in the
development of clinical biomarkers, which requires the availability of a test-retest data set.
To reduce the dimensionality of our feature space, we have chosen to combine different ad
hoc methods that are agnostically applied to the behavior of the features themselves, prior to
evaluating their ability to develop predictive models. Thus, we evaluated features to fulfill
three main requirements: highly reproducible, informative and non-redundant. We have
applied three methods in serial manner, where the methods were applied successively to
select features. The resulting features of one method were used as input to the next. First,
using a test-retest lung CT image data set, highly reproducible features were selected based
on concordance correlation coefficient, CCC, with a cutoff of 0.85 for high reproducibility.
Subsequently, the CCC-prioritized features were analyzed for dynamic range, calculated as
the ratio of scalar biological range to the test-retest absolute difference. Features showing
high dynamic range considered to be informative. A Dynamic Range of, e.g. 100 can be
arbitrarily used as a cut-off, although features with lower dynamic range may also be
informative. Finally, the redundancy in the features, selected after passing through
reproducibility and dynamic range requirements, can be reduced by identifying highly
correlated features based on correlation coefficients across all samples. Correlation
coefficients greater than 0.95 are considered to be highly redundant and thus can be
combined into a single descriptor. In a test set, the serial application of these three methods
was able to reduce a set of 327 quantitative features to between 39 that were reproducible,
informative and not redundant. More features could be added by relaxing the Dynamic
Range threshold, which was arbitrarily set at 100. These selected features can also be used to
develop classifier models based on machine learning algorithms to improve the
performance .
5. Databases and Data Sharing
5.1 De-identification
To follow the principle of providing the minimum amount of confidential information (i.e.
patient identifiers) necessary to accommodate downstream analysis of imaging data, raw
DICOM image data can be stripped of identified headers and assigned a de-identified
number. Maintaining de-identified images and clinical data is an important patient privacy
safeguard . In the context of DICOM images, Supplement 142 from the DICOM standards
committee provides guidance in the process of de-identifying images, including pixel-level
data. Software packages, including NBIA, implement these standards. Likewise, molecular
data can be de-identified using a similar approach. However, identifiers must be linked
between imaging, molecular data and clinical data in order to build classifier models. This
can be achieved through IRB approval or through the more expedient use of an “honest
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
broker”. The clinical data are de-identified by removing personal identifiers (including
medical record numbers, patient names, social security numbers and addresses) and
providing calculated interval-based survival times instead of actual dates which are also
personal identifiers. The approach taken within our radiomics effort is to avoid the use of
identified imaging or clinical data unless specifically required. This also facilitates the
sharing of data within and across institutions since the de-identification occurs at the
creation of the dataset.
5.2 RDB: An Integrated Radiomics Database
The goal of radiomics is to link the image features to phenotypes or molecular signatures,
and this requires development of an integrated database wherein the images and the
extracted features are linked to clinical and molecular data (Figure 7). The use of such a
database must also be integrated in the workflow starting from image retrieval and
calculation of image features up to the joint analysis of image features, clinical and
molecular data. Furthermore, as part of a larger network of quantitative imaging sites, we
must also be able to exchange data according to an evolving set of standards. Below are
some of the challenges discussed in more detail.
Image Storage—Using clinical PACS (image archive) systems is not amenable for
research projects. First, the clinical system is used for operational purposes and introducing
additional I/O load and increased storage could negatively impact clinical care. Second, the
requirements between research and clinical systems are different and often incompatible.
The research image storage server needs to be fully integrated with the downstream data,
including molecular and clinical research data. If the imported DICOM images contain
Medical Records Numbers (MRN) these need to be linked to other clinical data that are
stored on other systems and then the DICOM headers will be de-identified (e.g. patient
name). This allows for transparent merging of clinical data across systems. In a research
setting, some of the analyses or imaging feature generation software also needs direct access
to the DICOM images. Having direct access to the file system where the images are stored
makes it possible to create project folders, with all images selected for a specific project, that
are specific for the software used for the image feature extraction. In our instance, we are
using open source Clear Canvas® as a research PACS system, although others are available.
Integration to Create a Simple Work Stream—In a research setting, it is common that
several different software packages are used for image analysis (e.g. 3D-Slicer, Definiens
Developer, MITK) and statistical analysis (e.g. R, SAS, Stata). Many of these software
packages may be developed by industry, in-house or by other academic groups. This
requires that the RDB import data from analysis projects using these software packages in a
simple way without sacrificing data integrity. This can be achieved by having the RDB
application directly reading working directories and/or results files from the software used.
If unique tags have been used when creating image filenames, it is easy to link these data
with the right image and downstream clinical and molecular data.
Integration of Clinical and Molecular Data—Integrating data across systems is always
a challenge in large settings. The RDB application needs to integrate the data from several
systems, such as outcomes and demographic data (Cancer Registry), clinical trial data (e.g.
Oncore) or other systems that store clinical and patient information. The manual input of
such data should be kept to a minimum through the use of an ETL (extract, transform, and
load) tool that captures the physical metadata information to maintain data provenance and
minimizes the risk of human errors. The use of a well-developed data dictionary with
extensive metadata is essential when integrating data across systems. Therefore, a new data
warehouse model that incorporates the metadata layer into the data model, including a
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
comprehensive data dictionary along with calculated data quality attributes such as
completeness, accuracy and consistency, has been utilized for the radiomics project . This
new data structure was specifically designed to provide easy semantic integration of internal
data from multiple heterogeneous source systems as well as provide an easy solution for
harmonizing clinical, molecular and imaging data with external members of the quantitative
imaging network. Along this path, it has also been important to ensure that the RDB
structure and semantics are compatible with those from other institutions and (inter)national
databases.
Reporting and Exporting the Data—Advanced statistical analyses of radiomics data
require tools such as R, SAS, or MATLAB. The application must be able to export data in
such a way that it minimizes any need for processing of data outside the RDB application
and thus keeping the data aligned and correct. Longitudinal studies add an extra layer of
complexity with the potential need of reporting changes over time, such as imaging features
or clinical parameters. A flexible selection of which data should be included and in which
format the data should be exported is important.
6. Statistical and Radio-Informatics Analysis
Analysis within radiomics must evolve appropriate approaches for identifying reliable,
reproducible findings that could potentially be employed within a clinical context. Applying
the existing bioinformatics “toolbox” to radiomic data is an efficient first step since it
eliminates the necessity to develop new analytical methods and leverages accepted and
validated methodologies. Radiomics-specific analysis issues will exist, as in any field,
therefore an important step in achieving consensus on appropriate analysis and evaluation
techniques requires availability of real-world data. The goals of the QIN in providing
infrastructure to effectively share radiomics data will enable the further development of
methodology and best practices within the field.
Some of the more significant methods or developments from the bioinformatics toolbox
include: 1) multiple testing issues 2) supervised and unsupervised analysis, and 3) validating
biomarker classifiers. Another important analytical consideration is the incorporation of
clinical and patient risk factor data since they may have a causal effect or correlation with
image features or they may confound statistical associations. Thus, synergizing biostatistics,
epidemiology, and bioinformatics approaches is necessary to build robust, parsimonious,
and clinically relevant predictive models relating image features to phenotypes/endpoints or
gene-protein signatures.
6.1 High-Dimensional Biomarker Discovery and Validation
The field of high-dimensional biomarker discovery and validation has evolved rapidly over
the past decade since some of the earliest microarray-based results were reported . In
particular, these advances have prompted many studies to address clinical prediction (e.g.
prognosis, response to therapy). Many of the lessons learned and tools developed within this
field are immediately relevant to the analysis of radiomics datasets.
Multiple Testing—Many of the significant developments within the field of so-called
“large-p, small-n” data analysis problems are robust methods for accommodating multiple
testing issues. In many datasets in these areas, it is not unusual to test the significance of tens
of thousands of variables (p=50,000) using a univariate test (e.g. a t test) across 50 samples
(n=50). Any single test may have a low expected false positive rate, however the cumulative
effect of many repeated tests guarantees that many statistically significant findings are due
to random chance. The false positives (Type I errors in statistics) are controlled using an
appropriate p value threshold (e.g p<0.05) in the case of single test. However, performing
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
50,000 tests creates serious concerns over the accumulated Type I error from such an
experiment. This multiple testing problem has been addressed in statistics in many ways
however the most familiar, and conservative, Bonferroni corrections severely limit the
power of the test in the 50,000-test experiments . False discovery rates (FDR) have been
developed to provide more reasonable error estimates. Incorporating this type of correction
is an essential step, even in discovery-oriented analysis, to give researchers reasonable
guidance on the validity of their discoveries.
Unsupervised and Supervised Data Analysis—Depending on the type of analysis,
there are both unsupervised and supervised analysis options available. The distinction in
these approaches is that unsupervised analysis does not use any outcome variable, but rather
provides summary information and/or graphical representations of the data. Supervised
analysis, in contrast, creates models that attempt to separate or predict the data with respect
to an outcome or phenotype (for instance, patient outcome or response).
Clustering is the grouping of like data and is one of the most common unsupervised analysis
approaches. There are many different types of clustering, although several general types are
commonly used within bioinformatics approaches. Hierarchical clustering, or the assignment
of examples into clusters at different levels of similarity into a hierarchy of clusters, is the
most common type. Similarity is based on correlation (or Euclidean distance) between
individual examples or clusters. Most significantly, the data from this type of analysis can be
graphically represented using the cluster heat map. Figure 8 represents a heatmap of NSCLC
patients with quantitative imaging features extracted. The heat map is an intuitive display
that simultaneously reveals row and column hierarchical cluster structure in a data matrix
consists of a rectangular tiling with each tile shaded on a color scale to represent the value of
the corresponding element of the data matrix. This cluster heat map is a synthesis of various
graphic displays developed by statisticians over more than a century .
Supervised analysis consists of building a mathematical model of an outcome or response
variable. The breadth of techniques available is remarkable and spans statistics and data
mining/machine learning. Approaches we have used include neural networks , linear
regression and Cox proportional hazards regression . Some essential criteria in selecting an
approach include the stability and reproducibility of the model. Neural networks or
ensemble methods, if they involve an element of randomness, can lead to results that cannot
be replicated without the same random sequences generated. In light of many of the
difficulties surrounding genomic-based models, understandability of the generated models is
an important consideration. For clinical validation, alternate assays or measurements may be
required and thus an understanding of the way in which variables are combined in a decision
model is necessary for translation. In the case of NSCLC imaging, methods that generate
understandable decisions can be important for combining this information with existing
advances in genotyping patients (e.g. EGFR mutation, EML4-ALK rearrangements).
Multivariate data analysis tools such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Partial
Least Squares Projection to Latent Structures (PLS) can be used to analyze quantitative
features together with additional data. PCA allows for an unsupervised analysis of the data
where important features can be extracted and visualized. PCA extracts the underlying
structures, Principal Components, so that a high-dimensional space can be visualized in a
2D- or 3D-dimensional space. Additional layers of information can be added by using
coloring, shapes and size of the objects on the graphs. PCA can be utilized to find grouping,
outliers and other artifacts within the data. To find common underlying structures and
correlation between two matrices PLS can be used. PLS has been shown to work well on
large and complex data sets with more variables than observations, collinear variables and
where there are some missing data.
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A final, key contribution from the field of bioinformatics is the approach developed to
provide validation of prediction findings from high-dimensional experiments. As was noted
in , many genomics-based studies that have been published contain significant analytical
errors. These errors compromise the estimates of predictor accuracy or overall findings.
Following the best practices in developing and then independently validating the
observations in a distinct cohort is essential for reproducible results . For instance, in our
radiomics study we have provided for several validation components, including validation
between MAASTRO and Moffitt sample sets, as well as validation in prospectively
collected Moffitt samples. When model building and cross-validation efforts are completed,
the entire group will determine the appropriate model(s) to evaluate in independent
validation.
Sample Size Issues—High throughput technologies (CT Images, genomic/proteomic,
etc) provide us with enormous amount of multivariate data describing the complex
biological process. Ability to predict risks or to draw inferences based on clinical outcomes
is bogged by sample size. Efron et al has pioneered the work, studied various cross
validation methods and proposed unbiased error estimation called the bootstrap . Renewed
interest with genomics technologies has seen estimate errors and issues in small samples in
the context of classification . In order to make unbiased inference, synthetic samples were
generated following the distribution of the sample groups has been studies in classification
and contrasting with popular error estimates .
6.2 Clinical and Risk Factor Data
Incorporating detailed clinical and patient risk factor data into radiomics is important
because imaging features may be influenced by patient parameters. Patient parameters may
influence the image features via a direct causal association or exert a confounding effect on
statistical associations whereby the parameter is correlated with both the independent and
dependent variables. For instance, smoking-related lung cancers differ from lung cancers in
patients who never smoked and thus smoking status could influence image features, clinical
parameters (histology), phenotypes, molecular signatures and endpoints (i.e., survival,
recurrence). Addressing the influence of patient parameters in radiomics research by using
epidemiologic and biostatistical approaches will minimize spurious relationships by
avoiding Type I error. Moreover, predictive models which are more precise and clinically
relevant may be developed which target well-characterized and defined patient subgroups
rather than a broad heterogeneous disease group. For example, a model that includes all
patients with adenocarcinoma of lung would not likely be clinically relevant because of the
heterogeneity (biological and clinical) of this histologic subtype. However, a predictive
model which focused on adenocarcinoma patients with a specific molecular feature (e.g.,
EML4-ALK fusion) would likely be informative because of the biological and clinical
homogeneity and subsequent targeted therapies. Thus as noted with the bioinformatics
“toolbox”, existing epidemiologic and biostatistical approaches can be leveraged towards
radiomics research to develop robust and clinically relevant prognostic models, reveal
factors that may influence (casually or by confounding) radiomic features, and to explore
and mine complex datasets.
Acknowledgments
Radiomics of NSCLC U01 CA143062
Kumar et al.
Magn Reson Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript