SPECIAL SECTION ON CYBER-PHYSICAL-SOCIAL COMPUTING AND NETWORKING
Received February 7, 2018, accepted March 8, 2018, date of publication March 16, 2018, date of current version April 23, 2018.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2816565
Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular
Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber
Physical Social Systems
AI-MIN YANG
, XIAO-LEI YANG, JIN-CAI CHANG, BIN BAI, FAN-BEI KONG, AND QING-BO RAN
Laboratory of Engineering Computing, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063000, China
Corresponding author: Ai-Min Yang ( )
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 51674121, in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Hebei under Grant 2017209178, in part by the Returned Overseas Scholar Funding of Hebei Province under
Grant C2015005014, and in part by the Outstanding Youth Fund Project of North China University of Science and Technology under
Grant JQ201705.
ABSTRACT The Internet of Things (IOT) is considered to be the third wave of the world information
industry after the computer and the Internet. In order to realize the ubiquitous access to the IOT, the cellular
network can only be fused with the wireless sensor network physical social systems. Based on this,
the purpose of this paper is to extract the general functions that necessary but unrelated with the speciﬁc
application in the cellular network and wireless sensor fusion technology. These general functions, including terminal registration and serial number assignment, terminal authentication management, connection
management, terminal fault management, terminal state management and monitoring, congestion control,
terminal dormancy and activation, and so on. Aiming at these general functions, the author gives an
exploratory solution to provide a referable shared function module for the fusion of cellular network and
wireless sensor networks physical social systems. It is of great signiﬁcance to improve the development
progress of the IOT, reduce the difﬁculty and cost of development.
INDEX TERMS Cellular network, fusion, the Internet of Things, wireless sensor network, physical social
I. INTRODUCTION
In the era of Internet of things (IOT), any object in the world
has unique sign that can be identiﬁed by other objects, and
any object can be linked. Besides, information can be communicated independently between objects. The number of
‘‘objects’’ connected to the network will be much more than
the number of people . The ‘‘object’’ will also become the
main producer of network ﬂow. The mode of communication
will be transformed from the present form between man and
man to the form between man and man, man and thing, thing
and thing . The future communication trend is no longer
the communication between people, and it is no longer a
person to get information, but a communication between a
large number of objects that can represent person. Through
the Internet of things, the world of physical environment
can be combined with the virtual world of information. The
perception of physical environment is an important part of it.
Although there is no uniform standard, the consensus of the
industry and part of the actual industry application shows that
the information perception of physical environment is mostly
achieved through wireless sensor network physical social systems. The Internet of things is a ubiquitous network, and the
traditional wireless sensor network physical social systems is
connected to the limited IP through sink nodes. The way to
connect with the Internet is obviously difﬁcult to meet the
requirement of Internet of things access at any time and any
place. With the global coverage of mobile communication
cellular network, and with the deployment of 3G, 4G, 5G
and other technologies , the access bandwidth provided by
cellular networks is also increasing. Therefore, the use of cellular network as the information channel between the wireless
sensor network and the Internet has become the consensus
of experts. How to effectively fuse the cellular network with
the wireless sensor network has become an urgent problem
in the development of the Internet of things . On the basis
of this, the general function of the fusion technology of cellular network and wireless sensor network is extracted. The
solution of these general functions is tentatively given. This
2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See for more information.
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
paper provides a referable shared function module for the
integration of cellular network and wireless network, which
helps to standardize the Internet of things .
The concept of ‘‘Internet of things’’ was put forward
in 1999. Its deﬁnition is very simple: all items are connected
to the Internet through RFID and other information sensing
devices, so as to achieve intelligent recognition and management. In other words, the Internet of things refers to a
new technology that links all kinds of sensors to the existing
In August 7, 2009, Premier Wen Jiabao visited and delivered an important speech to the Wuxi Wiener sensing network
engineering and technology research and development center.
In August 24th, Wang Jianzhou, President of China Mobile,
made a public speech to Taiwan for the ﬁrst time, and put
forward the idea of ‘‘the Internet of things’’. Wang Jianzhou
pointed out that on all kinds of objects by means of electronic
tags (RFID), sensor, two-dimensional code after connected
with the wireless network interface, thus giving intelligence
to the object, can realize people and objects of communication and dialogue, can also be mutual communication and
dialogue between objects . The network that connects
objects is called the ‘‘Internet of things’’. At the same time,
Wang Jianzhou pointed out that there are two important
factors to truly establish an effective ‘‘Internet of things’’.
One is the scale, only to have the scale to make the items
of intelligence play a role; two mobility items are usually not
static, but in the state of the movement, we must maintain the
items in the state of motion, even under the condition of high
speed can achieve dialogue at any time.
II. THE ARCHIECTURE AND ANALYSIS OF THE
INTERNET OF THINGS
The Internet has a universal hierarchical architecture and runs
a general TCP/I protocol on this architecture . The practice
shows that it is a guarantee for the development and operation
of the Internet to have a uniﬁed standard architecture and
communication protocol.
Almost all of the objects are connected to the Internet of
things. Compared with the Internet, the number of objects
in the Internet of things is much more than that of terminals
now connected to the Internet. The objects in these Internet of
things can produce much more than the current network ﬂow
and need more data storage space. In addition, the Internet of
things is facing enormous challenges in many other aspects,
such as security, terminal access, terminal management, and
so on. Therefore, it is necessary to design a new system
architecture for the Internet of things , .
Redesigning a set of communication system architecture is
a very huge project. Many factors should be considered, such
as reliability, SOA, modular, security, interface, QOS and
so on. Anthony Furness put forward a proposal
for the architecture of the Internet of things. Based on the
proposal, there is an Internet of things at the basic level as
shown in Figure 1, and a rough framework of the Internet of
things, as shown in Figure 2.
FIGURE 1. The basic level of the IOT.
FIGURE 2. Structure of IOT.
Based on the design scheme of Internet of things architecture given by Anthony Furness, it is worth noting that
in Internet of things, all objects can be intervened, and
intercommunication between any object can be realized.
Frequent communication between huge numbers of objects
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
will increase the entire network ﬂow exponentially. Now
whether the backbone network of the Internet can withstand
such huge data ﬂow is an urgent problem to solve. Therefore,
Internet of things will be regarded as a network composed of
many different application systems. According to the actual
situation and through the backbone network, an application
system may communicate with another one or several application systems. However, there is no need to communicate
with all other application systems .
Up to now, although the Internet of things has no uniﬁed
standard, and the implementation methods of all existing
Internet of things applications are also different, with the indepth study of the Internet of things and the development
of various applications of the Internet of things, experts
have formed some basic consensus on the technology of the
Internet of things. One of these is that with the development of
the Internet of things, wireless sensor networks will become
the ‘‘last kilometre’’ of the Internet of things. It means that the
perception of physical world information in the IOT implementation system will be done by wireless sensor networks.
It is the key to the connection between the physical world and
the information world in the Internet of things technology.
Another consensus is to achieve the ubiquitous involvement
of the Internet of things, and cellular networks will be the ﬁrst
choice for WSN access to the Internet .
III. THE FUSION OF CELLULAR NETWORK AND
NETWORK AND WIRELESS NETWORK
A. WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK AND
CELLULAR NETWORK
The original deﬁnition of WSN in wireless sensor network
is made up of multiple sensor nodes, and does not rely on
other communication means entirely. It only relies on the
‘‘no center’’, ‘‘self organized’’ network formed by the Ad
HOC interconnection between sensor nodes, and the formation of WSN. The main steps of WSN are the following four
(1) Deploying nodes according to actual applications.
(2) The WSN node is awakened and conﬁgured automatically
according to the presetting.
(3) The nodes automatically identify each other and understand the location of each other, and automatically make up
(4) Ad HOC technology is used to automatically establish
routing, collect environmental information and send out the
information to the outside.
The latest networking methods for WSN are: let some
nodes close to each other to form a cluster, each cluster has a
cluster head, the cluster information gathered to cluster head,
and then sends the information gathered by the cluster head
to another special node, that is sink node, and then the wired
way will gather all the information sent out by the through
node. As shown in Figure 3.
The service area of the mobile communication network is
divided into a hexagonal subarea. Each cell is set up with
FIGURE 3. WSN node aggregation and cluster.
a base station, forming a structure that resembles a ‘‘honeycomb’’. Therefore, the mobile communication network is
also called a cellular network . The Internet of things
emphasizes that any object can be connected at any time
and any place. If people want to achieve ubiquitous access
anywhere in the Internet of things, they can make use of the
cellular network.
B. WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK AND CELLULAR
NETWORK FUSION ARCHITECTURE
At present, it is a common understanding that cellular network is the ﬁrst choice to access the Internet. The fusion
of cellular networks and WSN is not only necessary but
also technically feasible. The basic idea of the fusion of
cellular network and wireless network is: inserting an intermediate layer between the cellular network and the WSN.
The middle layer is made up of dual-mode WSN gateways (dual-mode). These dual-mode gateways can act as
WSN top cluster heads to collect information gathered by
WSN, and can be equivalent to cellular network’s wireless
access terminal, and transmit information to the Internet
through cellular network . The structure diagram is shown
in Figure 4.
In the architecture shown in Figure 4, the underlying targets
are network schemes for large, low rate, low power sensor
nodes and converging nodes. The goal of the middle level is
a network scheme for converging nodes, gateways, and high
data trafﬁc, low resource constrained large sensor nodes. The
layer is closely associated with the underlying network. The
high level is to make use of the existing communication network to realize the speciﬁc application. In the middle level,
mobile terminals can be used as sink nodes and gateways .
According to the existing applications, people can consider
directly using user phones as WSN gateways, or using cellular
network’s base stations and other infrastructures as sink nodes
and large capacity sensing nodes.
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
FIGURE 4. Fusion architecture of cellular network and wireless sensor
C. THE STRATEGY OF THE FUSION OF CELLULAR
NETWORK AND WSN
Although the basic idea of cellular networks and fusion mentioned earlier is to add a middle layer between them, and using
a dual mode—–WSN gateway, that is sink node to achieve
fusion. Indeed, it is the mainstream of industry research.
Basically, all kinds of existing practice systems are using this
strategy, which has basically become a factual one. For a new
technology that is still in the research stage and has not been
implemented on a large scale, in general, a large number of
researchers will give a variety of solutions. In the academia
circle, there are two different solutions to the convergence of
cellular networks and WSN, one is gateway strategy, and the
other one is the coverage strategy. Different technologies have
different starting points, the gateway strategy focuses on the
application information, and the coverage strategy focuses on
the transformation of the protocol stack.
1) GATEWAY STRATEGY
Gateway strategy can be divided into application gateway
strategy, delay tolerance strategy, virtual strategy and strategy. The common point is that the gateway needs to be
added between the cellular networks, which requires a twoway processing of the data from the cellular network. The
application gateway communicates with the cellular network
on the one hand, and on the other hand it communicates with
the WSN, that is, the dual mode form. There are two kinds of
gateway strategies, one is that the gateway as a forwarding
node of the information, the other one as a equivalent to
a platform. The delay tolerance strategy (DTN) is a highly
versatile heterogeneous network fusion strategy. Its main idea
FIGURE 5. Cellular network protocol covering WSN protocol.
FIGURE 6. WSN protocol covering cellular network protocol.
is to transform the protocol stack and to make the unreliable,
long delay link has characteristics of the common link. The
strategy is to add a public layer in the protocol stack of different network technology, which can make the heterogeneous
network communicate smoothly and realize the fusion. The
other is a proxy server based strategy to conﬁgure the proxy
server for the edge of the access heterogeneous network.
The main idea of the virtual strategy is to set up a set of
protocol conversion mechanism. Though it is not completely
independent of application, because the strategy has obvious
gateway characteristics and there is a clear transformation
entity between different protocols, it still belongs to gateway
policy. In a simple way, it is realized in the way of implementing the address and control of the sensor.
2) COVERAGE STRATEGY
The biggest difference between the coverage strategy and the
gateway strategy is that the coverage strategy does not have
a clear gateway, and the adaptation between the protocols
depends on the modiﬁcation of the protocol stack. The fusion
of cellular network and WSN can be divided into two ways,
one way is to use cellular network protocol to cover protocol,
as shown in Fig.5.
In contrast, the WSN protocol is used to cover cellular
network protocols, as shown in Fig.6.
IV. AN UNIVERSAL FUNCTIONAL SOLUTION FOR THE
FUSION OF CELLULAR NETWORK AND
WIRELESS NETWORK
In other words, the most basic function of the gateway is
to forward the information and realize the communication
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
FIGURE 7. WSN protocol WSN gateway platform.
between the cellular network and the WSN, besides
these functions, it also has some operational management ability. The WSN gateway is more like a platform, and its architectural schematic diagram is shown in
Figure 7 .
A. TERMINAL REGISTRATION AND SERIAL
NUMBER ALLOCATION
Before the whole system begins to work, sensing terminals
must be registered to the WSN gateway. And the registration process is related to the terminal serial number. Each
terminal has a unique terminal serial number. The terminal
sequence number is assigned by the WSN gateway according
to the agreed algorithm, and some terminals in the factory
has been preseted terminal number.The terminal number and
the previous two parts of the data are combined to form a
terminal serial number, the terminal serial number is unique.
The deﬁnition is shown in Figure 8 .
FIGURE 8. Terminal sequence number.
When terminal is in the state of unregistered, it needs to
register with WSN Gateway, the terminal registration process
as shown in Figure 9 .
B. AUTHENTICATION
The WSN terminal node and WSN gateway exchange information by the wireless channel. The wireless channel can
be shared without any restrictions, so there may be some
‘‘spy nodes’’ that do not belong to a certain application
want to get access to the application and steal information . In order to ensure that only legitimate terminal
can access a certain application, after the terminal is opened
or reset, the WSN sends the ﬁrst message to the gateway,
that is, the packet. The WSN gateway requires authentication of the terminal. The speciﬁc process as shown in
Figure 10.
FIGURE 9. Terminal registration process.
C. CONNECTION MANAGEMENT
The connection between WSN terminal and WSN Gateway
is divided into two kinds: continuous connection and discontinuous connection. Continuous connection means that
the connection between terminal and gateway will exist forever. In one process, multiple packets can be sent continuously, and if there is no packet sending, the terminal also
should send exciting packets to the gateway to maintain this
process . A non-persistent connection is the establishment of a connection to send data when people need it. The
connection can be disconnected after the data is sent out,
and it does not require an exciting package to maintain this
process. But the terminal still need to send an exciting packet
to the gateway. At this time, The effect of the excitement
package is to inform the gateway terminal’s running state,
so that the gateway monitors the terminal status.
D. TERMINAL FAULT MANAGEMENT
The WSN gateway needs to manage the failures that may
arise from the terminal. The WSN Gateway will periodically
check the data information sent from the WSN terminal node,
and if it is found that one of the terminal nodes within the
scope of management does not send data within the speciﬁed
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
FIGURE 10. Authentication process.
time range, then the gateway considers that the terminal
may fail, marks it as a temporary fault state, and counts the
temporary failure . After speciﬁed time, if the terminal
still does not transmit data, the temporary fault count plus 1.
E. TERMINAL STATE MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING
WSN gateway through the normal business process to obtain
the status of each terminal information, such as the terminal
through authentication can be marked as working state, but
those do not through authentication can be marked as a prohibited state. After a long time, if it does not send information,
that is marked as failure status and so on . In addition
to obtaining terminal state information through normal business process, WSN gateway should have special terminal
monitoring operation. The detailed procedure is shown in
Figure 11.
F. CONGESTION CONTROL
In the IOT technology, the sensor node collects a lot of
information through the wireless channel to send to the
WSN gateway, which is prone to congestion. In order to
make communication smooth, WSN gateway should have
congestion control ability. This paper presents a basic congestion control strategy: When congestion occurs, the WSN
gateway processes the information according to the priority of the business. It can ﬁrst deal with high priority data
packets, and then process data packets with low priority.
In general, the priority of business is to use real-time as
an important standard. Therefore, when congestion occurs,
FIGURE 11. Terminal proactively reporting failure process.
the WSN gateway will choose to prioritize the information
with high real-time requirements . The last four bytes of
the message head sent to the WSN gateway at the WSN node
are reserved ﬁelds, and packets can be sent with the priority of
the business assigned to the second byte band of the ﬁeld, and
when congestion occurs, the WSN gateway can determine the
processing order of each message according to the contents
of the byte.
G. TERMINAL HIBERNATION AND ACTIVATION
In order to strengthen the management and control ability
of WSN gateway to the owning terminal, WSN Gateway
requires mandatory hibernation and activation of the terminal. And the forced hibernation and activation of the gateway to the terminal can be treated as a special message,
which does not require a speciﬁc package. A byte ﬁeld in
the Baotou section represents the message type code. The
message type code deﬁnes two special values as the dormant and active identity, the message type code 0x00 represents the Sleep pack, and the 0xFF represents the activation
package .
H. PACKAGE DEFINITION
1) PACKAGE STRUCTURE
As the same as the packet structure deﬁnition of other network communication such as Internet, the message packet
of communication between Gateway and terminal is divided
into message packet Head and message package body as a
whole. The header of the message is the public head of all
types of packets, and the length is ﬁxed and the length is
byte . The content and length of the message package
vary depending on the type of message and the speciﬁc
communication situation. The package overall structure is
shown in the ﬁgure.
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems
FIGURE 12. Message Baotou format.
2) BAOTOU FORMAT
The Baotou department is a public head of all types of
messages, which is designed for reference to other communications, such as IP, TCP, UDP, and other messages.
In combination with the actual situation of the communication, the format of the design message Baotou is shown as
shown in Figure 12.
(1) The total length of the message is an indispensable part.
This ﬁeld is also available in UDP, IP. Here, the total length
ﬁeld is set to 2 bytes, which refers to the total length of
the entire message including the Baotou department and the
package, which is in bytes.
(2) There will be various types of messages in the communication process between the terminal and the Wsn gateway,
so a ﬁeld must indicate the type of the packet, that is the Message Type ﬁeld, which is designed to be 1 byte, representing
256 message types.
(3) Considering the development of the Internet of things and
Technology, the Protocol version may also occur faster development. So to design a byte ﬁeld to represent the protocol
version, which indicates the version of the communication
(4) In the above design, the synchronous communication
mode is used between the terminal and the WSN gateway.
Each packet has a corresponding ACK response, where the
design of 4 bytes for the packet Sequence Number ﬁeld,
the ﬁeld for the packet number sent, terminals and WSN
gateways to maintain their own package sequence number.
This sequence number range is 0x00000000-0xffffffff, this
range can satisfy the application need basically, each sends
a package, then this sequence number adds 1, if the package
book order arrives 0xFFFFFFFF, then return zero to start
counting again. When the receiver responds to the request,
the packet sequence number is copied back as is.
(5) The terminal’s message package is required to carry
the unique identity of the transmission terminal, which is
necessary. The message packet sent by the WSN gateway
also indicates which terminal is sent to the packet. The only
identiﬁcation of the terminal is the terminal serial number,
so the package head should have some ﬁeld to represent
the terminal serial number. This article sets the terminal
serial number is 12 bytes, which is the communication terminal’s unique identiﬁcation. And it is divided into three
parts, the ﬁrst byte indicates the manufacturer, the equipment
model and so on. The 5th to 8th byte is the time stamp,
which records the terminal registration time. For example,
September 2017 is expressed as 1709; the last four bytes are
the terminal number of the terminal . The entire 12-byte
terminal serial number is unique.
(6) Reserved ﬁelds. This article sets the length of the reserved
ﬁeld to 4 bytes. Usually people do not use this method, all
of them are ﬁlled with all 0. But it needs to use the partial
reserved ﬁeld byte when the terminal’s authentication and
congestion control determine the business priority.
In addition, other parts of the package deﬁnition (such as
REGISTER, LOGIN, LOGOUT, EXCITING, STATEGET,
etc.) should also have traditional basic functions and new
cognitive functions. Only in this way can the whole system
provide better service for both the common terminal and the
cognitive terminal.
V. CONCLUSION
In the future, there are many problems to be solved in the
development of Internet of things, and the integration of
cellular network and wireless sensor network WSN physical
social systems is one of the important problems. There is no
uniﬁed technical standard for the fusion of cellular network
and wireless sensor network WSN physical social systems,
and its solution is related to its application. The relatively
chaotic status of this standard will restrict the extensive
implementation of the fusion technology.
On the basis of studying the relevant draft of the international organization for standardization and the application
examples of some speciﬁc industries, this paper extracts some
necessary and independent functions of cellular network and
integration. In order to provide a general function module for
solving the problem of cellular network fusion, the author
proposes some solutions to these general functions. The sharing of functional modules can greatly improve the progress of
application and development, and reduce the difﬁculty and
cost of application and development. However, there is still
much work to do to solve this problem and achieve largescale deployment. In the future, people should make speciﬁc
analysis and research on the performance of this kind of
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 51674121), the natural science
foundation of Hebei (No. E2017209178), Returned Overseas Scholar Funding of Hebei Province(C2015005014) and
the outstanding youth fund project of North China University
of Science and Technology (No.JQ201705).
VOLUME 6, 2018
A.-M. Yang et al.: Research on a Fusion Scheme of Cellular Network and Wireless Sensor for Cyber Physical Social Systems