Comparisons of some learning models for
response bias in signal detection 1
MORTON P. FRIEDMAN, EDWARD C. CARTERETTE, LLOYD NAKATANI AND AL AHUMADA2
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES
The effects of variations in signal probability and varying
degrees of correct feedback on response bias were studied in
a yes-no auditory signal detection task. The main finding
was that the bias towards saying yes was an increasing function of the frequency of signal feedback events, but did not
depend on the correctness of the feedback. Several learning
models coupled with a simple psychophysical and decision
model yielded predictions about overall biases and certain
sequential statistic s. Only one model, which can be
decribed as an "informational" model, gave a good account of
both observed overall biases and sequential statistics. This
model assumes the observer's response bias is strengthened
for the feedback-reinforced response when the observer's
sensory information is ambiguous or is cOtItradicted by the
feedback information.
This report presents an empirical and theoretical
informational
signal-presentation probabilities
response bias in a yes-no auditory detection task.
general approach is similar to that employed
for forced-choice
tasks, though we use a broader range of informational variables and theoretical models. Our primary
interest is
varying degrees
correct feedback on response bias.
The main theoretical analysis compares a number
of learning models for response bias. The learning
models assume that the feedback and signal probability conditions lead to trial-by-trial bias adjustments which at asymptote yield statistically stable
The various models differ as to
which psychophysical and trial outcome events are
presumed to occasion adjustments in the bias.
Because the
main interest is response bias, only
a very primitive psychophysical model is employed.
It is assumed that the
stimulus event on each trial
plus noise or noise alone)
can lead to one
of three possible sensory events, or states, in the
subject. The intuitive meaning of the sensory states
is that, for purposes of deciding whether to respond
yes or no on a given trial, the sensory mechanism
only one of three outputs: State D,
corresponds
signal was presented; State U, uncertainty whether
signal or noise was presented: or State D, certainty
signal was not presented. The three states,
D, U, and D, are a simple way of representing the
continuum of sensory events which arise from fluctuations
physical signal and noise parameters. Exactly Which
physical aspects of the stimulus might give rise to
continuum of
still an open
and an area of active research and the recent work
of Ahumada .)
We relate the psychophysical and the bias models
by combining them with a simple "threshold" decision model. The model is ubiquitous and has been
suggested by a number of workers 
representing
of bias. It
evolved from the ordinary "correction for guessing"
threshold model. The particular version we use is
that given by Atkinson and Kinchla and Atkinson,
Bower, and Crothers . Figure 1 outlines the
assumptions of the
model and their relationship to
the experimental procedure.
each trial,
signal, a 1000 Hz tone
imbedded in band-limited Gaussian noise is presented,
noise alone is presented, with probabilities
y and 1 - Y. respectively. These stimulus events are
assumed to lead to one of the three sensory states
in the subject. If the signal is presented, then State
probability
<T and State U with
probability
1 - <T. If noise alone is presented, then
State D is elicited with probability
State U with probability 1 - T)•
judgment is
determined by the sensory state
according to a very simple response rule. If State
D is elicited, the
subject says "yes"; if State D is
subject says "no": and if State U is
subject biases his response and says
"yes" or "no" with probabilities P and 1- P. The
trial ends with the presentation of one of two trial
outcomes: (1) the
subject is
told that a signal was
presented, or
subject is told that
The probability of a signal
outcome is lTl on signal trials and lT2 on noise trials.
subject thus
receives correct feedback on all
trials when
lTl =1 and
lT2=O. It is assumed that the
value of the
guessing or bias parameter P depends
on the outcome and stimulus presentation probabilities
IT and Y but the values of the stimulus parameters
<T and T) do not.
theoretical
expressions
for the "hit rate,"
proportion
correct detections of the
"false alarm rate," the proportion
noise alone trials
P( F), are simply:
Perception & Psychophysics, 1968, Vol. 3 (1A)
Copyright 1968, Psychonomic Journals, Santa Barbara, Calif.
Fig. 1. An outline of the simple decision model and
how it relates to the
experimental procedure.
The ROC (iso-sensitivity) function relating the hits
and false alarms is:
A yes-no auditory signal detection task was employed.
was to report on each trial
whether a 1000 Hz sinusoidal signal was or was not
presented against a continuous background of white
noise during a brief observation interval.
Three variables were manipulated in the experiment: (1) signal intensity, (2) probability of occurrence
and (3) feedback.
The levels of the
variables were combined to yield a modified threeway, independent groups, factorial design.
There were two levels of signal intensity. These
will be referred to as the hard (low signal intensity)
intensity) conditions. There
whose slope and intercept depend only on the stimulus parameters, IT and '1'
point out that there are a variety of
conceptions
curvilinear
segmented linear ROC functions. SOme of these are discussed by Luce .
Recent results 
make it clear that
shape of the
ROC function and the relationship
parameters
of the ROC function to parameters
the physical stimulus is an open question. For
our purpose of studying response bias, the
model outlined here is convenient. And, as we shall
see, it is reasonably consistent with the data.
were three probabilities of occurrence of the signal:
.25, .50, and
.75. Finally, there were five different
feedback conditions: No Feedback on any trial; 100%
all trials; and three misinformation conditions. The three misinformation conditions
Feedback on all trials;
Signal-random feedback on all signal
trials but correct feedback on noise trials; and (3)
Noise-random feedback on all noise trials
but correct feedback on signal trials.
When Random Feedback was given on all trials,
50% of the trials were followed by signal outcome
events independent of the stimulus actually presented
and the S's response. In the Random Signal condition,
50% of the trials on which the
signal was actually
were called signal trials, and the other
50% were called noise trials independent of the S's
response; correct feedback was given on all noise
Random Noise condition was
conditions
100% Correct
signal intensity levels and all three levels of
probability. The Random Noise and Random
Signal feedback conditions were run under both signal
intensity levels, but only with the
.50 signal probabdity. It should be noted that, ignoring the correctness of the feedback in the Random Noise condition,
75% of the trials were followed by signal outcomes
and the other 25% by noise outcome events; and in
Signal condition, 25% of the trials were
followed by signal outcomes and
75% by noise outcomes. Altogether, these combinations of the three
variables yielded 22 independent groups. There were
15 Ss in each group.
There were four subject booths at the narrow end
P(H) = IT+ (l-IT) P
P (F) =(1- '1) P
P(H) = <T+ (1-'1) P(F)
Perception & Psychophysics, 1968, Vol. 3 (iA)
x 21 ft experimental room.
The warning,
observation-interval,
feedback lamps were located on the wall opposite the booths and 12 ft from
was placed above the
observation-interval lamp at about the Ss' eye level.
The two feedback lamps were located slightly below
symmetrically
observation-interval
lamp. The Ss' response switches were on large armrests on the chairs in the booths. The switches were
double-pole,
center-off,
spring-return,
silent knife
switches. Ss indicated their responses by pressing
switch momentarily to the left or right. Programming
adjoining control room.
The white background noise was band-pass filtered
per octave) between 100 and
electronic switch
gated the 1000 cps sinusoid during the entire .5 sec
observation interval with equal rise and decay times
of 25 msec, The calculated E/NO values were 4.97
and 6.30 for the hard and easy signal intensity conditions,
respectively.
binaurally over
PDR-600 earphones.
Insofar as possible, Ss were run in squads of four.
instructions,
groups receiving feedback
were led to believe that the feedback was correct.
was placed on correctly detecting
signal and noise trials. Ss were given examples of
the signal alone, the signal in noise, and 10 practice
trials (six signal and four noise trials in haphazard
order, in which the
signal started out 10 dB above
its experimental level and was gradually decreased
over presentations). Then the 350 experimental trials
were run without any break. Previous research has
enough training to
responding
when examples
of signal and noise trials are explicitly demonstrated
to Ss 
low sensitivity to the
signal. The
eliminating
Ss were: (1) 10 or more
trials on which there were no responses, or (2) a
d' sensitivity measure of less than
.33 in the hard
condition or .54 in the easy condition. There were
32 Ss eliminated for these reasons in the easy condition
and 41 Ss eliminated in the hard condition.
experimental
condition. Because squads of varying sizes were run
and because varying numbers of Ss were eliminated
each condition, there were actually from 15 to
19 "good" Ss run in each of the 22 conditions. To
simplify some of the calculations, Ss were eliminated
randomly to make equal the
sizes of the groups at
15 Ss per group.
The 330 Ss were students recruited from introductory
psychology
University
California, Los
Angeles. Participation in a certain
number of experiments was
a course requirement.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This report will discuss only the results for the
feedback conditions. A more complete discussion of
the experiment including an analysis of the No Feedback results is given elsewhere .
Preliminary Analysis
the adequency of the
threshold decision model may be had by considering the ROC functions for the hard and easy signal
intensity conditions. Figure 2 shows the ROC functions, plots of the hit rates (proportion of yesses on
signal trials) versus the false-alarm rates (proportion of yesses on noise trials) for all experimental
conditions. The left panel contains points for groups
the hard signal intensity condition, and
right panel contains points for groups run under
the easy signal intensity condition. Each data point
represents the
mean of the
responses of the 15 sa
taken over the final 150 trials of the
experiment.
A preliminary analysis of the data showed that the
false-alarm rates were stable over
at least that part of the data for all conditions. The
2 are linear ROC functions
with slope =1. They were not fit by the best methods
but are shown to illustrate predictions of the theory.
We shall not argue here that these data support
the three-state model over the many other alternatives. However, we do say that a linear function is
reasonable approximation for the obtained range
of hits and false alarms and that the model appears
to be a reasonable framework in which to study the
our experimental variables on response
bias, which we now consider.
50R";;:25R
Fig. 2. ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) plots of the hit rates P (H) (proportion of yeses on Signal
trials) versus the false alarm rates P (F) (proportion of yeses on Noise trials) for all experimental conditions
over the last 150 trials. The left panel shows the results for groups run under the Hard condition. and the right
panel shows the results for groups ruu under the Easy condition. The conditions are laheled according to their
signal prohability (25.
50, or 75) and feedback condition (C = Correct. N = No Feedback, R = Random, RS =
Random Signal, RN = Random Noise). The RS and RN conditions were run only with a signal probahility of .50.
The lines are linear theoretical ROC functions which illustrate the special case of Eq. 3 with a = 1).
PROBABILITY
Fig. 3. Obtained (open symbols) and predicted (closed symbols)
values of the bias parameter P for the Hard condition (left panel)
and the Easy condition (right panel). C = Correct Feedback, R =
Random Feedhack, RN = Random Noise, RS = Random Signal.
Analysis of Bias
To simplify our analysis of bias we consider the
case of the model in which
D- = '1. .) This special case of the theory generates the ROC function with slope = 1 shown in Fig. 2.
But more to the point, small changes in the slope
of the linear functions (or, for that matter, reasonable curvilinear ROC functions) will not change the
qualitative
relationships
experimental
conditions and the relative degree of bias, and will
make only small quantitative changes.
For the c ='1 case of the theory, Equations (1) and
solved for the bias
parameter P to yield:
P = 1 - P (H) + P (F)
relationship
the bias associated with
a given point (P(H), P(F)) with respect to the linear
ROC function with slope of unity through that point.
that the bias associated with a
given point is equal to the distance of that point from
x-Intercept along the
ROC function relative to
the total length of the ROC function.
Using Equation (4), estimates of P were calculated
for each S from his hit and false-alarm rates over
Trials 201-350.
Figure 3 shows
the mean obtained
symbols) for all feedback conditions as a function of signal probability along with
some predicted values (closed symbols) which will
be discussed shortly. The left panel shows the scores
for the hard signal intensity condition, and the right
panel shows the scores for the easy condition. The
main result of note here is that the bias is an increasing
function of the
probability of signal outcomes,
independently of the correctness of the information•
to a Newman-Keuls analysis run at the
conditions
which signal outcome
probabilities were equal were reliably different from
conditions run under other signal outcome probabilities,
not differ among themselves. Thus,
the biases obtained in the Random Noise conditions
Perception & Psychophysics. 1968, Vol. 3 (lA)
Some Alternative Models for the Bias Parameter P
The Value of the Bias Parameter on Trial n+ 1, Pn+1
Information Models
Reinforcement Models
Confirmation Models
(l- gl) Pn
(l- gl) Pn+Ol
(1-°1) Pn+ 01
(1-01) Pn+0 1
(1-01) Pn+0 1
(1-01) Pn+Ol
(1-01) Pn+01
(1-°1) Pn+01
(1- 02) Pn
(1-01) Pn+Ol
(1-01) Pn+01
(1-01) Pn+Ol
RN) In which
true signal probabiHty
was .5 but the overall outcome signal outcome probability was
.75 were not significantly different from
conditions
probabilities
hold for the
Random Signal conditions (in which the signal outcome probabilities were .25) and the Correct Feedback
conditions run with .25 signal probability. There are
other consistent (though not
significant by the
Newman-Keuls test)
relationships in
Fig. 3 that we
point out: First, for both signal intensity
conditions,
Random Noise
conditions generated the most extreme biases. Second,
the effects of signal probability on bias in the Random
conditions
the signal outcome
probability was always
.5) were small and opposite
effects of signal probability in the Correct
conditions.
For both intensity conditions,
a tendency for the bias to decrease as
the signal probability increased.
Learning Models for the Bias Parameter P
We now consider a class of alternative learning
models may be
understood in the context of an isomorphism between the probability learning experiment
and the simple psychophysical judgment experiment.
The fundamental notion is that the probability learning experiment may be regarded as a limiting case
psychophysical
stimulus information and the S must guess on every
trial . For the present
threshold model, the limiting case is one in which
psychophysical
parameters
'1 are both
zero and the uncertain state, U, is evoked on every
trial so that the S must guess. All of the learning
models employ simple linear operators which assume
that the value of the bias parameter P on trial n +I,
is a linear function of the value of the bias
parameter on trial n, Pn. Whether the bias increases
or decreases on trial n +1 and the amount of change
depend on the sensory state and trial outcome on trial
n, The only restriction placed on the operators when
employed is
that the bias can
direction of the
response specified by
Perception & Psychophysics, 1968, Vol. 3 (tAl
of the models which were
considered for the feedback conditions are outlined
in Table 1. All of the models require two learning
parameters.
The various models arise from three alternative
conceptions
on each trial will
change the
S's biases. The three classes of models
Reinforcement
Models, Information Models, and
Confirmation Models.
First consider the Information models. The psychological
models is that the
bias changes only when: (1) a trial outcome reduces
the observer's uncertainty concerning which stimulus
occurred on a trial, or (2) a trial outcome provides
information which conflicts with that of the sensory
For the Information Model
A, whenever the sensory state of uncertainty U occurs, the bias changes
the direction of the trial outcome, because information is provided about the stimulus occurrence
on that trial. Similarly, it is assumed that the bias
changes in the direction of the trial outcome whenever
states, D and D, and thus provides information to
S. (For the threshold model, this can only occur
when the feedback is sometimes erroneous.) Whenever certainty states and trial outcome agree, it is
assumed that the bias is unchanged, that is, Pn-sL
=Pn, since there was no uncertainty about the stimulus
information, the
agree. For
Information
Model A, the
learning parameters
depend only on the trial outcomes.
Information
Information
state and trial outcome conflict, the S ignores both
of information and the bias is unchanged,
Pn+1 = Pn•
Information
equivalent for correct feedback conditions.
psychological notion behind the Reinforcement
outcomes and not
sensory states are the crucial events which change
Reinforcement
changes on every trial and it changes in the direction
of the trial outcome. The learning parameters de-
Reinforcement
like Information Model B in ignoring
trial outcome when it is inconsistent with the
sensory state. Reinforcement Models A and B are
equivalent for the correct feedback conditions.
Confirmation
changes only when one of the certain states D or D
and then only when the
sensory information is
confirmed or disconfirmed by the trial
outcome information. Confirmation Model B is equivalent to Confirmation Model A for the correct feedback case, but assumes that only agreement between
information
Evaluation ofthe Learning Models
The learning models were evaluated by comparing
their predictions
observed values of the
first-order
sequential
statistics.
A complete
comparisons and a discussion of several additional
models is available elsewhere , so we shall only summarize the main results here.
of fit of the various models with
respect to the bias scores was evaluated by a procedure
which· allowed the treatment effects (signal
probabilities.
correctness. task difficulty)
the parameters
of the learning models to be
separated out as additive effects. All of the models
yield identical predictions for the correct feedback
conditions. but differed as to their predictions for
the partially correct and random feedback conditions.
main result of this analysis was that the predictions of the Information Model A were quite good.
All of the models yielded reasonably good predictions for the correct feedback conditions. but only
predictions of Information Model A were consistent with the observed scores in the random and
partially correct feedback conditions. The predicted
values for Information Model A are shown in Fig. 3.
Information
A correctly predicted the
inverse relationship between the direction
probab1l1ty in the
feedback condition. and also the large biases which
occurred in the partially correct feedback conditions.
In a second set of analyses the predictions of the
models were compared with the observed
first-order
sequential
statistics.
i.e•• the hits and false-alarm rates on trial n conditional on the stimulus. response. and outcome on
the preceding trial. The main result of these analyses
was that a number of models yielded adequate fits
to the data when separate learning parameters were
estimated for each condition. but Information Model
A again yielded the best fits when only a single set
of learning parameters was allowed for all conditions.
Our results for the feedback conditions are consistent with
Atkinson and Kinchla 
forced-choice auditory detection experiment.
and Kinchla compared what we here call
Information
Reinforcement
that the Information model yielded the best fits for
conditions.3
However, there were no
conditions in their experiment in which the stimulus
information could contradict the feedback information.
so a comparison of the Information A and B models
cannot be had from their results.
models considered here assume that
critical events which can change the bias are
on each trial is
irrelevant.
models have been suggested which assume
that the adjustments in the bias depend on the correctness
the response. The "error-correcting"
model developed by Sklansky assumes that the bias
error and remains the
same following a correct response. Models of this
sort appear
reasonable
to be tested
with the class of models presented
here. However. it should be noted that the errorcorrection
present Information models. since response errors
are highly correlated with what we are defining as
Information. In fact. it would appear to be hard to
distinguish between the two sorts of models.
Finally. it
be pointed out that all of the
the learning models which are used here in discrete
conceptions
can, at the
expense of a few
more parameters. be applied to continuous sensory
models. From our explorations with the continuous
models, our impression is that comparisons of these
woilld yield
pattern of results close to
that obtained here for the discrete models.
References
Ahumada, A. Detection of tones masked by noise: A comparison of
human observers with digital-computer-simulated energy detectors
of varying bandwidths. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA,
1967. (Available as Technical Report No. 29, Human Communication Laboratory, Department of Psychology, UCLA.)
Atkinson, R. C. A variable sensitivity theory of signal detection.
Psuchol, Rev .• 1963,70,91-106.
Atkinson, R. C., Bower, G. H., & Crothers, E. J. An introduction to
mathematical learning tneor». New York: Wiley, 1965.
Atkinson, R. C., & Kinchla, R. A. A learning model for forcedchoice detection experiments. Brit. J. math. & statist. Psychol.•
1965, 18, 183-206.
Blackwell, H. R. Neural theories of simple visual discriminations.
J. Opt. Soc. Amer.• 1963, 53, 129-160.
Carterette, E. C., Friedman, M. P., & Wyman, M. J. Feedback and
psychophysical variables in signal detection.
Acoust. Soc.
Amer., 1966, 39, 1051-1055.
Carterette, E. C., & Wyman, M. J. Application of a Markov learning
model to a simple detection situation involving social pressure.
In J. Criswell, H. Solomon and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical
methods in small group processes. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1962. Pp. 74-100.
Perception & Psychophysics, 1968, Vol. 3 ,
Studies in
mathematical psychology. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1963. Pp, 233-249.
Luce, R. D. A threshold theory for simple detection experiments.
Psuchol, Rev., 1963, 70, 61-79.
Markowitz, J., & Swets, J. A. Factors affecting the slope of empirical
ROC curves:
Comparison of binary and
rating responses.
Percept. & Psychophys., 1967, 2, 91-100.
Norman, D. A. Sensory thresholds, response biases, and the neural
quantum theory. J. math. Psuchol., 1964, 1, 88-120.
Parducci, A., & Sandusky, A. Distribution and sequence effects
in judgment. J. expo Psuchol., 1965, 89, 450-459.
Ronken, D. A. A note on some alternative models for response bias
forced-choice detection experiments.
math. & statist. Psycho!., 1966, 19, 33-38.
Markov chain
model of adaptive signal detection.
Proceedings of the 1963 Biomics Symposium. Air Force Systems
Command, Wright Patterson A. F. B., Ohio. March, 1963.
Swets, J. A., & Sewall, S. The invariance of signal detectability
over stages of practice and levels of motivation. J.
expo Psychol.• 1963, 66, 120-126.
1. This research was supported by Grant MH-07809 from the National Institutes of Health. Computing assistance was obtained from
Health Sciences Computing
sponsored by
National Institutes of Health Grant FR-3.
2. Ahumada is now at the University of California, Irvine. He was
a National Science Foundation Predoctoral Fellow when this work
was done. Nakatani is a Predoctoral Fellow of the United States
Puhlic Health Service.
3. Ronken has suggested an alternative interpretation of
Atkinson and Kinchla's results using a model which combines the
assumptions of the Information and Reinforcement models.
 
Comment on "Saturation estimates and chromatic adaptation" by Gerald H. Jacobs by Leo M. Hurvich and Dorothea Jameson
University of Pennsylvania
We were pleased to see Dr. Jacobs' paper 
reporting experimental results for scales of spectral
saturation that show "a rather striking correspondence"
own theoretical
predictions for the
dependence
saturation
adaptation
 .
Dr. Jacobs' statement that "there apparently have
been no direct experimental measurements of spectral saturation under chromatic adaptation." (p, 274)
overlooks an experimental study of this problem that
we published in the Journal of the Optical Society
of America in 1959 . Our
percentage magnitude estimate to
scale spectral saturation in a centrally fixated test
field within
3~ surrounds of two different chromaticities.
saturation
luminance of the test stimuli was equated to that
field, as in the Jacobs study. and
also when the test luminance differed from that of
the surround. We call attention to these 1959 data
sake of completeness. but more
importantly, because they also demonstrate experimentally the significance of the test luminance level
relative to the level of the adapting illumination in
determining the specific form of the spectral saturation
adaptation.
Our earlier theoretical treatment has been extended
include these intensity dependent effects .