Perception & Psychophysics
2003, 65 (4), 523-535
Overall slowing of response time (RT) is a hallmark
characteristic of aging. Fisher and Glaser , Ratcliff,
Spieler, and McKoon , Ratcliff, Thapar, and McKoon , and Thapar, Ratcliff, and McKoon (in press)
have recently argued that this slowing can be best understood through models that allow the various components
of cognitive processes to be individuallyexamined. Models can be useful not only in revealing which tasks suffer
decrements with age, but also in identifying the components of the cognitiveprocessesthat are responsiblefor the
observed decrements in performance.
Ratcliff et al. applied the diffusion model for simple two-choice decisions to data from a signal detection
task for college-age subjects and for older subjects (ages,
60–75 years). In the diffusion model, a decision is made
when information accumulated over time from a stimulus
reaches one or the other of two response criteria (representing the two-choicesavailableto the subject). Increases
in mean RT can come about from changes in the response
criteria, changes in the amount of information available
per unit time from the stimulus, and/or changes in components of responding outside the decision process (nondecision components—e.g., stimulus encoding, response
execution). Which possibility is responsible for mean RT
increases in any given set of data is determined by fitting
the model to correct and error RT distributionsand accuracy rates. Fitting all of these dependent variables simultaneously makes the model highly constrained .
For the signal detection task they investigated, Ratcliff
et al. found the usual slowing of RTs for older subjects relative to young subjects, coupled with approximately equal accuracy rates for the two groups. The diffusion model explained the longer RTs of the older subjects
as a combination of a 50-msec increase in nondecision
componentsof processingand more conservativeresponse
criteria. The rate of accumulationof informationover time
was the same for the older subjects as for the young. Thapar et al. (in press) also found the usual slowing of RTs for
older subjects with a masked-presentationletter discrimination task, and their older subjects were less accurate
than the young. The diffusion model showed the same effects as those with Ratcliff et al.’s signal detection
task—a 50-msec slowing of nondecision components of
RT and more conservativeresponsecriteria—butoldersubjects had a rate of accumulation of information that was
half that of the young subjects.
In this article, we present data for young and older subjects from a two-choice, masked-brightness discrimination task and show how age-related differences in performance in this task contrast with the age-relateddifferences
in letter discrimination found by Thapar et al. (in press).
We also show how the diffusion model explains this contrast and discuss how the model allows more insightfulinterpretations of aging effects than do earlier analyses—in
particular, Brinley plot analyses . The ap-
Copyright 2003 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
Preparation of this article was supportedby NIA Grant R01 AG17083,
NIMH Grants HD R37 MH44640 and HD K05-MH01891,and NIDCD
Grant R01-DC01240.Correspondenceconcerning this article shouldbe
addressed to R. Ratcliff, Department of Psychology,Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 (e-mail: ).
A diffusion model analysis of the effects of aging
on brightness discrimination
ROGER RATCLIFF
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
ANJALI THAPAR
Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania
GAIL MCKOON
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
The effects of aging on decision time were examined in a brightness discrimination experiment with
young and older subjects (ages, 60–75 years). Results showed that older subjects were slightly slower
than young subjects but just as accurate.Ratcliff’s diffusion model was fit to the data, and it provided a good account of response times, their distributions, and response accuracy. There was a 50msec slowing of the nondecision components of response time for older subjects relativeto young subjects, but response criteria settings and rates of accumulation of evidence from stimuli were roughly
equal for the two groups. These results are contrasted with those obtained from letter discrimination
and signal-detection-like tasks.
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
propriateness of Brinley analyses has been challenged recently on a variety of fronts , and for the data presented here, we
argue that the best interpretationof the effects of aging on
RT comes not from Brinley plot analyses, but from the
kind of comprehensive theoretical accounts that can be
provided by models like the diffusion model.
One significant property of the diffusion model is that
it providesan explanationof the full set of dependentvariables in two-choice tasks—that is, both RT and accuracy
data. In accommodating accuracy data as well as RT data,
the model allows theoretical linkage between paradigms
that use RT measures and those that use accuracy measures, such as threshold detection tasks. For example, if
older subjects show a decrement in threshold detection,
relative to young subjects, then in a two-choice version of
the same task, they should show a decrement in the rate of
accumulation of information from the stimulus, with the
size of the decrement predictable from the threshold detection data.
Without a model that relates RT and accuracy data, the
results from Ratcliff et al.’s signal detectionexperiments and Thapar et al.’s (in press) letter discrimination
experiments would present a puzzle. For example, consider the generalized slowing hypothesis,a prominent hypothesisthat has been widely accepted and attributesagerelated RT differences to a slowing with age in the speed
of all cognitive processes or in the speed of a general
mechanism that contributes to many cognitive processes
 .From the
point of view of this hypothesis, the fact that the increase
in mean RT for old subjects relative to young subjects is
about the same size in both Ratcliffet al.’s and Thapar et al.’s experiments would indicate that cognitive
processes are affected similarly by age in the two tasks.
But unlike the diffusion model, the hypothesis could not
explain why older and young subjects are about equally
accurate in the signal detection task, but not in the letter
discrimination task.
The diffusion model’s ability to integrate RT and accuracy data into a singletheoreticalaccountis highlightedin
the experiment presented in this article. From Thapar
et al.’s (in press) results, we know that older subjects are
slowed in two-choice, masked-letter discrimination. This
findingis consistentwith findingsin letter threshold identification tasks that show that letter identification accuracy decreases with age . Decreasing accuracy in letter identification
can be attributed to the declining contrast sensitivity for
high spatial frequenciesthat has been found for older subjects in experiments using sine-wave gratings .The diffusionmodel ties all of
these findings to a decrease, for older subjects, in the rate
of accumulation of information from high spatial frequency stimuli.
For low spatial frequency stimuli, it appears that there
is little effect of age on the accuracy of threshold identification performance .
If this is true, the diffusion model’s account of performance with high spatial frequency stimuli can be tested.
The prediction is that with low spatial frequency stimuli,
the rates of accumulation of information in a two-choice
task should be the same for older and young subjects.
Older subjects should differ from young subjects only in
other components of performance, such as nondecisional
processes or response criterionsettings.To implementthis
test of the diffusion model, we used two-choice maskedbrightness discrimination.
The stimuli in the experimentwere patchesof black and
white pixels. The subjects were asked to decide, for each
patch, whether it was dark or bright .
Brightness was implementedas the proportionof black to
white pixels in the patch. The brightness and duration of
the stimuli were manipulated to vary response accuracy
from near floor to near ceiling.Although the patcheshave
high spatial frequency information in them, the dark versus bright decision must be made on the basis of global
brightness (the information that would be obtainedby defocusing the eyes and judging a blurred patch). We expected that older subjects’ RTs would be longer than
young subjects’ and that the increase would come from
the nondecisionalcomponentsof processingand, perhaps,
response criteria settings. But because the required discriminationis based on low spatial frequency information,
there should be no decrement in the rate of accumulation
of information for the older subjects.Furthermore, if there
is no decrement in the rate of accumulation of information, then (as will be explained below) there should be a
difference in performance between older and young subjects in RTs, but not in accuracy.
THE DIFFUSION MODEL
The diffusion model is designed to apply only to twochoice decisions that are relatively fast and composed of
a single-stagedecisionprocess (as opposedto the multiplestage decision processes that might be involved in, e.g.,
reasoning or problem-solving tasks). As a rule of thumb,
the model would not be applied to experiments in which
mean RTs are much longer than about 1–1.5 sec. Other
models in the same class as the diffusion model have been
applied to decision making and simple
RT .
The diffusion model assumes that decisions are made
by a noisy process that accumulatesinformation over time
from a starting point toward one of two response criteria
or boundaries,as in Figure 1, where the starting pointis labeled z and the boundaries are labeled a and 0. When one
of the boundaries is reached, a response is initiated. The
rate of accumulation of information is called the drift rate
EFFECTS OF AGING ON BRIGHTNESS DISCRIMINATION
(v), and it is determined by the quality of the information
extracted from the stimulus. For example, if a “bright”
stimulus was displayed for a long time prior to masking,
information qualitywould be good, and the mean value of
the drift rate toward the bright boundary would be large.
Within each trial, there is noise (variability)in the process
of accumulating information, so that processes with the
same mean drift rate do not always terminate at the same
time (producing RT distributions) and do not always terminate at the same boundary (producing errors). This
source of variabilityis called within-trial variability.Panel
A in Figure 1 shows three processes, all with the same
mean drift rate toward the top boundary (shown by the
arrow labeledDrift Rate). One terminatesquicklyat thecorrect boundary, another terminates more slowly, and the
third terminates at the incorrect boundary.
In the experiment presented in this article, the subjects
were instructed to respond as quickly as possible in some
blocks of trials and to respond as accurately as possible in
other blocks.Speed–accuracy tradeoffs are modeledby alteringtheboundariesof thedecisionprocess: Wider boundaries require more information before a decision can be
made, and this leads to more accurate and slower responses. The dashed lines in panel A of Figure 1 show narrow boundaries.With these boundaries,the processes terminate at the pointslabeled T, one with a correct response
and the other two with error responses.
Empirical RT distributions are positively skewed. The
diffusion model naturally predicts this shape by simple
geometry, as is shown in panel B of Figure 1. Moving
from left to right in the figure, equal size decreases in the
rate of approach to the boundary (the X values, shown by
the arrows) for the fastest processes lead to increases in response time smaller than those for the slowest processes
(shown by the Y and Z values, respectively).
Accounting for differences in RT between correct and
error responses has longbeen a problem ,
but in the diffusion model, the relative speeds of correct
and error responses can be explained by assuming variability in components of processing across trials. Variability in drift rate across trials leads to slow error responses, and variabilityin starting pointleads to fast error
responses . The points
marked T represent the terminating points when the boundary positions are
at the dotted lines. Panel B represents how distribution shape changes when
drift rate changes by an amount X. The fastest responses slow by Y, and the
slowest responses slow by Z, leading to a small shift in the leading edge of the
distribution and a larger change in the tail, leading to increased skew.
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
execution.These are combined in the diffusion model into
one parameter, Ter (which is not shown in Figure 1). Like
drift rate and starting point, Ter has variability across trials . Because the standard deviation in the
distribution of Ter is typically less than one quarter the
standarddeviationin thedecision process,the combination
of the two (their convolution) alters neither the shape of
the RT distribution nor the standard deviation for the distributionthat
is predicted from the decision process. For example,if the
standard deviation in Ter is 25 msec and the standard deviationin thedecisionprocessis 100msec, the combination
(square root of the sum of squares) is 103 msec. Variability
in Ter stretches out the leading edge of the RT distribution,
stretching the difference between the .1 and the .3 quantiles (by typicallyless than 10% of the range, st, of the uniform distribution assumed for variability in Ter).
In sum, the parameters of the diffusion model correspond to the components of the decision process as follows: z is the starting point of the accumulation of evidence, a is the upper boundary, and the lower boundary is
set to 0. For the fits of the model to the data described in
this article, the boundarieswere assumed to be symmetric
about the starting point, so that z = a/2. The amount of
variabilityin the mean drift rate across trials is assumed to
be normally distributed with a standard deviation of h,
and the variability in starting point is assumed to have a
uniform distribution with a range of sz. For each stimulus
condition in an experiment, it is assumed that the rate of
accumulation of evidence is different, and so each has a
different value of drift, v. Within-trial variability in drift
rate (s) is a scaling parameter for the diffusion process
(i.e., if it were doubled, other parameters could be multiplied or dividedby two to produce exactly the same fits of
the model to data). Ter represents the nondecisionalcomponents of RT, and the amount of variability in Ter across
trials is assumed to have a uniform distribution with a
range of st.1
EXPERIMENT
On each trial of the experiment, a patch of pixels was
displayed on the screen and then masked. The duration
and brightness of the pixels was varied. A subject’s task
was to indicate whether the stimulus was dark or bright.
Speed blocks, for which the subjects were asked to respond as quickly as possible, alternated with accuracy
blocks, for which the subjects were instructed to respond
as accurately as possible. The aim was to determine how
fast older subjects can respond when they are encouraged
to go fast and how they compare under speed instructions
to young subjects asked to be accurate. Not only does the
speed–accuracy manipulation provide data for stringent
tests of the diffusion model, it also emphasizes that mean
RT is not a fixed characteristicof a subject; rather, it is adjustable in the same way as, for example, hit and false
alarm rates in signal detection.
Subjects. Thirty-six young adults (12 men and 24 women) and 35
older adults (15 men and 20 women) participated in the experiment.
The young adults were college students from Bryn Mawr, recruited
from fliers posted on campus, and were paid for their participation.
The older adults were healthy, active, community-dwelling individuals, 60–75 years of age, living in the suburbs of Philadelphia. The
older adults were recruited from advertisements placed in local
newspapers and were paid for their participation. The subjects had
to meet the following inclusion criteria to participate in the study: a
score of 26 or above on the Mini-Mental State Examination ; a score of 15 or less on the Center for Epidemologogical Studies–Depression Scale ; and no evidence of disturbances in consciousness,
medical or neurological disease causing cognitive impairment, head
injury with loss of consciousness, or current psychiatric disorder.
The means and standard deviations for standard background characteristics are presented in Table 1. The subjects’ static visual acuity was screened to ensure that all the subjects had a minimum corrected visual acuity of 20/30, using a Snellen “E” chart.
The subjects were tested individually for two, three, or four sessions; the number of sessions was the number required to produce
two sessions of stable data (i.e., data such that responses were not becoming significantly faster from session to session). The young subjects usually had stable performance in the first session, but the older
subjects took one or two sessions for performance to stabilize. Either
two or three sessions of data per subject were used in the data analysis and model fitting.
Stimuli. The stimuli were 64 3 64 arrays of black and white pixels on a gray background (the whole display was 320 3 200 pixels).
Brightness of the square was manipulated by varying the probability that a pixel was white. Four checkerboard patterns, each 64 3 64
pixels, were used to mask each stimulus; presented sequentially, they
were a checkerboard with 2 3 2 black and white squares, a checkerboard the same as the first but with the black and white squares reversed, a checkerboard with 3 3 3 black and white squares, and its
reverse. The checkerboards were designed by trial and error to mask
both smaller and larger random features of a stimulus that might
have remained visible through only one or two of the masks. The
smaller checkerboard seemed to eliminate the smaller random patterns in a stimulus, and the larger checkerboard seemed to eliminate
the larger random patterns. The stimulus and mask arrays measured
0.9 in. on each side on a display measuring about 10 3 8 in. The
subjects sat between 18 and 24 in. from the display.
Apparatus. The stimuli were presented on a Pentium II class machine, and the responses were collected from buttonpresses on the
computer’s keyboard—the / key for a bright response and the z key
for a dark response.
Procedure. There were six levels of brightness, achieved with six
values for the probability of a pixel’s being white: .350, .425, .475,
.525, .575, and .650. These were crossed with three stimulus durations—50, 100, and 150 msec.
Subject Characteristics
Older adults
Young adults
Years of education
Vocabulary
Picture completion
IQ estimate
Note—MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination.
EFFECTS OF AGING ON BRIGHTNESS DISCRIMINATION
Each trial began with a 1 sign fixation point presented on a gray
background for 250 msec. Then the stimulus was displayed, followed by the four checkerboard masks displayed for 17 msec each.
Then a gray background was presented until a response was made.
In accuracy blocks, if a response was correct, there was a 500-msec
pause and then the next trial; if a response was incorrect, the word
ERROR was displayed for 300 msec and then erased, and then there
was a 500-msec pause before the next trial. In speed blocks, there was
no accuracy feedback. If a response was shorter than 250 msec, the
message TOO FAST was displayed for 1,500 msec (to discourage the
subjects from simply making rapid random responses to finish the
experiment quickly); if a response was longer than 700 msec, TOO
SLOW was displayed for 300 msec. Then there was a 500-msec pause
before the next trial.
In each session, there were five blocks of accuracy trials alternating with five blocks of speed trials, with 144 trials per block presented in random order. There were a total of 40 trials for each
brightness, duration, and speed versus accuracy condition in each
In accuracy blocks, the subjects were instructed to respond accurately. In the speed blocks, the subjects were instructed to respond
quickly, using the TOO SLOW message as a guide to when they were
responding too slowly.
In the data analyses, RTs shorter than 250 msec and
longer than 3,000 msec were eliminated for the young
subjects (less than 0.6% of the data), and RTs shorter than
280 msec and longer than 3,500 msec were eliminatedfor
the older subjects(less than 0.3% of the data). Further discussion of outliersand contaminantsis given below in the
section on fitting the diffusion model to the data. At a
minimum, there were 2,600 observations per subject.
Brinley plots. As was mentionedin the introduction,a
standard procedure in aging research is to construct Brinley plots of the data. Older subjects’ mean RTs for each
experimental condition are plotted against young subjects’ mean RTs for the same conditions. Although Brinley plots can be produced from changes in any of several
components in the diffusion model, we present the plots
here for the data from our experiment to show that our results are consistent with the approximately linear functions obtainedin other studies. Figure 2 shows three fitted
straight lines, one for the data from speed blocks, one for
the data from accuracy blocks, and one for the speed and
accuracy blocks combined. The points on each function
are the points for the 18 experimental conditions (with
bright responses to bright stimuli grouped with dark responses to dark stimuli). For the speed blocks, the slope
was 1.24 (intercept,84 msec); for the accuracy blocks,the
slope was 0.82 (intercept, 107 msec); and for the combined data, the slope was 0.72 (intercept, 179 msec). The
fact that the slope varies according to whether all or part
of the data are plotted illustrates one of the problems with
interpretationsbased on Brinley plots: It would not be expected that the amount of cognitiveslowing for older subjects, relativeto young ones, would dependon whether experimentaldata for speed and accuracy blocksof trials are
plotted separately or combined. However, what is most
Figure 2. Brinley plots for correct response times (RTs) for the experiment. The points on the graph represent the same conditions for older
and youngsubjects. Straight lines are fitted for speed and accuracy conditions separately and for the conditions combined. Error bars are two
standard errors in mean RT.
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
surprising is that the slope is less than one for both the accuracy conditionand the combined data; usually, the slope
is greater than one.
The data pointshave2 standarderror bars plottedaround
them. For the speed plot and the accuracy plot,the straight
lines fall within the error bars (or ellipses that could be
drawn around them) for all but 3 or 4 out of 36 data points.
In other words, the straight lines provide reasonably good
descriptionsof the data. However, when the speed and accuracy data are combined,the straightline misses the confidence ellipses for about 10 data points, indicating that
the straight line does not provide an adequate description
of the data. Although standard error bars are usually not
presented for Brinley plots, the data in Figure 2 illustrate
why they shouldbe: In many cases in which data from different experiments or conditions are combined, a straight
line may not provide a good fit to the data .
Accuracy. Figure 3 shows plots of the probabilityof a
bright response as a function of six levels of brightness
and three stimulus presentationtimes for older and young
subjects for the speed and the accuracy conditions.At the
short stimulus duration, there is a bias toward responding
bright, and at the longstimulusduration,there is a bias toward respondingdark .If there were no
bias, the three functions would pass through the cross
hairs in the middle of the figure. The bias probably occurred because the neutral gray backgroundwas perceived
as dark, as compared with the white in the stimulus, at the
shortest stimulusduration.As will be seen below, this bias
is treated exactly the same way in the diffusion model as
bias is treated in signal detection theory, with a criterion
on drift rate . For each
stimulus presentation duration, response probability for
the two brightest stimuli is about the same, and the effect
of stimulus duration shows up for the darker stimuli.
Quantile probability functions. Quantitativemodels
are needed to provide a complete explanation of processing in this task—that is, to account for all aspects of the
experimental data. A model that deals only with correct
mean RT is incomplete, since it cannot account for accuracy rates, error RTs, or the shapes of RT distributions.If
a model for mean RTs only were extended, it would almost certainly make incorrect predictions.In contrast, the
diffusion model provides an account of all the dependent
variables in the decision process—correct and error RTs,
Figure 3. Probability of a bright response as a function of brightness of the stimulus for
three stimulus durationsand speed and accuracy conditions.The data are averaged over subjects.
EFFECTS OF AGING ON BRIGHTNESS DISCRIMINATION
their distributions,and accuracy rates. To fully test the diffusion model, it is fit simultaneously to all these aspects
of the data, which are plottedas quantileprobabilityfunctions (Figures 4 and 5).
In quantileprobabilityfunctions, response probabilities
are shown on the x-axis, and quantile RTs are plotted vertically on the y-axis. For each conditionof the experiment
reported here, the .1, .3, .5 (median), .7, and .9 RT quantiles are plotted for both error responses and correct responses in Figures 4 and 5. The x s and o s are data points
(the x s for the .1, .5, .9 quantiles and the o s for the .3 and
.7 quantiles), and the lines are the best-fitting functions
from the diffusion model, discussed below.
There were 36 conditionsin the experiment: 3 stimulus
duration conditions,6 brightness conditions, and 2 speed
and accuracy conditions.Responses for the bright and the
dark stimuliwere combined because theirquantilesfell on
the same function. For each of the 36 conditions,there are
two probabilities:the probabilityof a correct response and
the probability of an error (which equals 1 2 the probability of a correct response). The subjects were generally
above .5 in accuracy, and so the responses plotted on the
right hand side of the quantile probability function are
correct responses; the responses plotted on the left are errors. The function traces out the difficulty of the condi-
Figure 4. Quantile probability plots for older subjects. The
lines represent the theoretical fits of the diffusion model, and the
x s and o s represent the data (vertically adjacent quantiles alternate with x and o symbols). The lines in order from the bottom to
the top are for the .1, .3, .5, .7, and .9 quantile response times
(RTs). Correct responses are to the right of the .5 response probability point, and the corresponding error responses are to the
left; if the correct response probability is p, the error response
probability is 1 2 p. Extreme errors (with a probability of less
than about .2) are not represented because a sizable proportion
of the subjects had fewer than five responses in these extreme
conditions (five RTs are needed to compute five quantile RTs).
Figure 5. Quantile probability plots for young subjects. The
lines represent the theoretical fits of the diffusion model, and the
x s and o s represent the data (vertically adjacent quantiles alternate with x and o symbols). The lines in order from the bottom to
the top are for the .1, .3, .5, .7, and .9 quantile response times
(RTs). Correct responses are to the right of the .5 response probability point, and the corresponding error responses are to the
left; if the correct response probability is p, the error response
probability is 1 2 p. Extreme errors (with a probability of less
than about .2) are not represented because a sizable proportion
of the subjects had fewer than five responses in these extreme
conditions (five RTs are needed to compute five quantile RTs).
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
tions: The easiest conditions are those with the most extreme left and right hand quantiles—that is, the quantiles
with the highest probability of a correct response and the
lowest probability of an error. As an example, the condition with high brightness, medium duration,and accuracy
instructions has a probabilitycorrect of .875 and an error
probability of .125.
For each of the conditions,there are about 3,600 observations for correct and error responses combined.For example, for a condition in which accuracy was .8, there
were about 2,880 observations for correct responses and
720 for error responses, about 80 correct and 20 error responses per subject on average. However, the subjectsvaried considerablyin their accuracy,and for the easiest conditions, some subjects’ accuracy was above .95, so that
they had fewer than five errors, which means that they did
not have the five RTs needed to plot the error quantile
probabilityfunction. For this reason, quantile RTs are not
plotted for errors for the easiest conditions(between three
and seven quantiles are not plotted for the four plots in
Figures 4 and 5).
The quantileprobabilityfunction gives a summary picture of the data, including the shapes of the RT distributions.For both olderand young subjects, RT increases and
accuracy decreases as difficulty increases (i.e., as stimulus duration and brightness decrease), although the
changes are smaller with speed than with accuracy instructions. The overall shapes of the RT distributions are
about the same across all the conditions.The error RTs in
each condition are longer than the correct response RTs
for the same condition (as can be seen by comparing the
correct RTs for a condition on the right side of the function against the error RTs for the same condition on the
left side).
Responses are considerably faster with speed than with
accuracy instructions,as is shown in Figures 4 and 5 for all
quantileRTs. Responses are also more accurate with accuracy instructions,but the effect is small, between 0 and .05.
With accuracy instructions, for correct responses, the
RT distributionskews out as stimulusdifficulty increases.
Across the conditions,the .1 quantileRTs increase a little,
but the .9 quantiles increase much more, by as much as
300 msec. With speed instructions,the skewing is less apparent, with onlyabout100 msec of slowing in the.9 quantile for older subjects and a little less for young subjects.
Older subjects are slower than young subjects with
speed instructions, by about 50 msec, but with accuracy
instructions,they are aboutequally fast. If anything,the .1
quantile RTs are shorter for the young than for the older
subjects, whereas the .9 quantile RTs are longer for the
young. The older and young subjects were about equally
accurate in both the speed and the accuracy conditions.
To summarize, in order to fit the data, the diffusion
model has to produce moderately large changes in RT
with small changes in accuracy going from speed to accuracy instructions. Accuracy decreases as brightness becomes less extreme and stimulus duration becomes
smaller, and RT distributionshave to be right skewed, with
the spread in the tail greater for longer RTs, but with little
change in the .1 quantile RT. The small changes in accuracy suggestthat there may be littleeffect of aging on drift
rates because accuracy values determine drift rates to a
large degree. Because RTs are longer for older subjectsin
the speed condition,but not in the accuracy condition,the
model fits may show that older subjects use more conservative criteria settings with speed instructions, but not
with accuracy instructions.
DIFFUSION MODEL FITS
The diffusion model was fit to the data by minimizing
a chi-square value with a general SIMPLEX minimization
routinethat adjusts the parameters of the model to find the
parameters that give the minimum chi-square value. The
data entered into the minimizationroutine for each experimental condition were the RTs for each of the five quantiles for correct and error responses and the accuracy values. The quantile RTs were fed into the diffusion model,
and for each quantile, the cumulative probability of a responseby that pointin timewas generatedfrom the model.
Subtracting the cumulative probabilities for each successive quantile from the next higher quantile gives the proportion of responses between each quantile. For the chisquare computation, these are the expected values, to be
compared with the observed proportionsof responses between the quantiles (multiplied by the number of observations). The observed proportions of responses for each
quantile are the proportions of the distribution between
successive quantiles (i.e., the proportions between 0, .1,
.3, .5, .7, .9, and 1.0 are .1, .2, .2, .2, .2, and .1) multiplied
by the probability correct for correct response distributions or the probabilityof error for error response distributions (in both cases, multiplied by the number of observations).Summing over (observed 2 expected)2/expected
for all conditions gives a single chi-square value to be
minimized .
Short outliers were trimmed out by choosing a time
(250 msec for young subjects and 280 msec for older subjects) at which accuracy began to rise above chance and long outliers (RTs longer than
3,000 msec for young subjects and 3,500 msec for older
subjects) were also eliminated from the analyses. Ratcliff
and Tuerlinckx modeled remaining contaminant
RTs by assuming that they arose from a random delay
added to the normal decision process. The delay was assumed to vary uniformly between the minimum and the
maximum RTs in the condition, and there was a common
probability of a contaminant across all conditions. This
adds one additionalparameter to the diffusion model ( po)
to represent the probability of a contaminant in each condition of the experiment. In the fits presented next, po was
typically.01 or less, and so contaminantsplayedlittlerole.
For the fits presented here, five parameters were held
constant across the 18 stimulus duration and brightness
conditionsand the speed versus accuracy instructions:po,
Ter, st, sz, and h (probability of a contaminant, nondecision componentof RT, and across-trial variabilitiesin Ter,
EFFECTS OF AGING ON BRIGHTNESS DISCRIMINATION
z, and drift rate, respectively).Holding these five parameters constant reflects the assumption that neither speed
versus accuracy instructions nor the quality of the information from the stimulusaffects any of these components
of the decision process. The separation of the boundaries
was assumed to be affected by the speed/accuracy manipulation, but not by brightness or stimulus duration (because it was assumed that subjects could not identify the
stimulus duration or brightness in time to adjust criteria
before making their decision). The drift rate was assumed
to be affected by duration and brightness,but not by speed/
accuracy instructions. Changes in drift rate move points
along the quantileprobabilityfunction but do not alter the
shape of the function.
To reduce the number of parameters, we set the drift
rates for complementary bright and dark stimuli to be
complements of each other (e.g., bright drift rate equals
minus dark drift rate). However, individual subjects were
often biased on the brightness dimension (see Figure 3),
and so we added a drift criterion for each stimulus duration . The
criterion value was added to the drift rate for all brightness values.
With these restrictions on parameters, the model must
account for accuracy rates, the relative speeds of correct
and error responses, and the shapes of the RT distributions. Specifically, with only boundary separation varying, the model must account for the small changes in accuracy and the large changes in RT between the speed and
the accuracy conditions. With only drift rate varying, the
model must account for the changes in accuracy and RT
distributionshape for both errors and correct responses as
a function of brightness and stimulus duration.
We fit the diffusion model to the data in two ways. First,
each subject’s data were fit individually, and the parameter values were averaged across subjects. The means and
standard deviations for each of the parameters are shown
in Tables 2 and 3. Standard errors in the parameter values
(for significance tests) can be found by dividing the standard deviations by the square root of the number of subjects. Second, we fit the model to the data averaged over
all the subjects in a group (older vs. young subjects).
These fits were used as the basis for the predictions displayed in Figures 4 and 5 (the solid lines). Group data have
often been used in the fitting of models, and the assumption (usually implicit) is that the fits and parameter values
for the group data will turn out to be the same as the averages from the fits for the individualsubjects. We provide
both for comparison. The parameter values obtainedfrom
the group data and the average parametervalues across individuals are within two standard errors of each other for
all parameters (see Tables 2 and 3). Also, the parameter
Drift Rates for Fits of the Diffusion Model
Young Fit to
Young Means
Old Fit to
Brightness
Flash Time (msec)
Average Data
Over Subjects
Average Data
Over Subjects
.350 & .650
.425 & .575
.475 & .525
.350 & .650
.425 & .575
.475 & .525
.350 & .650
.425 & .575
.475 & .525
Bias (add to drift
rates above)
Note—Standard deviations are .10 when drift rate is .35, .07 when drift rate is .25, and .05 when drift rate is
.10. Drift rates are within 4% of each other for old and young for means over subjects (old are 4% higher than
young) and within 1% for fits to average data. A single correlation of plus or minus .33 would be significant
at a .05 level.
Parameters for Fits of the Diffusion Model
Young fit to average data
Young average parameters
Young SDs in parameters
Old fit to average data
Old average parameters
Old SDs in parameters
Note— as, boundaryseparation for speed condition;aa, boundaryseparation for accuracy condition; Ter, nondecision component of response time; h, standard deviation in drift across trials; sz, range of the distribution of starting point (z); po, proportion of contaminants; and st,
range of the distribution of nondecision times.
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
values are in the same ranges as the parameter values from
other experiments .
The fits (Figures 4 and 5) show that the model captures
the changes in RT and accuracy as a function of stimulus
duration, brightness, and speed versus accuracy instructions for both correct and error responses, as well as the
overall differences between the older and the young subjects. The only noticeable misses are for the .9 quantile
RTs with accuracy instructions .If subjectswere to truncatetheir
responses after 1.5–2 sec of processing on some proportion of the trials, the discrepancy in the .9 quantile in the
accuracy condition would be reduced or eliminated. This
might happen if the decision boundaries were reduced as
processingtime increased or if the
subjectssimply truncated processingafter some long variable time.
Analysis of the parameter estimates showed that the
older subjectsdiffered from the youngsubjectsin onlyone
way. The value of Ter was larger for older subjects than for
young subjects by about 40–50 msec [t(69) 5 4.93; this
was computed from the values of Ter for the fits to the individual subjects]. This increase in Ter for older subjects
relative to young subjects is about the same size increase
in Ter as that found by Ratcliff et al. and Thapar
et al. (in press). Drift rates and boundary separations for
both the speed and the accuracy conditions were not significantly different between older and young subjects.
Thus, the older subjectswere obtainingstimulusinformation from the display at the same rate as the young subjects, and they were setting the same decision criteria as
the young subjects.
We computed chi-square values for each subject in the
process of fitting the model to data, and the mean values
and SDs were x 2 5 951, SD 5 408, for young subjects
(average numberof observations5 4,735per subject) and
x2 5 680, SD 5 320, for older subjects (average number
of observations 5 3,275 per subject). But as was noted in
Ratcliff , the diffusion model is much more constrained than might be expected from the number of parameters used in fitting. First, the nine drift rates and the
three drift criterion parameters determine position along
the x-axis of the quantileprobabilityfunction.They do not
influence the shapes of the quantileprobabilityfunctions.
Second, the value of Ter locates only the vertical positions
of the quantile probability functions; it does not also influence their shape. Third, the estimate of the proportion
of contaminant responses ( po) is usually less than or near
to .01 and has no effect on the predicted quantile probability functions relative to the case in which it is zero.
Fourth, although variability in Ter (st) allows the .1 quantile response times to be more variable and more in line
with the observed variability, its only effect on quantile
RTs is a less than 7-msec increase in the difference between the .1 and the .3 quantileRTs. Fifth, the shape of the
quantile probability functions is determined only by the
parameters h (standard deviation in drift across trials), sz
(range of starting point across trials), and the values of
boundary separation (a), one value for the speed conditions and one for the accuracy conditions. All the parameters except a were held constant across the speed and
the accuracy data. Thus, the shape and location of the
quantile probability functions are determined by only
three parameters, with only one of them different for
speed versus accuracy instructions.
Correlations between data and parameters across
subjects. Figure 6 and Table 4 show scatterplots and correlationsacross subjectsfor mean values of accuracy, correct RTs, .1 quantileRTs for correct responses, error RTs,
and the parameters of the diffusion model—the mean values of boundary separations, the nondecisional components of RT, and drift rates. The means for the data were
averagedacross all brightness,stimulusduration,and speed
and accuracy conditions.The means for boundary separation and drift rate were computed by averaging across all
conditions(after first checkingthat the two boundary separations for speed and accuracy instructions behaved in
the same ways across subjects and that the nine drift rates
behaved in the same ways across subjects).
For the empirical measures, correct and error RTs are
highly correlated, and both are slightly less correlated
with .1 quantile RTs for correct responses. The correlation between accuracy and the RT measures is close to
zero, indicating that a subject’s accuracy level does not
predict his/her RTs.
There is only one correlation of note among the model
parameters, a moderate negativecorrelation between drift
rate and boundary separation, but inspection of the scatterplot in Figure 6 suggests that it is not particularly
strong. All the other correlations are small.
There are a numberof strongcorrelationsbetween model
parameters and empirical measures. First, there are strong
correlations between boundary separation and the RT
measures. This means that conservativeboundary settings
are reflected in longRTs. However, the correlationbetween
boundaryseparationand accuracy is close to zero. Second,
there is a moderately high correlation between drift rate
and accuracy, which means that low accuracy reflects a
low drift rate—that is, a slow rate of evidence accumulation. Third, there is a moderately high negativecorrelation
between drift rate and correct RTs, which means that
slower subjectstend to have lower drift rates. Fourth, there
is a strong correlation between the nondecisional component of RT and the .1 quantile RT and a lower correlation
between the nondecisional component of RT and RTs.
The only correlation of any note that is not displayedin
Table 4 or Figure 6 is the one between standard deviation
in drift across trials (h) and accuracy, a value of 2.57.
This indicates that accurate subjects tend to have small
standard deviations in drift across trials.
The most concisesummary of theseresults is that,across
subjects, accuracy tends to be associated with drift rate
and RTs tend to be associated with boundary separation
and the nondecisionalcomponent of RT, although the latter two are not associated.This suggeststhat accuracy and
EFFECTS OF AGING ON BRIGHTNESS DISCRIMINATION
RT values are determined by different factors in the diffusion model. If a subject is accurate relative to other subjects, the subject’s drift rates are higher than those for the
other subjects,whereas if a subjectis faster than other subjects, the subject’s boundary separations are smaller than
those for the other subjects.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The results from this study are remarkable. Older subjects perform just as well as young subjects in all aspects
of performance in brightness discrimination, except that
processes other than those directly involved in the decision take 40–50 msec longer. There was no deficit in the
rate of extraction of information from the stimuli (drift
rates) for the older subjects, and they were not more conservative in their criteria settings.
These results have some similarity to those obtainedby
Ratcliff et al. in a signal detection-like task. Ratcliff et al. found a 40- to 50-msec difference in the
nondecision component of RT between older and young
subjects and no deficit in drift rate. However, in contrast
to the present study, they also found that older subjects
adopted more conservative decision criteria than did
young subjects in both speed and accuracy conditions.
The present study contrasts in two ways to Thapar
et al.’s (in press) study, in which masked letter discrimination was examined. Although Thapar et al. found about
the same difference in nondecision components of RT,
they found both more conservative decision criteria for
older subjects than for young subjects and a deficit in the
rate of accumulation of evidence for older subjects, as
compared with young subjects.The difference in results is
surprising at a cursory level because masked-letter discrimination and masked brightness discrimination are
similar perceptualtasks. However, as was discussed in the
introduction, the perceptual literature 
provides evidence that with stimuli with high spatial fre-
Figure 6. Scatterplots of accuracy, mean correct response time (RT), .1 quantile RT for correct responses, mean
error RT, and, from fits of the diffusion model to the data, mean boundary separation (average of speed and accuracy settings), mean value of the nondecisional component of RT, and mean value of drift across conditions for
all subjects (young and old) in the experiment.
RATCLIFF, THAPAR, AND MCKOON
quencies,such as letters, older adultshave deficits in identification, relative to young subjects, whereas with low
spatial frequency stimuli, such as the stimuli in this experiment, there are no deficits as a function of aging for
our age range (deficits appear in 75- to 90-year-olds).
Thus, application of the diffusion model to the data from
this experimentand Thapar et al.’s experiment providesan
account of the effects of aging on two different perceptual
tasks that is highly consistent with the perceptual literature. In particular, the drift rate in the diffusion model,
which represents the accumulation of evidence from the
stimulus, shows the same effect of aging as that obtained
from other paradigmsthat use onlyaccuracy, not RT, measures. The diffusion model is a model of the decision
process, and so it is able to identify a deficit in the quality
of evidence presented by the visual-processing system to
the decision process, but it is not able to identify where in
visual processing the deficit occurs.
As the diffusion model is applied to a variety of tasks,
patterns of results are becoming apparent that allow rates
of extraction of information from stimuli (as represented
by drift rates in the model) to be decoupled from nondecision components of RT and from criterion effects (just
as signalstrengthis decoupledfrom criterion in signal detection theory). Instead of a monolithic account of processing speed solely in terms of mean correct RT, as has
been popularin the general slowing approachto aging,we
have a componential account in terms of information extracted from the stimulus and subject-adjustabledecision
criteria, an account that encompasses correct and error
RTs, their distributions, and accuracy. The three studies
conductedso far—this one, Ratcliffet al. , and Thapar et al. (in press)—also indicate that the measure of information extraction (drift rate) matches well with results
obtained using other measures, such as accuracy or
threshold values.Finally,the good fits of the model add to
a growing bodyof results that supportthe diffusion model
as an explanation of two-choice decision processes and
provide evidence of the generalityof the model across experimental paradigms.