Object Region Mining with Adversarial Erasing: A Simple Classiﬁcation to
Semantic Segmentation Approach
Yunchao Wei1
Jiashi Feng1
Xiaodan Liang2
Ming-Ming Cheng3
Yao Zhao 4
Shuicheng Yan1,5
1 National University of Singapore
3 Nankai University
4 Beijing Jiaotong University
5 360 AI Institute
{eleweiyv, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg
 
 
 
 
We investigate a principle way to progressively mine discriminative object regions using classiﬁcation networks to
address the weakly-supervised semantic segmentation problems. Classiﬁcation networks are only responsive to small
and sparse discriminative regions from the object of interest, which deviates from the requirement of the segmentation task that needs to localize dense, interior and integral
regions for pixel-wise inference. To mitigate this gap, we
propose a new adversarial erasing approach for localizing
and expanding object regions progressively. Starting with
a single small object region, our proposed approach drives
the classiﬁcation network to sequentially discover new and
complement object regions by erasing the current mined regions in an adversarial manner. These localized regions
eventually constitute a dense and complete object region
for learning semantic segmentation. To further enhance the
quality of the discovered regions by adversarial erasing, an
online prohibitive segmentation learning approach is developed to collaborate with adversarial erasing by providing
auxiliary segmentation supervision modulated by the more
reliable classiﬁcation scores. Despite its apparent simplicity, the proposed approach achieves 55.0% and 55.7% mean
Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) scores on PASCAL VOC
2012 val and test sets, which are the new state-of-the-arts.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success on semantic segmentation tasks ,
arguably beneﬁting from available resources of pixel-level
annotated masks. However, collecting a large amount of accurate pixel-level annotation for training semantic segmentation networks on new image sets is labor intensive and
inevitably requires substantial ﬁnancial investments. To relieve the demand for the expensive pixel-level image annotations, weakly-supervised approaches provide some promising solutions.
Among various levels of weak supervision information,
the simplest and most efﬁcient one that can be collected for
Classification
Object Region Mining with Adversarial Erasing
Classification
Classification
Object Region
Object Region
Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the proposed AE approach. With AE,
a classiﬁcation network ﬁrst mines the most discriminative region
for image category label “dog”. Then, AE erases the mined region
(head) from the image and the classiﬁcation network is re-trained
to discover a new object region (body) for performing classiﬁcation without performance drop. We repeat such adversarial erasing process for multiple times and merge the erased regions into
an integral foreground segmentation mask. (b) Examples of the
discriminative object regions mined by AE at different steps and
the obtained foreground segmentation masks in the end.
training semantic segmentation models is the image-level
annotation . However, to train a well-performing
semantic segmentation model given only such image-level
annotation is rather challenging – one obstacle is how to
accurately assign image-level labels to corresponding pixels of training images such that DNN-based approaches
can learn to segment images end-to-end. To establish the
desired label-pixel correspondence, some approaches are
developed that can be categorized as proposal-based and
classiﬁcation-based. The proposal-based methods 
often exhaustedly examine each proposal to generate pixelwise masks, which are quite time-consuming. In contrast,
 
the classiﬁcation-based methods provide
much more efﬁcient alternatives. Those methods employ
a classiﬁcation model to select the regions that are most
discriminative for the classiﬁcation target and employ the
regions as pixel-level supervision for semantic segmentation learning. However, object classiﬁcation models usually
identify and rely on a small and sparse discriminative region
(as highlighted in the heatmaps produced by the classiﬁcation network shown in Figure 1 (a)) from the object of interest. It deviates from requirement of the segmentation task
that needs to localize dense, interior and integral regions
for pixel-wise inference. Such deviation makes the main
obstacle to adapting classiﬁcation models for solving segmentation problems and harms the segmentation results. To
address this issue, we propose a novel adversarial erasing
(AE) approach that is able to drive a classiﬁcation network
to learn integral object regions progressively. The AE approach can be viewed as establishing a line of competitors,
trying to challenge the classiﬁcation networks to discover
some evidence of a speciﬁc category until no supportable
evidence is left.
Concretely, we ﬁrst train an image classiﬁcation network
using the image-level weak supervision information, i.e. the
object category annotation. The classiﬁcation network is
applied to localize the most discriminative region within an
image for inferring the object category. We then erase the
discovered region from the image to breakdown the performance of the classiﬁcation network. To remedy the performance drop, the classiﬁcation network needs to localize
another discriminative region for classifying the image correctly. With such repetitive adversarial erasing operation,
the classiﬁcation network is able to mine other discriminative regions belonging to the object of interest. The process
is illustrated by an example in Figure 1 (a), in which head
is the most discriminative part for classifying the “dog” image. After erasing head and re-training the classiﬁcation
network, another discriminative part body would pop out.
Repeating such adversarial erasing can localize increasingly
discriminative regions diagnostic for image category until
no more informative region left.
Finally, the erased regions are merged to form a pixel-level semantic segmentation mask that can be used for training a segmentation
model. More visualization examples are shown in Figure 1
However, the AE approach may miss some objectrelated regions and introduce some noise due to less attention on boundaries. To exploit those ignored object-related
regions as well as alleviate noise, we further propose a complementary online prohibitive segmentation learning (PSL)
approach to work with AE together to discover more complete object regions and learn better semantic segmentation models. In particular, PSL uses the predicted imagelevel classiﬁcation conﬁdences to modulate the corresponding category-speciﬁc response maps and form them into an
auxiliary segmentation mask, which can be updated in an
online manner. Those category-speciﬁc segmentation maps
with low classiﬁcation conﬁdences are prohibited for contributing to the formed supervision mask, thus noise can be
reduced effectively.
To sum up, our main contributions are three-fold:
• We propose a new AE approach to effectively adapt an
image classiﬁcation network to continuously mining
and expanding target object regions, and it eventually
produces contiguous object segmentation masks that
are usable for training segmentation models.
• We propose an online PSL method to utilize imagelevel classiﬁcation conﬁdences to reduce noise within
the supervision mask and achieve better training of the
segmentation network, collaborating with AE.
• Our work achieves the mIoU 55.0% and 55.7% on val
and test of the PASCAL VOC segmentation benchmark respectively, which are the new state-of-the-arts.
2. Related Work
To reduce the burden of pixel-level annotation, various
weakly-supervised methods have been proposed for learning to perform semantic segmentation with coarser annotations. For example, Papandreou et al. and Dai et al. 
proposed to estimate segmentation using annotated bounding boxes. More recently, Lin et al. employed scribbles
as supervision for semantic segmentation. In , the required supervised information is further relaxed to instance
points. All these annotations can be considered much simpler than pixel-level annotation.
Some works propose to train the segmentation models by only using image-level labels, which
is the simplest supervision for training semantic segmentation models. Among those works, Pinheiro et al. 
and Pathak et al. proposed to utilize multiple instance
learning (MIL) to train the models for segmentation. Pathak
et al. introduced a constrained CNN model to address this problem.
Papandreou et al. adopted an
alternative training procedure based on the Expectation-
Maximization algorithm to dynamically predict semantic
foreground and background pixels. However, the performance of those methods is not satisfactory. Recently, some
new approaches are proposed to further improve the performance of this challenging task. In
particular, Wei et al. presented a simple to complex
learning method, in which an initial segmentation model is
trained with simple images using saliency maps for supervision. Then, samples of increasing complexity are progressively included to further enhance the ability of the segmentation model. In , three kinds of loss functions,
Classification
Classification Network
conv1 conv2
conv5 conv6 conv7
Object Regions Mining with Adversarial Erasing
Classification Model
Object Region
Figure 2. Overview of the proposed adversarial erasing approach. At the step t, we ﬁrst train the classiﬁcation network with the current
processed image It; then a classiﬁcation activation method (e.g. CAM ) is employed to produce the class-speciﬁc response heatmap
(Ht). Applying hard thresholding on the heatmap Ht reveals the discriminative region Ft. The proposed approach then erases Ft from It
and produces It+1. This image is then fed into the classiﬁcation network for learning to localize a new discriminative region. The learned
heatmaps and corresponding proceeded training images with erasing are shown in the bottom. The mined regions from multiple steps
together constitute the predicted object regions as output, which is used for training the segmentation network later.
i.e. seeding, expansion and constrain-to-boundary, are proposed and integrated into a uniﬁed framework to train the
segmentation network. Both and our work propose
to localize object cues according to classiﬁcation networks.
However, Kolesnikov et al. can only obtain small and
sparse object-related seeds for supervision. In contrast, the
proposed AE approach is able to mine dense object-related
regions, which can provide richer supervised information
for learning to perform semantic segmentation. In addition,
Qi et al. proposed an augmented feedback method, in
which GrabCut and object proposals are employed to
generate pixel-level annotations for supervision. To the best
of our knowledge, Qi et al. achieved the state-of-theart mIoU scores using Selective Search (52.7%) and
MCG (55.5%) segmentation proposals on the PASCAL
VOC benchmark. However, note that MCG has been trained
from PASCAL train images with pixel-level annotations,
and thus the corresponding results of are obtained by
using stronger supervision inherently.
3. Classiﬁcation to Semantic Segmentation
The proposed classiﬁcation to semantic segmentation approach includes two novel components, i.e. object region
mining with AE and online PSL for semantic segmentation.
3.1. Object Region Mining with AE
To address the problem that classiﬁcation networks are
only responsive to small and sparse discriminative regions,
we propose the AE approach for localizing and expanding
object regions progressively.
As shown in Figure 2, the
AE iteratively performs two operations: learning a classi-
ﬁcation network for localizing the object discriminative regions and adversarially erasing the discovered regions. In
particular, the classiﬁcation network is initialized based on
the DeepLab-CRF-LargeFOV model. Global average
pooling is applied on conv7 and the generated representations pass through a fully-connected layer for predicting
classiﬁcation. In the ﬁrst operation, we train the classiﬁcation network by minimizing squared label prediction loss
as suggested by . In the second operation of performing erasing, we ﬁrst produce the heatmap for each imagelevel label using the classiﬁcation activation maps (CAM)
method . Then, the discriminative object regions are
obtained by applying a hard threshold to the heatmap. We
erase the mined region from training images by replacing its
internal pixels by the mean pixel values of all the training
images. The processed image with erased regions is then
fed into the next classiﬁcation learning iteration. As the discriminative regions have been removed and no longer contribute to the classiﬁcation prediction, the classiﬁcation network is naturally driven to discover new object discriminative regions for maintaining its classiﬁcation accuracy level.
We repeat the classiﬁcation learning and the AE process for
several times until the network cannot well converge on the
produced training images, i.e. no more discriminative regions left for performing reasonably good classiﬁcation.
We now explain the AE process more formally. Suppose the training set I = {(Ii, Oi)}N
i=1 includes N images
and F = {Fi}N
i=1 represents the mined object regions by
AE. We iteratively produce the object regions Fi,t for each
Algorithm 1 Object Regions Mining with AE
Input: Training data I = {(Ii, Oi)}N
i=1, threshold δ.
Initialize: Fi = ∅(i = 1, · · · , N), t = 1.
1: while (training of classiﬁcation is success) do
Train the classiﬁcation network Mt with I.
for Ii in I do
Set Fi,t = ∅.
for c in Oi do
Calculate Hc
i,t by CAM(Ii,t, Mt, c) .
Extract regions R whose corresponding pixel
values in Hc
i,t are larger than δ.
Update the mined regions F c
Update the mined regions Fi = Fi ∪Fi,t.
Erase the mined regions from training image
Ii,t+1 = Ii,t\Fi,t.
t = t + 1.
14: end while
Output: F = {Fi}N
training image Ii,t with the classiﬁcation model Mt at the
tth learning step. Denote C as the set of object categories
and CAM(·) as the operation of heatmap generation. Thus,
the cth heatmap Hc
i,t of Ii,t, in which c ∈Oi and Oi ⊆C
is the image-level label set of Ii,t, can be obtained according to CAM(Ii,t, Mt, c). To enforce the classiﬁcation network to expand object regions from Ii,t, we erase the pixels
whose values on Hc
i,t are larger than δ. Then, F is obtained
through the procedure summarized in Algorithm 1.
Beyond mining foreground object regions, ﬁnding background localization cues is also crucial for training the segmentation network.
Motivated by , we use the
saliency detection technology to produce the saliency
maps of training images. Based on the generated saliency
maps, the regions whose pixels are with low saliency values are selected as background. Suppose Bi denotes the
selected background regions of Ii. We can obtain the segmentation masks S = {Si}N
i=1, where Si = Fi ∪Bi. We
ignore three kinds of pixels for producing S: 1) those erased
foreground regions of different categories which are in con-
ﬂict; 2) those low-saliency pixels which lie within the object regions identiﬁed by AE; 3) those pixels that are not
assigned semantic labels. One example of the segmentation
mask generation process is demonstrated in Figure 3 (a).
“black” and “purple” regions refer to the background and
the object, respectively.
3.2. Online PSL for Semantic Segmentation
The proposed AE approach provides the initial segmentation mask for each training image that can be used for
training segmentation networks.
However, some object-
background
Segmentation Score Maps
Ignored pixels
background
Weighted Maps
background
Classification Loss
Noise-prohibitive
Segmentation Loss
Figure 3. (a) The process of segmentation mask generation. (b)
The proposed online PSL approach for semantic segmentation.
The classiﬁcation scores are used to weight “Segmentation Score
Maps” to produce “Weighted Maps” in an online manner. Those
classes with low classiﬁcation conﬁdences are prohibited for producing the segmentation mask. Then, both the mined mask and
the online produced mask are used to optimize the network.
related or background-related pixels may be missed (as
those “blue” pixels on the AE outputs shown in Figure 3
(a)). In addition, semantic labels of some labeled pixels may
be noisy due to the limitation of AE on capturing boundary
details. To exploit those pixels unlabeled by AE for training
and gain robustness to falsely labeled pixels, we propose an
online Prohibitive Segmentation Learning (PSL) approach
to further learn to perform semantic segmentation upon the
masks provided by AE. The online PSL exploits image classiﬁcation results to identify reliable category-wise segmentation maps and form them into a less noisy auxiliary supervision map, offering auxiliary information to the AE output. PSL updates the produced auxiliary segmentation map
along with training of the segmentation networks in an online manner and produces increasingly more reliable auxiliary supervision. As shown in Figure 3 (b), the proposed
PSL builds a framework that includes two branches, one
for classiﬁcation and the other for semantic segmentation.
In particular, PSL uses the squared loss as the optimization
objective for the classiﬁcation branch, whose produced classiﬁcation conﬁdences are used by PSL to weight the corresponding category-speciﬁc segmentation score maps. With
the help of classiﬁcation results, the online PSL is able to
integrate the multi-category segmentation maps into an auxiliary segmentation mask and provides supervision in addition to the AE output. With PSL, those segmentation maps
corresponding to categories with low classiﬁcation conﬁdences are prohibited from contributing to the auxiliary segmentation map. Thus, noise from those irrelevant categories
can be effectively alleviated.
Formally, denote the set of semantic labels for segmentation task as Cseg and the image-speciﬁc label set for a given
image I as Oseg, in which background category is included.
During each training epoch, we denote the image-level prediction from the classiﬁcation branch as v. Suppose S is
the segmentation mask produced by AE. The online PSL
exploits the image prediction over Cseg to train a segmentation network f(I; θ) parameterized by θ, which predicts
the pixel-wise probability of each label c ∈Cseg at every
location u of the image plane fu,c(I, θ). To produce the
additional segmentation mask ˆS for training the segmentation network, PSL uses v to weight foreground category
segmentation score maps as shown in Figure 3 (b). With
this prohibitive operation, large response values from negative score maps can be suppressed by multiplying a small
classiﬁcation category score. Meanwhile, the score maps
of dominant categories (i.e. the corresponding objects that
occupy a large area of the image) can also be enhanced. Denote the weighting operator as ⊗, and ˆS is then produced by
ˆS = max{[1, v] ⊗f(I; θ)}.
Here the appended element 1 is for weighting the background category. Suppose Sc and ˆSc represent the pixels
annotated with category c. The cross-entropy loss used for
noise-prohibitive semantic segmentation is formulated as
J(f(I; θ), S) + J(f(I; θ), ˆS)
J(f(I; θ), S) = −
c∈Oseg |Sc|
log fu,c(I; θ),
J(f(I; θ), ˆS) = −
c∈Oseg | ˆSc|
log fu,c(I; θ).
With online training, the segmentation ablity of the network
is progressively improved, which can produce increasingly
more accurate ˆS for supervising the later training process.
During the testing process, we take a more strict pohibitive policy for those categories with low classiﬁcation
conﬁdences. In particular, we set those classiﬁcation conﬁdences that are smaller than p to zero and keep others unchanged, and apply them to weight the predicted segmentation score maps and produce the ﬁnal segmentation result.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset and Experiment Settings
Dataset and Evaluation Metrics We evaluate our proposed
approach on the PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark dataset , which has 20 object categories and one
background category. This dataset is split into three subsets: training (train, 1,464 images), validation (val, 1,449
images) and testing (test, 1,456 images).
Following the
common practice , we increase the number of training images to 10,582 by image augmentation. In our experiments, only image-level labels are utilized for training. The
performance is evaluated in terms of pixel IoU averaged on
21 categories. Experimental analysis of the proposed approach is conducted on the val set. We compare our method
with other state-of-the-arts on both val and test sets. The
result on the test set is obtained by submitting the predicted
results to the ofﬁcial PASCAL VOC evaluation server.
Training/Testing Settings
We adopt DeepLab-CRF-
LargeFOV from as the basic network for the classiﬁcation network and segmentation network in AE and PSL,
whose parameters are initialized by the VGG-16 pretrained on ImageNet . We use a mini-batch size of 30
images where patches of 321 × 321 pixels are randomly
cropped from images for training the network.
We follow the training procedure in at this stage.
The initial learning rate is 0.001 (0.01 for the last layer) and decreased by a factor of 10 after 6 epochs.
Training terminates after 15 epochs. Both two networks are trained
on NVIDIA GeForce TITAN X GPU with 12GB memory.
We use DeepLab code in our experiments, which is
implemented based on the publicly available Caffe framework .
For each step of AE, those pixels belonging to top 20%
of the largest value (a fraction suggested by ) in
the heatmap are erased, which are then considered as foreground object regions. We use saliency maps from to
produce the background localization cues. For those images
belonging to indoor scenes (e.g. sofa or table), we adopt the
normalized saliency value 0.06 as the threshold to obtain
background localization cues (i.e. pixels whose saliency
values are smaller than 0.06 are considered as background)
in case some objects were wrongly assigned to background.
For the images from other categories, the threshold is set
as 0.12. For the testing phase of semantic segmentation, the
prohibited threshold p is empirically set as 0.1 and CRF 
is utilized for post processing.
4.2. Comparisons with State-of-the-arts
We make extensive comparisons with state-of-the-art
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation solutions with
different levels of annotations, including scribbles, bounding boxes, spots and image-level labels. Results of those
methods as well as ours on PASCAL VOC val are summarized in Table 1.
Among the baselines, MIL-* ,
STC and TransferNet use more images (700K, 50K
and 70K) for training. All the other methods are based on
10K training images and built on top of the VGG16 
From the result, we can observe that our proposed approach outperforms all the other works using image-level
labels and point annotation for weak supervision. In partic-
Table 1. Comparison of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
methods on VOC 2012 val set.
Training Set
Supervision: Scribbles
Scribblesup 
Supervision: Box
WSSL 
BoxSup 
Supervision: Spot
1 Point 
Scribblesup 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
(* indicates methods implicitly use pixel-level supervision)
SN B* 
MIL-seg* 
TransferNet* 
AF-MCG* 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
MIL-FCN 
CCNN 
MIL-sppxl 
MIL-bb 
EM-Adapt 
DCSM 
BFBP 
STC 
SEC 
AF-SS 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
AE-PSL (ours)
ular, AF-MCG achieves the second best performance
among the baselines only using image-level labels. However, the MCG generator is trained in a fully-supervised way
on PASCAL VOC, thus the corresponding result, i.e. AF-
MCG , implicitly makes use of stronger supervision.
Thus, with the Selective Search segments, the performance
of AF-SS drops by 1.7%. Furthermore, GrabCut 
is also employed by AF-* to reﬁne the segmentation
masks for supervision, which is usually time consuming for
training. In contrast, the proposed AE approach is very simple and convenient to carry out for object region mining.
In addition, the online PSL is also effective and efﬁcient
for training the semantic segmentation network. Compared
with those methods using image-level labels for supervision, the proposed AE-PSL improves upon the best performance by over 2.4%. Besides, our approach also outperforms those methods that implicitly use pixel-level supervision by over 0.7%. Additional comparison among these
approaches on PASCAL VOC test is shown in Table 2. It
can be seen that our method achieves the new state-of-theart for this challenging task on a competitive benchmark.
Figure 4 shows some successful segmentations, indicating that our method can produce accurate results even for
Table 2. Comparison of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
methods on VOC 2012 test set.
Training Set
Supervision: Box
WSSL 
BoxSup 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
(* indicates methods implicitly use pixel-level supervision)
MIL-seg* 
SN B* 
TransferNet* 
AF-MCG* 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
MIL-FCN 
CCNN 
MIL-sppxl 
MIL-bb 
EM-Adapt 
DCSM 
BFBP 
STC 
SEC 
AF-SS 
Supervision: Image-level Labels
AE-PSL (ours)
Prediction
Ground Truth
Figure 4. Qualitative segmentation results on the VOC 2012 val
set. One failure case is shown in the last row.
some complex images. One typical failure case is given
in the bottom row of Figure 4. This case may be well addressed with a better erasing strategy such as using low level
visual features (e.g. color and texture) to reﬁne and extend
erasing regions.
Table 3. Comparison of segmentation mIoU scores using object regions from different AE steps on VOC 2012 val set.
bkg plane bike bird boat bottle bus
cat chair cow table dog horse motor person plant sheep sofa train
82.6 63.0 27.5 45.9 38.3 43.6 61.3 29.2 60.0 13.6 52.0 32.6 52.4 49.8
61.4 29.4 35.1 41.9
82.2 69.3 29.7 60.9 40.8 52.4 59.3 44.2 65.3 13.0 58.9 32.2 60.0 56.6
69.7 32.1 42.8 43.2
78.5 71.8 29.2 64.1 39.9 57.8 58.5 54.5 63.0 10.3 60.5 36.0 61.6 56.1
64.5 31.5 49.5 38.7
74.4 65.5 28.2 59.7 38.5 57.8 57.5 59.0 57.2
54.9 39.2 56.5 52.6
55.9 30.4 47.9 36.8
Classification Training Loss
Erased Regions
Figure 5. (a) Loss curves of classiﬁcation network against varying
numbers of training epochs, for different AE steps. (b) Failure
cases of over erasing samples with four AE steps.
4.3. Ablation Analysis
Object Region Mining with AE
With the AE approach, discriminative object regions are adversarially erased step by step. Therefore, it is expected that
the loss values of the classiﬁcation networks at the convergence of training across different AE steps would progressively increase as more discriminative regions are absent
for training the classiﬁcation networks. Figure 5 (a) shows
the comparison of the classiﬁcation training loss curves for
different AE steps. It can be observed that the loss value
at convergence of training with original images is around
0.05. By performing the AE for multiple steps, the converged loss value slightly increases (AE-step2: ∼0.08, AEstep3: ∼0.1) compared with that of the AE-step1. This
demonstrates that AE removes regions with a descending
discriminative ability. By continuing to perform the AE for
more steps to remove more regions, the classiﬁcation network only converges to one that provides a training loss as
large as ∼0.15. This demonstrates no more useful regions
are left for obtaining a good classiﬁcation network, due to
over erasing. over erasing may introduce many true negative regions into the mined foreground object regions and
hampers learning segmentation. Some failure cases caused
by over erasing are shown in Figure 5 (b). In the case where
most object regions are removed from the training images,
the classiﬁcation network has to rely on some contextual
regions to recognize the categories. These regions are true
negative ones and detrimental for the segmentation network
training. To prevent contamination from negative regions,
we only integrate those discriminative regions mined from
the ﬁrst three steps into the ﬁnal segmentation masks.
For quantitatively understanding the contribution of each
AE step, Table 3 shows the comparison of mIoU scores
using foreground regions merged from varying k (k =
1, 2, 3, 4) AE steps for training the segmentation network
based on DeepLab-CRF-LargeFOV. We can observe that
the performance indeed increases as more foreground object regions are added since the segmentation network gets
denser supervision.
However, after performing four AE
steps, the performance drops by 2.1% due to the over erasing as explained above. Some visualization examples are
shown in Figure 6, including training images (top row),
heatmaps produced by different AE steps and the ﬁnally
erased regions (bottom row). We can observe that the AE
approach effectively drives the classiﬁcation network to localize different discriminative object regions.
For example, regions covering the body of the right-most instance
of “cow” shown in the last column are ﬁrst localized. By
erasing this instance, another two instances on the left side
are then discovered. We also conduct experiments on VOC
2012 test set using object regions merged from the ﬁrst three
AE steps. The mIoU score is 52.8%, which outperforms all
those methods (as indicated in Table 2) only using imagelevel labels for supervision.
Online PSL for Semantic Segmentation
We now proceed to evaluate the online PSL and investigate
how it beneﬁts the AE approach by discovering auxiliary
information. We report the performance of online PSL in
Table 4, where “w/o PSL” and “w/ PSL” denote the result
of vanilla DeepLab-CRF-LargeFOV and the proposed PSL
method for training, respectively. We can observe that PSL
improves the performance by 3.2% compared with “w/o
PSL”, , demonstrating the signiﬁcant effectiveness of PSL
providing additional useful segmentation supervision.
Besides, we perform one more iterative training step on
PSL to improve the segmentation results. In particular, we
ﬁrst employ the trained segmentation model from AE and
PSL to segment training images. Then, the predicted segmentation masks are used as supervision for training the
segmentation network for another round. As shown in Table 4, the performance provided by this extra training is further improved from 54.1% to
55.0%. The improvement beneﬁts from the operation of
performing CRF on the predicted segmentation masks of
training images. After one round training on top of CRF results, the segmentation network has been trained well. We
do not observe further performance increase by performing
additional training, as no new supervision information is fed
Furthermore, we also examine the effectiveness of our
testing strategy where the prohibited threshold is empirically set as 0.1. We utilize ground-truth image-level labels
as classiﬁcation conﬁdences to weight the predicted segmentation score maps (note this is different from the prohibitive information imposed in the training stage). The result is 56.1% (“w/ PSL + GT”), which is only 1.1% better
than “w/ PSL ++”. Note that “w/ PSL + GT” actually provides an upper bound on the achievable performance as the
score maps are ﬁltered by the ground-truth category annotations and “w/ PSL ++” performs very closely to this upper
PSL adopts the on-the-ﬂy output of the classiﬁcation
network to re-weight segmentation score maps. Another
choice for such classiﬁcation information is the groundtruth annotation. We also consider the case of using groundtruth image-level labels for prohibiting during the training stage and evaluate the performance.
However, using ground-truth information leads to performance drop of
0.6% compared with our proposed PSL design. This is because PSL effectively exploits the information about object
scale that is beneﬁcial for generating more accurate segmentation masks (i.e. categories of large objects are preferred with high classiﬁcation scores compared with those
of small objects). Simply using 0-1 ground-truth annotation
ignores the scale and performs worse. We also investigate
how PSL performs without using image-level classiﬁcation
conﬁdences and ﬁnd that the performance drops 1%. This
clearly validates the effectiveness of the proposed online
PSL approach using image-level classiﬁcation information.
5. Conclusion
We proposed an adversarial erasing approach to effectively adapt a classiﬁcation network to progressively discovering and expanding object discriminative regions. The
discovered regions are used as pixel-level supervision for
training the segmentation network. This approach provides
a simple and effective solution to the weakly-supervised
segmentation problems. Moreover, we proposed an online
prohibitive segmentation learning method, which shows to
be effective for mining auxiliary information to AE. Indeed,
the PSL method can aid any other weakly-supervised methods. This work paves a new direction of adversarial erasing
for achieving weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. In
the future, we plan to develop more effective strategies for
improving adversarial erasing, such as erasing each training
image with adaptive steps or integrating adversarial erasing
and PSL into a more uniﬁed framework.
Acknowledgment
The work is partially supported by the National Key Research and Development of China (No. 2016YFB0800404),
National University of Singapore startup grant R-263-000-
C08-133, Ministry of Education of Singapore AcRF Tier
One grant R-263-000-C21-112 and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 61532005).