American Journal of Qualitative Research
December 2019, Vol.3 No. 2, pp. 52-70
 
© 2019 AJQR. 
ISSN: 2576-2141
Refugee Perspectives on Integration in Germany
Cüneyt Gürer1
University of Siegen, Germany
This study will examine the integration process from the perspectives of refugees by focusing
on individual and social level experiences. Data for this study comes from individual-level semistructured and focus group discussions collected over a period of seven months in Germany
and covers refugees who applied for asylum after 2015. Keeping in mind the fact that the
meaning of integration differs for different audiences, this study identifies five distinct phases
of refugee integration in Germany. In each phase, refugees face certain challenges that hinder
their integration into local communities. These phases, with some minor differences, may also
be applicable to other countries, and therefore this study offers a general framework to analyze
the integration process from refugee perspectives. Individual and social dimensions of
integration analyzed and individual adjustment and coping mechanisms demonstrated
throughout the study. This study suggests that refugees should be more involved in the definition
of integration and more importantly, social and professional interaction through “entry points”
should be encouraged for successful integration of refugees.
KEYWORDS: Refugees, Integration, Adaptation, Integration Policies.
Introduction
According to the UN Refugee Agency, 70.8 million people displaced by active wars,
conflict, and persecution at the global level and these numbers have been increasing at least for
the last eight subsequent years . In the latest example, Syria produced most of the displacement in the
world and since the beginning of the conflict, more than 13 million people fled from the country
(more than 6 million internal and 5.6 million external displacements observed) . More recently, the political crisis in Venezuela created a displacement of 4,5 million
people to neighboring countries . The global scale of forced displacement and
refugees reached its record level and the international community fails to produce long term
solutions to reduce these numbers and cannot effectively address the root causes of
displacement.
UNHCR statistics indicate that almost 60% of refugees are coming from three
countries; Syria (6,7 million), Afghanistan (2,7 million) and South Sudan (2,3 million) and at
the global level 80% of refugees live in the neighboring countries which are mostly developing
countries with scarce sources and limited capacity to manage large numbers of people. Starting
from the early phases of the conflict in Syria, Turkey hosts 3,6 million Syrian refugees and
became the highest number of refugee-hosting countries in the world. Although Turkey pursued
1 Corresponding author; 
an open-door policy towards Syrian refugees at the earlier phases of the crisis, failure of policies
to integrate refugees in Turkey created a large influx of people towards Europe in 2015 . Recently Turkey started discussions about creating a
“safe zone” in northern Syria and relocate Syrian refugees to this area .
Integration to host societies become more important as expectations fade for a peaceful solution
in the regions of conflict producing migration flows, particularly in Syria. The most recent
development in the region increases the unpredictability of future perceptions of refugees in
countries where they are mostly populated. Recent discussion of creating a “safe zone”2 for
refugees in Northern Syria, along the Turkish border, added more uncertainty and complication
to already a very complicated issue of human displacement in the region. Turkish example
showed that managing crises with an open door policy solves immediate problems, however
long term policies to integrate refugees in host communities are an essential part of the ongoing
refugee challenge for many countries.3
Germany received 1.1 million people in 2015 alone, the biggest number of refugees in
Europe, which created political and social debates about refugees in German society. Although
German bureaucracy overwhelmed with the number of arrivals, State institutions, in
cooperation with civil society and NGOs, has managed better than might have been expected
to absorb a large number of refugees. However, Fratzscher argues that the challenge to
make integration successful is still ahead and it will be one of the most difficult postwar
economic, social, and political challenges since German reunification. Germany continued to
receive refugees in the flowing years and almost 200.000 people applied for asylum in 2018
 .
Refugees in every country go through different stages of adaptation and participation to
host societies and each stage requires well-designed integration policies to reduce negative
outcomes and increase the level adaptation to the new social environment. Integration policies
and associated procedures are mostly bureaucratic in nature and in many cases; the interaction
between refugees and the host country is a “one way street” from institutions to individuals.
The term integration lacks a clear understanding by different actors in the process, which leads
to not having clear expectations of host communities from refugees and eventually not being
able to reach a defined objective through integration policies. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) defines integration as “a dynamic and multifaceted twoway process which requires all parties concerned” . The European Union provides a similar definition and a comprehensive action plan laying out specific actions
for member states to be successful in the integration of refugees. The EU action plan requires
member states to take measures starting from pre-departure and pre-arrival to active
participation in society. Refugee integration is implemented through a number of measures in
several priority areas: learning the official language of the host country, access to education,
employment and healthcare, family reunion, social assistance, recognition of skills and
qualifications, participation in the social and cultural life of the host community. All these
2 Although discussions of a safe zone at the Northern Syria go back as early as the beginning of Syrian crises in
2011, more recently Turkish President Erdogan explicitly demanded creating a safe zone in Syria to re-locate
Syrian refugees living in Turkey (3,6 million people). Germany participated the discussion of creating the safe
zone by offering an “international safe zone” rather than only Turkey and Russia operates in the region.
Considering the complicated nature of the regional political and security dynamics, this paper only focuses on how
“safe zone” discussions increase the level of uncertainty for refugees living both in Turkey and in Europe since
proposals of safe zone have no clear plan and implementation strategy, at least during the writing of this study.
3 Official Turkey policy towards Syrian refugees always shaped around the term “guest” and never used the term
integration rather used harmonization. For the details and background of Turkish refugee policies please refer to
 
measures and tools are considered key factors for successful refugee integration. 
The overall objective of the study is to understand the interaction between the
individual, society, and institutions by focusing on refugee perspectives in the integration
context. It will also bring an alternative look to the refugee policy and will demonstrate the need
for adaptation of policies based on the emerging and changing needs of refugees during their
integration to host communities. Developing such a system requires interaction between the
system (rules regulations, bureaucratic structure, and agents of the system, etc.) and refugees.
Refugee integration has many aspects but most defining characteristics of the process,
at least at the early phases, are the official procedures that refugees go through in host societies.
Official perspective defines integration with steps regulated by rules and procedures, which are,
in most cases, produces tangible and measurable results. However, official procedures and
formal definitions of integration pay little attention to how refugees understand and interpret
the process. When we look at the same process from the perspective of refugees themselves,
we see a much different, more complex and dynamic process. This study is an attempt to
understand the process of integration from the perspective of refugees and provides an
alternative understanding of integrating refugees into host communities.
Individual and Social Aspects of Integration Process
The value of refugee input into the integration process and policy changes have not been
discussed and studied extensively in the literature. Active participation of refugees to
integration is reduced to expectations of the host state and following the official steps designed
by-laws, rules and other regulations. At the societal level, the definition of integration and
expectations of host communities might be different from each other, based on the
characteristics of local communities. At both levels, official and social, refugees are anticipated
to fill the expectation of (formal and informal) rules of the host society. Their interpretation of
the process and changing the nature of needs and demands mostly overlooked. However, their
interpretation and understanding of the process of integrations are critical to reaching a
successful level of integration. The involvement of refugees in the integration process is
necessary as not only objects (being observed and less contribution expected) but also subjects
(the observer and active contributor). In order to make the integration more interactive and
“two-way” process, policymakers, experts, and scholars should consider looking at the
integration process from the refugee perspective and understand how refugees perceive,
understand and interpret the process.
Understanding individual contributions to the process by collecting subjective
interpretations will help us to see the differences between official expectations and individual
perceptions. When we add the individual (objective) background factors such as (level of
education, previous work experience, professional and personal achievements, etc.), it would
be possible to increase our understanding of the process from the perceptions of refugees rather
than making our assessment solely based on the official definitions and measurements of
integration. Consideration of refugee experiences will also help to reduce the sources of
tensions and possible negative outcomes of the process which are created by the failures.
Ultimately, it has the potential to help increase the likelihood of successful participation of
refugees in host communities.
Figure-1 presents the main actors of the integration process and direction of the
interaction. Official integration policies demand refugees to follow certain steps and complete
requirements defined by the national and international rules and regulations. Although these are
an important part of the integration process, they represent only a small portion of a complete
understanding of integration. The third major factor in the integration process is the Society as
the determinant of the refugees' behavioral outcomes, cultural adaptations and the level of social
interaction. Taking society as a dependent variable (being influenced by other factors to identify
their demands from refugees) will extend the model presented in Figure-1 and it will be possible
to increase our understanding of social demands by adding new variables such as the role of
media, political choices, level of heterogeneity, etc. However, this study limits itself
considering society as an independent variable (influencing refugee integration with its
demands) but not go into details of how these social demands are shaped.
Figure 1. Interaction between main actors of the integration process.
The displacement process itself and following the adaptation process to new social
environments produce uncertainties and require individual-level coping mechanisms.
According to Ward and Kennedy , this process has two major
aspects; psychological adaptation and sociocultural adjustment. Psychological adaptation refers
to the individual-level well-being and mental health of the person, and sociocultural adjustment
is related to the ability of the individual to obtain social skills to function in the new society . Her findings indicate that language acquisition, maintaining social contacts in
the host community, and living in private housing rather than refugee establishments are the
most important predictor of successful integration to host communities.
Data and Methodology
Qualitative data provides an in-depth understanding of human behavior and allows
better examination of complexities of a situation using open-ended questions with flexible
interaction throughout the interview . The data for this study comes from
individual and focused group interviews with 28 individuals with a refugee background who
applied for asylum in Germany. The data collected as a part of the study supported by Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation in Germany which examines the integration process within the larger
context of conflict displacement and integration. In the time of the interview, almost half of the
participants (13 individuals) of this study applied for asylum but did not receive the final
decision of their application. The rest of the interviewees are recognized asylum seekers from
Turkey, Syria, and Iraq and they were attending German language courses during the interview
period. The level of the educational background of the individuals is high (mostly University
graduates and 5 people with Masters degrees) and almost all of them had a professional career
(min 5 years and max 25 years) before they arrived in Germany. The majority of the participants
are male and only four females represented in the data. Using the model presented by Gürer
and Akgül this study extends the understanding of phases of displacement and
integration by inserting individual-level experiences into their model. Gürer and Akgül 
demonstrate (Figure-2) a process of displacement starting before refugees leave their country
of origin. They take pre-displacement conditions and consider their effects on other stages of
the displacement. Their model looks at the individual refugee experiences at four levels;
international, national/state, national/social and individual level. This study focuses on the
individual and social level experiences of refugees during their displacement and integration
Official Integration
Policies and
Procedures
Refugees (Individual
and Social level)
Society: Social
Expectations
Figure 2. Levels of vulnerability on a timeline.
Source: Adapted from Gürer and Akgül .
Using the same model as a theoretical base, this study provides empirical data to
examine the integration challenges of individuals by starting the process of integration from
pre-arrival conditions and continue by exploring the first contact of refugees with the host
country's official process. After individuals start their official process they follow the official
integration step designed by the relevant bureaucratic structures based on the normative
requirements. The data collected during the interviews will be analyzed using these official
stages that refugees go through during their integration process. Using this framework and
taking an analytical approach will allow us to examine the perspectives of refugees and how
they identify the process. It will also help us to show the difference between bureaucratic
understanding and individual interpretation of the same process. As a result of the preliminary
analysis of the data collected for this study and a thorough examination of the integration
process, this study identified five major stages to use as an analytic framework. These stages
are; Pre-arrival, first contact with the official process and application to asylum, official
integration process, social and professional entry points and long term participation into host
communities. Each step examined from individual and social perspectives and the following
matrix (Table-1) presents the framework and main arguments.
Levels of Vulnerability (L)
Individual Level
International Level
National Level/States
National level/Society
Displacement timeline (t)
Five Stages of Integration and Individual/Social Dimensions
Conditions
Impact on the
Individual
Social Consequences
Pre-Arrival
-Escape from
-Exposed to violence
and victimization
-Exclusion and losing
social attachments
-Social status lost
-Disconnection from
First contact
with the official
-Lack of knowledge
about the process
-Waiting in the
refugee camp
-Ambiguous
bureaucratic process
and feeling helpless
-Communication
challenges and losing
self-esteem
-Not being able to
establish social
-Feeling lonely
-Exclusion from
Integration
-Language and
integration courses
-Losing the value of
mother language
-Not being able to
communicate the
language of the host
-Limited social
connection due to
language disability
-Seeking help from
people speaking the
same or a common
third language
Entry Points
-Developing social
and professional
mechanisms of
engagement
-More social and
professional
interaction
-Feel more included
and get familiar with
social norms
-Obtain information
to continue previous
professional career
-More attachment to
-Improve language
capacity through
interactions
-Professional networks
and a clear
understanding of the
job market
participation
-More stable
-More interaction
with the community
-Ability to pursue
daily tasks without
assistance
-More positive and
taking more
responsibility
-Establishes an
individual comfort
-Better relations with
-More social
engagements and
participation in social
-The family starts
having daily routines
Refugee experiences and their impact on the individual
In combination with the pre-displacement events, refugee experiences at different
stages, until a stable living condition, changes many aspects of the individual life. During this
process, the individual faces many uncertainties and loss of previous life. Identity of the
individual, previous professional achievements, and losing social status create an environment
that requires strong coping mechanisms. Even the individual reaches a more stable condition
after the displacement and arriving in the host country, most of these and related problems
remain and the individual realizes that most of the previous life conditions could never be reestablished. In some cases, the severity and the length of such pressures break the previous
understanding about the self and others. These pressures also challenge individuals’ meaning
systems, including beliefs about the world and their ability to envision future goals . Long term disconnection from previous professional and social
environments increases the risk of mental health problems and failures in the integration of
individuals to the host communities .
Refugees experience multiple stressful and even traumatic conditions that have a
significant psychological impact on individuals. Strang and Quinn argue that because of
“multiple losses and experiencing acutely distressing events before fleeing their homes and
during their journeys”, refugees might develop mental health problems, lose the sense of
identity and confidence. The entire process of displacement requires a complete understanding
of its effect on individuals and how the individual developed coping mechanisms to ease the
pressure of the process. Bemak and Chung state that most of the time refugees' departure
from their country of origin is sudden and without having enough time for planning and
preparation. Many uncertainties about their destinations, travel routes, means of travel and risks
during the travel put refugees under immense pressure and put them into psychological and
physical danger .
During different stages of displacement and integration process, individual perception
of “self” challenged by the approach of the new social environment to refugees.
Unpredictability and unclear messages increase the level of doubts about individual values,
capacities and create a gap between the individual now and the individual then. Most of the
participants interviewed for this study indicated such feelings that both during the displacement
process and integration, they had difficulty to feel the gap between the previous self and how
they define their identity now. In a focus group interview of the participant voiced what they
all agree to call “bitter truth” by stating;
“We lost our status and we will not be able to get it back. Many of us
accomplished a lot in our previous lives, but it is is different now. We
have to accept that. We will not be able to reach the same levels what
we have accomplished before.” 
According to Williams and Nida , the self consists of self-concept, selfesteem, and self-consciousness. These are all affected by significant changes and dramatic life
events. Refugee experiences (fear of persecution, escape from intolerable conditions,
displacement and other sources of pre-migration trauma) are considered to be important
elements of psychological impact on refugees. Self-concept is challenged by the new
circumstances and by the outside look to the individual as a refugee rather than the dominant
aspect of the identity. As the individual being pushed to the identity framework created by the
official process or by the society in everyday interactions, the gap between the individual selfconcept reduces to how the outside world perceives the individual. This interaction is likely to
have a negative impact on individual self-esteem.
Refugee experiences and social Interactions
At every stage of adaptation to a new environment, the individual constantly evaluates
the surrounding environment and makes adjustments based on the feedback from these
interactions. Individuals also define their roles in society by observing other people’s reactions
to them. In his classical theory of the looking-glass self, Charles H. Cooley claims that “self is a result of the social process whereby we see ourselves as
others see us.” Therefore, social interaction defines who we are and our definition of our
identities. Limited interactions with the outside world, especially after traumatic events or
sudden changes in social life could have severe effects on how individuals see and interpret the
world around them . After leaving their country of origin, refugees lose
their previous social connection which also affects their perception of identity. Their new social
environment and interactions define their new self-perceptions. In other words, refugees' selfconcept is shaped by their social interactions which eventually influence the re-shaping of
refugees' new identities in the host societies.
Limited social contact and interaction with the members of the host community also
reduces the likelihood of integration and lead refugees to develop relationships with
communities that they share the same language and culture. When individuals during their
integration process need assistance, having no contact from host communities gives no option
but to seek help from communities that shares the same language and culture. One can argue
that those communities are also part of the host society and such an approach might produce
positive results for integration. However, those communities, in most cases, have their own
integration problems and trust within these communities is not very well established. In addition
to these structural problems, especially for political asylum seekers, contact with communities
from the country of origin brings some risks therefore, they either stay isolated or become a
part of a selective group in these communities. Not developing social interactions with
mainstream society puts refugees in the already established diaspora or closed communities
which hinder integration process in the long run.
In our interviews most of the participants indicated that they had difficulty to contact
local communities to solve their immediate problems such as learning about the education
system, communicating with bureaucracy, finding housing, etc. Therefore most of the people
asked for help from other people from a similar national and cultural background. In a recent
study, Röing found that Turkish asylum seekers in the state of North Rhein Westphalia
in Germany mostly contacted Turkish organizations that they found similar to their political
views and social background. The same study further indicates that even in the Turkish
communities there is a big difference in understanding each other and different political
affiliations determine who refugees would contact. Turkish refugees have difficulty to develop
out-group relationships and create new contacts due to their reluctance to become the target of
their own government. In this case, differences originating from their home country and
political affiliations increase the risk of isolation of refugees in host communities. One
participant of this study who previously worked as a civil servant stated that;
“the only option I have at the moment to continue my social life is to
stick with people who are called Gülen supporters. They are the people
who became victims of persecution in Turkey and whoever comes to
Germany after 2016 more likely to be considered as a Gülenist
anyways. Yes, it is true that you can get help from these people, from
their organizations, but having no other social option is a different
thing. I prefer having more German friends rather than being only with
these people, even they help me a lot. I feel like I am stuck in Turkey
even I know that I live in Germany now. I have to break this circle and
have more contacts and more friends from Germany.” 
My field notes during the data collection combined with my own experiences in the
process also reflect that during early phases of the integration process, establishing social
connections is very important but difficult to do at the same time;
At every stage of the integration process, the lack of social interaction
is the main problem. Starting from the early stages of asylum
application the later stages in the process of official integration
establishing connections with the local people is the most difficult one.
The full picture of difficulties establishing such relationships could be
examined from both sides; why people have little engagement with
foreigners and why refugees have the reluctance to get in touch with
local populations. Language is definitely the number one issue for early
stages and knowing another common language such as English gives
an advantage at every level but not on every occasion. For example,
when I wanted to develop professional connections, English language
skills helped me to get in touch with people and meet them to discuss
my situation or to express my needs. In any engagement in society, you
realize that German language skill is the defining issue for further
connections. This is true, for example, regarding our relationship with
our neighbors. Not being able to speak perfect German we cannot
develop strong relations. 
Defining Major Steps of Integration of Refugees
The German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (BAMF) divides the official
procedure for asylum applications in Germany in 9 distinct stages.4 Application to asylum starts
with the arrival and registration of refugees at the reception centers and follows by the initial
distribution and accommodation. Personal asylum application, follow up interviews and the
final decision outcome of the process (including the appeal process in case of denial) completes
the application process. These stages reflect the legal and administrative procedural steps for
refugees to follow and represent the official side of the process, which takes between 6 months
to 2 years and includes changing of accommodation and residing cities several times.
The use of integration as a central term by different host community actors, referring to
adaptation of individuals to host communities, starts at the very early stages of the process.
Starting from the arrival refugees hear “integration” as a word that means different things for
different people. When they live in a refugee camp, integration mostly means respecting camp
rules and understanding the social environment, however the same word when it is used by a
local official might mean something else. One of the participants of this study argued that;
“When I make something wrong, or even different, the common answer
that I hear from people is ‘this is Germany and it does not work in
Germany’ then they start talking about we need to learn how things
work here and it comes to how much I need the integration. When they
help me to understand how it should be and give me concrete
explanations, this type of talking does not bother me at all because it
helps me to learn. However, most of the time I just listen how much I
need to integrate but receive no specific information about what I need
to do, I learn nothing from people just telling me I need to integrate,
what do they mean by integration anyways?”
4 Details of these stages can be found in the following document published by BAMF: “The State of the German
Asylum Procedure: An overview of the individual procedural steps and legal bases” available online at
 
This statement reflects the confusion of the individual when they start feeling the
pressure from the outside world to integrate into the host community but not knowing the
expectations clearly. In some cases, integration as a word choice, used against refugees to
highlight the need for them to learn how things work in Germany and adapt to many things
around them. However, this approach does not really help refugees to integrate rather re-enforce
the feeling of exclusion and remind them that they are not a natural part of the society and they
have a process to complete to be recognized as a full member of the society. Another problem
with this approach is that it does not have a clear understanding of what a refugee should do to
be considered integrated. Highly skilled refugees and people experienced living in other
Western countries feel the same pressure from society and for them also it is confusing what
society means by integration. Therefore, integration is not only a concept that requires refugees
to understand and do their part for a better adaptation but also it has to be defined and
expectations out of this definition should be clearly identified for refugees.
Main Stages of Adaptation and Integration
Human displacement is a long and challenging process. Individuals in the process of
displacement go through various difficulties most of them continue at later stages.
Displacement starts when people decide to leave their home, continue during their journey and
even last after their arrival and during their stay in the host country. It is possible to identify
three major steps of displacement; pre-departure, transit (journey) and reaching to the
destination. Each phase has its own specific conditions for refugees to cope with and should be
closely examined to obtain a clear understanding of the entire process. The theoretical
assumption of this paper connects these major phases and argues that each face interacts with
each other. Based on the interviews and data collected for this study, five major phases, that
refugees go through, are identified. These phases are related to pre-arrival conditions (including
their travels and journey), asylum application process and social integration stages; 1-
Conditions of Pre-Arrival, 2- First contact with the official process, 3- Official integration
process, 4- Attempting to find “entry points” to the society and 5- Long term participation
1- Conditions of Pre-Arrival to Host Nation
Pre-arrival conditions are incidents forcing refugees to leave their country and
experiences they have gone through both in the home country and during their journey. Before
leaving their countries, refugees face economic hardship and social disruption connected to
persecution and armed conflict in their home countries . The influence and effect
of these pre-departure problems continue during the displacement process and new challenges
emerge during the travel. In most cases, violence and life-threatening events combined with
experiences during the travel, including their protracted stay in the transit countries create an
immense amount of negative effects on individuals. In this study, most of the participants had
experiences that still create a significant amount of stress on them. Participants revealed some
of the following problems during the interviews that are still affecting their daily lives; losing
connection with their family members (including the time they had to hide from government
oppression at the country of origin), separation from family after leaving the country, and not
knowing when and how to see them again, being exposed to violence during detention and
experience of imprisonment, being exposed to psychological pressures and threats from
government forces extending to their families.
After crossing the border, many people reached Greece expecting to find a way to
continue their journey towards Western European countries. A number of participants indicated
that they, in addition to their payment to smugglers (between 3000 Euro – 10.000 Euro per
person), had to make extra payments to get false documentation to continue their journey. They
also argued, in addition to the financial challenges of the displacement process, they found
themselves in the middle of a criminal world which became their only option for protection. It
is a situation that they “would never think about being involved and never imagined criminals
become their only option to protect their dignity.” What they called it “losing their level” and
a process of “from belonging to non-belonging” meaning that “all previous life experiences
and status lose its meaning and not having options puts you in a position that you never think
for your self.” As one of the participants clearly indicated, “a crime that I never committed and
fabricated by the government follows me like a ghost.” , being threatened by people who know who I am.
It was a total nightmare. I cannot go through that fear again. Many
people became a victim of constant government aggression and
alienation from society. I had to hide for more than two years. I lived
in a room and never went outside, my body never saw sunlight because
I had to keep the curtains closed all day and could not have a light in
the evening. I don’t even want to remember now.” 
Many people try not to remember the difficulties they have gone through during their
stay in the home country. However, without getting professional help, individuals carry
negative impacts of pre-flight events. The level of difficulty they faced at the home country
reduces the making demands and exploring their rights in the host country rather enforces to
accept whatever is provided for them and therefore become a passive object of the process.
Pre Arrival conditions, such as individual exposure to violent conflict or being subject
to persecution or ill-treatment as well as living under difficult conditions are all important to
understand the current conditions of individuals who are applying for asylum. These
conditions with other challenges in the initial process of application can also be important
determinants of the quality of later stages of integration. Understanding the pre-arrival
conditions will also help to identify the specific challenges such as the consequences of
cultural, religious and other identity-related differences that the individual has been going
through during the displacement period.
2-First contact with the official process: Arrival registration and life in the refugee camp
The second major step for refugees after arriving at the host state is starting the official
process of an asylum application by reporting to any security or immigration authority,
reception facility, and an arrival center. Application to asylum starts with an initial registration
process and until they are called for their first interview, they are obliged to wait in refugee
camps. That is the moment when the long waiting process starts. In the context of Germany,
the time until the first interview varies according to the place where the application made.
According to German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (BAMF) in 2018, the average
time of application procedures was 8 months and average time until a final decision was 16.8
months (including court process in case of an appeal) .
Life in a refugee camp
Most people at this stage live in either refugee camps or facilities that are designated for
them and shared with other people. Living in a refugee camp disconnects people from
mainstream society and limits refugees' social options. Our study indicates that at this stage
refugees also could not receive information regarding the later stages of their application
process due to the lack of an informative interaction with the people who are providing services
at the accommodation facilities. Some of these problems emerged due to a lack of German
language capacities and not having direct contact with the officials processing application or
not having regular updates of the process. Each day refugees living in camps are advised to
follow the transfer or registration lists which are posted on the boards in a common area of the
camp. Some of the people interviewed for this study stated that “they have to wait and check
the information board at the camp whether they have their names on the list for a transfer or
for any other thing that might be important for them.” Interviewers also claimed that it is almost
impossible to think life outside the camp because the conditions and requirements “keep you in
the camp and do nothing but wait until you hear something about yourself.” This constant
feeling of depending on the information that would be provided on the board creates stress over
the individual because of not knowing when the expected information will appear. “It could be
tomorrow or next month,” says one of the participants and continues “that is a life lived by the
board, our main information provider” .
At the early stages of the asylum application process and mandatory stay in refugee
camps take months and during this process, the unpredictability of the later stages and waiting
become the nature of life. In order to reduce the stress and make camp life easier this
unpredictability can be reduced through alternative information channels. Another important
point highlighted by the people who participated in this study is limited resources to fill the
time during this waiting period. They claimed, where they live, they did not have many options
for activates especially for children and young people. Most people participated in this study
highlighted the need for more activities both for adults and children at refugee camps to use the
time more effectively and in a productive way. They claim language courses and being able to
participate in social activities in the region, rather than being isolated from communities would
be better for later stages of integration.
Overall perceptions of life and future prospects of refugees are significantly different
when they live in or outside the camp. Haase, Rohmann, and Hallmann found in their
study that refugees living in asylum centers reported more psychological problems and more
perceived discrimination than those living in independent housing. Another important finding
of their study is about the family situation of refugees and indicates that refugees who are alone,
away from their families in Germany reported more psychological problems than those living
in Germany together with their families. People living in the camp are more pessimistic about
the way their life develops and as time passes they claim to have more difficulty to explain the
situation to their children. One of the essential steps after difficult situations in the country of
origin is normalization of life which also reduces the psychological impact of past events on
children. However, normalizing life in a refugee camp is not an easy thing to do for many
The feeling of helplessness is an important aspect of living in refugee camps. The
waiting period for asylum application decision seems to affect the individual and each family
member in different ways. As one the participant couple indicated that their children were
constantly asking when they would have “a normal home and be able to feel the warmness of
having own home”. This family stated they have been avoiding invitations from people to their
homes thinking that the visit would remind their situation to their children and as a result, they
choose to close themselves to the outside world until they have the right to obtain their own
apartment. They argued that life in the camp gives children the feeling of inferiority and the
more they engage with the outside world the more they feel that they consider themselves
unequal and they are not like people living outside the camp. This feeling of losing selfconfidence can take years to overcome with other challenges on top of it such as, in the later
stages, the lack of language capacities not being able to fit into other children at school, etc.
One of the psychological conditions and feelings of refugees observed during the data
collection process was the lower self-esteem of people residing in refugee camps. During the
group interviews, it was easy to identify people who are living in camps as they were showing
signs of low confidence in their statements and about having an impact on their future. People
living in camps during the interview preferred not to make strong claims about what they want
or what they know about their surrounding environment, on the other hand, individuals living
in their own apartments made stronger claims about the similar topics discussed during the
interview. Personality factors should be controlled before making a general conclusion about
this finding, however, on several occasions individuals themselves also indicated that they have
lost their self-confidence after they started living in refugee camps.
The passive environment of the camps and not being able to connect to the world around
them reduce the sense of self and force individuals questioning the meaning of life and his/her
abilities to cope with challenges of the future. In a camp environment, refugees seem to be
living between two worlds and between two identities. The first world connected to the first
identity is the one which basically reflects the life before the displacement. The second is
constructed during the process of displacement and continues all the way to the later stages of
asylum application and integration process. The gap between the first and the second identity
creates a condition of anomie which might eventually cause
strain and reduction of self-esteem . Actual exclusion or the perception
of being excluded in a refugee camp might have devastating consequences on the individual.
Williams, Forgas, and Von Hippel argue that social outcasts and ostracism might
have detrimental effects on an individual which may not heal over the years. Refugees could
have the feeling of being isolated from mainstream society due to the conditions in camps or
force themselves to self-isolation as a result of losing self-esteem and develop a perception of
not-belonging to any social groups.
Personal asylum applications and interviews
After the first interview refugees are called for another interview which is the most
important of all other steps in the process affecting the outcome of the asylum application. By
design, it is a bureaucratic process and the actors involved in the interview have specific roles
and set of behavioral norms to be expected from them. In its ideal form, the interviewer is the
government agent asking questions to understand the applicant’s position of seeking refuge and
whether or not the claims made fit the definition of refugee status in international and national
regulations. The applicant is the person who is being interviewed (interviewee) and also
expected to give the most accurate information about her/his situation related to the claim for
refuge. The interview is an interactive process that each individual involving the interview
constantly affecting the behavior of the other. Asylum interview is not only bounded to the
individual interactions and social-psychological environment of the interview setting, it is also
highly connected to the previous events and future expectations of the applicant. All these
factors have a combined effect on the storytelling and to some extent on the outcome of the
interview (to grant asylum or not).
In this environment, applicants found themselves in a rather stressful condition between
what happened in reality and what (and how) bureaucracy actually wants to hear it. One of the
findings of this study indicates that in most cases bureaucracy only interests the facts that are
directly related to the application and the entire story of displacement with its emotional
consequences are ignored. Woolley indicates that “the process is based on a refugee’s
ability to provide a credible account of their persecution and, where possible, to prove the
authenticity of their claim through documentary evidence” however she also argues that “in
practice, the process relies heavily on the self-presentation of the individual claimant; their
ability to convince an immigration officer or judge. The claimant must narrate themselves into
a position of legitimacy.” In their investigation of asylum interviews, Puumala, Ylikomi, and
Ristimäki found out that asylum narratives are subject to the influence of bureaucratic,
interactional and psychological elements that are both expressed verbal and non-verbally during
the interview. They argue that verbal accounts are considered as the most important aspect of
the asylum stories and non-verbal actions (or non-actions) are in most cases considered not
In this setting, applicants are expected to tell their stories in a structured way and most
of the time answer the questions they have been asked and not to go details of the events that
are not relevant directly to their case. Following are some of the issues highlighted by the people
interviewed for this study indicating their understating and experience of the interview process;
-I had this feeling I had to make my case clear but I was not sure how
to do that without explaining the events around it. My officer thought
these are irrelevant and general issues but without telling them my
cases did not have much value for my officer. I was not able to impress
the officer. (In this particular case, the applicant believes that the officer
should be impressed and the case should be different than many other
people. It might also be interpreted not as to impress but to convince
the officer.) 
-I was so stressed and was not able to talk without taking deep breaths.
I knew what I would tell in that room and how I would tell that had a
powerful impact on my family’s future. We have waited for the interview
so long and everybody said something and during the interview, I don’t
even remember any of them (the interview started with a high level of
stress due to the possible impact of the interview on the future)
 
-We have explained our story to other people in the camp assuming they
would the people who were going to make the decision we were wrong.
I don’t understand why we have given so much information to these
people and which information will be more valuable now for this
interview. I am tired of telling my story over and over. (The lack of
knowledge about the administrative structure and several occasions of
talking with officials at different levels force them to tell their entire
story and with limited interest from these authorities, the applicant lost
interest telling the story) 
3- The Official Integration Process
The official integration process starts with the registration to an integration course.
Learning the German language is the main component of the official integration process. The
second part of the integration course is the orientation course which covers the subjects of life
in Germany, politics, state structure, standards, and values of the society. Language courses
create an interactive environment for people from different backgrounds and significantly
improve their language skills, however in most cases language courses designed to teach
language based on the standard teaching methods which cover grammar and test skills. People
in that stage demonstrated that they needed more interaction with native speakers outside
classroom settings. Some language courses provide free conversation classes that people can
attend which is helpful to practice the language. However, attending social gatherings to
improve the interaction with native speakers and being part of other types of social engagements
considered more valuable and desirable.
4-Attempt to find “entry points” to the society (more than integration)5
The official integration process, with its emphasis on language training and some formal
classes about history, politics and social life does not provide the actual entry points for refugees
to adapt and integrate them into society. According to the German Federal Office for Migration
and Refugees , over 90% of the refugees had a weak command of the German language upon their arrival.
Comparing the 2016 data with a new wave collected in 2017, the same report indicates that
71% of refugees who completed official integration and language courses managed to reach, as
it is coded by the survey, a “good” or “very good” level of German language capacity.
Gürer argues that the following stages of the integration process should focus
more on including refugees into the economic and social systems of the society and, he further
suggests that for effective integration and more positive outcomes, multiple entry points and
opportunities for the individual should be established. Entry points are interaction mechanisms
for individuals with local communities and societal institutions at the local level. Gürer 
argues that establishing a professional entry point means “a connection with a professional
environment that may provide insights and conditions enabling individuals to continue with a
similar profession that fits their background.” Social entry points help people to develop social
attachments that they need both in coping with psychological challenges and establishing a new
social environment in the integration process.
Individuals participated in this study claimed that social and professional interactions
will help them not only to speak German better but also it will contribute to their social and
professional integration. Without having social interactions, successful completion of language
courses will not automatically result in better integration into society. Gürer therefore
argues that more interaction with local communities is an emerging need for refugees in
Germany. He further claims that putting entry points into practice will only require adaptation
of existing institutions to the needs of refugees and increasing the visibility and accessibility of
present programs.
5-Long term participation, adaptation and integration outcomes
This stage starts when the individual develops a complete understanding of the host
society, general structure of the job market, and establishes social attachments as well as obtains
a level of language capacity to pursue daily life without needing anyone to provide guidance.
Individual base identity re-construction continues at this stage with a combination of previous
homeland identity and a new identity. Hermans argues that individual lives in
three distinguished zones in their self-space; comfort, challenge and danger zones. Comfort
zones reflect our space where we feel safe and relaxed. Our natural tendency keeps us to stay
5 The idea of “entry points” examined in this part has been presented by the author at the German Refugee Studies
Network Blog and available at : 
in our comfort zones unless we want a change motivating us to take a position in the challenge
zone. In the long term participation stage, refugees start developing a comfort zone that provides
a predictable social and professional environment. The unfamiliar, stressful, or traumatic
situation, temporarily or permanently force us to the danger zone where strong negative
emotions, uncomfortable, threatened and unsafe feelings will dominate our behavioral pattern.
Initial refugee experiences, until reaching a level of comfort creates a constant and a
protracted stay in the danger zone, until reaching this stage. Refugees struggle to find an
appropriate place in the host society and try to accomplish the basic human need for belonging.
The need for belonging is a need to be satisfied at every stage that has been discussed until now,
however it is more important at this stage as the individual prioritizes developing a relationship
and meaningful participation to the society. In the absence of such meaningful connections, the
individual will have a perception of exclusion and rejection by the host society.6 Considering
the socially dependent nature of human beings, the feeling of exclusion and rejection may have
devastating effects on individuals and groups made of these individuals .
Research indicates that social exclusion and rejection can lead to aggressive and anti-social
behavior . Hogg and Wagoner also state that uncertainty
resulting from normative exclusion can be resolved by identifying with extremist groups. In
order to reduce the uncertainty about the identity, the individual develops a connection with a
group that reduces self-uncertainty. In order to go back to confidence zone, individuals tend to
join groups that meet the urgent need of belonging and also give a clear understanding of group
norms and expected behaviors by dictating how one behaves and perceives the world and how
one is in turn perceived and treated by the outside world.
Conclusions
This study examined the integration process by focusing on the refugee perspectives
and their individual and social experiences in the process. After collecting data about the
process of integration in Germany, this study developed five categories of integration that
refugees go through. Pre-arrival conditions are considered as a separate phase of the integration
because most people show signs of being influenced by the challenges they have faced before
they arrive. This phase even overlaps with other phases and effects the level of future prospects
and refugees' attachment to host society. After their first contact with the official process of the
asylum system, refugees spend some amount of time waiting for the process of application and
finalization of their application During this time, most people stay in refugee camps or some other
type of shared accommodation. This study found that staying in refugee camps for a longer time
time period affects people's self-perceptions, reduces self-confidence and reduces the contacts
with the host community.
Another challenge for refugees during their waiting period for the decision of their
application is the information gap about the individual asylum application process. At the early
stages of the asylum application having better functioning information channels between
bureaucracy and individual applicants is critical both reducing the stress of waiting and
unpredictability of the process by providing a clear picture of the bureaucratic process of the
asylum application. This interaction will provide more clarity for people about their
environment and it will have a positive impact on individuals. During this time individuals can
engage different activities that will help them to increase their capacities for later stages of
6 Williams et al. defines social exclusion as “not being included within a given social network (but
not necessarily ignored) and rejection as “an explicit verbal or physical action that declares that the individual is
not wanted as a member within a relationship group.
integration. During the official integration process which mainly focuses on the language and
integration courses, refugees have certain level of interaction with other refugees and host
communities, however this phase might be improved by adding more activities of engagement
with the host society through activities of non-governmental organizations and society base
associations.
Many integration programs financed by the German government, private sector or by
the EU provide significant opportunities for refugees to develop their social and professional
attachment to society. During the data collection process, this study identified the fact that many
refugees did not know much about the programs provided by these organizations, and these
organizations had difficulty to reach individuals who might need their programs. Therefore,
better coordination between refugees and social initiatives are needed to improve the success
of integration. Finally, this study argues, refugees need both social and professional entry points
to a society that will allow them to feel more included and attached to the social structure and
norms of the host communities. With these entry points, long term participation and integration
will be more successful. Most of the people interviewed for this study were in the early stages
of their integration, therefore the last two stages of the model created for this study still require
more input. Future studies could look at how refugees develop social and professional
attachments, how they develop networks of integration and unique challenges of later stages of
integration. Comparison of the model amongst different communities in Germany and with
other European countries will also allow gaining more information about the process of refugee
integration.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.
The data collected for this paper is a part of research supported by Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation Philipp Schwartz Initiative and hosted by the University of Siegen in Germany