Vol.:(0123456789)
Science and Engineering Ethics 26:2141–2168
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH/SCHOLARSHIP
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available
AI Ethics Tools, Methods and Research to Translate
Principles into Practices
Jessica Morley1   · Luciano Floridi1,2 · Libby Kinsey3 · Anat Elhalal3
Received: 16 May 2019 / Accepted: 29 November 2019 / Published online: 11 December 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
The debate about the ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence dates from the
1960s (Samuel in Science, 132(3429):741–742, 1960. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​
ce.132.3429.741; Wiener in Cybernetics: or control and communication in the animal and the machine, MIT Press, New York, 1961). However, in recent years symbolic AI has been complemented and sometimes replaced by (Deep) Neural Networks and Machine Learning (ML) techniques. This has vastly increased its potential
utility and impact on society, with the consequence that the ethical debate has gone
mainstream. Such a debate has primarily focused on principles—the ‘what’ of AI
ethics (beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and explicability)—rather
than on practices, the ‘how.’ Awareness of the potential issues is increasing at a fast
rate, but the AI community’s ability to take action to mitigate the associated risks is
still at its infancy. Our intention in presenting this research is to contribute to closing
the gap between principles and practices by constructing a typology that may help
practically-minded developers apply ethics at each stage of the Machine Learning
development pipeline, and to signal to researchers where further work is needed.
The focus is exclusively on Machine Learning, but it is hoped that the results of this
research may be easily applicable to other branches of AI. The article outlines the
research method for creating this typology, the initial findings, and provides a summary of future research needs.
Keywords  Artificial intelligence · Applied ethics · Data governance · Digital ethics ·
Governance · Ethics of AI · Machine learning
Electronic supplementary material  The online version of this article (https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1194​
8-019-00165​-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
* Jessica Morley
 
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
J. Morley et al.
Introduction
As the availability of data on almost every aspect of life, and the sophistication of
machine learning (ML) techniques, has increased so have the
opportunities for improving both public and private life .
Society has greater control than it has ever had over outcomes related to: (1) who
people can become; (2) what people can do; (3) what people can achieve; and (4)
how people can interact with the world . However, growing concerns about the ethical challenges posed by the increased use of ML in particular,
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) more generally, threaten to put a halt to the advancement of beneficial applications, unless handled properly.
Balancing the tension between supporting innovation, so that society’s right to
benefit from science is protected , and limiting
the potential harms associated with poorly-designed AI (and specifically ML in
this context), (summarised in Table 1) is challenging. ML algorithms are powerful
socio-technical constructs , which raise concerns that
are as much (if not more) about people as they are about code (see Table 1) . Enabling the so-called dual advantage of ‘ethical ML’—so that
the opportunities are capitalised on, whilst the harms are foreseen and minimised
or prevented —requires asking difficult questions about design,
development, deployment, practices, uses and users, as well as the data that fuel the
whole life-cycle of algorithms . Lessig was right all along: code is
both our greatest threat and our greatest promise .
Rising to the challenge of designing ‘ethical ML’ is both essential and possible.
Indeed those that claim that it is impossible are falling foul of the is-ism fallacy
where they confuse the way things are with the way things can be , or indeed should be. It is possible to design an algorithmically-enhanced
society pro-ethically1 , so that it protects the values, principles, and
ethics that society thinks are fundamental . This is the message that
social scientists, ethicists, philosophers, policymakers, technologists, and civil
society have been delivering in a collective call for the development of appropriate governance mechanisms that will enable society
to capitalise on the opportunities, whilst ensuring that human rights are respected
 , and fair and ethical decision-making is maintained .
1  The difference between ethics by design and pro-ethical design is the following: ethics by design can
be paternalistic in ways that constrain the choices of agents, because it makes some options less easily
available or not at all; instead, pro-ethical design still forces agents to make choices, but this time the
nudge is less paternalistic because it does not preclude a course of action but requires agents to make up
their mind about it. A simple example can clarify the difference. A speed camera is a form of nudging
(drivers should respect the speed limits) but it is pro-ethical insofar as it leaves to the drivers the freedom to choose to pay a ticket, for example in case of an emergency. On the contrary, in terms of ethics
by design, speed bumps are a different kind of traffic calming measure designed to slow down vehicles
and improve safety. They may seem like a good idea, but they involve a physical alteration of the road,
which is permanent and leaves no real choice to the driver. This means that emergency vehicles, such as
a medical ambulance, a police car, or a fire engine, must also slow down, even when responding to an
emergency.
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
The purpose of the following pages is to highlight the part that technologists, or
ML developers, can have in this broader conversation, and to highlight where further research is urgently needed. Specifically, section ‘Moving from Principles to
Practice’ discusses how efforts to data have been too focused on the ‘what’ of ethical AI (i.e. debates about principles and codes of conduct) and not enough on the
‘how’ of applied ethics. The ‘Methodology’ section outlines the research planned
to contribute to closing this gap between principles and practice, through the creation of an ‘applied ethical AI typology,’ and the methodology for its creation. Section ‘Framing the results,’ provides the theoretical framework for interpreting the
results. The ‘Discussion of initial results’ section summarises what the typology
shows about the uncertain utility of the tools and methods identified as well as
their uneven distribution. The section on ‘A way forward’ argues that there is a
need for a more coordinated effort, from multi-disciplinary researchers, innovators, policymakers, citizens, developers and designers, to create and evaluate new
tools and methodologies, in order to ensure that there is a ‘how’ for every ‘what’
Table 1   Ethical concerns related to algorithmic use based on the ‘map’ created by Mittelstadt et  al.
Ethical concern
Explanation
Inconclusive evidence
Algorithmic conclusions are probabilities and therefore not infallible. This can
lead to unjustified actions. For example, an algorithm used to assess credit
worthiness could be accurate 99% of the time, but this would still mean that
one out of a hundred applicants would be denied credit wrongly
Inscrutable evidence
A lack of interpretability and transparency can lead to algorithmic systems
that are hard to control, monitor, and correct. This is the commonly cited
‘black-box’ issue
Misguided evidence
Conclusions can only be as reliable (but also as neutral) as the data they are
based on, and this can lead to bias. For example, Dressel and Farid 
found that the COMPAS recidivism algorithm commonly used in pretrial,
parole, and sentencing decisions in the United States, is no more accurate or
fair than predictions made by people with little or no criminal justice expertise
Unfair outcomes
An action could be found to be discriminatory if it has a disproportionate impact
on one group of people. For instance, Selbst articulates how the adoption of predictive policing tools is leading to more people of colour being
arrested, jailed or physically harmed by police
Transformative effects Algorithmic activities, like profiling, can lead to challenges for autonomy and
informational privacy. For example, Polykalas and Prezerakos examined the level of access required to personal data by more than 1000 apps listed
in the ‘most popular’ free and paid for categories on the Google Play Store.
They found that free apps requested significantly more data than paid-for apps,
suggested that the business model of these ‘free’ apps is the exploitation of the
personal data
Traceability
It is hard to assign responsibility to algorithmic harms and this can lead to issues
with moral responsibility. For example, it may be unclear who (or indeed
what) is responsible for autonomous car fatalities. An in depth ethical analysis
of this specific issue is provided by Hevelke and Nida-Rümelin 
J. Morley et al.
at each stage of the Machine Learning pipeline. The penultimate section lists some
of the limitations of this study. Finally, the last section, concludes that the suggested recommendations will be challenging to achieve, but it would be imprudent
not to try.
Moving from Principles to Practices
On 22nd May 2019, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) announced that its thirty-six member countries, along with an additional
six (Argentine, Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Peru, and Romania), had formally
agreed to adopt, what the OECD claims to be the first intergovernmental standard
on Artificial Intelligence (AI) . Designed to ensure AI systems are
robust, safe, fair and trustworthy, the standard consists of five complementary valuebased principles, and five implementable recommendations to policymakers.
The values and recommendations are not new. Indeed, the OECD’s Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence is only the latest among a list of more than 70 documents, published in the last 3 years, which
make recommendations about the principles of the ethics of AI . This list includes documents produced by industry
(Google,2 IBM,3 Microsoft,4 Intel5), Government (Montreal Declaration,6 Lords
Select Committee,7 European Commission’s High-Level Expert Group8), and academia (Future of Life Institute,9 IEEE,10 AI4People11). The hope of the authors of
these documents is that the principles put forward, can, as abstractions , act as normative constraints on the ‘do’s’ and
‘don’ts’ of algorithmic use in society.
As Jobin et al. and Floridi point out, this intense interest from
such a broad range of stakeholders reflects not only the need for ethical guidance,
but also the desire of those different parties to shape the ‘ethical AI’ conversation
2  Google’s AI Principles: https​://www.blog.googl​e/techn​ology​/ai/ai-princ​iples​/.
3  IBM’s everyday ethics for AI: https​://www.ibm.com/watso​n/asset​s/duo/pdf/every​dayet​hics.pdf.
4  Microsoft’s guidelines for conversational bots: https​://www.micro​soft.com/en-us/resea​rch/uploa​ds/
prod/2018/11/Bot_Guide​lines​_Nov_2018.pdf.
5  Intel’s recommendations for public policy principles on AI: https​://blogs​.intel​.com/polic​y/2017/10/18/
navee​n-rao-annou​nces-intel​-ai-publi​c-polic​y/#gs.8qnx1​6.
6  The Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI: https​://www.montr​ealde​clara​tion-respo​nsibl​eai.com/thedecla​ratio​n.
7  House of Lords Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence: AI in the UK: ready, willing and able?:
https​://publi​catio​ns.parli​ament​.uk/pa/ld201​719/ldsel​ect/ldai/100/100.pdf.
8  European Commission’s Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI: https​://ec.europ​a.eu/futur​ium/en/aiallia​nce-consu​ltati​on/guide​lines​/1.
9  Future of Life’s Asilomar AI Principles: https​://futur​eofli​fe.org/ai-princ​iples​/.
10  IEEE General Principles of Ethical Autonomous and Intelligent Systems: 
com/2019/04/an-updat​ed-round​-up-of-ethic​al.html.
11  Floridi et al. .
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
around their own priorities. This is an issue that is not unique to debates about the
components of ethical ML, but something that the international human rights community has grappled with for decades, as disagreements over what they are, how
many there are, what they are for, as well as what duties they impose on whom, and
which values of human interests they are supposed to protect , have
never been resolved. It is significant, therefore, that there seems to be an emerging
consensus amongst the members of the ethical ML community with regards to what
exactly ethical ML should aspire to be.
A review of 84 ethical AI documents by Jobin et al. found that although
no single principle featured in all of them, the themes of transparency, justice and
fairness, non-maleficence, responsibility and privacy appeared in over half. Similarly, a systematic review of the literature on ethical technology revealed that the
themes of privacy, security, autonomy, justice, human dignity, control of technology
and the balance of powers, were recurrent . As argued by,
taken together these themes ‘define’ ethically-aligned ML as that which is (a) beneficial to, and respectful of, people and the environment (beneficence); (b) robust and
secure (non-maleficence); (c)respectful of human values (autonomy); (d) fair (justice); and (e) explainable, accountable and understandable (explicability). Given
this emergent consensus in the literature, it is unsurprising that these are also the
themes central to the OECD standard. What is perhaps more surprising s that this
agreement around the basic principles that ethical ML should meet is no longer limited to Europe and the Western world. Just three days after the OECD publication,
the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI), an organisation backed by
the Chinese Ministry of Science and technology and the Beijing municipal government, released its fifteen AI principles for: (a) research and development; (b) use;
and (c) the Governance of AI , which when read in full, bear remarkable similarity to the common framework (see Table 2).
This fragile12 consensus means that there is now the outline of a shared foundation upon which one can build, and that can be used as a benchmark to communicate expectations and evaluate deliverables. Co-design in AI would be more difficult
without this common framework. It is, therefore, a necessary building block in the
creation of an environment that fosters ethical, responsible, and beneficial ML, especially as it also indicates the possibility of a time when the distractive risk of ethics
shopping13 will be lessened. Yet, challenges remain.
12  We say fragile here as there are gaps across the different sets of principles and all use slightly different
terminology, making it hard to guarantee that the exact same meaning is intended in all cases. Furthermore, as these principles have no legal grounding there is nothing to prevent any individual country (or
indeed company) from suddenly choosing to adopt a different set for purposes of convenience or competitiveness.
13  “Digital ethics shopping is the malpractice of choosing, adapting, or revising (“mixing and matching”) ethical principles, guidelines, codes, frameworks or other similar standards (especially but not
only in the ethics of AI), from a variety of available offers, in order to retrofit some pre-existing behaviours (choices, processes, strategies etc.) and hence justify them a posteriori, instead of implementing or
improving new behaviours by benchmarking them against public, ethical standards” .
J. Morley et al.
Table 2   Comparison of ethical principles in recent publications demonstrating the emerging consensus of ‘what’ ethical AI should aspire to be
For a more detailed comparison see Floridi and Cowls and Hagendorff 
AI4People 
Five principles key to any ethical
framework for AI
 
 
Recommendation of the Council of
Artificial Intelligence
 
 
Beijing AI Principles for R&D
 
 
Beneficence
AI must be beneficial to humanity
Respect for human autonomy
Inclusive growth, sustainable
development and well-being
Do good: (covers the need for AI
to promote human society and the
environment)
Non-Maleficence
AI must not infringe on privacy or
undermine security
Prevention of harm
Robustness, security and safety
Be responsible: (covers the need for
researchers to be aware of negative
impacts and take steps to mitigate
Control risks: (covers the need for
developers to improve the robustness and reliability of systems to
ensure data security and AI safety)
AI must protect and enhance our
autonomy and ability to take
decisions and choose between
alternatives
Human-centred values and fairness
For humanity: (covers the need for
AI to serve humanity by conforming to human values including
freedom and autonomy)
AI must promote prosperity and
Human-centred values and fairness
Be diverse and inclusive: (covers
the need for AI to benefit as many
people as possible)
Be ethical: (covers the need to make
the system as fair as possible,
minimising discrimination and
Explicability
AI systems must be understandable
and explainable
Explicability
Transparency and explainability
Accountability
Be ethical: (covers the need for AI
to be transparent, explainable and
predictable)
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
The availability of these ‘agreed’ principles supports but does not yet bring about
actual change in the design of algorithmic systems . As notes, almost all of the guidelines that have been produced to date suggest that
technical solutions exist, but very few provide technical explanations. As a result,
developers are becoming frustrated by how little help is offered by highly abstract
principles when it comes to the ‘day job’ . This is reflected
in the fact that 79% of tech workers report that they would like practical resources
to help them with ethical considerations . Without this
more practical guidance, other risks such as ‘ethics bluewashing’14 and ‘ethics shirking’15 remain .
Such risks, associated with a lack of practical guidance on how to produce ethical
ML, make it clear that the ethical ML community needs to embark on the second
phase of AI ethics: translating between the ‘what’ and the ‘how.’ This is likely to
be hard work. The gap between principles and practice is large, and widened by
complexity, variability, subjectivity, and lack of standardisation, including variable
interpretation of the ‘components’ of each of the ethical principles . Yet, it is not impossible if the right questions are asked and closer attention is payed to how the design process
can influence whether an algorithm is more or less ‘ethically-aligned.’
The sooner we start doing this, the better. If we do not take on the challenge and
develop usable, interpretable and efficacious mechanisms for closing this gap, the lack of guidance may (a) result in the costs of ethical mistakes outweighing the benefits of ethical success (even a single critical ‘AI’
scandal could stifle innovation): (b) undermine public acceptance of algorithmic
systems; (c) reduce adoption of algorithmic systems; and (d) ultimately create a scenario in which society incurs significant opportunity costs . Thus,
the aim of this research project is to identify the methods and tools already available to help developers, engineers, and designers of ML reflect on and apply ‘ethics’
 so that they may know not only what to do or not to do, but
also how to do it, or avoid doing it . We hope that
the results of this research may be easily applicable to other branches of AI.
Methodology
With the aim of identifying the methods and tools available to help developers, engineers and designers of ML reflect on and apply ‘ethics’ in mind, the first task was to
design a typology, for the very practically minded ML community ,
that would ‘match’ the tools and methods identified to the ethical principles outlined
14  “Ethics bluewashing is the malpractice of making unsubstantiated or misleading claims about, or
implementing superficial measures in favour of, the ethical values and benefits of digital processes, products, services, or other solutions in order to appear more digitally-ethical than one is.” .
15  “Ethics shirking is the malpractice of doing increasingly less “ethical work” (such as fulfilling duties,
respecting rights, honouring commitments, etc.) in a given context the lower the return of such ethical
work in that context is mistakenly perceived to be.” .
J. Morley et al.
in Table  2 (summarised as beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and
explicability).
To create this typology, and inspired by Saltz and Dewar who produced a
framework that is meant to help data scientists consider ethical issues at each stage
of a project, the ethical principles were combined with the stages of algorithmic
development outlined in the overview of the Information Commissioner’s Office
(ICO) auditing framework for Artificial Intelligence and its core components,16 as
shown in Table 3. The intention is that this encourages ML developers to go between
decision and ethical principles regularly.
The second task was to identify the tools and methods, and the companies or
individuals researching and producing them, to fill the typology. There were a number of different ways this could have been done. For example, Vakkuri et al. 
sought to answer the question ‘what practices, tools or methods, if any, do industry professionals utilise to implement ethics into AI design and development?’ by
conducting interviews at five companies that develop AI systems in different fields.
However, whilst analysis of the interviews revealed that the developers were aware
of the potential importance of ethics in AI, the companies seemed to provide them
with no tools or methods for implementing ethics. Based on a hypothesis that these
findings did not imply the non-existence of applied-ethics tools and methods, but
rather a lack of progress in the translation of available tools and methods from academic literature or early-stage development and research, to real-life use, this study
used the traditional approach of providing an overarching assessment of a research
topic, namely a literature review .
Scopus,17 arXiv18 and PhilPapers,19 as well as Google search were searched. The
Scopus, arXiv and Google Search searches were conducted using the terms outlined
in Table 4. The PhilPapers search was unstructured, given the nature of the platform, and instead the categories also shown in Table 4 were reviewed. The original
searches were run in February 2019, but weekly alerts were set for all searches and
reviewed up until mid-July 2019. Every result (of which there were originally over
1000) was checked for relevance—either in terms of theoretical framing or in terms
of the use of the tool—actionability by ML developers, and generalisability across
industry sectors. In total, 425 sources20 were reviewed. They provide a practical or
16  More detail is available here: https​://ai-audit​ingfr​amewo​rk.blogs​pot.com/2019/03/an-overv​iew-ofaudit​ing-frame​work-for_26.html.
17  Scopus is the largest abstract and citation database of peer-reviewed literature: scientific journals,
books and conference proceedings: https​://www.scopu​s.com/home.uri.
18  arXiv provides open access to over 1,532,009 e-prints in the fields of physics, mathematics, computer
science, quantitative biology, quantitative finance, statistics, electrical engineering and systems science,
and economics: https​://arxiv​.org/.
19  PhilPapers is an index and bibliography of philosophy which collates research content from journals,
books, open access archives and papers from relevant conferences such as IACAP. The index currently
contains more than 2,377,536 entries. https​://philp​apers​.org/.
20  This total includes references related specifically to discourse ethics after an anonymous reviewer
made the excellent suggestion that this literature be used as a theoretical frame for the typology.
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
Table 3   ‘Applied AI Ethics’ Typology comprising ethical principles and the stages of algorithmic development
Business and use-case
development Problem/
improvements are defined
and use of AI is proposed
Design phase
The business case is turned
into design requirements for
Training and test data
procurement
Initial data sets are
obtained to train and test
AI application is
Deployment
When the AI
system goes
Monitoring
Performance of he
system is assessed
Beneficence
Non-Maleficence
Explicability
J. Morley et al.
theoretical contribution to the answer of the question: ‘how to develop an ethical
algorithmic system.21
The third, and final task, was to review the recommendations, theories, methodologies, and tools outlined in the reviewed sources, and identify where they may fit in
the typology. To do this, each of the high-level principles (beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and explicability) were translated into tangible system
requirements that reflect the meaning of the principles. This is the approach taken by
the EU’s High Level Ethics Group for AI and outlined in Chapter II of Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI: Realising Trustworthy AI which “offers guidance on the
implementation and realisation of Trustworthy AI, via a list of (seven) requirements
that should be met, building on the principles” .
This approach is also used in the disciplinary ethical guidance produce for internet-mediated researchers by the Belmont Report , and by La Fors
et al. who sought to integrate existing design-based ethical approaches for
new technologies by matching lists of values the practical abstraction from mid-level
ethics (principles) to what calls ‘microethics.’ This translation
is a process that gradually reduces the indeterminacy of abstract norms to produce
desiderata for a ‘minimum-viable-ethical-(ML)product’ (MVEP) that can be used by
people who have various disciplinary backgrounds, interests and priorities . The outcome of this translation process is shown in Table 5.
Table 4   Showing the search terms used to search Scopes, arXiv and Google and the categories reviewed
on PhilPapers
Scopus, Google and arXiv search terms (all searched with and
machine learning OR Artificial Intelligence)
Category of PhilPapers reviewed
Information ethics
Public perception
Technology ethics
Intellectual property
Computer ethics
Business model
Autonomy in applied ethics
Evaluation
Beneficence in applied ethics
Data sharing
Harm in applied ethics
Impact assessment
Justice in applied ethics
Human rights in applied ethics
Applied ethics and normative ethics
Legislation
Responsibility in applied ethics
Regulation
Ethical theories in applied ethics
Data minimisation
Transparency
Data protection
21  The full list of sources can be accessed here: https​://mediu​m.com/@jessi​camor​ley/appli​ed-ai-ethic​
s-readi​ng-resou​rce-list-ed931​2499c​0a.
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
Table 5   showing the connection between high-level ethical principles and tangible system requirements as adapted from the methodology outlined in Chapter II of the
European Commission’s “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI”
As highlighted by one of the anonymous reviewers, these categorisations may appear somewhat ad-hoc. For example, one could ask why does ‘protection of fundamental
rights’ belong in the box ‘beneficence’ rather than justice or non-maleficence, and why is ‘privacy and data—protection’ not a fundamental right. This is an important
point. These are very much open questions worthy of deeper philosophical analysis. However, such analysis is outside the scope of this paper. Here the purpose is not to
critique the ethical principles themselves, nor the system requirements for meeting them as set out by the European Commission, we merely seek to use it as an existing
framework and assess the extent to which it is possible for developers to meet these requirements based on the availability (and quality) of the tools and methods that are
publicly available to help them be ‘compliant.’
Beneficence
Non-Maleficence
Explicability
Requirements
Stakeholder participation: to develop systems
that are trustworthy and
support human flourishing, those who will be
affected by the system
should be consulted
Protection of fundamental
Sustainable and environmentally friendly
AI: the system’s supply
chain should be assessed
for resource usage and
energy consumption
Justification: the purpose
for building the system
must be clear and linked
to a clear benefit—system’s should not be built
for the sake of it
Resilience to attack and security: AI
systems should be protected against
vulnerabilities that can allow them to be
exploited by adversaries.
Fallback plan and general safety: AI systems should have safeguards that enable
a fallback plan in case of problems.
Accuracy: for example, documentation
that demonstrates evaluation of whether
the system is properly classifying results.
Privacy and Data Protection: AI systems
should guarantee privacy and data
protection throughout a system’s entire
lifecycle.
Reliability and Reproducibility: does the
system work the same way in a variety of
different scenarios.
Quality and integrity of the data: when
data is gathered it may contain socially
constructed biases, inaccuracies, errors
and mistakes—this needs to be addressed
Social Impact: the effects of system’s on
people’s physical and mental wellbeing
should be carefully considered and
Human agency: users
should be able to make
informed autonomous
decisions regarding AI
Human oversight: may
be achieved through
governance mechanisms
such as human-on-theloop, human-in-the-loop,
human-in-command
Avoidance of unfair bias
Accessibility and universal
Society and democracy: the
impact of the system on institutions, democracy and society
at large should be considered
Auditability: the enablement of
the assessment of algorithms,
data and design processes.
Minimisation and reporting of
negative impacts: measures
should be taken to identify,
assess, document, minimise
and respond to potential negative impacts of AI systems
Trade-offs: when trade-offs
between requirements are
necessary, a process should
be put in place to explicitly
acknowledge the trade-off, and
evaluate it transparently
Redress: mechanism should
be in place to respond when
things go wrong
Traceability: the data sets and
the processes that yield the AI
system’s decision should be
documented
Explainability: the ability to
explain both the technical processes of an AI system and the
related human decisions
Interpretability
J. Morley et al.
Framing the Results
The full typology is available here The purpose
of presenting it is not to imply that it is ‘complete,’ nor that the tools and methodologies highlighted are the best, or indeed the only, means of ‘solving’ each of the
individual ethical problems. How to apply ethics to the development of ML is an
open question that can be solved in a multitude of different ways at different scales
and in different contexts . It would, for example, be entirely possible
to complete the process using a different set of principles and requirements. Instead,
the goal is to provide a synthesis of what tools are currently available to ML developers to encourage the progression of ethical AI from principles to practice and to
signal clearly, to the ‘ethical AI’ community at large, where further work is needed.
Additionally, the purpose of presenting the typology is not to give the impression
that the tools act as means of translating the principles into definitive ‘rules’ that
technology developers should adhere to, or that developers must always complete
one ‘task’ from each of the boxed. This only promotes ethics by ‘tick-box’ . Instead, the typology is intended to eventually be an online searchable
database so that developers can look for the appropriate tools and methodologies
for their given context, and use them to enable a shift from a prescriptive ‘ethicsby-design’ approach to a dialogic, pro-ethical design approach .
In this sense, the tools and methodologies represent a pragmatic version of
Habermas’s discourse ethics22 . In his theory, Habermas argues that morals and norms are not ‘set’ in a top-down fashion
but emerge from a process where those with opposing views, engage in a process
where they rationally consider each other’s arguments, give reasons for their position
and, based upon the greater understanding that results, reassess their position until
all parties involved reach a universally agreeable decision .
This is an approach commonly used in both business and operational research ethics, where questions of ‘what should we do?’ (as opposed to what can we do?) arise
 . This is a rationalisation process that involves
a fair consideration of the practical, the good and the just, and normally relies heavily on language (discussion), for both the emergence of agreed upon norms or standards, and their reproduction. In the present scenario of developers rationalising ML
design decisions to ensure that they are ethically-optimised, the tools and methods
in the typology replace the role of language and act as the medium for identifying,
checking, creating and re-examining ideas and giving fair consideration to differing interests, values and norms . For example, the data
nutrition tool provides a means of prompting a discussion and
re-evaluation of the ethical implications of using a specific dataset for an ML development project, and the audit methodologies of ensure that
external voices, who may have an opposing view as to whether or not an ML-system
22  We would like to thank one of the anonymous reviewers for suggesting this framing, it represents a
significant improvement to the theoretical grounding of this paper.
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
in use is ethically-aligned, have a mechanism for questioning the rational of design
decisions and requesting their change if necessary. It is within this frame that we
present an overview of our findings in the next section.
Discussion of Initial Results
Interpretation of the results of the literature review and the resulting typology are
likely to be context specific. Those with different disciplinary backgrounds (engineering, moral philosophy, sociology etc.) will see different patterns, and different
meanings in these patterns. This kind of multidisciplinary reflection on what the
presence or absence of different tools and methods, and their function, might mean
is to be encouraged. To start the conversation, this section highlights the following
three headings:
1. an overreliance on ‘explicability’;
2. a focus on the need to ‘protect’ the individual over the collective; and
3. a lack of usability
They are interrelated, but for the sake of simplicity, let us analyse each separately.
Explicability as the All‑Encompassing Principle23
To start with the most obvious observation: the availability of tools and methods is
not evenly distributed across the typology, either in terms of the ethical principles
or in terms of the stages of development. For example, whilst a developer looking
to ensure their ML algorithm is ‘non-maleficent’ has a section of tools available to
them for each development stage—as highlighted in Table 6—the tools and methods
designed to enable developers to meet the principle or ‘beneficence’ are almost all
intended to be used during the initial planning stages of development (i.e. business
and use-case development design phases). However, the most noticeable ‘skew’ is
towards post hoc explanations; with those seeking to meet the principle of explicability during the testing phase having the greatest range of tools and methods from
which to choose.
There are likely to be several reasons for this, but two stand out. The first and
simpler is that the ‘problem’ of ‘interpreting’ an algorithmic decision seems tractable from a mathematical standpoint, so the principle of explicability has come to be
seen as the most suitable for a technical fix . The second is that
‘explicability’ is not, from a moral philosophy perspective, a moral principle like
23  We recognise that that there is an extremely rich literature on ML fairness which this paper does not
cover. Much (although not all) of this literature focuses on the definition of fairness and the statistical
means of implementing this which sits slightly outside the scope of the typology which aims to highlight
tools and methods that facilitate discussion about the ethical nature of one design decision over another.
To fit an entire decade’s worth of literature into a row on a table would not do it justice.
J. Morley et al.
Table 6   Applied AI ethics typology with illustrative non-maleficence example. A developer looking to ensure their ML solutions meets the principle of non-maleficence
can start with the foundational principles of privacy by design to guide ideation appropriately, use techniques such as data minimisation , training for adversarial robustness , and decision-making verification in the train-build-test phases, and end by
launching the system with an accompanying privacy audit procedure 
Business and use-case
development
Problem/improvements
are defined and use of
AI is proposed
Design Phase
The business case is
turned into design
requirements for
Training and test
data procurement
Initial data sets are
obtained to train and
test the model
AI application is built
The system is tested
Deployment
When the AI system
Monitoring
Performance of the
system is assessed
Beneficence
Non-maleficence
 
outline 7 foundational principles for
Privacy by Design:
1.Proactive not reactive: preventative not
2.Privacy as the default
3. Privacy embedded
into design
4. Full functionality = positive sum,
not zero sum
5. End-to-end lifecycle
protection
6. Visibility and Transparency
7. Respect for user
 set
out a step-by-step
privacy impact
assessment (PIA) to
enable companies to
achieve ‘privacy-bydesign’
 
provide the python
code to create
DataMin (a data
minimiser—a preprocessor modifying
the input of data to
ensure only the data
needed are available
to the program) as a
series of Java source
code files which
can be run on the
data sources points
before disclosing
 provide a
practical introduction, from a mathematical and coding
perspective, to the
topic of adversarial
robustness with the
idea being that it
is possible to train
deep learning classifiers to be resistant to adversarial
attacks: https​://
adver​saria​l-ml-tutor​
 
outline a methodology for verifying
the decisionmaking of an
autonomous agent
to confirm that the
controlling agent
never deliberately
makes a choice
it believes to be
(AI Now Institute
Algorithmic
Accountability
Policy Toolkit)
provides a list of
questions policy
and legal advocates
will want to ask
when considering
introducing an automated system into a
public service and
provides detailed
guidance on where
in the procurement
process to ask
questions about
accountability and
potential harm https​
://ainow​insti​tute.
org/aap-toolk​it.pdf
 outline
a structured privacy
audit procedure based
on the most widely
adopted privacy
principles:
-Purpose specification
-Collection limitation
-Data quality
-Use retention and disclosure limitation
-Safety safeguards
-Individual participation
-Accountability
Explicability
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
the other four principles. Instead, it can be seen as a second order principle, that has
come to be of vital importance in the ethical-ML community because, to a certain
extent, it is linked with all the other four principles.24 Indeed, it is argued that if a
system is explicable (explainable and interpretable) it is inherently more transparent and therefore more accountable in terms of its decision-making properties and
the extent to which they include human oversight and are fair, robust and justifiable
 .
Assuming temporarily that this is indeed the case,25 and that by dint of being
explicable an ML system can more easily meet the principles of beneficence, nonmaleficence, autonomy and justice, then the fact that the ethical ML community has
focused so extensively on developing tools for explanations may not seem problematic. However, as the majority of tools and methods that sit in the concentration at
the intersection of explicability and testing are primarily statistical in nature, this
would be a very mechanistic view because such ‘solutions’—e.g. LIME , SHAP , Sensitivity Analysis —do not really succeed in helping developers provide meaningful explanations that give individuals greater control over what is
being inferred about them from their data. As such, the existence of these tools is at
most necessary but not sufficient.
From a more humanistic, and realistic perspective, in order to satisfy all the five
principles a system needs to be designed from the very beginning to be a transparent
sociotechnical system . To achieve this level of transparency, accountability or explicability, it is essential that those analysing a system
are able to “understand what it was designed to do, how it was designed to do that,
and why it was designed in that particular way instead of some other way” . This kind of scrutiny will only be possible through a combination of tools or
processes that facilitate auditing, transparent development, education of the public,
and social awareness of developers . As such, there should ideally be
tools and methods available for each of the boxes in the typology, accepting that
there may be areas of the typology which are more significant for ML practitioners
than others.
Furthermore, available of tools and methods in a variety of typology areas is also
important in the context of culturally and contextually specific ML ethics. Not all of
the principles will be of equal importance in all contexts. For example, in the case
of national security systems non-maleficence may be of considerably higher importance than explicability. If the community prioritises the development of tools and
methods for one of the principles over the others, it will be denying itself the opportunity for such flexibility.
24  We would like to thank one of the anonymous reviewers for making this important point.
25  It is entirely possible that this is not always the case and that there may be instances where an explicable system has, for example, still had a negative impact on autonomy. Additionally, this view that transparency as explanation is key to accountability is one that is inherently western in perspective and those
of other cultures may have a different viewpoint. We make the assumption here for simplicity’s sake.
J. Morley et al.
An Individual Focus
The next observation of note is that few of the available tools surveyed provide
meaningful ways to assess, and respond to, the impact that the data-processing
involved in their ML algorithm has on an individual, and even less on the impact on
society as a whole . This is evident from the very
sparsely populated ‘deployment’ column of the typology. Its emptiness implies that
the need for pro-ethically designed human–computer interaction (at an individual
level) or networks of ML systems (at a group level) has been paid little heed. This is
likely because it is difficult to translate complex human behaviour into design tools
that are simple to use and generalisable.
This might not seem particularly important, but the impact this has on the overall acceptance of AI in society could be significant. For example, it is unlikely that
counterfactual explanations26 (i.e. if input variable x had been different, the output
variable y would have been different as well)—although important for many reasons—will be sufficient to improve the interpretability of recommendations made by
black-box systems for the average member of the public or the technical community.
If such methods become the de facto means of providing explanations, the extent to
which the ‘algorithmic society’ is interpretable to the general public will be very
limited. And counterfactual explanations could easily be embraced by actors uninterested in providing factual explanations, because the counterfactual ones provide
a vast menu of options, which may easily decrease the level of responsibility of the
actor choosing it. For example, if a mortgage provider does not offer a mortgage, the
factual reasons may be a bias, for example the gender of the applicant, but the provider could choose from a vast menu of innocuous, counterfactual explanations—if
some variable x had been different the mortgage might have been provided—e.g.,
a much higher income, more collaterals, lower amount, and so forth, without ever
mentioning the factual cause, i.e. the gender of the applicant. All this could considerably limit the level of trust people are willing to place in such systems.
This potential threat to trust is further heightened by the fact that the lack of
attention paid to impact means that ML developers are currently hampered in their
ability to develop systems that promote user’s (individual or group’s) autonomy.
For example, currently there is an assumption that prediction = decision, and little
research has been done (in the context of ML) on how people translate predictions
into actionable decisions. As such, tools that, for example, help developers pro-ethically design solutions that do not overly restrict the user’s options in acting on this
prediction (i.e. tools that promote the user’s autonomy) are in short supply . F users feel as though their decisions are being curtailed and controlled by systems that they do not understand, it is very unlikely that these systems
will meet the condition of social acceptability, never mind the condition of social
preferability which should be the aim for truly ethically designed ML .
26  See for example Johansson et al. , Lakkaraju et al. , Russell et al. , and Wachter
et al. .
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
A Lack of Usability
Finally, the tools and methods included in the typology are positioned as discourse
aids, designed to facilitate and document rational decisions about trade-offs in the
design process that may make an ML system more or less ethically-aligned. It is
possible to see the potential for the tools identified to play this role. For example,
at the “beneficence → use-case → design” intersection, there are a number of tools
highlighted to help elicit social values. These include the responsible research and
innovation methodology employed by the European Commission’s Human Brain
Project , the field guide to human-centred design and Involve and DeepMind’s guidance on stimulating effective public engagement on the ethics of Artificial Intelligence . Such tools
and methods could be used to help designers pro-ethically deal with value pluralism (i.e. variation in values across different population groups). However, the vast
majority of these tools and methods are not actionable as they offer little help on
how to use them in practice . Even when there are open-source
code libraries available, documentation is often limited, and the skill-level required
for use is high.
This overarching lack of usability of the tools and methods highlighted in the
typology means that, although they are promising, they require more work before
being ‘production-ready.’ As a result, applying ethics still requires considerable
amounts of effort on behalf of the ML developers undermining one of the main
aims of developing and using technologically-based ‘tools’: to remove friction from
applied ethics. Furthermore, until these tools are embedded in practice and tested
in the ‘real world,’ it is extremely unclear what impact they will have on the overall ‘governability’ of the algorithmic ecosystem. For example Binns asks
how an accountable system actually will be held accountable for an ‘unfair’ decision
in a way that is acceptable to all. This makes it almost impossible to measure the
impact, ‘define success’, and document the performance of
a new design methodology or tool. As a result, there is no clear problem statement
(and therefore no clear business case) that the ML community can use to justify time
and financial investment in developing much-needed tools and techniques that truly
enable pro-ethical design. Consequently, there is no guaranatee that the so-called
discursive devices do anything other than help the groups in society who already
have the loudest voices embed and protect their values in design tools, and then into
the resultant ML systems.
A Way Forward
Social scientists and political philosophers (from Rousseau and
Kant, to Rawls and Habermas) , are used to dealing with the kind of
plurality and subjectivity informing the entire ethical ML field . Answering questions such as, what happens when individual level and group
level ‘ethics’ interact, and what key terms such as ‘fairness,’ ‘accountability,’ ‘transparency’ and ‘interpretability’ actually mean when there are currently a myriad
J. Morley et al.
definitions is standard fare for individuals with social science, economy, philosophy or legal training. This is why argues
for a contextual account of privacy, one that recognises the varying nature of informational norms and state that transparency is only meaningful in the context of a defined critical audience.
The ML developer community, in contrast, may be less used to dealing with
this kind of difficulty, and more used to scenarios where there is at least a seemingly quantifiable relationship between input and output. As a result, the existing
approaches to designing and programming ethical ML fail to resolve what terms the moral-semantic trilemma, as almost all tools and methods highlighted in the typology are either too semantically strict, too semantically flexible, or
overly unpredictable .
Bridging together multi-disciplinary researchers into the development process of
pro-ethical design tools and methodologies will be essential. A multi-disciplinary
approach will help the ethical ML community overcome obstacles concerning social
complexity, embrace uncertainty, and accept that: (1) AI is built on assumptions; (2)
human behaviour is complex; (3) algorithms can have unfair consequences; (4) algorithmic predictions can be hard to interpret ; (5) tradeoffs are usually inevitable; and (6) positive, ethical features are open to progressive
increase, that is an algorithm can be increasingly fair, and fairer than another algorithm or a previous version, but makes no sense to say that it is fair or unfair n absolute terms (compare this to the case of speed: it makes sense to say that an object
is moving quickly, or that it is fast or faster than another, but not that it is fast).
The resulting collaborations are likely to be highly beneficial for the development of
applied ethical tools and methodologies for at least three reasons.
First, it will help ensure that the tools and methods developed do not only protect value-pluralism in silico (i.e. the pluralistic values of developers) but also in
society. Embracing uncertainty and disciplinary diversity will naturally encourage
ML experts to develop tools that facilitate more probing and open (i.e. philosophical) questions that will lead to more nuanced and reasoned answers
and hence decisions about why and when certain trade-offs, for example, between
accuracy and interpretability , are justified, based on
factors such as proportionality to risk .
Second, it will encourage a more flexible and reflexive approach to applied ethics
that is more in-keeping with the way ML systems are actually developed: it is not
think and then code, but rather think and code. In other words, it will accelerate the
move away from the ‘move fast and break things’ approach towards an approach of
‘make haste slowly’ (festina lente) .
Finally, it would also mitigate a significant risk—posed by the current sporadic
application of ethical-design tools and/or methods during different development
stages—of the ethical principles having been written into the business and use-case,
but coded out by the time a system gets to deployment.
To enable developers to embrace this vulnerable uncertainty, it will be important to promote the development of tools, like DotEveryone’s agile consequence
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
scanning event , and the Responsible Double Diamond
‘R2D2’ that prompt developers to reflect on the impacts
(both direct and indirect) of the solutions they are developing on the ‘end user’,
and on how these impacts can be altered by seemingly minor design decisions at
each stage of development. In other words, ML developers should regularly:
(a) look back and ask: ‘if I was abiding by ethical principles x in my design then,
am I still now? ; and
(b) look forward and ask: ‘if I am abiding by ethical principles x in my design now,
should I continue to do so? And how? By using foresight methodologies , such as AI Now’s Algorithmic
Impact Assessment Framework .
Taking this approach recognises that, in a digital context, ethical principles are
not simply either applied or not, but regularly re-applied or applied differently,
or better, or ignored as algorithmic systems are developed, deployed, configured
 tested, revised and re-tuned (Arnold and Scheutz
This approach to applied ML ethics of regular reflection and application will
heavily rely on (i) the creation of more tools—especially to fill the white spaces
of the typology (for the reasons discussed in the previous section) and (ii) acceleration of tools’ maturity level from research labs into production environments.
To achieve (i)–(ii), society needs to come together in communities comprised of
multi-disciplinary researchers , including innovators, policymakers, citizens, developers and designers , to foster
the development of: (1) common knowledge and understanding; and (2) a common goal to be achieved from the development of tools and methodologies for
applied AI ethics . These outputs will provide a reason, a mechanism, and a consensus to coordinate the efforts behind tool development. Ultimately, this will produce better results than the current approach, which allows a
‘thousand flowers to bloom’ but fails to create tools that fill in the gaps (this is a
typical ‘intellectual market’ failure), and may encourage competition to produce
preferable options. The opportunity that this presents is too great to be delayed,
the ML research community should start collaborating now with a specific focus
1. the development of a common language;
2. the creation of tools that ensure people, as individuals, groups and societies, are
given an equal and meaningful opportunity to participate in the design of algorithmic solutions at each stage of development;
3. the evaluation of the tools that are currently in existence so that what works, what
can be improved, and what needs to be developed can be identified;
4. a commitment to reproducibility, openness, and sharing of knowledge and technical solutions (e.g. software), also in view of satisfying (2) and supporting (3);
J. Morley et al.
5. the creation of ‘worked examples’ of how tools have been used to satisfy one of
the principles at each stage of the development and how consistency was maintained throughout the use of different tools’
6. the evaluation and creation of pro-ethical business models and incentive structures
that balance the costs and rewards of investing in ethical AI across society, also
in view of supporting (2)–(4).
Limitations
All research projects have their limitations and this one is no exception. The first is
that the research question ‘what tools and methods are available for ML developers
to ‘apply’ ethics to each stage of the ML system design’ is very broad. This lack
of specificity meant that the available literature was excessive and growing all the
time, making compromises from the perspective of what is practically essential. It
is certain that such compromises, for example which databases to search and the
decision to restrict the tools reviewed to those that were not industry sector-specific,
have resulted in us missing a large number of tools and methods that are publicly
available. Building on this, it is again, very likely that there are a number of proprietary applied ethics tools and methods being developed by private companies for
internal or consulting purposes that we will have missed, for example the ‘suite of
customisable frameworks, tools and processes’ that make up consulting firm PWC’s
“Responsible AI Toolkit” .
The second limitation is related to the design of the typology itself. As attest, the “neat theoretical distinction between different stages of technological innovation does not always exist in practice, especially not in the development of big data technologies.” This implies that by categorising the tools by stage
of development, we might be reducing their usability as developers in different contexts might follow a different pattern or feel as though it is ‘too late’ to, for example,
engage in stakeholder engagement if they have reached the ‘build’ phase of their
project, whereas the reality it is never too late.
Finally, the last limitations has already been mentioned and concerns the lack of
clarity regarding how the tools and methods that have been identified will improve
the governability of algorithmic systems. Exactly how to govern ML remains an
open question, although it appears that there is a growing acceptance among tech
workers (in the UK at least) that government regulation will be necessary . The typology can at least be seen as a mechanism for facilitating co-regulation. Governments are increasingly setting standards and system
requirements for ethical ML, but delegating the means for meeting these to the
developers themselves —the tools and methods of the typology can
be seen as the means of providing evidence of compliance. In this way, the typology
(and the tools and methods it contains within) help developers take responsibility for
embedding ethics in the part of the development, deployment, and use of ML solutions that they control . The extent to which this makes a difference is yet to be determined.
From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI…
Conclusion
The realisation that there is a need to embed ethical considerations into the
design of computational, specifically algorithmic, artefacts is not new. Samuel
 , Wiener and Turing were vocal about this in the 1940s and 1960s
 . However, as the complexity of algorithmic systems and our reliance on them increases , so too does the need to be critical
 AI governance and design solutions. It is possible to
design things to be better , but this will require more coordinated
and sophisticated approaches to translating ethical principles
into design protocols .
This call for increased coordination is necessary. The research has shown that
there is an uneven distribution of effort across the ‘Applied AI Ethics’ typology.
Furthermore, many of the tools included are relatively immature. This makes
it difficult to assess the scope of their use and consequently hard to encourage their adoption by the
practically-minded ML developers, especially when the competitive advantage of
more ethically-aligned AI is not yet clear. Taking the time to complete any of
the ‘exercises’ suggested by the methods reviewed, and investing in the development of new tools or methods that ‘complete the pipeline’, add additional work
and costs to the research and development process. Such overheads may directly
conflict with short-term, commercial incentives. Indeed, a full ethical approach
to AI design, development, deployment, and use may represent a competitive disadvantage for any single ‘first mover’. The threat that this short-termism poses
to the development of truly ethical ML is significant. Unless a longer-term and
sector-wide perspective in terms of return on investment can be encouraged—so
that mechanisms are developed to close the gap between what and how—the lack
of guidance may (a) result in the costs of ethical mistakes outweighing the benefits of ethical successes; (b) undermine public acceptance of algorithmic systems,
even to the point of a backlash ; and (c) reduce adoption of algorithmic systems. Such a resultant lack of adoption could then turn into a loss of
confidence from investors and research funders, and undermine AI research. Lack
of incentives to develop AI ethically could turn into lack of interest in developing
AI tout court. This would not be unprecedented. One only needs to recall the dramatic reduction in funding available for AI research following the 1973 publication of Artificial Intelligence: A General Survey and its criticism
of the fact that AI research had not lived up to its over-hyped expectations.
It this were to happen today, the opportunity costs that would be incurred
by society would be significant . The need for ‘AI Ethics’ has
arisen from the fact that poorly designed AI systems can cause very significant
harm. For example, predictive policing tools may lead to more people of colour
being arrested, jailed or physically harmed by policy . Likewise, the
potential benefits of pro-ethically designed AI systems are considerable. This is
especially true in the field of AI for Social Good where various AI applications
are making possible socially good outcomes that were once less easily achievable,
J. Morley et al.
unfeasible, or unaffordable . So, there is an urgent need to
progress research in this area.
Constructive patience needs to be exercised, by society and by the ethical AI
community, because such progress on the question of ‘how’ to meet the ‘what’ will
not be quick, and there will definitely be mistakes along the way. The ML research
community will have to accept this, trust that everyone is trying to meet the same
end-goal, but also accept that it is unacceptable to delay any full commitment, when
it is known how serious the consequences of doing nothing are. Only by accepting
this can society by positive about the opportunities presented by AI to be seized,
whilst remaining mindful of the potential costs to be avoided .
Funding  This study was funded by Digital Catapult.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
ses/by/4.0/.