Recommendation Systems:
Decision Support for the Information Economy
Edward A. Stohr
Sivakumar Viswanathan
Workins Paper Series
Stern #IS-98-1 7
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Recommendation Systems:
Decision Support for the lnformation
Edward A. Stohr
Sivakumar Viswanathan
lnformation Systems Department
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 1001 2
To be published in Kenneth E. Kendall (ed.), "Emerging lnformation Technologies.", Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publication, Inc., 1999.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
INTRODUCTION
It is five years hence, the dawn of the new millenium. The World Wide Web
serves two hundred million people and is inhabited by perhaps a billion software agents.
A large part of the world economy is on-line. Organizations are networked in a constantly
changing kaleidoscope of relationships - some fleeting others mutating slowly.
Competition is for the intelligent and agile - those organizations that have mastered the
arts of discovering new value propositions, nurturing customer relationships, and
executing their core functions rapidly and faultlessly. Human beings in the developed
nations are totally dependent on the electronic world for their education, entertainment,
communication and commerce.
Is such a world possible? Simple extrapolation of current exponential growth
trends indicates that the above human and software agent population figures are not
unreasonable. The feasibility of such a vision, however, rests on issues of system
stability and human benefits. Can an electronic economy making millions of decisions
per minute and executing billions of transactions and transferring trillions of dollars per
day remain stable? Or will there be an electronic world financial crisis that will make the
recent Asian crisis seem like a minor blip? Will the evolving electronic society actually
benefit mankind? Will it create an elite of whiz-kid millionaires controlling vast electronic
financial resources and a huge underclass of the less fortunate or less able? We are
already experiencing an almost unbearable flood of information and communication
requirements that sap our time, make leisure more difficult, and our time more and more
valuable. How can we realize the benefits of the increased productivity that we feel
instinctively can be provided by the information revolution?
The questions raised in the last paragraph, can probably only be answered in
practice as new markets, organizational forms and life styles evolve from the maelstrom
of electronic commerce. In this chapter, we will concentrate on only one necessary
condition for the existence of such an electronic world. Our thesis is that we need new
technologies to help individuals and firms cope with the evolving information ecology -
coping technologies to manage the information producing technologies (which if
unchecked could actually become disabling technologies). The emphasis in information
technology research and practice must turn from producing information to controlling and
managing it. Shaping the information into forms that are more useful and accessible,
condensing it, filtering out noisy elements, finding useful nuggets of information on
demand, analyzing them, and creating new knowledge - using every means at our
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
disposal to make the new information universe friendly, understandable, and useful. The
technologies for doing this are exciting and challenging. Some have been around since
the early days of computer and management science, others are emerging in response
to the new electronic realities.
The technologies fall into four groups (see Figure 1). The technologies for
discovering information: search engines, directories, electronic markets and electronic
auctions. The technologies for controlling and restricting the flow of information to which
we are subject: filtering and alerting systems. The technologies for understanding
information: knowledge representation, visualization, data mining, and the tools of
statistics and management science. The technologies to assist decision making:
recommender systems and "electronic butler" systems . The first three categories of
technology - those for discovering, controlling and understanding information - provide
support for the fourth category - that of decision support and decision making
discovery technologies
Technologies for controlling
and filtering information Y
Technologies for
understanding information
A Classification of Technologies for Coping with the Information Explosion
In this chapter, we will concentrate on the fourth set of technologies and within
Decision support and
decision making technologies
that only on a new class of systems that have been called recommender systems. Our
objective is to provide an overview of recommender systems and their role in the
information economy. We look at where they fit in the panoply of technologies that have
been developed to support decision making in electronic commerce, their technical
foundations, managerial implications, and issues that surround their deployment and
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS AS A DECISION TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation systems provide information about the relative merits of
alternative courses of action. In everyday life, when faced with a choice for which we
lack adequate information, we often turn to various guides such as Consumer Choice
magazine, Zagat's restaurant guide, knowledgeable friends, experts, and so on. The
function of these guides is to increase the probability that we will be satisfied with the
results of our decision making. Recommendation systems are electronic versions of
such everyday systems.
There is a subtle definitional issue. As originally conceived, and by common
usage, recommender systems are automated systems in which people (recommenders)
provide recommendations as inputs, which the systems then aggregate and direct to
appropriate recipients . This is narrower than the definition of the previous
paragraph, which essentially says that recommender systems make recommendations
(by any means.) We prefer the broader definition: first, because it is more goal-oriented
and second, because the narrow definition seems unnecessarily restrictive. Strictly
interpreted, for example, the narrow definition would not include the use of intelligent
software agents as recommenders. Nor would it include information filtering systems that
make recommendations based on content analysis in which a user's interest profile is
matched with document content profiles. Worse still, many recommender systems are
really hybrids in which the source of the recommendations is both human and non-
human (collaborative filtering plus content analysis, for example). To distinguish
between the broad and narrow definitions of recommender systems, we will call the
former "recommendation" systems. Because this is a new area for computer support, it
is worth while taking some pains to make the definitions as clear as possible. We move
from the general to the particular (see figure 2.).
The objective of decision technologies in general is to overcome the limits of our
bounded rationality - to help us make better decisions, to make them more quickly, and
with less expenditure of effort. Decision making technologies automate the decision
making process and remove the human element. Automated inventory systems are a
prime example. More recently, has suggested that automated decision making be
extended to include everyday activities such as shopping. He has proposed "electronic
butler" services that use the past history of user purchases to infer a subset of
purchases that can be made automatically without user consultation.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Decision Technoloaies
Decision Support Systems
Decision Making Systems
Recommender Systems (Broad Definition)
= Recommendation Systems
(Narrow Definition)
/ Collaborative Filterina I
Partial Classification of Decision Technologies
Decision Support Systems (DSS) were originally conceived as an alternative to
computerized decision making systems for use in situations in which the human inputs
were necessary because the decision situation was not highly structured
(programmable) and therefore, required human judgement and intuition . The role of
the computer was to provide information via databases or models to help in the decision
making process [I]. An interesting consequence of the new information economy is that
a decision situation can become unstructured as a result of a glut of information and the
speed at which decisions have to be made. Users then need computer support, not only
because of the complexity of a given decision (the original DSS concept), but also,
because they lack the processing speed and power to cope with an overload of
information and a myriad of decisions that demand attention.
Recommendation systems, systems that evaluate choices, fall in this category of
decision support. Typical uses of recommendation systems have been to suggest the
information that a decision maker might need (filtering systems), and to rank films,
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
restaurants, books, and so on'. These are small decisions in a way, but demanding in
the aggregate. However, we do not mean to restrict recommendation systems to low or
medium matters of importance to individuals or organizations. Systems to assist users
in decisions of major consequence, such as equipment purchases for corporations and
home or automobile purchases for individuals, can also be envisaged as outlined below.
Recommendation systems may use all or any information from whatever source and
make use of very different processing algorithms to form their recommendations.
Recommender systems (narrow definition) on the other hand, perform the same
function as recommendation systems, but involve other human beings as
recommenders. The recommenders may or may not explicitly collaborate with the
recipients of the information because the recommenders and recipients may not be
known to each other .
Finally, collaborative filtering systems are special purpose recommender systems
that filter or restrict the information delivered to recipients. They are narrower in scope
than recommender systems because the latter can suggest new items of interest rather
than just filter out those that are presumed to have little or no interest . Typically,
collaborative filtering systems have been used to filter information from Internet Usenet
groups (as in Grouplens ), provide recommendations on books (as in Amazon.com),
etc. Collaborative filtering techniques can differ in their implementation and approach,
but all incorporate the use of individuals to annotate or recommend items to others. Of
course, the same individual can alternate between the roles of recommender and
recipient at different times.
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS WITHIN A FRAMEWORK FOR ELECTRONIC
The World Wide Web has dramatically altered the availability of information for
users, but most of this information is useless or of poor quality. Given the magnitude and
diversity of content and its uncertain quality, familiar search engines, such as Lycos,
Yahoo and Alta Vista, have proved inadequate. Typically, these search engines employ
a fairly traditional information retrieval (IR) paradigm augmented by software agents
(spiders) that continuously examine and index the content of millions of web sites. The
metamorphosis of the World Wide Web from a digital library (where the focus was on
' Many existing examples of recommendation systems fit the narrow definition of recommender systems.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
retrieval) into an electronic marketplace (where the focus now is on transactions) alters
the rules of the game, calling for a new perspective and a broad range of new
capabilities, institutions and control mechanisms. The following framework provides
some pointers for future directions and some insights into the role of recommendation
systems in the information economy.
The framework is based on the concept of infermediafion in an economy. Just as
the traditional economy is populated by physical intermediaries in various forms, who
serve to facilitate transactions, the information economy requires the service of
'electronic intermediaries' serving similar roles2 on the Web. Intermediaries, by nature of
their role-specialization, help to reduce the risks and uncertainties that plague
transactions in a traditional economy. In addition, intermediaries add value by engaging
in activities that help reduce coordination costs and provide economies of scale and
scope. The information economy could, similarly, be greatly benefited by intermediaries
who can help facilitate transactions.
The framework in Figure 3 is an adaptation and expansion of that contained in
[?I. The framework proposes a hierarchy of ten levels of functionality. While some of the
levels of functionality primarily focus on the needs of customers, others serve the needs
of suppliers1 manufacturers. Note that these levels are not necessarily conceptualized as
strict levels in a hierarchy, i.e., we do not claim that higher levels of functionality, by
themselves, add more value than those below them. While the higher levels of
functionality indicate potentially greater benefit, they also rank higher in terms of
complexity of implementation and execution besides requiring human intervention and
consensus among various players. The higher levels of functionality, being inherently
more complex in nature, have been slower to evolve. Thus the various levels in the
framework may be conceptualized as stages in the evolution of e-commerce systems.
Web-based agents typically focus on one or more levels of functionality and strive to
gain efficiencies in these. A more complete description of the framework and its
implications for the design of web-based agents and for electronic commerce in general
is contained in .
2 Since we are primarily concerned with 'electronic intermediaries' in an information economy, we restrict
our discussion to intermehay functions that lend themselves to automation.
Center for Digital Econon~y Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Automated Neeohahoii
Negotiation
Product guarantees
Rahrigr, Reviewr
Recornmendahnnr, ctc
Agents that track consluirler
preferences & buy~rig habrts
Online Aiichow, Bargamnug,
banner ads etc
E-mad, d~scuss~ori
Effectiveness
A Value Framework for Web-based Agents
The above framework highlights the role of recommendation systems in
electronic commerce. Recommendation systems are software agents that attempt to
incorporate the three functions of search and retrieval, eliciting customer information,
and signaling quality. In addition, because they convey quality information, they help
mitigate the risk of executing transactions on the Web.
The combination of the three functions of search and retrieval, eliciting customer
information, and signaling quality in recommendation systems makes them ideally
suitable for "one-to-one marketing" applications. In one-to-one marketing, firms seek to
learn and satisfy the unique needs of each individual customer . For example,
Individual Inc.'s First! Service allows it to compete with wire, clipping and information
retrieval services [ Clients such as MCI Telecommunications,
McKinsey & Co., and Avon products, use the service to have customized information
delivered to executives via fax, e-mail, Lotus Notes, or their corporate Intranets. The
executives first provide simple descriptions of the kinds of items in which they are
interested. The system then fine tunes these "user profiles" by asking the executives to
rate each received article as being of high, medium or low relevance. Over time, the
ratio of medium plus highly relevant articles to the total number of articles received by
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
the executives, is reported to be as high as 80% . Firefly (hnp:llwwtv.firefly.com/)
another example of a commercial recommendation system that facilitates one-to-one
marketing. The Firefly software enables businesses to create user-centric applications
and services that manage personal profiles and personalize services for individual users.
For example, Filmfinder (http:ll~iww.filmfinder.conl/),
a site that recommends movies, is
enabled by Firefly. Other companies that have formed partnerships with Firefly include
Barnes and Noble, Virtual Emporium, and Yahoo.
Other applications of recommendation systems on the Web include: personalized
recommendations of URLs, filtering of Usenet articles, blocking access to undesirable
Web sites, one-to-one marketing of banking services, and shopping services for music,
video and books . Some of these applications are discussed in more detail below.
Within an organization, recommendation systems will be increasingly used in
organizational learning applications in which employees share knowledge by
commenting on and rating various company products, sales leads and practices [ZO].
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL - THE UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGY FOR
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS
To understand recommendation systems, it is useful to compare them with the
information retrieval systems from which they have evolved. In this section, we provide a
broad overview of IR as a background to the framework for recommendation systems
that we develop in the next section.
An information retrieval system helps users find documents that best satisfy their
need for information, or helps them obtain information from knowledge sources for the
purposes of problem management . The term 'information retrieval' is primarily
associated with text retrieval. The three major areas of concern in IR Research are
depicted in Figure 4. These are: representation of the individual's information needs;
representation of the meaning of the texts/documents, and comparison of the two to find
the most suitable match.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Basic Inference Network
Information Needs Representation - The information needs of a user are usually
represented by means of a query consisting of a simple term or a set of terms. The
query terms are usually keywords or phrases involving Boolean representation.
However, given the richness of natural language, query terms are usually not
accurately indicative of the user's true meaning.
Document Representation - Documents or texts produced by different sources are
indexed (manually or automatically) to extract terms that are best representative of
the documents. As in the case of queries, these document terms too are not
accurately indicative of the actual document meaning. Various indexing techniques
(for example Probabilistic Indexing and TF-IDF 1181) have been developed in an
attempt to more accurately characterize the information content of the document.
Retrieval Techniques -The third area of concern is the comparison of the query
terms with the document terms, based on which the relevant documents are
retrieved. Most of the major IR models have been primarily concerned with this
process of comparison.
It is inherently difficult to satisfy specific user needs with a document database
Center for Digital Econotny Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
indexed by librarians to serve the needs of a general audience. "Associative" search
techniques based on probability, statistics, set theory and logic (for example, Boolean
models, Vector Space Models and Probabilistic Retrieval Models [IT]), enable the
retrieval of documents that are "close" in some sense to the user's query. These same
measures of closeness can narrow the user's search for relevant documents by
providing a system-determined relevance rating or ranking of retrieved articles in terms
of their "relevance" to the user's request. In addition, "relevance feedback techniques -
continuously improving queries by asking the user to rate the relevance of retrieved
articles - can greatly improve the performance of IR systems. IR systems that provide
relevance ratings are a specialized form of recommendation system as we have defined
Current IR systems depend on the 'best-match' principle, i.e., given a query, the best
possible system response is the text whose representation most closely matches it .
The 'best-match' principle in turn depends on the assumption of equivalence between
the expression of need and the document text in that it treats the representation of the
need as a representation of the document that is ideal for resolving that need. The best-
match principle looks first for a document, which is just like the expression of need; that
is, which is functionally equivalent to it 141. If we know precisely what the user wants and
if we know what documents best satisfy this need, then the problem reduces to a simple
matching process. Unfortunately, "noise" is inherent in each of the IR components in
Figure 4. Users generally cannot specify precisely what information is needed to resolve
a particular problem, documents are represented imprecisely by the document terms,
and, while many different algorithms have been proposed, the retrievat process may be
unsatisfactory.
Precision and recall are the two most common measures for evaluating IR
effectiveness. Precision is defined as the percentage of items retrieved in a search that
are relevant to the query, while recall is defined as the percentage of relevant items that
are retrieved in a search. While one would like the IR system to consistently score high
on both measures, there is an inherent trade-off between the two. The concept of
relevance has in itself, been a source of problems. Although, there has been a lack of
consensus regarding the concept of relevance, a "system's view" of relevance has
dominated most of IR research. As stated by Saracevic , "the system's view
of relevance was a result of thinking that relevance is mostly affected by the internal
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
aspects and manipulations of the system. Relevance was conceived in terms of
indexing, coding, classification, linguistic manipulations, file organization, and e venfually
question analysis and searching strategies. This thinking led to development of a myriad
of schemes, and to attention to input processing and manipulation almost to the
exclusion of other aspectsJJ. Saracevic emphasized the need for a view of relevance that
included the concept of pragmatic usefulness or "pertinence" to the needs of the user.
The problems and limitations of IR systems become acute as we move to the domain
of Web-based commerce. Most of the early attempts at information retrieval on the Web
(for example search engines and directories) have built upon the models of IR, not
withstanding the fact that these systems performed best in narrow domains where the
information was relatively well structured and homogenous. The Web, though, is a very
different information space, with vast differences in the structure, quantity and quality of
content. In particular, the development of electronic commerce, where the focus is on
transactions involving consumer durables as well as informational items, demands a
much higher level of functionality and a quite different view of "relevance."
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
The schematic in Figure 5, provides a framework for recommendation systems
illustrating both their basic components and the change in perspective that differentiates
them from traditional IR systems. The dotted lines in the figure encompass the areas of
concern of IR systems (see Figure 5).
The major differences between IR and recommendation systems are first, that the
objects of interest may be general items (goods) as well as informational items, and
second, that the pertinence, or relevance of the retrieved items to the user's actual
needs (utility), is paramount. These two differences imply capabilities that are not found
in IR systems.
Returning to our earlier discussion, recommendation systems provide information
about the relative merits of alternative choices or courses of action. The objects of
choice can be informational, such as articles, books, and web sites. In this case the
recommendation system might produce a relevance ranking for the user query as in IR
systems, or choose from a large population of information items only those that should
be of importance to the user, as in filtering systems. Alternatively, the objects of choice
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Inzrlai Data
Recommendahonr
Relevance Feedback
User's Needs
User Profile
Pertinence
User Needs Representation
Relevance i
(I~iformational I Consuoier durahles)
1 D o m a i ~ ~
Experts] 1
Collaborators
The Architecture for Recommendation Systems
could be durables such as cars and houses; consumable items such as plays, movies
and concerts; or abstract entities such as stocks and other investment vehicles. In the
sequel, the various alternatives considered by the recommendation system will be said
to belong to its "choice domain." The choice domain may be constructed on the fly in
answer to a particular user request, or it might be an index or database that is
maintained by the system and continuously updated.
Given the broad range of possible applications of recommendation systems, it is
of interest to see what minimal set of functions a recommendation system must perform.
First, a recommendation system, like an IR system, must have search capabilities in
order to access and process information about the available choices. In some cases,
recommendation systems have been linked to WWW search engines such as Alta Vista
[ in other cases, they have accessed and processed
information in Usenet newsgroups. More generally, the recommendation system might
access information in web-based shopping malls, on-line auctions, or the homepages of
car manufacturers.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Second, the recommendation system must ensure that the relevant information is
available for each alternative in the choice domain. For information items, the relevant
information might be annotations and rankings by other users (the recommenders) or a
set of document terms as in a traditional IR application; for durable goods, the
information on each alternative will usually consist of a list of attribute values including
the price of the good, and so on.
Third, the evaluation system must have some notion of user preferences. In most
systems, a userprofile will be generated by asking the user to rank some typical
alternatives or to state their preferences and requirements (for example for certain
classes of subject matter.) The userprofile is usually updated on a continuous basis
using relevance feedback techniques. In other systems, those using rating agencies, it
is tacitly assumed that the quality rankings of third party experts can be used as a proxy
for the user's own preferences.
Fourth, the recommendation system must be able to score the alternatives in its
choice domain by assigning them an ordinal rank or cardinal rating that will signal their
relative desirability to the user. The scoring mechanisms employed in recommendation
systems differ depending on the source of expertise that is used to rank the alternatives
as explained in the next section.
Finally, the recommendation system must be able to present its results in an
understandable and convenient fashion to the user. Again, there are many alternatives,
depending on the type of scoring system used and the application domain. For example,
in an IR system, information items are generally ranked in terms of their predicted
relevance to the query - and this may be the only choice-oriented information offered by
the system. However, especially, in collaborative systems, much more elaborate
information may be presented to the user, For example, in Amazon.com the user may
read the full text of book critiques by other users.
These five sets of capabilities are necessary in any recommendation system.
Namely, the system must be able to seek out possibilities for user choice, generate or
maintain relevant information about each alternative in its choice domain, elicit or infer
the preference profile of each of its users, evaluate the choices in terms of the user's
profile, and present its recommendations to the user. While each recommendation
system has these capabilities, there are major differences between them in philosophical
approach, which will now be sketched.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
CLASSIFICATION AND EXAMPLES OF RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS
Recommendation systems can be classified according to the source of the
knowledge, or expertise, on which the system bases its recommendations. The major
alternatives are set out in Table 1 together with some example application domains and
references to actual systems that have adopted each approach. As in real life, there are
four sources of such expertise. The users themselves (utility approach), information
about user preferences and about the choices (content-based systems), the
recommendations of a peer group (collaborative systems), and the opinions of third party
experts or rating agencies (third party expertise). Many existing Web-based systems
combine the content-based and collaborative approaches (hybrid systems). In this
section, we discuss each of these approaches, provide examples, and overview their
relative advantages and disadvantages.
Recommendation
Technique1
Philosophy
Utility estimation
Content or rule-
based analysis
Collaborative
the Recommender?
Descriptive
Example System
as-houses and cars
Information items -
information about
alternatives and user
interests. Match
alternative profile to
user profile.
The judgements or
opinions of a like
No known examples
information retrieval
or filtering
Choices involving
tastes; alerting and
Syskill & Webert [I41
[http:Ilwww.ics.uci. edul-
pazz'dni11
Newsweeder [I
Phoaks 
~ 
consult domain
consult peers
Rating Agencies -
Argus Clearing
[ 
group of peers
The judgement or
opinion of one or more
experts in the choice
Table 1 : Recommendation System Approaches
filtering systems
1 phoaks/ 1
Problems in an
I Referral Web 
organizational
learning application;
issues of high
importance
Utility Based Techniques: In this approach, the expertise (on what the user requires) is
assumed to reside only in the user. The system interacts with the user to construct an
explicit representation of the user's utility function in terms of the features (attributes) of
the choices. Utility estimation techniques are suitable for choices between extremely
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
valuable items such as cars and houses for which attribute values such as price are
readily available, but for which the ultimate choice must be made by the user. The
Prefcalc system [ I 113, for example, requests users to rank a subset (five or six items)
from a much larger set of choices and uses the rankings to construct an additive piece-
wise linear utility function for the user. Given values for the attributes of each possible
choice (such as the price, size, speed and fuel consumption in the case of automobiles),
it is then a simple matter to rank all the choices - even those for which the user had no
prior knowledge. In a similar vein, users could interactively and implicitly indicate their
utility for the various choice possibilities as in multi-criterion decision making techniques
 . While a scoring approach based on utility theory is possible and even desirable in
some situations, to our knowledge, no existing Web-based recommendation systems
attempt to estimate user utility functions in this classical, decision theory sense.
Content-Based Systems: In this approach, the knowledge required to rank alternatives
is embedded in a combination of descriptive information about the alternatives
themselves (e.g. document terms or attribute values) plus an explicit user profile (e.g.
keywords indicating subject interest, or a past history of previous choices by the user.)
The content-based (or rule-based) approach has its roots in information retrieval (IR) 121.
The techniques used for full-text searches of Web-based documents are similar to those
used in IR. The key to improved performance of the content-based approach over
traditional IR approaches is the use of user profiles containing information on user
preferences and tastes. These may be explicitly elicited through questionnaires or built
over time by observing and tracking users as they interact with the Web. Relevance
feedback, an important component of content-based approaches, is used to update user
profiles. One or more of the above-mentioned IR methods may be used for weighting
words to represent documents and text. Similarly several different methods exists for
updating user profiles.
"Syskill & Webert" is the name of a software agent that uses a content-based
approach to recommender systems . Syskill & Webert learns the user's
interests and preferences and then uses a LYCOS (Web-based search engine)
query to retrieve Web pages that match the user's profile. The user evaluates the
retrieved Web pages, which are usually related to a narrow subject domain, and
these preferences are then stored in the user's profile, which is updated as more
evaluations are made. A simple Bayesian classifier is used to determine the
probability that the user would like a Web page. The system uses a boolean
3 Prefcalc is a stand-alone MCDM application (not web-based.)
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
vector space model for learning 'features' (document terms) that help
discriminate between interesting sites and uninteresting ones.
Content-based approaches build upon IR models and consequently inherit many of their
limitations. In particular, given the diversity of resources on the Web, not all Web-based
documents are amenable to proper representation using traditional IR indexing
techniques, which are best suited for text-based documents. Secondly, content-based
approaches rely heavily on prior feedback from users. This results in 'over-specialization'
i.e., the system performs best in restricted domains that the users have evaluated in the
past [Z]. Thirdly, obtaining proper feedback from users for retrieved items is time-
consuming and frustrating - given their limited knowledge and experience, users cannot
determine what documents best satisfy their needs without actually browsing through
each and every one of them. More importantly, the user might not be in a position to
satisfactorily evaluate the quality of the items retrieved. 'Collaborative' recommender
systems overcome some of the limitations of content-based systems, but have some
weaknesses of their own.
Collaborative Systems: In collaborative approaches, the opinions of people that have
similar interests and tastes to the user provide the basis for the recommendations. This
is the basic philosophy underlying recommender systems (narrow definition) and
collaborative filtering applications. "Rather than compute the similarity of the items, the
collaborative approach computes the similarity of users" [Z]. In collaborative systems, the
user profile does not represent the user's preferences over the various choices that are
to be recommended. Rather, it helps determine the user's similarity to other users of the
recommender system. The recommendations are then based on the choices made by
users with similar profiles. For example, a user might simply indicate a set of keywords
of interest and will be provided rankings by a subset of users with a similar profile. In this
approach the software agent finds other users whose preferences are similar to those
specified by the user and then recommends items that they liked. Clusters of users with
similar preferences are identified based on the correlation of their earlier evaluations of
items in the choice domain. This, however, requires that the user have rated the same
items for comparison. Scores for unseen items are predicted based on a combination of
scores known from the nearest neighbors in a cluster .
PHOAKS (People Helping One Another Know Stuff) is a collaborative
recommender system that mines Usenet News groups for mention of Web pages
(URLs), which on passing a number of tests are then classified as
recommendations . Some of the search, classification and filtering techniques
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
common to IR systems are used. URLs that are cross-posted to a number of
newsgroups and have accompanying text that are suggestive of an
advertisement or promotion are automatically discarded. URLs recommended by
a large number of users were found to be of higher quality than those with fewer
recommendations. Additional information from FAQ (Frequently Asked
Questions) databases was used to measure and improve the quality of the
recommendations. One of the limitations of the PHOAKS system is that it does
not distinguish between different evaluations, thus assigning them equal weights,
irrespective of their credibility.
Collaborative approaches can recommend a wide variety of items, not just those
evaluated by the user. One of the most significant advantages of the collaborative
approach is how little an individual user has to contribute to be able to retrieve relevant
documents since the approach relies less on the user's own evaluations and more in the
evaluations of users with similar tastes. However, the success of such a system
depends on the availability of a critical mass of users with similar profiles, on the
willingness of the users to contribute evaluations, and the credibility of their evaluations.
As some users who benefit from such systems have no incentive to contribute
evaluations, there may be problems of free riding. Market-mechanisms and pricing
schemes for evaluations have been suggested to overcome some of these problems
Third Party Expertise: In the fourth approach to producing recommendations, the
system facilitates consultation with a domain expert. This approach might be indicated
for problems and issues of major consequence. The referral web , in which users are
linked into communities around domain specialists, takes this approach.
The Argus Clearinghouse ( serves as a
clearinghouse for topical guides that identify, describe and evaluate Internet-
based information sources. The topical guides are rated based on five criteria: (i)
Level of resource description (content, currency, access, technical performance
etc.); (ii) Level of resource evaluation (subject quality indicators, information on
authors, document layouts, graphics etc.); (iii) Guide design (images, layout,
navigational aids etc.); (iv) Guide organizational schemes; and (v) Guide meta-
information. Exceptionally good guides are also given a "Digital Librarian's
Award". Rating agencies (or Clearinghouses) can thus serve as a credible
source of recommendations in different domains.
Rating agencies or third party experts are useful in situations where special expertise is
required in order to make the recommendations. A disadvantage is that the
recommendations produced by such systems are not usually personalized to the user.
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
Hybrid Systems - Most existing recommendation systems take a hybrid approach
involving some combination of content-based analysis and collaborative filtering. The
Barnes and Noble implementation of the Firefly software mentioned earlier uses a
combination of rule-based and collaborative filtering.
FAB - The FAB system, a part of the Stanford University digital library project, is
a hybrid recommendation system 121. It is comprised of three main components -
collection agents that find pages on a specific topic; selection agents that find
Web pages for a specific user; and the central router. Users receive items both
when they score highly against their own profile as well as when they are rated
highly by a user with a similar profile. While the collection agent's profile
represents its current topic, the selection agent's profile represents a single
user's interests based on his/her evaluation. The central router forwards Web
pages from the collection agent to users based on their profiles, which are stored
in their personal selection agents. Collection agents specialize in narrow domains
and adapt to a dynamically changing population of users. The FAB system uses
Web based full-text search engines to retrieve pages that match the user's
profile. The success of the system depends largely on how accurately the users'
profiles reflect their true preferences.
Hybrid systems overcome some of the limitations of content-based systems. By
utilizing group feedback we potentially require fewer cycles to achieve the same level of
personalization [Z]. In addition, individuals gain because the group can appraise more
items and will usually provide a different viewpoint.
The application domains in Table 1 are suggestive only. Each technique could be
applied in multiple domains. This is suggested by Table 2, which arranges the
information described above around some typical problem domains. (The third row in
the table lists the alternative approaches in each problem domain).
MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
From a firm's viewpoint, recommendation systems can be used in two ways - as
a marketing tool to positively influence consumer perceptions and preferences, and/or as
a tool for knowledge management and organizational learning. Table 2 shows sample
problem domains in these two areas of concern. The first and second rows in Table 2 list
the choice domain and characterize the type of problem to be solved by the
recommendation system, the third row suggests alternative sources of
recommendations, while the last row describes the value that the system provides its
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
As is to be expected, the design and deployment of recommendation systems
should differ to reflect the concerns of the different problem domains. Columns 2 and 3
illustrate two contrasting decision situations in e-commerce - high value, one-off decision
making in which personal preferences are of overriding importance and low value
decision making where matters of opinion and taste are paramount. The level of trust,
risk, validity and performance expected in these two situations is vastly different. For
example, as suggested in the third row of the table, the locus of decision making for high
value decisions should probably reside in the user, while in low value decision making
situations it seems feasible to rely on more automated approaches
recommended?
Typical choice
Problem type
Durables - known I Consumables-
attribute values
/ matters of opinion
from a relatively
items of low value.
few big ticket items
(such as price)
Cars, houses,
Art, movies, books,
Continuous flow of
knowable product
Who is the
recommender?
Value added by
recommendation
e.g. information
News feeds, Usenets,
problem databases,
organizational learning
Filtering; prevention of
information overload;
directing attention to
important issues
(1) Content-based
(Rules + personal
(2) Collaborative
(Peer group)
(3) Experts
lnformation filtering,
evaluation and
presentation; alerting
to new issues and
ideas; match to
personal information
needs; save time by
reading only items of
direct interest
(1) Utility-based
decision aid)
(2) Rating
Information
gathering and
presentation; one-
to-one matching to
preferences
Table 2: Problem Domains, Alternative Approaches and Value Added
(1) Content-based
(Rules + personal
(2) Collaborative
(Peer group)
(3) Rating Agencies
Information gathering
and presentation;
one-to-one matching
to personal
preferences; save
time and cost of
sampling; align with
opinions of others
As organizations are overwhelmed by the information explosion and as they
become more knowledge intensive, organizational learning and knowledge management
within the organization becomes important. Recommendation systems, using some of
the techniques discussed earlier, can help firms in this area. Column 4 in Table 2 lists
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
information filtering applications in which the chief concern is to bring only interesting or
new (from the recipients point-of- view) items to the attention of employees and to
eliminate uninteresting or unimportant items.
ISSUES SURROUNDING THE USE OF RECOMMENDATION SYSTEMS
Space does not permit a review of the many interesting issues and problems
involved in successfully implementing a recommendation system. Obviously, these
issues span the gamut from the development of advanced software technologies to the
care and nurturing of customers. In the case of recommender systems in particular, the
developers must be concerned with how they can develop a community of people who
will actively contribute to the common good. In this section, we briefly discuss only two
questions: Why would a user accept the recommendations of a recommendation
system? And, how can the value of such systems be measured?
The major factors associated with user acceptance and use of recommendation
systems are shown in Table 3. The issues of trust, validity, privacy, and risk are
necessary preconditions for acceptance of recommendation systems, but ultimately,
their success, will depend on the performance factor - the utility they provide their users
Authenticity of source - is the recommender who I think it is?
Does the recommender provide an unbiased recommendation?
Does the system have the correct information/expertise?
Does the system understand my requirements and wishes?
How does the system make its recommendations?
Is my personal profile kept secret?
Are my inquiries and purchases private?
What redress do I have if I act on bad recommendation? (e.g. Money
back if not satisfied?)
Performance: What value do I derive from the recommendations - do I save money or
Table 3: Factors Influencing the Acceptance of a Recommendation System
Trust - Possible bias in the recommendations due to self-interest of either the owners or
users of such systems is a major issue, particularly for collaborative recommender
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper 19-98-17
systems. "If anyone can provide recommendations, content owners may generate
mountains of positive recommendations for their own materials and negative
recommendations for their competitors," [163.
Validity - The question here is whether the system has the information and expertise to
be helpful. Just as we associate more or less validity to the pronouncements of wine
and food critics or human experts in any other walk of life, so too will computer
recommendation systems acquire reputations for the relative usefulness or otherwise of
their recommendations. The second question under this heading in Table 3 refers to the
ability of the recommendation system to adapt its response to the needs of individual
users. The third question emphasizes the need for recommendation systems to have
accurate and reliable inference mechanisms - an active area of current research.
Privacy - Most recommendation systems rely upon the evaluations and ratings provided
by different users to recommend items. Sharing the opinions of individuals with the
society at large raises concerns relating to privacy. While anonymity and the use of
pseudonyms provide a partial solution to this problem, several alternatives have been
proposed. For example, the Open Personalization Standard (OPS) also known as the
Open Profiling Standard is yet to be agreed upon by industry participants . Under
OPS, users could choose to store personal information, hobbies and interests on their
PC hard drives and then decide whether to disclose that information to a particular web
Risk - The risk assumed by users of recommendation systems varies with the choice
domain. For users of filtered Usenet information the risks are probably inconsequential,
but for users of recommendation systems for large budget items or stock advisory
services, the risks of acting upon computer-generated recommendations will be quite
large. In normal commerce, both competition and legal considerations have shaped the
way risks are shared between sellers and consumers. We suspect that a proper
understanding of the risks for both providers and users of recommendation services will
be similarly shaped over a period of use.
Performance - The market for recommendation services will ultimately decide which
ones survive and prosper. Performance will improve over time as the technology
becomes more sophisticated and the surviving intermediaries reach and surpass critical
mass. Size is especially important for recommender systems, which depend on
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
evaluations and feedback from users and hence, require a critical mass of
recommenders and recommendations to be able to perform effectively.
This leads us to the interesting question of how the performance of
recommendation systems can be evaluated. One possibility is to use the notions of
recall and precision that were defined above. More generally, we stated in the
introduction that the role of a recommendation system is to increase the probability that
its users will be satisfied by the choices that they make as a result of using the system
From a similar viewpoint, we have the notion of "predictive utility" . In other words,
recommendation systems must be able to predict which items in its domain of choice will
most satisfy each user. A simple cost-benefit analysis approach based on illustrates
the need for a closer look at performance measures for recommendation systems.
Table 4 shows the possible outcomes for a recommendation system that makes binary
predictions as to whether an item will be useful to the user (good) or not useful (bad).
Illustrative costs and benefits are provided for two different hypothetical recommendation
systems: one that rates movies and a second that filters news items for financial
analysts. To illustrate the kind of reasoning that might determine the values in each cell,
the benefit of the correct prediction of a good movie (one that the user will enjoy) is listed
as "medium", while the cost of a false positive (the prediction that the user will enjoy the
movie, when helshe does not), is the cost of buying a ticket and wasting an evening -
which has been judged to be "high." As another example, the value of a hit and the cost
(opportunity cost) of a miss of a pertinent news item to a financial analyst are both rated
as "high" in the table.
Predict "Good item"
Movie: Medium benefit
News item: High benefit
FALSE POSITIVE
Movie: High cost
News item: Medium cost
Predict "Bad item"
Movie: Low cost
News item: High cost
CORRECT REJECTION
Movie: Medium benefit
News item: Low benefit
Table 4: Cost-Benefit Analysis for Recommendation Systems
As discussed earlier, recall measures the number of relevant items ("hits") divided by the
total number of items in all four quadrants, while precision records the number of hits
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
divided by the total number of hits plus false positives. But such ratios do little to reflect
the costs and benefits of the various possible outcomes and can therefore, shed little
light on whether a recommendation system is beneficial to an individual or an
organization. A complete cost-benefit analysis, even in such simple applications, is quite
difficult because it depends on a correct assessment of the utility of the various
outcomes for each particular user as well as the probabilities of a given recommendation
ending up in each of the four cells4. Nevertheless, a consideration of the issues raised by
even an approximate cost-benefit analysis should provide useful guidance for the
designers of recommendation systems. Further research on the costs and benefits of
recommendation systems is urgently required.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
To cope with the ever-increasing complexities of the information economy, we
suggested in the introduction that research and development of a range of "coping
technologies" is needed. In fact, we believe that we will need to develop support
environments that will, among other things, monitor the environment, direct our attention
to what is urgent, relevant and important, increase our understanding of the world and
help us with our decision making. Recommendation systems are an important new
technology that may help us in the decision-making aspect of our lives. We defined
recommendation systems broadly as systems that provide recommendations by any
means, reserving the term recommender systems for the important sub-class of
recommendation systems that make recommendations based on the opinions of other
The explosive growth of the Internet and the World Wide Web has resulted in the
proliferation of information of uncertain quality in widely varying formats, which has
greatly reduced the effectiveness of traditional IR approaches. More importantly, the
needs of electronic commerce extend far beyond those of information dissemination and
retrieval. In this new world, we see a huge potential market for systems that collect and
analyze user tastes and needs on the one hand, and signal the quality of products and
services on the other hand. Throughout the chapter, we discussed a number of
examples of expert-based, content-based, collaborative and hybrid recommendation
4 A closed form solution for this problem was first proposed in the IR context by .
Center for Digital Econotny Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
systems. Some of these are research systems; others are already commercial
successes.
The framework for recommendation systems clarifies the differences with IR
systems and the general functions provided by recommendation systems. We also
identified four general classes of recommendation systems based on the source of
expertise underlying the recommendation: utility-based systems, content-based
systems, collaborative systems, and expert consultation. Finally, we briefly discussed
the issues of user acceptance of recommendation systems and the need for research on
performance measures.
This brief survey and classification of recommendation systems has barely
scratched the surface of a whole new technology of assisted decision making that we
feel will grow in importance as electronic media become the main vehicles for human
communication, education and commerce. As we argued in the introduction,
recommendation systems are a response to the need for individuals and organizations
to manage the overwhelming flood of new information, products and services, and to
make more and more decisions under increasing time pressure. For these reasons, we
believe that recommendation systems are inevitable and that they will be part of a
thriving new industry of web-based intermediaries.
The social consequences of such systems are enormous. If recommendation
systems fulfill their promise, they could make markets more efficient by providing
consistent, valid and credible quality signals thereby reducing or eliminating the hassle
associated with search and investigation of a wide range of goods and services.
Recommendation systems also provide opportunities for one-to-one marketing, which,
by catering to individual tastes, should increase overall welfare.
On the other hand, there are several dangers. First, individuals and organizations
could become overly dependent on such systems creating opportunities for
unscrupulous companies, or even government agencies, to manipulate user tastes and
decision making. Second, it is not at all certain whether widespread use of
recommendation systems will lead to more diversity and freedom of expression or to the
opposite - an economic and social system in which individual tastes and needs are
satisfied on the margin, but in which overall cultural and intellectual directions are
dictated by the majority. Civil liberty groups, for example, are concerned by the power of
filtering systems to limit free speech on the Internet . In our opinion, the future
Center for Digital Economy Research
Stern School of Business
Working Paper IS-98-17
economic and social consequences of these new technologies are a matter for urgent
research and debate in academic, industry and governmental regulatory agencies.