A Survey on Smart Grid Potential Applications and Communication Requirements
V. Cagri Gungor, Member, IEEE, Dilan Sahin, Taskin Kocak, Salih Ergut, Concettina Buccella, Senior
Member, IEEE, Carlo Cecati, Fellow, IEEE, and Gerhard P. Hancke, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Information and communication technologies (ICT)
represent a fundamental element in the growth and performance of
smart grids. A sophisticated, reliable and fast communication
infrastructure is, in fact, necessary for the connection among the huge
amount of distributed elements, such as generators, substa-tions,
energy storage systems and users, enabling a real time ex-change of
data and information necessary for the management of the system and
for ensuring improvements in terms of efﬁciency, reliability,
ﬂexibility and investment return for all those involved in a smart grid:
producers, operators and customers. This paper overviews the issues
related to the smart grid architecture from the perspective of potential
applications and the communications requirements needed for
ensuring performance, ﬂexible operation, reliability and economics.
Index Terms—Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), demand Response, smart Grid Communications.
I. Introduction
Global warming, an increase in carbon emissions, and the
growing world population and power demand have
provoked governments and energy utilities to take solid steps
towards the use of renewable energies, their integration within
the existing power transmission and distribution systems and the
increase of the efﬁciency and ﬂexibility of the latter .
The existing grid was developed using a centric approach: relatively few very high-power ac plants (hundreds of MVA) operating at 50 or 60 Hz interconnected by ac or dc transmission
systems operating at very high voltages (e.g., 400 kV), many
substations, where the high voltage is reduced to distribution
level (e.g., 20 kV), a huge number of distribution lines sup-
V. C. Gungor, D. Sahin, and T. Kocak are with the Department of Computer Engineering, Bahcesehir University, Besiktas, Istanbul, 34353, Turkey
(e-mail: ; ;
 ; ).
S. Ergut is with AVEA, Ýstanbul, Turkey. (e-mail: ).
C. Buccella and C. Cecati are with the Department of Industrial and
Information Engineering and Economics, University of L’Aquila, and
with DigiPower Ltd. L’Aquila, Italy (e-mail: ;
 ).
G. P. Hancke is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and
Engineering,
University
(e-mail: ; ).
plying the loads directly (in the case of high-power loads) or
after voltage reduction (e.g., 400 V in Europe), such as in residential or low-power industrial loads.
Recently, renewable energy generators, which produce
a few kilowatts in the case of residential photovoltaic systems, up to some megawatts in the case of large photovoltaic
and wind generators, are becoming widely diffused around
the world, thus transforming the present power system in a
large-scale distributed generation system (DG) incorporating
thousands of generators, characterized by different technologies, voltage, current, and power levels, as well as topologies
 , . Hence, their integration with the existing network
is transforming the whole electrical power system , .
However, there are many issues on the ground and they are
complicated by the aging infrastructure of the existing power
grid, which already cause problems to utilities and customers,
being unreliable, with low power quality, hence too high and
increasing cost and low customer satisfaction.
The power grid infrastructure is very critical and contains a
large number of interconnected components: generators, power
transformers, and distribution feeders that are geographically
spread. Moreover, its increasing complexity, the huge number
of geographically spread generators, and the side effects caused
by the variable nature and high penetration of renewable energy
systems (RES) make it very vulnerable, thus requiring sophisticated security mechanisms .
The current power network was designed as a centralized
system such that the electric power ﬂows unidirectional through
transmission and distribution lines from power plants to the customer premises. The intelligence is concentrated in central locations and only partially in substations, while remote terminations (i.e., loads) are almost or totally passive. The new systems
would provide higher and widely distributed intelligence embedded in local electricity production, two-way electricity and
information ﬂows, thus achieving reliable, ﬂexible, efﬁcient,
economic, and secure power delivery and use .
The new approach, widely known as Smart Grid (SG), requires both a complex two-way communication infrastructure,
sustaining power ﬂows between intelligent components, and sophisticated computing and information technologies, as well
as business applications. They enable, among others, new approaches in grid management by applying demand side management and providing grid energy storage, needed for load balancing and for overcoming energy ﬂuctuations caused by the
intrinsic nature of RES, preventing widespread power grid cascading failures , and enabling the integration of plug-in hy-
Fig. 1. SG framework integrating energy infrastructure with the
communica-tion, computing and information technologies, and business
applications.
brid and electric vehicles (PHEV and PEV), thus reducing emissions from the transportation industry, providing storage and
matching the generation and load balance , , .
Fig. 1 summarizes the main issues related to SG (from bottom
to top): the energy infrastructure represents the physical infrastructure for energy generation, transmission, and distribution;
the communication infrastructure is responsible for transferring
the critical information through the network; Information Technology provides modeling, analysis, web visualization, and
commercial transactions; potential applications are responsible
for distinguishing the use cases of infrastructure usage. The
communication infrastructure performs a critical role in the
overall smart grid framework. Connecting all relevant components in the grid is very important to collect information about
the conditions of the components for control, monitoring, and
maintenance purposes. Any problems related to the energy
infrastructure can be avoided if proper action is taken immediately with the help of the communication infrastructure.
Different communication technologies can be used for different
purposes and requirements of each speciﬁc application. Information technology provides a common platform for sharing
the information coming from different business ﬁelds related
to the smart grid by giving support to the collection of different
information, analysis, and advanced applications and providing
the integration of information from different layers of the
smart grid. Potential applications propose better management,
automation, detection, and generation techniques for the overall
system; fundamental applications generally focus on reducing
the electricity consumption in homes, ofﬁces, and factories and
changing the customer consumption behaviors with advances
in-home displays and energy dashboards, etc.
In Fig. 2, instead, the components of all of the smart grid
layers are illustrated from the energy infrastructure to the potential applications.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II, after a definition of the smart grid from the power system point of view,
brieﬂy describes the smart grid communication architecture and
its main elements. Section III introduces and analyzes some
key applications and their main communication requirements.
Section IV reviews an SG applications and services roadmap.
Finally, Section V presents conclusions.
II. SG Communication Architecture
A. General Overview
The SG concept aims to achieve a sophisticated system by integrating an information and communication technology infrastructure to the existing power system infrastructure and the new
distributed generation system, in order to fully exploit the use of
renewable energy systems and to maximize energy efﬁciency of
the whole power system. From a slightly different perspective,
a “smart grid” can be considered as a data communication network that achieves, with the support of speciﬁc power management hardware devices, ﬂexible, seamless inter-operation abilities among different advanced components of the system for
efﬁcient utilization of the energy .
SG end-to-end architectures basically comprise of three main
layers: the SG application layer, the power layer, and the communication layer.
1) Application Layer: It includes advanced applications
providing inter-operability among them. Demand response
management, outage management, advanced metering infrastructure, asset management, and fraud detection are among the
most considered. A detailed view of applications is included in
Section III.
2) Power Layer: The fundamental novelty in SG comes
with: 1) the integration of renewable energy sources that disrupt
the balance of the prediction of energy sources and the replacement of the one-way communication system and 2) two-way
communication between the customer and the utility that will
enable the possibility to balance between demand and supply
of the energy. Therefore, the power generation, transmission
and distribution system, and customer premises are all included
in the power layer part of the system. The changes applied to
the power layer will also affect the customer participation in an
active way.
3) Communication Layer: It represents the heart of the
system by providing interconnections between all of the systems and devices. The telecommunication technology is used
at the communication layer to enable the data digitization,
intelligent self-awareness, and increased reliability. Nowadays,
existing power grids are affected by severe drawbacks, such as:
1) fragmented architectures; 2) a lack of adequate bandwidth
for achieving two-way communications; 3) a lack of inter-operability between system components; and 4) the inability to
handle the increasing amount of data from smart devices.
Importantly, the SG communication infrastructure could be
either public or private. To this end, a public network like the Internet may offer an alternative communication path to remotely
control and monitor the power grid due to its already existing
shared communication infrastructure. However, when a public
network is utilized for SG applications, security and quality
of service (QoS) concerns may arise. Therefore, the utilities
should perform a detailed cost versus beneﬁt analysis to evaluate the performance of public versus private networks for SG
applications.
Fig. 2. SG framework depicting the potential applications, information technology, communication, and energy infrastructure of the overall system.
The communication layer consists of three transmission categories: 1) a wide-area network (WAN); 2) a ﬁeld-area network
(FAN); and 3) a home-area network (HAN). The three main tiers
that are located between these three networks are the core backbone, back-haul distribution, and the access point .
The communication between back-haul aggregation points to
the core backbone utility center is carried over different types
of communication networks, such as star networks or ﬁber or
wireless networks. In the following, a brief description of the
transmission categories is given.
• WAN provides communication between the electric utility
and substations. WAN should span all over the substations, distributed power generation and storage facilities,
distribution assets, such as capacitor banks, transformers,
and reclosers to be fully effective and scalable enough.
It is a high-bandwidth backbone communication network
that handles long-distance data transmission with advance
monitoring and sensing applications. WAN provides a
two-way communication network for communication,
automation, and monitoring purposes of SG applications.
Each SG application running on WAN has unique communication and QoS requirements. Some applications like
wide-area situational awareness systems require real-time
or near real-time responses; some of them, like substation
automation, will require high bandwidth and fast response
times; some applications, like AMI, will need considerable
bandwidth and broadband data rates.
— WAN Communication: Remote communication between utility and the smart meters is essential for
exchanging relevant information, such as price signals
or tariff information with the customer. Cellular networks, WiMAX, and wired communications can be
counted as the best candidate technologies for WAN.
Importantly, the back-haul distribution system acts as
an aggregation point between FAN and WAN, such as
a substation, data concentrator, RF access point, or a
communication tower that collects the total metering
information and transfers it to the backbone communication network. Moreover, aggregation points can
serve as energy-storing points for back-up power in
the period of critical outages and other speciﬁc needs
 . Fiber and microwave communication are preferred for high-bandwidth requirements and reliable
communication, since this system is the aggregation
point where large amounts of critical data are gathered for transmission to the back ofﬁce. Licensed and
unlicensed wireless technologies and ﬁxed wire-line
communication technologies can be used to transfer
data from aggregation points to utilities’ backhaul data
centers. At the end, the communication technology will
mostly depend on its cost-effectiveness and ability to
provide suitable coverage.
• FAN can be described as the communication network for
power distribution areas and includes distribution automation and control devices communicating over networks
between individual service connections and backhaul
points to the electric utilities. FAN acts as a bridge between customer premises and substations with collectors,
Fig. 3. SG home energy management with diverse wireless communications technology support.
access points and data concentrators. Intelligent nodes are
deployed between customer premises and substations to
collect and control the data from surrounding data points.
These nodes are connected to a centralized gateway, which
is always supported by electric utilities to transmit the
collected data. Low bandwidth FAN channels are highly
robust for reliable data communication. A FAN is ubiquitous and broadband wireless resource that meets the utility
requirements for reliability and resilience. The coverage
area includes urban-suburban and rural environments. A
FAN is highly supported by advanced metering infrastructure deployments and it is rapidly expanding the range of
its application areas, e.g., advanced distribution automation and integration of distributed energy resources.
— FAN Communication: The choice of communication
technology varies for FAN according to different SG
applications. Some electric utilities prefer ﬁber optic
cables to have low latency and superior communication
performance, others prefer WiMAX where cellular and
RF mesh technologies do not have coverage over the
area. Moreover, current communication trends in substation automation and distribution automation systems
of FAN are towards using IEC 61850 (International
Electrotechnical Commission), which provides interoperability between intelligent electronic devices and
better device-to-device communication. IEC 61850
supports a wide range of applications to handle their
needs. For example, the latency for mission critical data
of FAN is between 3–10 ms with the integration of the
IEC 61850 protocol .
• HAN: Smart meters will have the ability to connect to
the HAN, and this will enable consumers to be aware
of electricity usage costs and manage their consumption
behaviors and take control of smart appliances. Home area
networks support low-bandwidth communication between
home electrical appliances and smart meters. The primary
task of in-home applications is to inform customers about
the consumption behaviors via home displays or a web
interface. Hence, the bandwidth needs are between 10
and 100 Kbps per device and there is no urgent need for
low latency . However, as described in Section III-C,
it is expected that new functions will quickly be integrated, thus implementing intelligent load management.
Low-bandwidth, slow-speed, cost-effective, and ﬂexible
connections are preferred for HAN.
— HAN Communication: The Association of Home
Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) has conducted research on the communication technologies that best
meet the requirements of home-smart appliances. This
research has shown that ZigBee, Wi-Fi, HomePlug,
Z-wave, and M-Bus are the candidates for the HAN
category. ZigBee has the ability to operate in a mesh
network topology, which offers some advantages, i.e.,
some devices in a ZigBee mesh can remain in sleep
mode when they are not active in the network, which
results in energy conservation. On the other hand,
Z-wave is an interference-free wireless standard that
was speciﬁcally designed for remote control of the
appliances and widely used for HANs. In Fig. 3, an illustrative architecture of a HAN is shown. In this ﬁgure,
the gateways are illustrated as the output points to the
HAN and some communication technologies used as
HAN protocols, such as Wi-Fi, ZigBee, HomePlug, and
Z-wave, are also shown. However, application-layer
information models have not been fully standardized by
any of the technologies above. Greenbox CustomerIQ
is a system that provides customer service via an online
monitoring web-site or Onzo Smart energy kit .
The GEO Home Energy Hub is installed at customer
premises to provide a display of customers’ consumption behavior .
III Applications and Communication Requirements
The G is the integration of the power grid infrastructure
with an advanced communication infrastructure where different types of data can be efﬁciently moved with varying
degrees of security, reliability, QoS, and communication requirements. Hence, an integrated, ﬂexible, interoperable, and
secure two-way communication backbone, which meets the
communication requirements of each SG component, is critical
to the success of the SG. Here, some of the requirements that
should be satisﬁed by the SG communication backbone are
• Latency: Latency can be described as the delay of the
data transmitted between the smart grid components. Some
mission-critical applications may not tolerate any latency,
such as wide-area situational awareness systems or distribution automation systems. For other applications, such as
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) or home energy
management (HEMs), latency is not critical.
• Frequency Ranges: SG applications may need lower frequency ranges (below 2 GHz) to provide high-quality and
cost-effective communication across the utility’s service
area. This is because lower frequency ranges can enable
radio signals to overcome line-of-sight issues, e.g., foliage,
rain fade, and penetration through walls .
• Reliability: Reliability is a metric of how reliable a communication system can perform data transfers according
to the speciﬁc requirements. The communication nodes
should always be reliable for the continuity of communications. Some of the SG applications, such as distributed automation, expect highly reliable data communication, and
some of them can tolerate some outages in data transfer.
• Data Rate: Data rate is a closely related term specifying
how fast the data is transmitted between SG components.
The data-rate requirements can be different for each speciﬁc SG application. Some of the SG applications that
transmit video and audio data, such as wide-area situational
awareness systems, require high data-rate values to achieve
a reliable and accurate data transfer. On the other hand, the
communication data rates for distribution automation and
AMI can be low . Hence, the choice for communication technology should be determined according to speciﬁc
data requirements for each application.
• Security: Security is the ability of the communication infrastructure to combat with physical and cyber security
attacks to protect the critical data gathered from various
smart grid components. Providing end-to-end security carries the highest priority for almost all SG applications .
Especially for mission critical applications, security should
be provided on a communication network to prevent any
vulnerabilities to the critical assets of the power grid .
• Throughput: The estimation of the total throughput that
the SG will require for the communication systems of
many applications, e.g., AMI, demand response, is 3–10
Mbps .
In the following, the main applications and communication requirements are summarized and analyzed in a structured way.
A. Substation Automation
Substations are key elements of the power grid network
and all their devices are monitored, controlled, and protected
by substation automation systems (SASs). SAS collects the
data and performs actions on it allowing robust routing of
power from generators to loads through the complex network
of transmission lines. The communication network plays a
critical role for SAS to have full control and monitoring of
the real-time operating conditions and performances of substations. A highly reliable, scalable, secure, and cost-effective
communication network is a prerequisite to prevent possible
disruptions, e.g., power disturbances and outages. Wireless
communication technologies, such as wireless mesh networks
and WiMAX, are the communication technologies that can be
used for SASs. Cellular technology can be used for remote
monitoring of substation equipment; GPRS can be used for
performing noncritical information exchange between distribution energy resources (DERs). Wireless local area network
(LAN) can be used for monitoring, protection, and control of
distributed energy resources, especially for remotely located
small substation and DERs, where data-rate requirements and
radio interference are comparatively less. The National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) has recognized the IEC
61850 standard for substation automation and protection applications in the SG environment, which proposes Ethernet-based
communication networks to achieve interoperable SASs .
IEC 61850 brings an object-oriented representation of the
power system by separating the functions of power substation
into monitoring, control and protection . Furthermore,
IEC 61850 brings many advantages to substation automation
systems such as the complexity of utility automated solutions
and the operational and maintenance costs are reduced; the
cost of copper wiring are provided with the proposition of an
Ethernet-based communication network between process-level
switchyard equipment .
• Communication Requirements of SAS: The communication requirements of substation automation are shaped
by the hazardous electrical environments. The wired technologies need high protection from the problematic currents on the ground, hence wireless or ﬁber optic technologies are preferred mostly . On the other hand, the latency requirements must be low, e.g., less than 100 ms, to
prevent communication from timing out.
B. Overhead Transmission Line Monitoring
Overhead Transmission Line Monitoring is one of the most
important T&D-side smart grid applications since transmission
lines are vulnerable to icing, overheating and lighting strikes,
which can adversely affect the lives of citizens. Hence, to monitor T&D systems, wireless sensor nodes are deployed on some
parts of the transmission lines and communicate with the relay
node to transmit the monitored data. The relay node can be serviced by GSM/GPRS/UMTS as proposed in , to send the collected data via cellular communication technologies to the control center.
• Communication Requirements of Overhead Transmission Line Monitoring: The communication requirements
for overhead transmission line monitoring systems depend
on the network model, number of nodes and the preferred
communication technology. Importantly, a large portion
of energy is ﬂowing through the transmission lines, hence,
overhead transmission line monitoring systems should
support reliable, secure, effective and real-time communication to respond to emergency situations quickly.
According to the network model that is proposed in ,
it takes 73 s to send information from the relay node to
the sink node in a 100 node network model with hybrid
communication technologies, e.g., ZigBee, GPRS, etc.
C. Home Energy Management (HEM)
HEMs focus on the power management on consumer side,
where home appliances can be monitored and controlled to
balance and optimize the power supply and consumption .
HEMs basically consist of smart meters, smart appliances,
in-home displays, and advanced control systems. The fundamental task of the HEM system is energy efﬁciency , data
measurement, and transmission. The real-time consumption
data gathered from each appliance are measured and transferred
to a data concentrator back to the utility. Hence, statistical analysis, intelligent advice generation, various kinds of query
support, and the view of consumption data and electricity
pricing can enable in-home displays to inform customers about
their consumption behavior. Mesh topology can be used in
HEM systems as it has many advantages due to the higher data
reliability with multiple transmission paths.
• Communication Requirements of HEM: The communication needs of HEM systems on customer premises can
be handled with low-power, short-distance technologies,
such as ZigBee, Bluetooth, and HomePlug. There is no
need for a large amount of bandwidth or communication
speed, since such applications are not counted as mission
critical. Verizon declares that the reasonable latency time
for in-home applications should be between 2–15 s .
Since ZigBee is the predominant technology used in most
installations and it offers ﬂexible, low-power usage and
low-cost deployment capabilities, it seems to be the best
candidate for HEM systems.
D. Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)
AMI create a two-way communication network between
smart meters and utility systems and the integration of advanced
sensors, smart meters, monitoring systems, computer hardware, software, and data management systems, thus enabling
the collection and distribution of information between meters
and utilities, allowing consumer participation in managing
energy consumption , , , . AMI does not only
mean the physical deployment of smart meters, but it also is
a complicated communication network and IT infrastructure,
including many systems, such as a meter data management
system, that handles the huge amount of data and manages
the raw data to create meaningful information and messages
for customers, assisting them in using energy intelligently.
Hence, consumer awareness, interactive services for regulation
of energy demand, avoidance of electricity-related frauds, and
more timely and precise billing services are the advantages
of AMI systems . Fig. 6 summarizes the evolution from
the early automatic meter reading (AMR), characterized by
one-way communication, to the AMI, incorporating two-way
communications, and to the smart grid with intelligent applications and communication infrastructure.
Fig. 4. Detailed architecture of an AMI.
The choice of the communication technology for AMI depends on the coverage and the number of customers per area,
the availability of the Internet connection, the expected energy
efﬁciency, scalability, the required data rate, and the expected
communication delay. Fig. 4 shows some possible communication from residences to data collector units and from data collector units to meter data management systems in the AMI.
Some beneﬁts emanating from using AMI are given here.
• Reading cost: Remote operations prevent incorrect manual
readings and eliminate costly periodical readings.
• Real-time consumption information: The customers can
view the real-time consumption information and real-time
pricing options via home displays/dashboards and shape
their consumption behaviors according to these feedbacks.
This will result in shifting loads from periods of high demand to those of lower demand, hence both customers and
utility companies will beneﬁt from the optimization of energy production, transmission and distribution.
• Multi-utility service: Multiple services can be managed at
the same time, such as electricity, heating, water, and gas.
• Multi-vendor service: Multiple vendors can share AMI, offering their services to customers, who can select the best
market proposals, eventually changing them in real time.
• Communication requirements of AMI: Communication
requirements differ according to the communication
technology chosen for AMI deployments. Low-latency
and higher bandwidths are essential for some AMI applications. The latency should be around 12–20 ms for
real-time metering . Power-line communication technology (PLC) is widely diffused, especially in urban areas,
because of its use of the existing power lines. However,
it may be insufﬁcient for some real-time applications
requiring bandwidths up to 100 Kbps per device . RF
mesh and GPRS technology for rural AMI deployments
need some coverage requirements due to the insufﬁcient
meter density.
E. Wide-Area Situational Awareness (WASA) Systems
WASA can be deﬁned as the integration of a set of technologies for effective power system monitoring and providing an
overall, dynamic picture of the functioning of the grid .
Wide-area monitoring and situational awareness is one of the
key functions of smart grids, since achieving reliability, security, and inter-operability among so many interconnected systems and devices is a must for utilities. Furthermore, any abnormalities such as a disturbance in power supply can result in a
widespread problem that threatens the overall system reliability
and security. Synchrophasors are regarded as new wide-area
measurement technologies. The primary task of synchrophasors
is to measure the different portions of the power system and
put these measurements on the same time base, enabling a view
of the whole power system at the same time and thus simpli-
ﬁes the comparison of different portions of the power system in
real-time. Currently, Florida Power and Light and Alcatel-Lucent are supporting synchrophasor deployments.
• Communication Requirements of WASA: The latency prerequisite for real-time monitoring and control
is strict. Synchrophasors is one of the wide-area measurement technologies that facilitate the integration of
intermittent and renewable resources and improve system
modeling and planning. The communication requirements
of synchrophasors depend on the nature of data being
transmitted. For example, latency requirements are very
low for real-time monitoring and control. Alcatel-Lucent
cites a maximum latency of 20 ms , while UTC and
Avista suggest that it should be below 200 ms .
F. Demand Response Management
Demand response management (DRM) entails the control of
the energy demand and loads during critical peak situations to
achieve a balance between electrical energy supply and demand,
thus obtaining a better utilization of the available energy and
more reliable and cheaper operation of the whole power system.
Customers can participate in the energy market competition by
changing their energy consumption approach instead of being
passively exposed to ﬁxed prices, resulting in proﬁts by both
the companies and end-users . Improving system reliability
and encouraging energy efﬁciency are the expectations from demand response (DR) programs. Different DR programs are examined in , , and , such as incentive-based programs
(IBP) and priced based programs (PBP). Time of use (TOU)
rate, critical peak pricing (CPP), extreme day pricing (EDP),
extreme day CPP (ED-CPP), and real time pricing (RTP) are
some of the mechanisms that present different electricity prices
for different times and conditions. Fig. 5 shows price-based and
incentive-based demand response options, respectively. Time
of use rate, real-time pricing and critical peak pricing are explained brieﬂy. OpenADR is a modern automated demand response system, which is an open-source reference implementation of a distributed and client-server demand response infrastructure . The integration of this system will provide effective deployment of dynamic pricing, demand response, and grid
reliability.
• Communication Requirements of DRM: The communication requirements of DRM applications depend on its
Fig. 5. Demand response options with time-of-use rates, real-time pricing, and
critical peak pricing.
purpose. If it is used as a load-balancing tool, no special requirement for low latency for data transmission is needed.
However, 14–100-Kbps bandwidth is required per node/
device for typical DRM programs, providing system continuity and remote turn-off of smart appliances for avoiding
system overloads or simply reducing peak demands .
Low-speed communication can be tolerated with DRM
smart devices.
G. Outage Management
Power outage is basically deﬁned as the loss in the electricity
supply for a long or short-term period. Short circuits, failures at
power stations, and damage in transmission or distribution lines
can be counted as reasons for power outages. Most electric
utilities have been facing system outage crises. A blackout
in the North-Western United States resulted in $6 billion in
losses. Hence, outage detection, management, and restoration are very critical for the continuity of reliable electricity
delivery, quality of service (QoS) and customer satisfaction.
In restoration processes, outage management systems (OMS)
are used for prediction of outage location, service restoration,
additional customer services, outage analysis and prediction,
crew management, and reliability reporting. These advanced
functions can be accomplished through the integration of
OMS interfaces into supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA) systems, automatic meter reading systems (AMR),
utility call centers, customer information systems (CIS), and an
automated mapping/facility management/geographic information (AM/FM/GIS) system. Recent discussions and activities
are aimed at improving outage management processes by using
smart grid technologies. AMI data integration into OMS can
result in advanced customer services, improved outage management service reliability, outage notiﬁcation and restoration
notiﬁcation. However, there have been negative business impacts on the integration of AMI and OMS in the past few years.
There are many ways in which AMI can be integrated into the
system and improve OMS, depending on the communication
network. An outage management process is often initiated by
an outage report from a customer call. However, a last-gasp or
outage notiﬁcation message from the AMI meter will be sent
to the OMS sooner even if it is not reported by the customer,
such as during the time when most customers are at work
or sleep. The other advantage of the integration of AMI and
OMS is the restoration notiﬁcation functionality. Basically, it
is used to improve the accuracy of reliability reports, or reduce
the manpower needed to collect and analyze outages for the
• Communication Requirements of Outage Management: OMS need to be integrated with other systems and
require good quality of data. The communication requirements will affect all three phases of outage management,
being outage realization/detection, outage discovery, and
outage recovery. The main purpose of outage management is to enable utilities to respond to the power outage
more quickly, hence 2000-ms latency and 56-kbps bandwidth are the requirements of any outage management
systems . Furthermore, integration of advanced and
highly capable wired/wireless communication networks,
high-powered computers, and specialized software applications are essential for an advanced OMS.
H. Distribution Automation (DA)
An electricity distribution system acts as a bridge between
the transmission system and end-user premises. Electricity is
delivered through distribution systems. DA is important for
utilities to provide efﬁciency, reliability, and quality of electric
services. DA is deﬁned as the ability to automatically and remotely monitor, control, manipulate and coordinate distribution
components in real time modes. According to the US Smart
Grid Market, DA has a vital role in the electricity distribution
process. The emergence of DA provides much quicker fault
corrections, reducing impacts and duration of outages. Area
load control, load balancing, and calculation of voltage sag are
some of the advance application functions that a DA system is
capable of yielding. The SCADA software application system
is generally used for remote manipulation to allow dispatchers
to see the system failures and make remote changes easier.
With the advancements introduced by smart grid, DA can be
elevated a further step, known as advanced distribution automation (ADA). A more widespread communication interface
and advanced integrated and coordinated protection using
intelligent electronic devices, are some of the advantages of
ADA. The ADA function is used in Electric Power Research
Institute’s (EPRI) IntelliGrid Project to provide the reliability
of power system service, power quality, and power system
efﬁciency .
• Communication Requirements of DA: DA is one of the
mission-critical smart grid applications that is not tolerant
to latency. Less than 1 s of latency for alarms and alert
communication and 100 ms for messaging between points
are preferred for some of the DA functions. The measured
values for power system control signals should not exceed
15 ms . In general, between 9.6- and 100-Kbps bandwidth for communications is needed for a reliable and ﬂexible DA operation .
I. Distribution Management
Distribution networks have become too complex to be
controlled and monitored manually. An advanced distribution
management system (DMS) is required to provide an advanced
overview of the distribution network and report abnormalities
in the system. Distribution management can be deﬁned as the
ability to manage, operate and maintain the power distribution
assets and provide reliable, secure and efﬁcient power delivery.
DMS has been one of the most important systems in the power
industry; in other terms, it is mentioned as the actual brain
of future distribution grids . DMS is basically a complete
ICT-based system to provide management of the overall
real-time network operation. The data exchange, back-up, and
coordination in DMS are always achieved via the connection
to a WAN. Today DMS systems are based on existing SCADA
systems. The substations are remotely monitored by SCADA
systems in distribution networks and the SCADA data is not
available to other system, which therefore requires manual
coordination. Hence, full integration of DMS is needed to
achieve intelligent communication between different assets of
the distribution network. Nearly 90% of all outages originate in
the distribution network, emphasizing the importance of smart
distribution technologies and prompting utilities to rebuild their
SCADA systems or make investment in intelligent distribution
management systems. To provide interoperability and seamless
data exchange between different components of the smart grid,
it is essential to adopt some standards across the communication network. There are some IEC standards (IEC 62357,
IEC 61970 and IEC 61968) that describe different components
and their inter-relationships with a hierarchical architecture
 . Moreover, the IEC 61850 standard aims to improve the
interoperability between intelligent electronic devices (IEDs)
for substation automation systems.
• Communication Requirements of DMS: DMS is a comprehensive application system that is closely connected to
real-time systems and provides complete management and
maintenance functions for the distribution network. Thus,
highly reliable and seamless communication with real time
systems, a strong integration capability and advanced interoperability between other components are the most crucial
requirements for DMS. Furthermore, 9.6–100-kbps bandwidth and latency of 100 ms to 2 s is needed for reliable
data communications of DMS .
J. Asset Management
Electric utilities have been under pressure to assure a QoS
at mimimum cost for customers and regulators. Asset management has primarily been developed as a response to this problem
by offering management, automation, tracking, optimization of
the work order process, ﬁeld crews scheduling and ﬁeld assets. Assets, replacement and maintenance costs, performance
of the system, risk of failure, and reliability impacts are the key
drivers that can be balanced through asset management systems
by the help of new technologies such as sensors, new communication infrastructures and new information and monitoring
systems . Most utilities use some software programs and
business models to monitor and control the plant and put asset
management into practice. There are many assets that are managed through different software tools such as Asset/Work Management Systems, SCADA, and GIS. Furthermore, introducing
smart grid technologies adds new assets to the system to be managed for better service at appropriate cost levels.
• Communication Requirements of Asset Management:
Transmission and distribution assets are needed to be
managed to improve the system reliability. Equipment
condition monitoring, coordinated asset management, and
dynamic adjustment of operating limits are the critical
functions of an asset management system. Thus, advanced
monitoring devices, seamless data trafﬁc with other applications such as SCADA, GIS, meter data management
systems and an appropriate bandwidth around 56 Kbps
 are required for better asset utilization.
K. Meter Data Management
Meter data management is a key requirement of the smart
grid infrastructure, since the amount of metering data is growing
dramatically due to the real time communication between smart
meters and utilities’ back ofﬁce. The metering data needed to
be stored, managed and further analyzed for dynamic pricing,
better customer service, outage management, demand response
and energy consumption management purposes. A meter data
management system (MDMS) is responsible for storing and
processing the metering data before making it available for other
applications. Smart meters transfer the collected raw data to
MDMS via a two-way communication network. MDMS acts as
a database system for storing and analyzing metering data and
furthermore has capabilities such as managing all kinds of meters (electric, gas, heat), transmitting data other than tariff and
turn electricity on/off, etc.
• Communication Requirements of MDMS: The success
of meter data management systems directly affects some
critical applications such as demand response, outage
management and dynamic pricing that need the information provided by MDMS. Hence, the communication
requirements of MDMS are dependent on the other applications’ requirements. For instance, demand response
programs can be adversely affected by higher latencies
in the required information. Thus, MDMS has to provide
the analyzed information to DR as soon as possible. Basically, the bandwidth requirement is around 56 Kbps, and
2000-ms latency is appropriate for MDMS.
L. Renewable Distributed Energy Resources (DER) and
DERs have an important role in the future power grid and the
environment, since it is the enabler technology for lower carbon
imprints, lower fuel costs, and reduced power ﬂows on transmission lines. The renewable resources, such as solar and wind,
have a non-consistent nature. Hence, they may not be available
or meet the expected output levels all of the time. In this regard,
energy storage systems can provide the energy during periods of
reduced production. The integration of energy storage system to
DERs will increase the advantages of DERs and provide a consistent, controllable, fast-acting power grid with increased reliability and power delivery capacity.
• Communication Requirements of DERs: The unpredictable nature of renewable energy resources requires
fast-response, effective, and advanced communication
technologies
instantaneous
information
on different electricity generation points and advanced
weather forecasting. Based on studies in , the bandwidth requirement is around 9.6 to 56 Kbps, and latency
requirement is between 300 ms to 2 s, while reliability
requirement is between 99% and 99.99%.
M. Vehicle to Grid (V2G)
In electric vehicles, the ac power (usually from 10 to 200 kW)
needed for traction is supplied by a group of batteries or fuel
cells. The same group, when fully charged and connected to the
grid can reverse its power ﬂow routing the stored energy from
the car to the power grid, thus realizing the so called ”vehicle
to grid” or V2G operation. Hence, EVs act as distributed resources in that the power previously absorbed from the grid or
produced by the kinetic energy during motion can be sent back
to the utility, which provide a smooth load curve and improve
back-up capacity and reliability of the power system. One of
the important roles of V2G is the ability to support renewable
energy. Penetration and the intermittency of renewable energy
can be problematic if the ﬂuctuating supply cannot be matched
to the already ﬂuctuating load with additional resources. In addition, V2G can provide back-up and storage for renewable energy generation.
• Communication Requirements of V2G: The communication needs of V2G should be considered for both
ﬂeet vehicles and dispersed vehicles. The communication needs of a ﬂeet parked in one location are simple
 . A short-range, lower cost wireless communication
techniques, such as ZigBee or Bluetooth, can be used for
each parking space. Long-distance communication are
needed for dispersed vehicles for electronic identiﬁcation
of the electric utility meter that the vehicle is plugged into,
billing systems and capacity identiﬁcation. Hence, cellular
communication technologies and land-line communication can be the best for these purposes. In case of the
creation of a signiﬁcant new load from EVs, transmission
enhancements are required to be analyzed in the light
of larger scale system planning or regional transmission
planning. The communication needs are 5–10 kbps and
the data latency is a maximum of 2 s .
N. Electrical Vehicles (EVs) Charging
Electrical vehicles might be one of the key solutions to the
rising energy costs, increase in oil prices, and global warming
issues. The energy storage seems the key technology for the realization of EVs technology . To make this technology practical and real, more and more charging stations should be built.
One of the challenges is also the charging time of EVs. There are
some studies towards this issue. For example, the SAE J2293,
SAE J2836, SAE J2847 standards have been developed for energy transfer and communication purposes between EVs and the
power grid. One of the proposed methods to reduce the charging
time is increasing the charging voltage and current. However,
this may cause an increase in chargers’ capacity, safety, size,
cost, which can limit the ultrafast high-capacity charging. Local
energy storage can be a solution for this issue, which will reduce the investments and increase the efﬁciency of the electrical
• Communication Requirements of EVs: The communication infrastructure should provide reliability, acceptable
response times, and appropriate throughput. In this regard,
power-line communications, GSM, GPRS, and 3G wireless WAN technologies may provide alternative solutions
for EV charging applications. The estimated latency requirement is between 2 s to 5 min and the bandwidth requirement for both load balancing and billing purposes will
be between 9.6–56 Kbps .
IV. SG Applications and Services Roadmap
The electricity delivery systems of most countries were built
almost 100 years ago, where electricity travels hundreds of thousands of kilometers from central power plants to consumers with
major energy losses. The structure of the current power grid is
not well suited to the distributed nature of renewable solar and
wind resources, and it is the major source of CO emissions and
does not have the capacity to meet the future energy demand.
Hence, the SG has become one of the most important items on
the agenda of many governments and utilities, since it is the key
to increasing the recognition of the current problems, reduce the
emissions of greenhouse gases, and forecast and meet the electricity demand.
As depicted in Fig. 6, there is an increasing trend from
one-way communications and traditional AMR systems to
smart grid technology with advances of AMI. Intelligent appliances, applications, agents, and customer portals integrate the
SG system with the help of advance management, distribution
automation, smart sensors, and demand response systems.
Hence, in many countries, SG roadmaps have been developed
to draw a global path with recommendations and action plans
for further technology and policy developments. Here are some
of the activities that should be focused on by the governments,
regulators, utility companies, and technology ﬁrms to make
meaningful progress toward the future grid development.
A. Future Transmission and Distribution (T&D) Systems
During the Tamp;D process, a considerable amount of generated electricity, 6% to 8%, is lost due to the resistance of the
wires and equipment that the electricity passes through. With
the SG, transmission and distribution infrastructure will be updated, new technologies will be integrated into the system to
obtain better performance, and ﬂexible ac transmission systems
(FACTS) can be used to maximize the power transfer capability.
High-voltage dc (HVDC) technologies can be used for the integration of renewable energy resources near the urban areas
with less T&D system losses. Dynamic line rating (DLR) can
be used to identify the carrying capabilities of network parts to
prevent any overloading problems, moreover, high-temperature
superconductors (HTS) can be used to decrease the transmission losses .
Fig. 6. SG applications road map.
B. Renewable Resources
There will be an increase in the integration of distributed solar
and wind power generation plants to the power grid system,
which will not cause any additional greenhouse gas emissions.
There will be a greater deployment of plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles (PHEVs) to avoid emissions from conventional engines of the transport sector, and the integration of storage units,
weather reports, real-time output monitoring, and grid-load balancing to the system to prevent the shortages when anything
may threaten the energy generation process, e.g., the wind stops
blowing. With these investments, it is estimated that there will
be an annual reduction in CO emissions that is equivalent to
60 to 211 million metric tons of CO in 2030 .
C. Advanced Forecasting Algorithms
The growth in electricity demand has had an accelerated
increase in recent years and varies between different countries.
For instance, the U.S. Energy Information Administration
(EIA) stated that electricity consumption in the U.S. will increase with an annual rate of 1.07 percent from 2008 through
2030 . However, the inability to forecast energy demand
and to balance power supply and demand is the same problem
for all of the countries. Integration of SG technologies into the
existing system is promising to increase the efﬁciency of the
supply system and meet the challenges of increasing complexity
of generation loads and distributed generation resources. There
will be more sophisticated DR regulations in the future, which
will require two-way communications provided by AMI for
more effective dynamic pricing, active customer participation
and smooth integration of new technologies, e.g., HEV, EV,
and PHEVs.
D. International Collaborations
In the revolution process of an SG, a set of well-established,
interoperable standards should be developed with the collaboration of different industrial and government organization groups.
REQUIREMENTS OF SG APPLICATIONS , 
In the following, we summarize some of the smart grid standardization studies.
• Institute
Electrical
Electronics
(IEEE): The IEEE is one of the world’s largest professional associations for the advancement of the technology
that focuses on SG interoperability standardization .
IEEE P2030 is the ﬁrst IEEE standard providing a roadmap
and guidelines for better understanding and deﬁning smart
grid interoperability . Hence, IEEE P2030 has deﬁned
the SG interoperability reference model (SGIRM) to
expand the current knowledge base, characteristics, and
principles for SG interoperability and power grid architectural designs and operations to provide more reliable
and ﬂexible power system . In general, IEEE P2030
focuses on three integrated architectural perspectives,
e.g., power systems, communication technology, and
information technology . There exist two additional
complementary standards based on the IEEE P2030 standard. IEEE P2030.1 provides guidelines on the knowledge
base addressing terminology, methods, equipment and
planning requirements for transportation electric-sourced,
road-based personal and mass transportation applications,
which can be used by utilities, manufacturers, transportation providers, infrastructure developers, and end users of
electric-sourced vehicles; IEEE Standard P2030.2 focuses
on discrete and hybrid energy storage systems integrated
with the electric power infrastructure .
• International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC): IEC
is the international electrical standard development organization focusing on the general requirements of smart grid
architectures and smart grid efforts in the electrical industry with the creation of the IEC Smart Grid Strategic
Group in 2008 . The IEC Smart Grid Strategic Group
has described and identiﬁed over 100 IEC standards and
examines 44 recommendations, 12 application areas, and
six general topics . IEC 61970 and IEC 61968 are the
reference model standards to carry out the information, diverse legacy devices, and applications integration in the
distribution grid and to accomplish successful SG deployment , . Another important standard is IEC 61850,
which is an electrical substation automation standard and
contains data modeling, fast transfer of events, reporting
schemes and data storage . On the other hand, the IEC
62351 standard covers the security issues related to power
system management and associated information exchange
• American National Standards Institute (ANSI): ANSI
is the coordinating institute of the U.S. standards and conformity assessment system that promotes the international
use of the U.S. standards and protects the U.S. policy and
technical position in international and regional standards
organizations .
• National
Technology
(NIST): NIST has been responsible for controlling
the development of standardization efforts, protocols and
models for providing interoperable, reliable and secure
services and systems for smart grid. With this framework,
NIST presents a conceptual reference model for smart grid
architecture, an initial set of 75 identiﬁed SG standards,
the priorities for additional standards, initial steps for
cyber security of SG and SG action plans .
• International Council on Large Electric Systems
(CIGRE): CIGRE is one of the leading, nongovernmental
and nonproﬁt international organizations on electric power
SG ROAD MAP-ACTION PLANS OF DIFFERENT DOMAINS 
systems that focuses on the impact of new communication
standards and SGs on existing and new substations, and
new ICT architectures to control the bulk power systems
(e.g., smart meter, SG, and intelligent grid) .
• International Telecommunication Union Standardization Sector (ITU-T) Smart Grid Focus Group: A focus
group on smart grids has been established by ITU-T for
developing recommendations, examining the potential impacts of standardization efforts and encouraging partnerships between smart grid communities and ITU-T for smart
grid deployment from a telecommunication view .
• Japanese Industrial Standards Committee (JISC):
JISC has a central role in standardization activities in
Japan, consisting of many national committees and
providing contributions in international standardization
activities, and contributing to the development phases of
measurement standards and technical infrastructure for
standardization .
• European Standardization Mandate M441 and the
Smart Meter Co-ordination Group : M441 is the
mandate of standards and technical documents to the organizations European Committee for Standardization (CEN),
European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) and European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI) for any type of smart meter’s
functionalities and communication issued by the European
Union. The main objective is providing reliability, interoperability and security for smart metering deployments.
• Smart Grid Standardization Mandate M/490 to European Standardisation Organisations (ESOs) to support European Smart Grid deployment: The goal of
M490 is to develop or update a set of standards within
a common European framework, which provides the integration of a variety of communication technologies and
electrical architectures, and related processes and services.
Hence, the interoperability between different high-level
smart grid services and functionalities will be achieved.
Building, industry, appliances and home automation are
not covered in M490 and it will be coordinated with the
outcomes of the existing mandate M441 to provide a coherent standardization framework .
• State Grid Corporation of China: China is one of the
largest markets for the upcoming open standards and products for the smart grid. Hence, the State Grid Corporation
of China has performed an SG standardization roadmap,
which include eight domains such as planning, power generation, transmission, substation equipment and communication, distribution, utilization, dispatching, ICT, 26 technical ﬁelds, and 92 series of standards .
• International Organization for Standardization (ISO):
ISO is an international standard body that has various representatives from national organization bodies. ISO has
made SG standardization efforts in building automation
and control systems (ISO 16484-5) and home electronic
system architecture (ISO/IEC 14543-3).
V. Conclusion
Smart Grid is a foundational technology that will provide
considerable changes to the existing power grid, consumer lives,
the quality of power delivery, and traditional energy resources.
Traditional energy sources produce energy with high environmental damage, as opposed to renewable energy sources (solar,
wind, waves, and biomass), which do not present this problem,
but have remarkable different dynamic characteristics than traditional ones. An integration of these into the existing energy
grid is necessary and involves new technologies. The information ﬂow is an important concept to deﬁne these technologies. On the other hand, advanced technologies and applications
offered by smart grid will shave the energy consumption behaviors of consumers, and hence, a considerable reduction in
energy consumption will be achieved. The integration of SG
technology into the existing system has been accelerated with
the SG standardization efforts of different organizations, government regulations, and SG solutions of technology and solution providers as depicted in Tables I and II. A description
of communication requirements, potential applications, and the
SG roadmap has been presented in this paper as the keys to SG
development.