Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations , pages 723–727,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
ELiRF-UPV at SemEval-2017 Task 4: Sentiment Analysis using Deep
Jos´e- ´Angel Gonz´alez, Ferran Pla, Llu´ıs-F. Hurtado
Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia
Cam´ı de Vera sn, 46022, Val`encia
{jogonba2|fpla|lhurtado}@dsic.upv.es
This paper describes the participation
of ELiRF-UPV team at task 4 of SemEval2017. Our approach is based on the
use of convolutional and recurrent neural
networks and the combination of general
and speciﬁc word embeddings with polarity lexicons. We participated in all of the
proposed subtasks both for English and
Arabic languages using the same system
with small variations.
Introduction
Twitter has become a source of a huge amount
of information which introduces great possibilities of research in the ﬁeld of Sentiment Analysis.
Sentiment Analysis or Opinion Mining,
is a research area within Natural Language Processing whose aim is to identify the underlying
emotion of a certain document, sentence or aspect . Sentiment Analysis systems has
been applied, among other, for classifying reviews
 , for generating
aspect-based summaries , or
political tendency identiﬁcation with polarity lexicons.
Slight modiﬁcations of the system have been
applied to adapt it to each subtask. These modiﬁcations are motivated by the characteristics of
each subtask and the available resources.
The system combines three Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) in order to learn high level abstractions from noisy representations . The input of these three networks are:
out-domain embeddings, in-domain embeddings,
and sequences of the polarities of the words. The
output of the CRNNs is concatenated and used as
input for a discriminating model implemented by
a fully-connected Multilayer Perceptron (MLP).
Figure 1 summarizes the proposed approach.
The CRNNs used have as a ﬁrst layer a unidimensional convolutional layer that allows to extract spatial relations among the words of a sentence .
In some subtasks, a down-
(out-domain embeddings)
(in-domain embeddings)
(polarity sequence)
argmax c p(c | x)
Figure 1: General system architecture.
sampling process by means of a max pooling layer
was applied.
Then, the output of the convolutional layers (including max pooling in some subtasks) is used
as input for a recurrent neural network (LSTM).
Moreover, because the polarity of a subsequence
of the sentence not only depends on the previous words but also depends on the next words,
we used a Bidirectional Long-Short-Term Memory (BLSTM) network . In most
subtasks, only one BLSTM layer has been used.
The dimension for the output vector has been ﬁxed
between 32 and 256.
Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the
CRNN layers, where ˜xi is a noisy version of the
input, ci are the kernels of the convolutional layer,
pi represent the operations of max pooling, and ys
is the output of the CRNNs.
Figure 2: Implementation of the Convolutional
Recurrent Neural Network.
The last network used in our system is a fully
connected Multilayer Perceptron. Depending on
the subtasks, we used between 1 and 3 hidden layers. The number of neurons also depended on the
subtask. Softmax activation function was used in
the output layer to estimate p(c|x) (the number of
neurons in that layer depends on the number of
classes in the task).
A graphical representation of the MLP used can
be seen in Figure 3, where yi are the outputs of
the CRNNs, which are used as input for the MLP.
Note that, in this case, no noise is applied to the
input because the chosen setup obtained better results during the tuning phase.
argmax c p(c | x)
Softmax FC
Figure 3: Implementation of the Multilayer Perceptron.
As we stated above, we used two different kind of
embeddings (in-domain and out-domain) as input
to the system for all the Arabic and English subtasks.
We used these two embeddings models in order
to reduce the number of unseen words. In this way,
we combined a speciﬁc representation that only
considers the words seen in the training set (indomain embeddings) with a more general one that
has a great amount of words unseen in the training
set but that can appear in the test set (out-domain
embeddings).
For the English subtasks, we used as outdomain model the word2vec model learned
by Fr´ederic Godin from 400 million tweets in English.
For the Arabic subtasks, we learned a
400-dimensional word2vec model using the articles of the Wikipedia in Arabic .
With respect to the in-domain models, a word2vec
model was trained for each subtask from the provided training corpus.
In addition to the two representations based on
embeddings, we added polarity information to the
input layer. To include this information, we considered a representation of tweets based on a sequence of C-dimensional one-hot vectors, where
C is the number of sentiment classes. Each vector indicates the polarity of one word according
to certain polarity lexicon. This way, a tweet is a
sequence of C-dimensional vectors. Once again,
the resources used depended on the language. We
used the NRC lexicon 
both for the Arabic and English subtasks and the
Aﬁnn lexicon only for the
English subtasks.
In this section, we present the modiﬁcations we
made on the general schema for all the subtasks in
which we participated. We also report and discuss
the results we achieved in the different subtasks.
Due to the different sizes of the corpora used
in every subtask, we made some changes from
the generic model in order to reduce or increase
the number of parameters to be estimated. These
changes had been ﬁxed for each subtask by means
of a tuning process.
Subtask A: Message Polarity
Classiﬁcation
Subtask A consists in classifying the message as
positive, negative, or neutral. Our model for this
subtask consists of three CRNN merged with a
three layer MLP, see general schema in Figure 1.
The results achieved by our system in Subtask
A are shown in Table 1.
The measure used to
range the participants was macroaveraged recall
(ρ). Two additional measures were also considered: F1 averaged across the positives and the negatives (F PN
) and Accuracy (Acc). We have also
included, for each measure, the position reached
by our system compared with the other participants.
Table 1: Results for Subtask A: Message Polarity
Classiﬁcation, English and Arabic.
Note the different ranking position achieved by
our system considering ρ and Acc measures for
English. ρ achieved the 14th position while Acc
achieved the 24th position. We think this is due to
the way we tackled with the imbalanced classes
in the corpus. The decision was to balance the
training set by eliminating some samples of those
classes that appeared more times in the corpus.
In contrast, for the Arabic subtask, Accuracy results are not inﬂuenced by the way we managed
the imbalanced problem, achieving similar position in all the measures considered.
Subtask B: Tweet classiﬁcation according
to a two-point scale
In subtask B, given a message and a topic, the participants must classify the message on two-point
scale (positive and negative) towards that topic.
Unfortunately, we did not include information of
the topic in the model and, in consequence, our
model consists of a variation of the generic model.
In this case, max pooling layers were replaced
with another convolutional layer, the number of
neurons in MLP layers was reduced and we used
Gaussian noise over MLP layers activations because better results are obtained over the validation set. For the Arabic language, we used the
same topology, but we reduced the number of parameters due to the size of the training corpus.
The results achieved by our system in Subtask
B are shown in Table 2. The measures considered
were the same as in Subtask A.
The scores achieved in all measures are better
than those obtained in task A. Perhaps, this sub-
Table 2: Results for Subtask B: Tweet classiﬁcation according to a two-point scale, English and
task is easier because only two classes are considered. But, compared with the other participants,
our system ranked lower in this subtask. We think
this is because no information of the topic was included in the model. For this subtask, the behavior
of the system for both languages is similar.
Subtask C: Tweet classiﬁcation according
to a ﬁve-point scale
In this subtask, given a message and a topic, participants must classify the message on a ﬁve-point
scale towards that topic. As in Subtask B, we did
not include topic information to the model. Our
model was an extension of the generic model, with
two convolutional layers and two max pooling layers in each CRNN. For the Arabic version, we
used the generic model with less parameters because of the available data.
The results achieved by our system in Subtask C
are shown in Table 3. The measure used to range
the participants was macroaveraged Mean Absolute Error (MAEM). An extension of macroaveraged recall for ordinal regression (MAEµ) was
also considered.
Table 3: Results for Subtask C: Tweet classiﬁcation according to a ﬁve-point scale, English and
For the English language, our system achieved
the 7th position (0.806), with big difference respect to the team that obtained the best results
Once again, not including information
about the topic could be decisive in the performance of the system.
Subtask D: Tweet quantiﬁcation
according to a two-point scale
Subtask D consists of tweet quantiﬁcation in a
two-point scale.
Given a set of tweets about a
given topic, participants must estimate the distribution of the tweets across two-point scale (positive and negative). We used the output of Subtask
B to estimate, by maximum likelihood, the distribution of the tweets.
The results achieved by our system in Subtask D
are shown in Table 4. The measure used to range
the participants was Kullback-Leibler Divergence
(KLD). Two additional measures were also considered: absolute error (AE) and relative absolute
error (RAE).
Table 4: Results for Subtask D: Tweet quantiﬁcation according to a two-point scale, English and
We can partially explain these poor results due
to the simplicity of the method used to estimate
the probability distribution and because the output
of Subtask B also included errors.
Subsection E: Tweet quantiﬁcation
according to a ﬁve-point scale
In a similar way that Subtask D, Subtask E was a
tweet quantiﬁcation task, but in a ﬁve-point scale.
For this subtask, we used the output of Subtask C
to estimate, by maximum likelihood, the distribution of the tweets.
The results achieved by our system in Subtask
E are shown in Table 5.
The measure used to
range the participants was Earth Mover’s Distance
Table 5: Results for Subtask E: Tweet quantiﬁcation according to a ﬁve-point scale, English and
Our system achieved the 4th position (0.306) for
English, with slight difference respect to the ﬁrst
system (0.245).
Conclusions
In this work, we have presented the system developed by ELiRF-UPV team for participating in the
task 4 of SemEval2017. We used a general system
with small modiﬁcations to participate in all the
subtasks. The system was based on the use of convolutional and recurrent neural networks and the
combination of general and speciﬁc word embeddings with polarity lexicons. The results achieved
by our system were competitive in many subtasks.
As future work, we plan to study some problems not addressed in this work such as tackle with
the imbalance problem, address tweet quantiﬁcation problem properly, add topic information in the
model for B and C subtasks, and consider additional resources for tweet representation.
Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the MINECO
and FEDER founds under TIN2014-54288-C4-3-
R project: ASLP-MULAN: Audio, Speech and
Language Processing for Multimedia Analytics.