11C-PIB PET Image Analysis for Alzheimer’s Diagnosis Using
Weighted Voting Ensembles
Wenjun Wu [Student Member, IEEE], Janani Venugopalan [Student Member, IEEE], May D.
Wang, Ph.D. [Senior Member, IEEE] Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Wallace H. Countler Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is one of the leading causes of death and dementia worldwide. Early
diagnosis confers many benefits, including improved care and access to effective treatment.
However, it is still a medical challenge due to the lack of an efficient and inexpensive way to
assess cognitive function . Although research on data from Neuroimaging and Brain Initiative
and the advancement in data analytics has greatly enhanced our understanding of the underlying
disease process, there is still a lack of complete knowledge regarding the indicative biomarkers of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Recently, computer aided diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and AD
with functional brain images using machine learning methods has become popular. However, the
prediction accuracy remains unoptimistic, with prediction accuracy ranging from 60% to 88%
 . Among them, support vector machine is the most popular classifier. However, because of
the relatively small sample size and the amount of noise in functional brain imaging data, a single
classifier cannot achieve high classification performance. Instead of using a global classifier, in
this work, we aim to improve AD prediction accuracy by combining three different classifiers
using weighted and unweighted schemes. We rank image-derived features according to their
importance to the classification performance and show that the top ranked features are localized in
the brain areas which have been found to associate with the progression of AD. We test the
proposed approach on 11C- PIB PET scans from The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI) database and demonstrated that the weighted ensemble models outperformed
individual models of K-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forests, Neural Nets with overall cross
validation accuracy of 86.1% ± 8.34%, specificity of 90.6% ± 12.9% and test accuracy of 80.9%
and specificity 85.76% in classification of AD, mild cognitive impairment and healthy elder
I. INTRODUCTION
As one of the compelling unsolved medical problems, Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) affects
more than 5.3 million patients in the United States of America . AD is an irreversible
chronic neurodegenerative disease that is the most common form of dementia. The incidence
of dementia caused by AD has become a significant social problem. There has been
extensive ongoing research about early diagnosis and treatment of AD, but early diagnosis
 .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 29.
 
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2017 July ; 2017: 3914–3917. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2017.8037712.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
remains a medical challenge due to the absence of a definitive diagnosis test for AD. In fact,
less than 50% of the people with AD are being diagnosed accurately with the disease based
on clinical symptoms . The positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is a noninvasive, three-dimensional imaging modality that uses radioactive substance to detect
functional changes in the brain. PET imaging has been recently identified as a major
advancement in the detection of AD . The tracer, Carbon 11-labeled Pittsburgh
Compound B (11C- PIB), has shown more uptake in the brains of patient with AD than in
those of control group, especially in the area thalamus, putamen, caudate, hippocampus and
subcortical white matter of the patients . Thus, a region-based analysis of 11C- PIB PET
scans that addressed those critical brain areas is expected to generate optimistic prediction
performance.
Recent advances in computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have shown potentials in
providing accurate diagnosis of the AD using brain function images However, the
prediction accuracy of AD, especially among patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
was approximately 70% . Besides, most present CAD systems are based on support
vector machine (SVM) . Although SVM has been the most commonly used classifier,
it has limited performance in the presence of noise and outliers, which is abundant in PET
imaging data. Moreover, because of relatively small sample size and the amount of noise in
functional PET imaging data, a single classifier cannot achieve good general performance. It
is well-known in the artificial intelligence field that ensemble methods can be used for
improving general classification performance and alleviate the potential data overfitting .
Previous study has demonstrated the potential of ensemble methods in improving prediction
accuracy of AD in PET imaging data. C. Cabral et al classified AD, MCI and Control
(CN) in Fluorodeoxyglucose-(FDG) PET images using favorite class ensemble methods,
which composed of three base classifiers, each trained with different feature subsets.
However, their proposed ensemble method only utilized single type of classifier and average
voting to generate final decision, which could be biased and prone to noise due to the
limitation of unweighted voting and single type of classifier. In present study, we addressed
this challenge by proposing an ensemble classification of 11C-PIB PET scans from
Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) participants. In this approach, the
classification produced in first iteration is used as “prior knowledge” to generate both
weighted and unweighted ensemble of different classifiers.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this work, we performed a systematic analysis of 11C- PIB PET scans to refine the
current knowledge regarding the indicative biomarkers of AD and to improve AD diagnosis
precision (Figure 1). After obtaining data from ADNI database and perform image
processing, we extracted volume, texture and voxel features across different brain areas
segmented. We then performed classification using individual classifiers, such as Random
forests, k-Nearest Neighbors and Neural Nets. Finally, we combined the decision of three
individual classifiers using weighted and unweighted voting.
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Data used in the preparation of this study were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). The ADNI was initiated in
2003 and led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD. The study aims to test
whether serial magnetic resonance imaging, PET, other biological markers and clinical and
neuropsychological assessment can be used to measure the progression of MCI and early
AD. In this study, the preprocessed 228 11C-PIB PET image volumes from 103 ADNI
participants were acquired from the ADNI database. Preprocessing steps performed by
ADNI are: co-registration, average, standard space transformation, voxel normalization and
smoothing with 8mm FWHM filter.
B. Image Processing
PET scans were processed automatically (Figure 2), using FSL Toolbox (Oxford University,
UK) . First, the images were skull-stripped to remove non-brain tissue. To enable robust
registration, all images were then aligned to standard space, ICBM152 space . Next,
tissue segmentation is performed to segment the images into Grey Matter (GM), White
Matter (WM) and Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Finally, we performed volume segmentation to
extract useful brain areas that have been found to show increased 11C- PIB uptake in AD
patients by previous study . The extracted brain areas are Thalamus, Brainstem,
Hippocampus, Amygdala, Putamen, Pallidum, Accumbens, and Caudate. In our study, a
total of 208 out of 228 PET scans, which have sufficient quality to provide us with
successful volume segmentation of the listed eight brain areas through the processing steps
(Figure 2) were utilized for further analysis.
C. Feature Extraction
We extracted three types of features to be used as classification features: volume, voxel
intensities and texture. Volumes of the eight extracted brain areas were calculated from the
binary mask. We calculated volumes of WM, GW, CSF from the probability tissue maps
 . Using segmented binary masks, the voxels within all tissue types and brain areas were
extracted. We performed texture analysis to extract energy, entropy and 13 Haralick texture
features . Energy and entropy were calculated from multiwavelet transformation .
Haralick’s texture features were calculated using 64 gray-level co-occurrence matrix
(GLCM) in 8 directions . Since there is a lack of established way to perform threedimensional texture analysis, we extended two-dimensional texture analysis for threedimensional texture analysis. For each volume, texture features of each slice were averaged
to generate the final value.
C. Feature Selection
Minimum redundancy maximum relevance feature selection method (mRMR) was used to
minimize redundancy and select features according to measures of relevance and
dependence . Up 300 features were selected and used by the classifiers. The number of
features used by each classifier was optimized by 10-fold cross validation (CV). Considering
the total sample size is 208, a maximum of 300 features would be appropriate.
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
D. Classification
Features selected by mRMR were used by baseline classifiers for prediction of CN, AD and
MCI. The baseline classifiers adopted in this study were K-Nearest Neighbors (kNN),
Random Forests (RF), and Neural Nets (NN). These classifiers are commonly used
classifiers and are suitable for solving high dimensional, multi-class classification problems
where there is relatively small amount of training samples. SVM is not selected since it is
inherently binary classifier. Classification scores, which are the predicted class posterior
probabilities, were generated from the classifiers.
1) Hyper parameter selection: hyper parameters of different classifiers, such as the hidden
layers of neural nets, the number of nearest neighbors of kNN and the number of single
decision trees in the RF, were optimized using grid search in 10-fold CV.
2) Ensemble decision: the classification score from baseline classifiers were assembled
using weighted and unweighted voting schemes.
In unweighted voting scheme, the new classification scores were computed by averaging the
classification scores from three baseline classifiers. The new decision label is the class that
has largest classification score.
In weighted voting scheme, we first determined the weight for each classifier using the
following equation 
1 −accuracy)
where accuracy refers to the classification accuracy of individual classifiers. The weight
adjusted the relative importance of each classifiers so that the accuracy performance of each
classifier is proportional to its weight. In weighted voting scheme, the weighted average of
classification scores from baseline classifiers is the new classification scores, which were
then used to compute new decision labels.
E. Evaluation
Dataset was separated into 20% testing data and 80% training data. Hyparameters and the
number of features selected were optimized using 10-fold CV on training data. The final
model was trained on entire set of training data with optimized hyperparameters and
evaluated on 20% testing data. Performance metrics reported in this study are: Accuracy,
Specificity and Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC). Mean values with standard
deviations were reported (mean ± standard deviation).
III. RESULTS
As described above, each classifier classified 208 PET image scans into categories of CN,
MCI and AD. The performances of three individual classifiers and two ensemble classifiers
are compared. In this dataset, there were 47 instances of CN, 99 instances of MCI, and 62
instances of AD.
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A. Classification Results
The results obtained from classification experiments are shown in Table II. The best CV
performance of 86.1% ± 8.34% accuracy, 90.6% ± 12.9% specificity and the best test
performance of 80.9% accuracy, 85.76% specificity were achieved by weighted ensemble
classifier.
In terms of individual classifiers, the results of RF, kNN and NN are drastically different. RF
achieved 74.5% overall test accuracy and 82.0% specificity while the overall test accuracy of
KNN and NN are 61.3%, 63.4% and specificity of 66.5% and 65.3% respectively. Besides,
the CV performance of RF is much better than kNN and NN interms of accuracy, specificity
and PCC across three classes. The superiority of RF over kNN and NN could attribute to the
fact that when training set is small, high bias classifiers, such as single decision tree, which
is the base unit of RF, have an advantage over low bias classifiers, such as kNN since the
latter will overfit. Besides, RF by itself, is an ensemble method that uses a multitude of
simple decision trees. Decision trees are weak learners and might have better prediction in
regards to this classification problem.
In regards to ensemble methods, the unweighted ensemble classifier has overall test
accuracy of 70.1% and 62.5% specificity. The weighted ensemble classifier achieved highest
accuracy in CN, MCI and AD, and highest specificity in MCI and AD. The unweighted
ensemble classifier outperforms NN and KNN in terms of overall accuracy, PCC and
specificity.
However, RF and weighted ensemble classifier performs much better than unweighted
ensemble classifier in almost all areas of measurements. The superiority of weighted
ensemble classifier over unweighted ensemble classifier conforms with our expectation since
unweighted average of decision values could lead to biased performance. The presented
results indicate that the weighted ensemble method that combines multiple classifiers has
great potential to enhance the overall diagnosis precision of AD.
B. Feature Analysis
To determine the most important features for the classification methods, top ranked features
from mRMR were investigated, as shown in Table I. Although there is some variability in
the feature ranked by different classification methods, there are several highly ranked
common features. Haralick texture features are ranked the highest and among them,
correlation feature , which measures the gray tone linear-dependencies and information
measure of correlation , are the most important. Highly ranked brain regions are: Grey
Matter , Caudate , Putamen and Thalamus in descending sequence. These
highly ranked brain areas conform with the important brain areas found by previous study
that exhibit marked 11C-PIB uptakes in patients with AD and MCI, comparing with that in
normal elders .
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
IV. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
Recently, computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems using brain images has become popular
in AD diagnosis . However, the prediction accuracy of AD, especially among patients
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was only approximately 70% .
In this study, we achieved high AD and MCI diagnosis accuracy with ensemble learning
methods that combine different types of classifiers, such as NN, RF and kNN, as well as to
refine current knowledge regarding brain areas associated with 11C- PIB. Both weighted
ensemble methods and unweighted ensemble methods were tested on 11C- PIB PET image
dataset from ADNI. The top features ranked by classifiers are in the brain areas that have
been found to associate with the progression of AD . We showed that the ensemble
method, where the proportion of the decision was based on the performance of individual
classifier outperformed individual classifiers, with best overall CV accuracy of 86.1% ±
8.34%, CV specificity of 90.6% ± 12.9%, best overall test accuracy of 80.9% and specificity
of 85.76%. This result also outperforms most state-of-art computer-aided AD diagnosis
systems with accuracy of 60% to 88%. Besides, we have also confirmed that the highly
ranked common features are in brain areas that have been found to be related with the
progression of AD. The results have demonstrated the potential value of 11C-PIB in
improving AD diagnosis accuracy as an indicative biomarker of AD.
Our work, however, currently only addressed 11C- PIB PET image datasets while other
tracers such as FDG and Florbetapir are also suggested as core biomarkers for AD. In the
future, we would like to compare the performance of proposed methods on different PET
imaging datasets. We would also like to develop ensemble methods that can integrate PET
imaging datasets from different PET imaging tracers such as Florbetapir, FDG and 11C-
Acknowledgment
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
(National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number
W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of
Southern California.