High-resolution medical image synthesis using
progressively grown generative adversarial
Andrew Beers1, James Brown1, Ken Chang1, J. Peter Campbell2, Susan
Ostmo2, Michael F. Chiang2,3, and Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer1,4
Abstract. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a class of unsupervised machine learning algorithms that can produce realistic images
from randomly-sampled vectors in a multi-dimensional space. Until recently, it was not possible to generate realistic high-resolution images
using GANs, which has limited their applicability to medical images
that contain biomarkers only detectable at native resolution. Progressive
growing of GANs is an approach wherein an image generator is trained
to initially synthesize low resolution synthetic images (8x8 pixels), which
are then fed to a discriminator that distinguishes these synthetic images
from real downsampled images. Additional convolutional layers are then
iteratively introduced to produce images at twice the previous resolution until the desired resolution is reached. In this work, we demonstrate
that this approach can produce realistic medical images in two diﬀerent
domains; fundus photographs exhibiting vascular pathology associated
with retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), and multi-modal magnetic resonance images of glioma. We also show that ﬁne-grained details associated with pathology, such as retinal vessels or tumor heterogeneity, can
be preserved and enhanced by including segmentation maps as additional
channels. We envisage several applications of the approach, including image augmentation and unsupervised classiﬁcation of pathology.
Keywords: deep learning, generative adversarial networks, unsupervised learning, image synthesis, retina, glioma
Introduction
Synthesis of medical images has many applications. One application is image
augmentation, whereby a small dataset with low diversity is ampliﬁed by approximating and randomly sampling the underlying data distribution. This can
facilitate the training of more robust machine learning algorithms by dramatically increasing the size and heterogeneity of the training dataset. This is especially useful in scenarios where the patient population is small, such as for rare
diseases . Secondly, in multi-institutional studies, there may be diﬀerences in
imaging protocols such that certain imaging modalities are missing for a subset
or all of the patients. It would therefore be desirable to produce a complete set
of data by synthesizing the missing modalities (or even additional modalities)
for all patients to improve algorithm performance . For example, brain tumor
 
segmentation performs best when multiple MR modalities (such as T1, T2, and
FLAIR) are used . Lastly, certain imaging modalities have downsides to their
acquisition. For example, CT and PET imaging impart a high dose of radiation
to the patient. Eﬀective synthesis of CT from other imaging modalities would
avoid unnecessary radiation exposure and reduce the costs incurred due to
instrument time and contrast agents .
The biomedical imaging community stands to gain from robust image synthesis methods. However, two key challenges exist with existing methods. Current
techniques are unable to generate high resolution images, which are important
for diseases with subtle pathological features. Secondly, image synthesis methods
often neglect certain biological features that are critical for diagnosis, and therefore need to be well-represented. Here, we propose a method of addressing both
of these challenges. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been used to
generate synthetic images of unprecedented realism and diversity . Applications in imaging - including biomedical imaging - have ﬂourished, but have been
conﬁned to relatively small image sizes . Recently, Karras et al. devised a
training scheme for GANs called progressive growing of GANs (PGGANs) that
can create photorealistic images at high resolutions, with images up to 1024
× 1024 pixels being showcased in their work . However, their application was
limited to common image benchmarking datasets such as celebrity faces and natural scenes. Application of PGGANs to biomedical data with clinically-relevant
imaging biomarkers has yet to be explored.
In this paper, we propose an application of the PGGAN method to two
classes of medical image: retinal fundus photographs with retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), and two-dimensional magnetic resonance images taken from a
publicly-available, multi-modality glioma dataset (BraTS). We show that application of PGGANs to these data produces images at high resolution that are
both realistic and phenotypically diverse. We also demonstrate that preservation
of ﬁne-grained details of pathology may be improved by having the generator
produce a segmentation of a structure of interest, which is criticized alongside
the raw image by the discriminator. Lastly, we show that the latent space encodes clinically relevant information by inverting the generator and transforming
real images into low dimensional representations.
Retinopathy of Prematurity Dataset
We used a dataset of 5,550 posterior pole retinal photographs collected as part of
the ongoing multicenter Imaging and Informatics in Retinopathy of Prematurity
(i-ROP) cohort study. All images were resized to 512 × 512 pixels. Segmentations
of the retinal vasculature were produced by ﬁrst converting images to grayscale
and applying gamma adjustment and contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE). A U-net pre-trained on 200 manually segmented vessel
images was used to perform segmentation of the vasculature, which operates on
48 × 48 pixel patches with an overlap of 8 pixels in the x and y directions.
Brain Tumor Magnetic Resonance Imaging Dataset
We utilized the Brain Tumor Segmentation (BraTS) Challenge 2017 training
dataset, which contains magnetic resonance (MR) images from 75 low-grade
and 210 high-grade glioma patients from 19 institutions, with varying scanner
models, magnetic ﬁeld strengths, echo times, and repetition times . The
modalities included T1, T1 post-gadolinium, T2, and T2 FLAIR weighted MR
imaging. All imaging was co-registered with respect to each patient, brain extracted, and isotropically resampled. 3 segmentation labels from 1-4 expert raters
were provided: 1) edema, 2) non-enhancing/necrosis, and 3) contrast enhancing
tumor. We preprocessed each MR volume to have zero mean and unit variance.
Network Architectures
Fig. 1. A schematic for a progressively growing GAN (PGGAN). The GAN is trained
in phases, with each phase adding an upsampling layer and a pair of convolutional
layers to the both the discriminator and generator. Outputs from a single latent vector
at each stage of the training are shown superimposed on the generator arm.
The PGGAN architecture trains a single GAN in a step-wise fashion (Figure
1). In our case, we initially train a GAN to produce realistic downsampled images
at 4x4 pixel resolution from a 128-vector latent space via a pair of convolutional
layers, and then discriminate between real and synthesize images via a symmetric
pair of convolutional layers in the discriminator. We then iteratively add pairs of
convolutional layers to both sides of the GAN architecture, that synthesize images at 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512 square pixels respectively. We follow the
scheme suggested by Karras et al. for adding additional layers. When transitioning from generating lower to higher resolution images, we interpolate between
nearest neighbor upsampling alone, and nearest neighbor upsampling followed
by the newly-added pair of convolutional layers. Convolutional layers below 256
pixel resolution are set at 128 ﬁlters, while layers at and above 256 are set to
64 and 16 layers respectively. Training stages at resolutions below 512 pixels are
trained with a 16 image batch size, while resolutions equal to and above 512
pixels are trained with an 8 image batch size. Both of these choices speciﬁc to
higher resolutions were made in deference to GPU memory constraints. Models
were trained using an Adam optimizer for 40,000 batches per resolution, with
20,000 iterations spent on the interpolation phase, and 20,000 iterations training
without interpolation. We evaluated the loss for the GAN using a Wasserstein
loss, and trained the generator and discriminator in equal proportion. For the
retinopathy of prematurity dataset, we trained up to 512 pixel resolution, while
for the glioma dataset, we trained up to 256 pixel resolution. All images were
trained on an NVIDIA P100 GPU.
We also trained a network for encoding images using the same network architecture as the discriminator, with the exception of terminating in a 128-vector
output with a mean-squared error cost function. This network was fed synthetic
images generated from the already-trained PGGAN, and trained to predict the
latent vector which generated that synthetic image. It was trained in a nonprogressive manner for 20,000 iterations under the same training conditions as
the primary PGGAN.
Image Quality
In both retinal fundus images and glioma multi-modality MRI images, images of
high quality and variation were produced by the PGGAN architecture (Figure
2) . Qualitatively, some unrealistic images were produced, moreso in the MRI
slice case. Both examples suﬀered from the appearance of overly-distinct edges
in pathological tissue, likely caused by the requirement for the generator to
create segmentation maps in addition to anatomy. Upon close inspection, minor
checker-boarding artifacts could be found in the retinal images.
In the case of the retinal fundus images, we further tested whether data generated by the PGGAN would be interpreted similarly by algorithms trained only
on real retinal data. Speciﬁcally, we took a state of the art retinal vessel segmentation algorithm, applied it to synthetic fundus images generated by the GAN,
and evaluated the diﬀerences between the algorithm’s computed segmentations
and the segmentation map generated automatically by the GAN. We found that
segmentation maps generated from from the GAN could accurately predict the
segmentation maps generated from the segmentation algorithm with the AUC of
0.97, suggesting that the vessels and segmentation maps generated by the GAN
are in the modeling context indistinguishable from vessels in real images.
Eﬀect of Segmentation Channels
To accurately synthesize those areas of the image important to medical diagnosis, we included segmentation maps previously described as additional channels
Fig. 2. Images generated by a PGGAN trained on a retinal fundus dataset (left) and an
by the PGGAN trained on multi-modal glioma MRI data (right). Retinal images show
synthetic fundus images and synthetic vessel maps, while MRI images show synthetic
2D MRI slices (modalities clockwise from top-right: T2, post-contrast T1, FLAIR, and
pre-contrast T1).
Fig. 3. Both rows show synthetic images generated by PGGANs. Images in Row A
show images generated from a PGGAN that did not train on vessel segmentation data
or glioma segmentation data, while images on Row B were generated from a PGGAN
that trained on segmentation data.
to the network. As shown in Figure 3, images trained without these segmentation maps often obscured details important to pathological diagnosis, such as
global retinal structures in the fundus images, and biologically-plausible tumor
structures in the MRI slices.
Image Variety
Fig. 4. The top rows consist of retinal fundus data held out from the training of the PG-
GAN, and their segmentations produced via a state of the art segmentation algorithm.
The bottom row consists of images generated from latent vectors that were derived
from the top row by an encoding neural network. These images are, approximately, the
nearest neighbor in latent space to the true images in the top row.
Qualitatively, a variety of lighting conditions, vessel conﬁgurations, and optic
disc locations could be seen generated in the retinal fundus images. In MRI
images, a similar variety in slice location, tumor location, presence and absence
of tumor, and distribution of necrosis, edema, and enhancing tumor could be
To further explore the variability of the synthetic images produced, we separately trained a neural network to determine the latent vector the produced a
given input image, and used it to generate approximate nearest neighbors in the
latent space of a test set of 200 real images held-out from the PGGAN training
set. As shown in Figure 4, the neural network was able to qualitatively approximate the global vessel structure of each real image in the held-out set, suggesting
that this PGGAN has the ability to generate vessel trees from outside its original
training set.
Fig. 5. Each point above represents an image from the training set for the retinal fundus
PGGAN. These real images have been encoded into 128-dimensional latent vectors in
the space of the PGGAN via a separate neural network, and those latent vectors have
been projected onto a two-dimensional surface via t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (T-SNE). Each point has been color-coded according to whether its image
represents a right eye or left eye.
Latent Space Expression
We refer here to the latent space as the space of images generated by the 128dimensional latent vector inputs to the PGGAN. Previous work has shown that
the latent space of GANs often encodes semantic information about the images
produced, and that latent vectors similar to each other in latent space produce
qualitatively similar output images . This result can be useful if one wishes
to generate images of a certain phenotype, as they only need determine which
subset(s) of latent space correspond to images generated with that phenotype,
and sample accordingly.
To show that such qualities hold for PGGANs in medical imaging data, we
trained a neural network to generate approximate latent vectors for each of
the images in our training set. We then used t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (T-SNE) to create a two-dimensional reduced representation of the
128-dimensional space that these latent vectors occupied, and color-coded the
results by simple morphological characteristics of the training data. One can see
that a right eye / left eye distinction is primary in the latent space of the PGGAN
generating retinal images in Figure 5. Similarly, one can traverse through the
axial slices of the brain by interpolating through images produced in the T-SNE
projection of encoded slices from the BRATS training dataset (Supplement).
Upon further exploration of the latent space, and additional annotation of input
data, other associations may be found.
Conclusion
We present an application of the PGGAN method to retinal fundus and MRI
data, speciﬁcally for the diseases of retinopathy of prematurity and glioma. This
method can generate synthetic images of unprecedented size, and be used via
its latent to space to learn imaging features in an unsupervised manner. Its
application will open new avenues for synthetic image generation in medical
imaging, which has thus far been limited by an inability to synthesize images at
native resolution.