Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
 
 
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only.
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their
employer(s) is intended or implied.
The Stata Journal 
8, Number 4, pp. 532–539
Erratum and discussion of propensity-score
reweighting
Austin Nichols
Urban Institute
Washington, DC
 
Keywords: st0136 1, xtreg, psmatch2, nnmatch, ivreg, ivreg2, ivregress, rd, lpoly, xtoverid,
ranktest, causal inference, match, matching, reweighting, propensity score, panel, instrumental
variables, excluded instrument, weak identiﬁcation, regression, discontinuity, local polynomial
Nichols described estimating the probability that an observation receives a binary
“treatment” as a function of observable variables X (by using, e.g., logit or probit)
and described using the estimated probabilities of treatment, or “propensity scores”, λ,
to reweight the data (as an alternative to matching). Section 3.4 of that article neglects
to mention that the weights λ/
should be applied only to make the control
group’s outcomes represent the counterfactual outcomes of the treatment group by
making the groups similar with respect to observable characteristics. The reweighting
makes the mean of each variable in matrix X (i.e., those variables included in the
propensity-score model) approximately equal across the treatment and control groups.
The examples in section 3.5 of that article also neglect this restriction on propensitybased weights.
That is, the line
generate w=_ps/(1-_ps)
which generates a weight equal to λ/
, should be followed by the command
replace w=1 if _tr
(where tr is a treatment indicator and ps is the propensity score). This makes the
weight equal to 1 for observations receiving treatment (e.g., those belonging to a union or
having completed college), i.e., those having tr==1. It is also advisable to scale weights
within the treatment and control groups so that the reweighted proportions are similar
to those observed in the original sample. In fact, the reweighting of the control group to
resemble the treatment group is only one of several plausible reweighting schemes, and
a regression of outcomes on a treatment indicator using this weight can be considered
an estimate of the average treatment eﬀect (ATE) on the treated.
c⃝2008 StataCorp LP
A. Nichols
Alternative weighting schemes
The above pair of commands generating weights can be replaced by the single command
generate w=cond(_tr,1,_ps/(1-_ps))
with the same result. A rescaled weight to approximately preserve proportions in treatment and control groups would be
summarize _tr
generate w1=cond(_tr,r(mean)/(1-r(mean)),_ps/(1-_ps))
Multiplying treatment weights by p/(1 −p), where p is the proportion of the sample
receiving treatment; multiplying control weights by (1 −p)/p; or multiplying treatment
weights by p and control weights by (1 −p) all produce identical results if weights
themselves are rescaled to sum to N (Stata internally rescales aweights to sum to N).
The weight λ/
for untreated “control” observations reweights the distribution
of observable characteristics included in the logit or probit model to be like that of
the treated group. A weighted regression of outcome on treatment is thus a comparison
of means across treatment and control groups, but the control group is reweighted to
represent the average outcome that the treatment group would have exhibited in the
absence of treatment. That is, every control group observation is contributing to an
estimate of the mean counterfactual outcome for all treated observations (rather than
speciﬁc observations being matched).
An alternative weighting scheme of the form
summarize _tr
generate w2=cond(_tr,(1-_ps)/_ps*r(mean)/(1-r(mean)),1)
reweights the distribution of observables in the treatment group to be like that of the
control group. A comparison of means across (reweighted) treatment and control groups,
for example, by using a weighted regression of an outcome variable on the treatment
indicator, is then an estimate of the ATE on the controls.
The treatment group is
reweighted to represent the average outcome that the control group would have exhibited
in the presence of treatment.
One method of computing an estimate of the ATE for the population is to take the
weighted mean of these two estimates, with the weight attached to the ATE on the
treated equal to the proportion receiving treatment, and with the weight attached to
the ATE on the controls equal to one minus the proportion receiving treatment.
An alternative estimate of the ATE is available. First, the outcome under treatment
for the whole population, i.e., the mean outcome if every unit received treatment, can
be estimated by a weighted mean of outcomes in the treatment group with the weights
1/λ . Similarly, the outcome under control for the whole
population, i.e., the mean outcome if every unit received no treatment, can be estimated
by a weighted mean of outcomes in the control group with the weights 1/
weights for both groups are given by
Erratum and discussion of propensity-score reweighting
summarize _tr
generate w3=cond(_tr,1/_ps*r(mean)/(1-r(mean)),1/(1-_ps))
An ATE estimate is then simply a weighted comparison of mean outcomes in the treatment and control groups (e.g., via a weighted regression of the outcome on a treatment indicator, and possibly covariates for the so-called “double robust estimator”).
One problem that is exacerbated in this scheme is measurement error in the estimated
propensity score; as DiNardo writes, “Small errors in estimating ρ(x) can produce potentially large errors in the weights. Since the weight is a nuisance parameter
from the viewpoint of estimating a density or a speciﬁc moment of the distribution, this
is not a straightforward problem.”
A fourth reweighting scheme,
generate w4=cond(_tr,(1-_ps),_ps)
minimizes the observable distance between the treatment and control groups in the
sense that a test statistic for the diﬀerence in means (the Hotelling test) is zero (and
the weighted groups are of equal size, so the mean of the treatment indicator is one
half), but a diﬀerence in means using this weight is not so readily interpreted as an
ATE. Nevertheless, simulation evidence not presented here indicates that it can be very
eﬀective (in the sense of having small bias and mean squared error) in estimating the
ATE, especially when the estimated propensities are near zero or one.1 It also exhibits
good robustness to omitted variables in the selection equation and Busso, DiNardo, and McCrary for
additional discussions of the construction of weights and rescaling, including an asymptotically variance-minimizing choice.
Results of reweighting
The results of reweighting are clear in a Hotelling test or an equivalent linear discriminant model. The example below,2 using hotelling and regress, gives identical F
statistics, but the regress approach allows relaxing of the assumption of equal variance across groups via the vce(robust) option.
1. Estimated propensities near zero or one represent a possible violation of the condition required for
matching or reweighting that the probability of treatment is bounded away from zero and one. Here
it is advisable to restrict to a subpopulation in which estimated propensities are never near zero
or one and reestimate. The densities of propensities near the zero and one boundaries should be
estimated by using kdens with boundary correction options, available from the Statistical Software
Components archive. Note also that the probability of treatment must be strictly bounded away
from zero and one to satisfy the assumptions, implying not only that the density should be zero at
the boundaries but that the derivative of the density function should be zero at the boundaries.
2. This extract of the 1968 National Longitudinal Survey of Young Women 14–26 years of age does
not include sample weights, but in general, we would prefer to convolve the weights by multiplying
our reweighting factor by the sample weights.
A. Nichols
webuse nlswork, clear
keep if year==77
local x "collgrad age tenure not_smsa c_city south nev_mar"
hotelling `x´, by(union)
regress union `x´
regress union `x´, vce(robust)
logit union `x´
predict _ps if e(sample)
summarize union if e(sample)
local p=r(mean)
generate w3=cond(union,`p´/_ps/(1-`p´),1/(1-_ps))
hotelling `x´ [aw=w3], by(union)
regress union `x´ [aw=w3]
regress union `x´ [aw=w3], vce(robust)
regress ln_wage union `x´ [aw=w3], vce(robust)
The F statistic drops from 20 to 0.1 after reweighting (18 to 0.1 when using
heteroskedasticity-robust statistics), and the weighted means of each individual variable
look much closer. The last regression of log(wage) on union using the inverse-probability
weights based on propensity scores gives an estimate of the eﬀect of union membership
on wages, over both union and nonunion workers, suggesting that an individual would
earn 14% more in 1977 as a union member than as a nonunion worker, on average.
Instead, using weights generated by
generate w1=cond(union,`p´/(1-`p´),_ps/(1-_ps))
regress ln_wage union `x´ [aw=w1], vce(robust)
gives an estimate of the eﬀect of union membership on wages for union members, suggesting that union members earned 14.5% more in 1977 than they would have as nonunion
What is not clear from hotelling or regress is if the distributions of variables
are similar; even if the means of X variables are equal in the reweighted sample, that
does not imply that their distributions are similar. As long as treatment status can
be inferred from higher moments of the X variables, we have not fully controlled for
the observable diﬀerences across treatment and control groups. In practice, however,
reweighting to make means match seems to make the distributions of observables very
similar, for the same reason that matching on the propensity score does.
The diﬀerence in distributions is most clearly observable in the distribution of estimated propensity scores but can be seen in the individual variables (e.g., tenure in the
example below; kdens is available from the Statistical Software Components archive).
(Continued on next page)
Erratum and discussion of propensity-score reweighting
webuse nlswork, clear
keep if year==77
local x "collgrad age tenure not_smsa c_city south nev_mar"
logit union `x´
predict _ps if e(sample)
kdens _ps if union, bw(.03) ll(0) ul(1) gen(f1 x) nogr
kdens _ps if !union, bw(.03) ll(0) ul(1) gen(f0) at(x) nogr
label var f0 "pdf of propensities for unweighted non-union (control) obs"
label var f1 "pdf of propensities for unweighted union (treatment) obs"
line f1 f0 x, leg(col(1)) name(unwtd, replace)
summarize union if e(sample)
local p=r(mean)
generate w3=cond(union,`p´/(1-`p´),_ps/(1-_ps))
kdens _ps if union [aw=w3], bw(.03) ll(0) ul(1) gen(g1 x1) nogr
kdens _ps if !union [aw=w3], bw(.03) ll(0) ul(1) gen(g0) at(x1) nogr
label var g0 "pdf of propensities for reweighted non-union (control) obs"
label var g1 "pdf of propensities for reweighted union (treatment) obs"
line g1 g0 x1, leg(col(1)) name(rewtd, replace)
kdens tenure if union [aw=w3], bw(1.5) ll(0) gen(td) at(tenure) nogr
label var td "Density for union members"
kdens tenure if !union [aw=w3], bw(1.5) ll(0) gen(cd) at(tenure) nogr
label var cd "Density for nonunion reweighted to resemble union members"
line td cd tenure, sort leg(col(1))
Matching on the propensity score ensures that the distributions of estimated propensity scores are virtually identical in (matched) treatment and control groups, especially
if matching models are iterated until balance is achieved, but reweighting does not. For
example, if the distribution of some variable (including propensity scores) is bimodal
in the control group and single-peaked in the treatment group, those properties will
typically still be observable in the reweighted data. Nevertheless, reweighting achieves
much of the balancing achievable via matching on the propensity score.
The last approach to reweighting always achieves the smallest diﬀerence in means,
with an F statistic as close to zero as is feasible given machine precision, but the distributions of observable characteristics and estimated propensity scores are very similar
under all these approaches to reweighting. See Iacus, King, and Porro for an
alternative matching method that controls, up to user-chosen speciﬁed levels, “for all
imbalances in central absolute moments, comoments, coskewness, interactions, nonlinearities, and other multidimensional distributional diﬀerences between treated and
control groups”.
A. Nichols
Uses of reweighting
The propensity-based reweighting approach is at the heart of the method proposed by
DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux . The paradigmatic example of that approach uses
two years of data, estimates the probability that an observation is in the ﬁrst year or
the second, then reweights the second year’s observations by λ/
so that the
distributions are nearly equal across the two years. Changes in means or distributions
(of some outcome variables) in the reweighted data are then interpreted as estimates of
change had the means of the X variables not changed over time.3
A similar method could be applied to estimate the proportion of a wage gap observed
across men and women or white and nonwhite workers that is attributable to characteristics, along the lines of the oaxaca method described by Jann and related
methods referenced there. The connections between these methods are discussed by,
e.g., DiNardo and Lemieux .
The reweighting approach extends easily to a polytomous categorical treatment variable, by considering the analogy to the DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux approach
applied to multiple years. For example, each subsequent year’s data can be reweighted
to have observable characteristics similar to the ﬁrst year, or each year can be reweighted
to match some other base year’s distribution. In the same way, observations receiving
various levels of treatment can be reweighted to match some base category (the choice
of base category can aﬀect the interpretation of results).
Extensions of the reweighting approach to the case of a continuous treatment are
also possible by using the generalized propensity-score approach of Hirano and Imbens
 , described by Bia and Mattei . The generalized propensity score, r(t | x),
is the density of treatment conditional on X = x, estimated as r(t, x).
Missing data and a conjecture
This kind of reweighting could also be employed to correct for bias because of missing
For example, the distributions of variables observed for both survey respondents and nonrespondents (i.e., potential stratiﬁcation variables) can be adjusted via
reweighting to look similar. Then the hope is that the unobservable survey responses of
nonrespondents will be suitably captured by reweighted respondents. An alternative approach, imputing responses to nonrespondents, is a form of matching. Depending on the
type of imputation, this can be propensity-score matching, nearest-neighbor matching,
or exact matches on observables (also known as hotdeck imputation).
3. See also Altonji, Bharadwaj, and Lange for a recent article dealing not only with diﬀerences
in distributions in samples but also with sample attrition and missing values.
Erratum and discussion of propensity-score reweighting
The standard approach to missing data is to multiply impute responses (see, e.g.,
Carlin, Galati, and Royston ). It is natural to wonder whether multiple imputation could also be fruitfully applied to the imputation of hypothetical counterfactual
outcomes (the unobserved outcomes of treatment cases when in the control group, or
the outcomes of control cases when in the treatment group).
Acknowledgments
I thank without implicating John DiNardo and Ben Jann for helpful conversations.