Deep Successor Reinforcement Learning
Tejas D. Kulkarni∗
 
Ardavan Saeedi∗
CSAIL, MIT
 
Simanta Gautam
CSAIL, MIT
 
Samuel J. Gershman
Department of Psychology
Harvard University
 
Learning robust value functions given raw observations and rewards is now possible
with model-free and model-based deep reinforcement learning algorithms. There is
a third alternative, called Successor Representations (SR), which decomposes the
value function into two components – a reward predictor and a successor map. The
successor map represents the expected future state occupancy from any given state
and the reward predictor maps states to scalar rewards. The value function of a state
can be computed as the inner product between the successor map and the reward
weights. In this paper, we present DSR, which generalizes SR within an end-to-end
deep reinforcement learning framework. DSR has several appealing properties
including: increased sensitivity to distal reward changes due to factorization of
reward and world dynamics, and the ability to extract bottleneck states (subgoals)
given successor maps trained under a random policy. We show the efﬁcacy of
our approach on two diverse environments given raw pixel observations – simple
grid-world domains (MazeBase) and the Doom game engine. 2
Introduction
Many learning problems involve inferring properties of temporally extended sequences given an
objective function. For instance, in reinforcement learning (RL), the task is to ﬁnd a policy that
maximizes expected future discounted rewards (value). RL algorithms fall into two main classes:
(1) model-free algorithms that learn cached value functions directly from sample trajectories, and
(2) model-based algorithms that estimate transition and reward functions, from which values can
be computed using tree-search or dynamic programming. However, there is a third class, based on
the successor representation (SR), that factors the value function into a predictive representation
and a reward function. Speciﬁcally, the value function at a state can be expressed as the dot product
between the vector of expected discounted future state occupancies and the immediate reward in each
of those successor states.
Representing the value function using the SR has several appealing properties. It combines computational efﬁciency comparable to model-free algorithms with some of the ﬂexibility of model-based
algorithms. In particular, the SR can adapt quickly to changes in distal reward, unlike model-free
algorithms. In this paper, we also highlight a feature of the SR that has been less well-investigated:
the ability to extract bottleneck states (candidate subgoals) from the successor representation under a
random policy . These subgoals can then be used within a hierarchical RL framework. In this
paper we develop a powerful function approximation algorithm and architecture for the SR using a
deep neural network, which we call Deep Successor Reinforcement Learning (DSR). This enables
learning the SR and reward function from raw sensory observations with end-to-end training.
∗Authors contributed equally and listed alphabetically.
2Code and other resources – 
 
Figure 1: Model Architecture: DSR consists of: (1) feature branch fθ (CNN) which takes in raw
images and computes the features φst, (2) successor branch uα which computes the SR mst,a for
each possible action a ∈A, (3) a deep convolutional decoder which produces the input reconstruction
ˆst and (4) a linear regressor to predict instantaneous rewards at st. The Q-value function can be
estimated by taking the inner-product of the SR with reward weights: Qπ(s, a) ≈msa · w.
The DSR consists of two sub-components: (1) a reward feature learning component, constructed
as a deep neural network, predicts intrinsic and extrinsic rewards to learn useful features from raw
observations; and (2) an SR component, constructed as a separate deep neural network, that estimates
the expected future “feature occupancy” conditioned on the current state and averaged over all
actions. The value function can then be estimated as the dot product between these two factored
representations. We train DSR by sampling experience trajectories (state, next-state, action and
reward) from an experience replay memory and apply stochastic gradient descent to optimize model
parameters. To avoid instability in the learning algorithm, we interleave training of the successor and
reward components.
We show the efﬁcacy of our approach on two different domains: (1) learning to solve goals in
grid-world domains using the MazeBase game engine and (2) learning to navigate a 3D maze to
gather a resource using the Doom game engine. We show the empirical convergence results on several
policy learning problems as well as sensitivity of the value estimator given distal reward changes. We
also demonstrate the possibility of extracting plausible subgoals for hierarchical RL by performing
normalized-cuts on the SR .
Related work
The SR has been used in neuroscience as a model for describing different cognitive phenomena. 
showed that the temporal context model , a model of episodic memory, is in fact estimating the
SR using the temporal difference algorithm. introduced a model based on SR for preplay and
rapid path planning in the CA3 region of the hippocampus. They interpret the SR as an an attractor
network in a low–dimensional space and show that if the network is stimulated with a goal location
it can generate a path to the goal. suggested a model for tying the problems of navigation and
reward maximization in the brain. They claimed that the brain’s spatial representations are designed
to support the reward maximization problem (RL); they showed the behavior of the place cells and
grid cells can be explained by ﬁnding the optimal spatial representation that can support RL. Based
on their model they proposed a way for identifying reasonable subgoals from the spectral features
of the SR. Other work (see for instance, ) have also discussed utilizing the SR for subgoal and
option discovery.
There are also models similar to the SR that have been been applied to other RL-related domains.
 introduced a model for evaluating the positions in the game of Go; the model is reminiscent of
SR as it predicts the fate of every position of the board instead of the overall game score. Another
reward-independent model, universal option model (UOM), proposed in , uses state occupancy
function to build a general model of options. They proved that UOM of an option, given a reward
function, can construct a traditional option model. There has also been a lot of work on option
discovery in the tabular setting . In more recent work, Machado et al. presented
an option discovery algorithm where the agent is encouraged to explore regions that were previously
out of reach. However, option discovery where non-linear state approximations are required is still an
open problem.
Our model is also related to the literature on value function approximation using deep neural networks.
The deep-Q learning model and its variants (e.g., ) have been successful in learning
Q-value functions from high-dimensional complex input states.
Background
Consider an MDP with a set of states S, set of actions A, reward function R : S →R, discount factor
γ ∈ , and a transition distribution T : S × A → . Given a policy π : S × A → , the
Q-value function for selecting action a in state s is deﬁned as the expected future discounted return:
Qπ(s, a) = E
γtR(st)|s0 = s, a0 = a
where, st is the state visited at time t and the expectation is with respect to the policy and transition
distribution. The agent’s goal is to ﬁnd the optimal policy Q∗which follows the Bellman equation:
Q∗(s, a) = R(st) + γ max
a′ E [Q(st+1, a′)] .
The successor representation
The SR can be used for calculating the Q-value function as follows. Given a state s, action a and
future states s′, SR is deﬁned as the expected discounted future state occupancy:
M(s, s′, a) = E
γt1[st = s′]|s0 = s, a0 = a
where 1[.] = 1 when its argument is true and zero otherwise. This implicitly captures the state
visitation count. Similar to the Bellman equation for the Q-value function (Eq. 2), we can express the
SR in a recursive form:
M(s, s′, a) = 1[st = s′] + γE[M(st+1, s′, at+1)].
Given the SR, the Q-value for selecting action a in state s can be expressed as the inner product of
the immediate reward and the SR :
Qπ(s, a) =
M(s, s′, a)R(s′)
Deep successor representation
For large state spaces, representing and learning the SR can become intractable; hence, we appeal to
non-linear function approximation. We represent each state s by a D-dimensional feature vector φs
which is the output of a deep neural network fθ : S →RD parameterized by θ.
For a feature vector φs, we deﬁne a feature-based SR as the expected future occupancy of the features
and denote it by msa. We approximate msa by another deep neural network uα parameterized by
α: msa ≈uα(φs, a). We also approximate the immediate reward for state s as a linear function
of the feature vector φS: R(s) ≈φs · w, where w ∈RD is a weight vector. Since reward values
can be sparse, we can also train an intrinsic reward predictor Ri(s) = g˜θ(φs). A good intrinsic
reward channel should give dense feedback signal and provide features that preserve latent factors of
variations in the data (e.g. deep generative models that do reconstruction). Putting these two pieces
together, the Q-value function can be approximated as (see 4 for closed form):
Qπ(s, a) ≈msa · w.
The SR for the optimal policy in the non-linear function approximation case can then be obtained
from the following Bellman equation:
msa = φs + γE
where a′ = argmaxamst+1a · w.
The parameters (θ, α, w, ˜θ) can be learned online through stochastic gradient descent.
The loss function for α is given by:
t (α, θ) = E[(φ(st) + γuαprev(φst+1, a′) −uα(φst, a))2],
where a′ = argmaxauα(φst+1, a) · w and the parameter αprev denotes a previously cached parameter
value, set periodically to α. This is essential for stable Q-learning with function approximations (see
For learning w, the weights for the reward approximation function, we use the following squared
loss function:
t(w, θ) = (R(st) −φst · w)2
Parameter θ is used for obtaining the φ(s), the shared feature representation for both reward prediction
and SR approximation. An ideal φ(s) should be: 1) a good predictor for the immediate reward for
that state and 2) a good discriminator for the states. The ﬁrst condition can be handled by minimizing
loss function Lr
t; however, we also need a loss function to help in the second condition. To this end,
we use a deep convolutional auto-encoder to reconstruct images under an L2 loss function. This
dense feedback signal can be interpreted as an intrinsic reward function. The loss function can be
stated as:
t (˜θ, θ) = (g˜θ(φst) −st)2.
The composite loss function is the sum of the three loss functions given above:
Lt(θ, α, w, ˜θ) = Lm
t (α, θ) + Lr
t(w, θ) + La
For optimizing Eq. 9, with respect to the parameters (θ, α, w, ˜θ), we iteratively update α and (θ, w, ˜θ).
That is, we learn a feature representation by minimizing Lr
t (˜θ); then given (θ∗, w∗, ˜θ∗),
we ﬁnd the optimal α∗. This iteration is important to ensure that the successor branch does not
back-propagate gradients to affect θ. We use experience replay memory D of size 1e6 to store
transitions, and apply stochastic gradient descent with a learning rate of 2.5e−4, momentum of 0.95,
a discount factor of 0.99 and the exploration parameter ϵ annealed from 1 to 0.1 as training progresses.
Algorithm 1 highlights the learning algorithm in greater detail.
Automatic Subgoal Extraction
Learning policies given sparse or delayed rewards is a signiﬁcant challenge for current reinforcement
learning algorithms. This is mainly due to inefﬁcient exploration schemes such as ϵ−greedy. Existing
methods like Boltzmann exploration and Thomson sampling offer signiﬁcant improvements
over ϵ-greedy, but are limited due to the underlying models functioning at the level of basic actions.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithms such as the options framework provide
a ﬂexible framework to create temporal abstractions, which will enable exploration at different
time-scales. The agent will learn options to reach the subgoals which can be used for intrinsic
motivation. In the context of hierarchical RL, discuss a framework for subgoal extraction using
the structural aspects of a learned policy model. Inspired by previous work in subgoal discovery from
Algorithm 1 Learning algorithm for DSR
1: Initialize experience replay memory D, parameters {θ, α, w, ˜θ} and exploration probability
2: for i = 1 : #episodes do
Initialize game and get start state description s
while not terminal do
φs = fθ(s)
With probability ϵ, sample a random action a, otherwise choose argmaxauα(φs, a) · w
Execute a and obtain next state s′ and reward R(s′) from environment
Store transition (s, a, R(s′), s′) in D
Randomly sample mini-batches from D
Perform gradient descent on the loss Lr(w, θ) + La(˜θ, θ) with respect to w, θ and ˜θ.
Fix (θ, ˜θ, w) and perform gradient descent on Lm(α, θ) with respect to α.
Anneal exploration variable ϵ
15: end for
state trajectories and the tabular SR , we use the learned SR to generate plausible subgoal
candidates.
Given a random policy πr (ϵ = 1), we train the DSR until convergence and collect the SR for
a large number of states T = {ms1,a1, ms2,a2, ..., msn,an}. Following , we generate an
afﬁnity matrix W given T , by applying a radial basis function (with Euclidean distance metric)
for each pairwise entry (msi,ai, msj,aj) in T (to generate wij). Let D be a diagonal matrix with
D(i, i) = P
j wij. Then as per , the second largest eigenvalue of the matrix D−1(D −W) gives
an approximation of the minimum normalized cut value of the partition of T . The states that lie on the
end-points of the cut are plausible subgoal candidates, as they provide a path between a community
of state groups. Given randomly sampled T from πr, we can collect statistics of how many times a
particular state lies along the cut. We pick the top-k states as the subgoals. Our experiments indicate
that it is possible to extract useful subgoals from the DSR.
Experiments
In this section, we demonstrate the properties of our approach on MazeBase , a grid-world
environment, and the Doom game engine . In both environments, observations are presented as
raw pixels to the agent. In the ﬁrst experiment we show that our approach is comparable to DQN in
two goal-reaching tasks. Next, we investigate the effect of modifying the distal reward on the initial
Q-value. Finally, using normalized-cuts, we identify subgoals given the successor representations in
the two environments.
Goal-directed Behavior
Solving a maze in MazeBase
We learn the optimal policy in the maze shown in Figure 2 using
the DSR and compare its performance to the DQN . The cost of living or moving over water
blocks is -0.5 and the reward value is 1. For this experiment, we set the discount rate to 0.99 and the
learning rate to 2.5 · 10−4. We anneal the ϵ from 1 to 0.1 over 20k steps; furthermore, for training the
reward branch, we anneal the number of samples that we use, from 4000 to 1 by a factor of 0.5 after
each training episode. For all experiments, we prioritize the reward training by keeping a database of
non-zero rewards and sampling randomly from the replay buffer with a 0.8 probability and 0.2 from
the database. Figure 3 shows the average trajectory (over 5 runs) of the rewards obtained over 100k
episodes. As the plot suggests, DSR performs on par with DQN.
Finding a goal in a 3D environment
We created a map with 4 rooms using the ViZDoom platform . The map is shown in Figure 2. We share the same network architecture as in the case of
MazeBase. The agent is spawned inside a room, and can explore any of the other three rooms. The
agent gets a per-step penalty of -0.01 and a positive reward of 1.0 after collecting an item from one
Figure 2: Environments: (left) MazeBase map where the agent starts at an arbitrary location and
needs to get to the goal state. The agent gets a penalty of -0.5 per-step, -1 to step on the water-block
(blue) and +1 for reaching the goal state. The model observes raw pixel images during learning.
(center) A Doom map using the VizDoom engine where the agent starts in a room and has to get
to another room to collect ammo (per-step penalty = -0.01, reward for reaching goal = +1). (right)
Sample screen-shots of the agent exploring the 3D maze.
Steps ( × 1000)
Steps ( × 1000)
Figure 3: Average trajectory of the reward (left) over 100k steps for the grid-world maze. (right)
over 180k steps for the Doom map over multiple runs.
of the room (highlighted in red in Figure2). As shown in Figure3, the agent is able to successfully
navigate the environment to obtain the reward, and is competitive with DQN.
Figure 4: Changing the value of the distal reward: We train the model to learn the optimal policy
on the maze shown in Figure 2. After convergence, we change the value of the distal reward and
update the Q-value for the optimal action at the origin (bottom-left corner of the maze). In order for
the value function to converge again, the model only needs to update the linear weights w given the
new external rewards.
Value function sensitivity to distal reward changes
The decomposition of value function into SR and immediate reward prediction allows DSR to rapidly
adapt to changes in the reward function. In order to probe this, we performed experiments to measure
the adaptability of the value function to distal reward changes. Given the grid-world map in Figure2,
we can train the agent to solve the goal speciﬁed in the map as highlighted in section 5.1. Without
changing the goal location, we can change the reward scalar value upon reaching the goal from 1.0 to
3.0. Our hypothesis is that due to the SR-based value decomposition, our value estimate will converge
to this change by just updating the reward weights w (SR remains same). As shown in Figure 4, we
conﬁrm that the DSR is able to quickly adapt to the new value function by just updating w.
Extracting subgoals from the DSR
Following section 4, we can also extract subgoals from the SR. We collect T by running a random policy on both MazeBase and VizDoom. During learning, we only update SR (uα) and the
reconstruction branch (g˜θ), as the immediate reward at any state is zero (due to random policy).
As shown in Figures 5 and 6, our subgoal extraction scheme is able to capture useful subgoals and
clusters the environment into reasonable segments. Such a scheme can be ran periodically within
a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework to aid exploration. One inherent limitation of this
approach is that due to the random policy, the subgoal candidates are often quite noisy. Future work
should address this limitation and provide statistically robust ways to extract plausible candidates.
Additionally, the subgoal extraction algorithm should be non-parametric to handle ﬂexible number of
Figure 5: Subgoal extraction on grid-world: Given a random policy, we train DSR until convergence and collect a large number of sample transitions and their corresponding successor representations as described in section 4. We apply a normalized cut-based algorithm on the SRs to obtain a
partition of the environment as well as the bottleneck states (which correspond to goals) (a) Subgoals
are states which separate different partitions of the environments under the normalized-cut algorithm.
Our approach is able to ﬁnd reasonable subgoal candidates. (b) Partitions of the environment reﬂect
latent structure in the environment.
Conclusion
We presented the DSR, a novel deep reinforcement learning framework to learn goal-directed behavior
given raw sensory observations. The DSR estimates the value function by taking the inner product
between the SR and immediate reward predictions. This factorization of the value function gives rise
to several appealing properties over existing deep reinforcement learning methods—namely increased
sensitivity of the value function to distal reward changes and the possibility of extracting subgoals
from the SR under a random policy.
For future work, we plan to combine the DSR with hierarchical reinforcement learning. Learning goaldirected behavior with sparse rewards is a fundamental challenge for existing reinforcement learning
algorithms. The DSR can enable efﬁcient exploration by periodically extracting subgoals, learning
policies to satisfy these intrinsic goals (skills), and subsequently learning hierarchical policy over
these subgoals in an options framework . One of the major issues with the DSR is learning
discriminative features. In order to scale up our approach to more expressive environments, it will be
crucial to combine various deep generative and self-supervised models 
Figure 6: Subgoal extraction on the Doom map The subgoals are extracted using the normalized
cut-based algorithm on the SR. The SR samples are collected based on a random policy. The subgoals
mostly correspond to the rooms’ entrances in the common area between the rooms. Due to random
policy, we sometimes observe high variance in the subgoal quality. Future work should address robust
statistical techniques to obtain subgoals, as well as non-parametric approaches to obtaining ﬂexible
number of subgoals.
with our approach. In addition to subgoals, using DSR for extracting other intrinsic motivation
measures such as improvements to the predictive world model or mutual information is
worth pursuing.