A Frequency Warping Approach to Speaker Normalization
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degrees of
Bachelor of Science
Master of Engineering
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
February 1996
@ Li Lee, MCMXCVI. All rights reserved.
The author hereby grants to MIT permission to reproduce and distribute publicly
paper and electronic copies of this thesis document in whole or in part, and to grant
others the right to do so.
A uthor .................................... .
. .......... .
....................
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
January 30, 1996
C ertified by ....................... .. . ...........
Distinguis'ed Professor
Certified by ....
Memv r o Technical Staff,
Alan V. Oppenheim
of Electrical Engineering
T4Wft Supervisor
Richard C. Rose
AT&T Bell Laboratories
Thesis Supervisor
A ccepted by ................................. .
.. ........
.....................
Frederic R. Morgenthaler
Chairman, Depart ent Committee on Graduate Theses
MAACU:. rFTS 4INST J I'L:
OF TECHNOLOGY
JUN 111996
A Frequency Warping Approach to Speaker Normalization
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
on January 30, 1996, in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degrees of
Bachelor of Science
Master of Engineering
In an effort to reduce the degradation in speech recognition performance caused by
variations in vocal tract shape among speakers, this thesis studies a set of lowcomplexity, maximum likelihood based speaker normalization procedures. By approximately modeling the vocal tract as a simple acoustic tube, these procedures
compensate for the effects of the variations in vocal tract length by linearly warping
the frequency axis of speech signals. In this thesis, we evaluate the effectiveness of the
procedures using a telephone based connected digit recognition task with very short
utterances. Experiments are performed to evaluate the convergence properties of the
proposed procedures, as well as their ability to reduce measures of inter-speaker variability. In addition, methods for improving the efficiency of performing model-based
speaker normalization and implementing frequency warping are proposed and evaluated. Finally, comparisons of speaker normalization with other techniques to reduce
inter-speaker variations are made in order to gain insight into how to most efficiently
improve the robustness of speech recognizers to varying speaker characteristics. The
results of the study show the frequency warping approach to speaker normalization
to be a promising way to improve speech recognition performance.
Thesis Supervisor: Alan V. Oppenheim
Title: Distinguished Professor of Electrical Engineering
Thesis Supervisor: Richard C. Rose
Title: Member of Technical Staff, AT&T Bell Laboratories
Acknowledgments
I wish to express my deepest gratitude to my thesis advisor Dr. Richard Rose for his
guidance and friendship over the past few years. Rick sparked my first interests in
the speech recognition field, and his exceptional standards and humor made my thesis
experience both challenging and fun. I also want to thank Prof. Alan Oppenheim for
his support and helpful advice on the thesis.
I have benefited greatly from opportunities to work with and learn from many
wonderful people at MIT and at Bell Labs during my undergraduate years. I am especially indebted to Dr. Alan Berenbaum at Bell Labs for his cheerful encouragement
and wonderful books, Dr. Victor Zue at MIT for his honest advice in times of indecision, and Prof. James Chung at MIT for his insistence that I have fun regardless
of my academic pursuits. I want to thank them for always taking time out of their
busy schedules to offer me advice when I needed it.
Finally, I thank my family for their love, encouragement, and humor. This thesis,
like all of my other accomplishments, would not have been possible without their
1 Introduction
Problem Description ...........................
Proposed Solution .............................
Thesis Outline ...............................
2 Background
Hidden Markov Models ..........................
Speaker Adaptation ............................
Speaker-Robust Features and Models .
.................
Telephone-based speech recognition .
..................
.................................
A Frequency Warping Approach to Speaker
Warping Factor Estimation
Training Procedure ..............
Recognition Procedure ............
Baseline Front-End Signal Processing . . . .
Filter Bank Front-end
Linear Predictive Analysis ......
Frequency Warping ..............
Normalization
. . . . . .
.. ... ... ... ...
.. ... .... .. .. .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. ... .... ... ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Filter Bank Analysis with Frequency Warping
LPC Analysis with Frequency Warping . . . .
Discussion on Bandwidth Differences . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .
Sum m ary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 Baseline Experiments
Task and Databases ........
Baseline Speech Recognizer
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Speech Recognition Performance . . . . . . . . . . .
Distribution of Chosen Warping Factors
. . . . . .
Speaker Variability and HMM Distances . . . . . .
Definition of HMM Distance Measure . . . .
Experimental Setup ..............
Results . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . ....
Warping Factor Estimation With Short Utterances
Convergence of Model Training Procedure . . . . .
...........
...........
5 Efficient Approaches to Speaker Robust Systems
Efficient Warping Factor Estimation . . . . . . . . .
Mixture-based Warping Factor Estimation .
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Comparison with Other Approaches . . . . . . . . .
Gender-Dependent Models . . . . . . . . . .
Cepstral Mean Normalization . . . . . . . .
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . .....
Speaker Normalization vs. Class-Dependent Models
HMM Parametrization ....................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .....
6 Conclusions
Future Work . .
... ... ... .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
... ... ....
... ... ... .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
.. ... ... .
Introduction
While speech is clearly a natural mode of communication between human beings, it
is only recently that human-machine interactions using speech has become practical.
However, even today's most advanced systems suffer from performance degradations
due to variations in the acoustic environment, communications channel, and speaker
characteristics. The goal of this thesis is to develop techniques which reduce the effect
of speaker-dependent variability on speech recognition performance.
This chapter
motivates this work and describes the organization of the thesis. First the problem
of speaker variability in automatic speech recognition(ASR) is described. Then, the
general approach taken to solve this problem is introduced. Finally, an outline of the
thesis is provided.
Problem Description
Physiological and dialectal differences that exist among speakers lead to variations
in the characteristics of the speech signal. Whereas variations in vocal tract shape
change speech features such as formant positions in vowels, dialectal differences affect
both the acoustic and the phonological properties of utterances. In this thesis, we are
interested in methods which enable ASR systems to handle these variations gracefully, with minimal degradation in performance. We refer to the ability of an ASR
system to be relatively insensitive to unexpected changes in speaker characteristics as
robustness to speaker-dependent variabilities. Because the thesis is mostly concerned
with physiological differences, this section discusses vocal tract variations and their
effect on speech modeling.
Human speech production apparatus differ in many ways, leading to differences in
the pitch and formant frequencies among utterances of the same sound. While some
types of variation, such the vocal tract shape, carry crucial phonetic information,
others, such as the vocal tract length, are irrelevant for speech recognition and should
be treated as "noise". For example, vocal tract length in the human population ranges
from about 13cm for a female to over 18cm for a male. Since the positions of formant
peaks are inversely proportional to the length of the vocal tract, formant center
frequencies can vary by as much as 25% across speakers for utterances of the same
Speech recognition features for the English language are chosen to represent the
spectral envelope of short-time segments of speech. The large variations in formant
positions lead to a large discrepancy between error rates found for speaker independent (SI) recognizers and those found for speaker dependent (SD) recognizers. While
SI systems are trained using tokens from a large number of speakers, SD recognizers
are trained on tokens from only one speaker. Error rates of SI systems are often two to
three times that of SD systems for similar recognition tasks. Two practical problems
account for this degradation. First, statistical models trained on data from a large
number of speakers tend to show higher variances within each phonetic class, causing
overlap between distributions of neighboring classes. Highly-overlapping statistical
distributions in turn lead to highly-confusable speech units, reducing the recognition
accuracy of the system. Secondly, high variability in formant positions gives rise to
the existence of statistical outliers. Even when the training speaker population consists of a large number of speakers, the characteristics of certain test speakers may
not be closely matched to that of the speakers in the training set. Statistical outliers
are often the dominant source of errors in SI recognition systems.
Examples of the performance discrepancy that exists between SI and SD recognition have been published by many research laboratories using the DARPA Resource
Management task. This task consists of continuously spoken utterances taken from
a 1000 word vocabulary designed to simulate queries to a naval battle management
database. After training a SI system with 104 speakers, Huang and Lee reported a
word error rate of 4.3% . However, the average word error rate for 12 speakers
using SD models was only 1.4%. The result is typical of many speech recognition
tasks and serves to illustrate the need for techniques to make ASR systems more
robust with respect to inter-speaker variabilities.
This thesis attempts to develop techniques which achieves speaker-robustness by
compensating for sources of speaker variability. The problem is studied in the context of telephone-based speech recognition with very short utterances. The context
of the problem places two major constraints on the types of approaches that can be
examined. First, we assume that no prior knowledge of the speaker characteristics
is available, so that any adjustment to the acoustic signal or the models must be
determined based only on a single utterance. Secondly, it is assumed that the utterances can be as short as one or two words in duration. This places a limitation
on the complexity of the approaches that can be applied. For example, with such
a small amount of data available for estimating the properties of each speaker, the
effectiveness of methods which require the estimation of a large number of parameters
is limited.
Proposed Solution
The technique studied in this thesis is motivated by the fact that robustness to speaker
variations can be improved if the physical sources of the variations are explicitly
modeled and compensated for. We consider a method of speaker normalization over
different vocal tract lengths by using a simple linear warping of the frequency axis.
Vocal tract length is clearly a physiological variation which changes the acoustic
properties of each speaker's speech without bearing phonetic or linguistic information.
Given a certain vocal tract configuration, changing only the vocal tract length does
not change phonetic content of the sound, and the effect can be approximated by a
linear scaling of the resonant frequencies of the tract. In this thesis, we propose that
if all vocal tract shapes from all speakers are normalized to have the same length, the
acoustic space distributions for each phone would be better clustered, with reduced
within-class variance.
Conceptually, normalizing for vocal tract length requires two steps. First, a measure of the ratio of the vocal tract length of the speaker to a reference "normal" length
is estimated. Then, this ratio is used as a scaling factor with which the frequency axis
of the acoustic signal is warped. The resulting signal should be one which would have
been produced from a vocal tract of the same shape, but of the reference length. For
example, since the formant frequencies produced by someone with a short vocal tract
length tend to be higher than average, their speech could be normalized by uniformly
compressing the frequency axis of the utterances. Since the vocal tract tends to be
shorter in females and longer in males, the normalization process tends to perform
frequency compression for females, and frequency expansion for males.
In practice, the estimation of the vocal tract length of the speaker based on the
acoustic data is a difficult problem. Techniques based on tracking formants are often
not very reliable. In this thesis, a model-based approach for estimating the warping
factor is used. In other words, the warping factor is chosen to maximize the likelihood of the frequency-warped features with respect to a given model. The reference
"normal" length is thus defined implicitly in terms of the parameters of the statistical
When the acoustic feature space of the training speech has been normalized using
the warping process, models can be built using the normalized features. The result
of such a training process is a set of models which is more efficient and effective at
describing the vocal tract variations which carry phonetic information. This normalized set of models can then be used during recognition to first estimate the frequency
warping factor for the test utterances, and then to decode the utterances.
This thesis is an experimental study of the speaker normalization process outlined
above. We study the effectiveness and efficiency of a maximum-likelihood speaker normalization technique from a variety of different perspectives. In addition to speech
recognition performance, several measures are used to evaluate the convergence properties of the proposed procedures, as well as their ability to reduce measures of interspeaker variability. Methods for improving the efficiency of performing model-based
speaker normalization and implementing frequency warping are proposed and evaluated. Finally, comparisons of speaker normalization with other techniques to reduce
inter-speaker variations are made in order to gain insight into how to most efficiently
improve the speaker robustness of ASR systems. The goal of such a study is to better
understand the basic properties of speaker normalization so that the technique can
become practical for use in existing applications.
Thesis Outline
The body of this thesis is divided into five chapters:
Chapter 2 covers the background information useful for the discussion of speaker
normalization procedures presented later in the thesis. Statistical modeling of speech
using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) is described. Current work in the areas of
speaker adaptation and speaker normalization is examined. Finally, a brief discussion
of the acoustic properties of telephone handsets and channels is presented.
discussion is relevant because the experimental study to be described in the thesis
was performed using speech utterances collected over the telephone network.
Chapter 3 presents a detailed description of procedures for implementing HMMbased speaker normalization using frequency warping. Procedures to perform warping
factor estimation, model training, and recognition are described. Efficient methods
used to implement frequency warping for two different feature analysis front-ends are
presented and discussed.
Chapter 4 presents an experimental study of the effectiveness of the speaker normalization procedures. The database, task, and baseline system are described. The
effectiveness of speaker normalization is examined from a few perspectives. First,
speech recognition performance before and after using speaker normalization is compared. In addition, experiments were performed to understand the ability of the
speaker normalization procedures to decrease inter-speaker variability, and to produce normalized HMMs which describe the data more efficiently. We show statistics
reflecting the ability of the warping factor estimation procedures to estimate the
warping factor reliably with small amounts of data. Convergence issues related to the
training procedure will also be discussed.
Chapter 5 further studies the speaker normalization procedures by proposing techniques to make them more efficient, by comparing them with other types of procedures also designed to reduce the effects of speaker variability, and by evaluating
their effectiveness over different degrees of modeling complexity. A mixture-based
method for estimating the warping factor is presented and compared against the
less efficient HMM-based method. Speaker normalization is compared with genderdependent models and cepstral mean normalization to gain insight into the possible
advantages of using a physiologically-motivated procedure like frequency warping over
other statistically-based compensation and modeling procedures.
Chapter 6 concludes the thesis with a summary and directions for future work.
The techniques and experiments that were presented in the thesis have left many
open issues. It is hoped that this work will stimulate further investigations which
may address these issues.
Background
This chapter provides the background for further discussion on the model-based
speaker normalization procedures which are investigated later in this thesis. It includes discussion of the statistical modeling techniques used, of the previous work in
the areas of speaker adaptation and speaker normalization, of the acoustic characterization of the telephone-based speech. The first section briefly reviews the structure
and properties of Hidden Markov Models(HMMs). The second section provides an
overview of previous work in speaker adaptation. The third section discusses previous work on robust modeling for inter-speaker variations and speaker normalization
techniques. Finally, the last section describes the acoustic properties of telephone
handsets and channels in an attempt to characterize the telephone-based databases
which are used in the experimental study of this thesis.
Hidden Markov Models
Hidden Markov Models are perhaps the most widely used statistical modeling tool
used in speech recognition today .
There are two stochastic components in a
HMM. The first is a discrete state Markov chain. The second is a set of observation
distribution functions associated with each state of the Markov chain. This doubly
stochastic structure allows the HMM to simultaneously capture the local characteristics of a speech signal, and the dependencies between neighboring sounds. In the
context of speech recognition, it is assumed that at each instant of time, the HMM
generates a "hidden" state index according to the underlying Markov chain and then
generates a speech observation vector according to the observation density associated
with that state. Thus, given a particular observation sequence and an HMM, it is
possible to compute the probability that the sequence has been generated by the
In a speech recognizer, HMMs are trained for each lexical item in the vocabulary of
the recognizer using the Baum-Welch algorithm or the segmental k-means algorithm
 . These iterative algorithms estimate parameters of the HMMs to maximize the
likelihood of the training data with respect to the trained models. During recognition,
the Viterbi algorithm is used to find the sequence of HMMs which maximizes the
likelihood of the observed speech.
A variety of different HMM structures are possible for speech modeling. In this
thesis, we use a simple left-to-right Markov structure, which means that all of the
allowable state transitions are from a state of lower state index to a state of higher
index. In addition, within each state, mixtures of multivariate Gaussian distributions
are used as the observation densities for each state. The Gaussian distributions are
assumed to have diagonal covariance matrices, and are defined over cepstral feature
vectors. Signal processing implementations to derive the feature vectors from the
speech time waveforms will be described in Chapter 3.
Speaker Adaptation
As already mentioned in Chapter 1, for any particular speaker, sources of inter-speaker
variability make SI HMMs less accurate than SD HMMs trained for that speaker.
Research efforts at making ASR systems more robust to speaker differences has taken
two major approaches. First, a large number of speaker adaptation procedures have
been developed to improve the recognition performance of SI systems to the level of
SD systems as more and more data from a particular speaker becomes available. A
second approach is to develop more speaker-robust acoustic features and models which
are invariant to acoustic characteristics that are not relevant for speech recognition.
This section describes work in the speaker adapation area. The next section describes
work in speaker-robust features and models.
Speaker adaptation (SA) is the process of modifying either an existing HMM
model or the input signal to reduce the differences between the new speaker's characteristics and those represented by the model. It has been applied successfully in
many commercial systems which are used extensively by only one user. SA procedures
"learn" from the user's utterances, and modify the system so that the model statistics
become well-matched to the actual acoustic observations from that speaker. As more
adaptation utterances become available, the performance of speaker independent ASR
systems can be made to approach that of SD systems using SA techniques.
The adaptation of model or data transformation parameters requires speech data
from each new speaker. Adaptation utterances can be obtained in several ways under
different levels of supervision. First, in the simplest case, the SA data can be collected during an enrollment or adaptation phase in which the new user speaks a set
of pre-specified sentences whose transcriptions are assumed to be known. Since this
enrollment process is not always convenient, SA data can also be gathered during the
normal recognition process itself. For recognition-time adaptation, the system decodes each incoming utterance with the existing model, and then updates the models
based on the recognition result. Some systems operate in a supervised mode by eliciting feedback from the user concerning the accuracy of the recognized string. However,
the feedback process can work without the help of the user in systems whose initial
accuracy (without adaptation) is already high enough .
Using the additional adaptation data, one approach to SA consists of modifying
the model parameters to maximize some design criterion. For example, Gauvain and
Lee applied Bayesian MAP estimation to adapt SI models to individual speakers and
reported a error rate reduction of approximately 40% with 2 minutes of adaptation
data on the Resource Management task which was briefly described in the last chapter
 . As the amount of adaptation data increased to 30 minutes, the error rate dropped
to the level of SD models. ML model reestimation and other types of probabilistic
mappings have also been used to adapt the model parameters to fit the speaker 
A second approach to SA consists of mapping the incoming speech features to a
new space using transformations designed to minimize the distance between the new
speech vectors and a set of "reference" speech vectors. The forms of the transformation can be linear, piecewise linear, or even non-linear (as modeled by a neural
network) . For example, Huang described a method of using neural networks to
map between the acoustic spaces of different speakers' speech . The extension of
such a technique is to map the acoustic space of all speakers to one chosen reference
speaker, and then use the SD model built with the reference speaker's speech for
recognition purposes.
Speaker-Robust Features and Models
While speaker adaptation techniques have been successful, they cannot be used in
systems where the only available speech from a given speaker is a single, possibly
very short, utterance. In such cases, the ability to extract speaker-robust features,
and to build models from these features is needed. In the area of robust modeling,
techniques have been developed to train separate models for different speaker groups
according to gender, dialect, or by automatic clustering of speakers . While
the resulting models are more refined and accurate, separating the speakers into a
large number of classes can sometimes lead to under-trained models due to the lack
Techniques which attempted to "normalize" speech parameters in order to eliminate inter-speaker differences were first developed in the context of vowel identification. Linear and non-linear frequency warping functions were developed to compensate for variations in formant positions of vowels spoken by different speakers .
These normalization methods relied on estimates of formant positions as indications
of the vocal tract shape and length of each speaker, and then compensated for these
differences.
These vowel space normalization techniques were not extended to continuous
speech recognition until recently.
Andreou, et al., proposed a set of maximumlikelihood speaker normalization procedures to extract and use acoustic features which
are robust to variations in vocal tract length[l]. The procedures reduced speakerdependent variations between formant frequencies through a simple linear warping
of the frequency axis, which was implemented by resampling the speech waveform in
the time domain. However, despite the simple form of the transformation being considered, over five minutes of speech was used to estimate the warping factor for each
speaker in their study. While this and other studies of frequency warping procedures
have shown improved speaker-independent ASR performance, the performance improvements were achieved at the cost of highly computationally intensive procedures
As a simplification, Eide and Gish proposed using the average position of the third
formant over the utterance as the estimate the length of the vocal tract. Different
vocal tract lengths can then be normalized by using a linear or exponential frequency
warping function . However, besides the difficulty of reliably estimating formants,
the position of the third formant changes according to the sound being produced,
and therefore does not directly reflect the vocal tract length of the speaker . This
thesis extends the approach of Andreou, et al., by applying the procedures to very
short utterances, by using an experimental study to further understand the properties
of the procedures, and by proposing methods to make them more efficient.
Telephone-based speech recognition
The experimental study to be described in the thesis was performed using speech utterances collected over the telephone network. Since the telephone channel introduces
many sources of variability in addition to those due to differences between speakers,
this section describes characteristics of the telephone channels. In addition, the characteristics of carbon and electret telephone transducers are discussed in relation to
their effect on ASR performance.
The combined channel composed of the handset transducer and telephone network
introduces several different types of distortion on the speech signal. It is well known
that the transmission channel filters the signal between 200 and 3400 Hz, with different degrees of attenuation within the passband. Besides this convolutional effect, the
local loop, long distance transmission lines, and switching equipment in the telephone
network are also sources of additive noise. The severity of these and other nonlinear
effects often vary from call to call, leaving the exact types or degree of distortion
almost impossible to predict from one call to the next.
The telephone handset is an additional source of variable distortion. The electret
transducers used in the newer telephones have linear filtering characteristics.
the other hand, carbon button transducers, which are still widely used throughout
the telephone network, are known to have highly nonlinear characteristics which vary
over time and from one transducer to the next . In addition to these nonlinearities,
adverse environmental conditions, variation in the electrical conditions, and simple
aging can result in further variation in the characteristics of the carbon transducer.
For example, excessive humidity can cause "packing" of the carbon granules and result
in a reduction in sensitivity of 10-20 dB . This severe variability resulting from a
carbon transducer that is not in proper working order can also result in degradations
in ASR performance.
In comparing ASR performance when using electret and carbon handsets which
were known to be in good working condition, however, Potamianos, et al., found
that ASR performance obtained using carbon transducers was actually better than
that obtained for electret transducers . This suggests that the carbon transducers
perform some transformation which is beneficial to ASR performance. One possible
cause of the discrepancy in performance may be that the carbon transducer suppresses
speech energy in portions of the signal where variability is high, and modeling accuracy is low. Such areas may include fricative sounds, and formant valleys in voiced
In the same study, Potamianos, et al., also found empirical evidence that the carbon transducer is relatively less affected by the direct airflow energy that accompanies
the production of plosive and fricative sounds . An example of this observation is
displayed in figure 2-1, where the short-time energy contours for stereo carbon(solid)
and electret (dashed) utterances are plotted for the string "three-six-six." It is clear
that the areas of the greatest energy differences are in the plosive production of /ks/
and the fricative productions of /s/ and /th/. The plot shows that the electret transducers are more affected by the direct airflow that accompanies plosive and fricative
production. The amount of this 'pop' noise is highly dependent on the design of the
handset as well as the position of the handset relative to the speaker's mouth. It
is believed that because of the electret transducer's higher sensitivity to this type
of noise, there is a increased variability associated with speech passed through the
electret transducer, and hence the ASR error rates obtained using electret handsets
are higher.
TIME (sec)
Figure 2-1: Short-time energy contours for stereo carbon (solid) and electret (dashed)
utterances for the string "three-six-six". From 
This chapter attempted to cover the background information necessary for a better
perspective of the speaker normalization procedures and experimental study which
will be described later. The structure and properties of hidden Markov models was
first described. Then, model adaptation and feature space mapping techniques for
dealing with speaker differences were discussed. While these techniques are effective,
they require adaptation data from each speaker, which is not possible in scenarios
where only one single utterance is available from each speaker. For that type of application, speaker-robust models and features are needed. Work in frequency warping
approaches to speaker normalization was described in Section 2.3. The advantage
of these techniques is that the use of simple models of physiological variations limited the number of parameters which must be estimated in real time. As a result, it
is plausible that these procedures can be effective even when applied to very short
utterances.
A Frequency Warping Approach to
Speaker Normalization
The goal of the speaker normalization procedures described in this chapter is to reduce the inter-speaker variation of speech sounds by compensating for physiological
differences among speakers. In chapter 1, these normalization procedures were motivated as a means to compensate for "distortions" due to differences in vocal tract
length. This distortion is modeled as a simple linear warping in the frequency domain
of the signal. As a result, the normalization procedure compensates for the distortion
by linearly warping the frequency axis by an appropriately estimated warping factor.
This chapter presents detailed descriptions of the procedures used to implement
a frequency warping approach to speaker normalization. It is divided into four parts.
First, the warping factor estimation process is presented. The second section describes
the iterative procedure used to train HMMs using normalized feature vectors from
the training data. The third section describes how warping factor estimation and
frequency warping is incorporated into the HMM recognition procedures. Finally,
methods for implementing frequency warping as part of both filter bank and linear
prediction based feature analysis procedures will be described.
Warping Factor Estimation
Conceptually, the warping factor represents the ratio between a speaker's vocal tract
length and some notion of a reference vocal tract length. However, reliably estimating
vocal tract length of speakers based on the acoustic data is a difficult problem. In the
work described here, the warping factor is chosen to maximize the likelihood of the
normalized feature set with respect to a given statistical model, so that the "reference"
is taken implicitly from the model parameters. Even though lip movements and other
variations change the length of the vocal tract of the speaker according to the sound
being produced, it is assumed that these types of variations are similar across speakers,
and do not significantly affect the estimated warping factor. Therefore, one warping
factor is estimated for each person using all of the available utterances. Evidence
supporting the validity of this assumption will be presented in Chapter 4.
The warping factor estimation process is described mathematically as follows. The
basic notation is defined here. In the short-time analysis of utterance j from speaker
i, the samples in the t-th speech frame, obtained by applying an M-point tapered
Hamming window to the sampled speech wavefrom, are denoted with si,j,t[m], m =
1...M. The discrete-time Fourier transform of si,j,t[m] is denoted as Si,j,t(w), and the
cepstral feature vectors obtained from this spectrum is denoted as £i,3,t. The entire
utterance is represented as a sequence of feature vectors Xilj = {i,j,,1,
i,j,2, ... , i,j,T}.
In the context of frequency warping, Saj,t(w) is defined to be Si,jt(aw). The
cepstrum feature vectors which are computed from the warped spectrum is denoted
,j,t, and the warped representation of the utterance is represented as a sequence
of the warped feature vectors Xi, = {j,1, 4,j,2, ... ,
Additionally, Wi,3 refers to the word level transcription of utterance j from speaker
i. This transcription can be either known in advance or obtained from the speech
recognizer.
Finally, we let
2, ... , XN } denote the set of feature space representations of all
of the available utterances from speaker i, warped by a;
* Wi = {Wi, 1, Wi,2, ... , Wi,Ni} denote the set of transcriptions of all of the utterances;
* &i denote the optimal warping factor for speaker i; and
* A denote a given set of HMMs.
Then, the optimal warping factor for speaker i, &i, is obtained by maximizing the
likelihood of the warped utterances with respect to the model and the transcriptions:
&i = argmaxPr(X |A, Wi).
However, a closed form solution for & from equation 3.1 is difficult to obtain. This
is primarily because frequency warping corresponds to a highly non-linear transformation of the speech recognition features. Therefore, the optimum warping factor is
obtained by search over a grid of 13 factors spaced evenly between 0.88 < a < 1.12.
This range of a is chosen to roughly reflect the 25% range in vocal tract lengths found
in humans.
Training Procedure
The goal of the training procedure is to appropriately warp the frequency scale of
the utterances for each speaker in the training set consistently, so that the resulting
speaker-independent HMM will be defined over a frequency normalized feature set.
It is clear from equation 3.1 that the warping factor estimation process requires a
preexisting speech model. Therefore, an iterative procedure is used to alternately
choose the best warping factor for each speaker, and then build a model using the
warped training utterances. A diagram of the procedure is shown in Figure 3-1.
First, the speakers in the training data are divided into two sets, training(T) and
aligning(A). An HMM, AT, is then built using the utterances in set T. Then, the optimal warping factor for each speaker i in set A is chosen to maximize Pr(Xc AT, Wi).
Since we assume the vocal tract length to be a property of the speaker, all of the
1. Train an HMM h, with
2. Choose &i in set A
warped utterances in set T.
to maximize Pr(XI j r, Wi
Figure 3-1: HMM training with speaker normalization
utterances from the same speaker are used to estimate & for that speaker. Sets A
and T are then swapped, and we iterate this process of training an HMM with half
of the data, and then finding the best warping factor for the second half. A final
frequency normalized model, AN, is built with all of the frequency warped utterances
when there is no significant change in the estimated &'s between iterations.
With a large amount of training data from a large number of speakers, it may
not be necessary to divide the data set into half. If the data were not divided into
two separate sets, it can be easily shown that the iterative procedure of estimating
warping factors and then updating the model always increases the likelihood of the
trained model with respect to the warped data. Suppose we use Xj-1 to denote the
set of all warped training vectors from all speakers in iteration j - 1, and A3-1 to
denote the model trained with this data. Then, in reestimating the warping factors
during the jth iteration, the warping factors are chosen to increase the likelihood of
the data set, Xj, with respect to Aj-l:
Pr(XjAjI, W) > Pr(XjIiAj-1, W).
In addition, the use of the Baum-Welch algorithm to train Aj using X3 guarantees
the following:
Pr(XjlAj, W)
Pr(XjIA,-1, W).
By combining Equations 3.2 and 3.3, it is seen that the likelihood of the data with
respect to the model is increased with each iteration of training:
Pr(XjlAj, W) _> Pr(Xj_|Ajl,
While this informal proof of convergence does not hold when the data is divided in
half, empirical evidence is presented in Chapter 4 to show that the model likelihood
converges even in that case.
Recognition Procedure
During recognition, the goal is to warp the frequency scale of each test utterance
to "match" that of the normalized HMM model AN. Unlike the training scenario,
however, only one testing utterance is used to estimate 6, and the transcription is
not given. A three-step process, as illustrated in Figure 3-2, is used:
1. First, the unwarped utterance Xij and the normalized model AN are used to
obtain a preliminary transcription of the utterance. The transcription obtained
from the unwarped features is denoted as Wij.
2. & is found using equation 3.1: & = arg max Pr(X 3 AN, Wi,). The probability
is evaluated by probabilistic alignment of each warped set of feature vectors
with the transcription W.
3. The utterance Xj is decoded with the model AN to obtain the final recognition
Baseline Front-End Signal Processing
In the previous sections, the processes of HMM training and recognition with speaker
normalization were defined independent of the analysis method used to obtain the
Figure 3-2: HMM Recognition with Speaker Normalization
cepstrum. The most commonly used speech recognition feature sets are cepstra derived either from linear predictive analysis, or from a filter bank. Both of these
front-ends are described in this section. The next section describes the steps taken to
implement frequency warping within these front-ends. While the notation from the
previous sections is kept consistent, the subscripts denoting the speaker, utterance,
and frame numbers are dropped hereafter.
Filter Bank Front-end
A block diagram of the mel-scale filter bank front-end proposed by Davis and Mermelstein is shown in Figure 3-3 . After the sampled speech waveform has been passed
through a Hamming window, the short-time magnitude spectrum, S[k], is computed
on the speech segment. The resulting spectrum is then passed through a bank of
overlapped, triangular filters, and an inverse cosine transform is used to convert the
sequence of the output filter energies to cepstrum. The process is then repeated by
FinT 1'rv2
mel-scale filterbank
Figure 3-3: Mel Filter Bank Analysis
shifting the position of the Hamming window.
In a mel-scale filter bank, the spacing and width of the filters are designed to
model the variations in the human ear's ability to discriminate frequency differences
as a function of the frequency of the sound. Physiological and perceptual data show
that the human ear is more sensitive at lower frequencies than at higher frequencies
 . Therefore, the filters are spaced linearly between 0 and 1000 Hz, and logarithmically above 1000 Hz. The lower and upper band-edges of each filter, corresponding
to the DFT indices L1 and U1, coincide with the center frequencies of its adjacent
filters, resulting in 50% overlap between adjacent filters. The bandwidth of the filters
increases for the higher frequency bands. The magnitudes of the filters are normalized
so that the area of each filter is constant, i.e., Ek=UL, F, [k] = 1.
The filters cover the entire signal bandwidth, and the mel-filter bank representation of the signal consists of the log energy output of the filters when S [k] is passed
through them:
Y[l] = log (
Fc [k] S [k]
The last step of the front-end computes the cepstral coefficients of the filter bank
vector using an inverse cosine transform:
E Y cos(m( - •) -
) m = 1, ..., NF - 1.
Only the first 10 to 15 cepstral coefficients are used as speech features. Cepstral
coefficients are used in place of filter bank energies mainly because they tend to be
less correlated with one another. The high degree of overlap between neighboring
filters results in a high degree of correlation between filter bank coefficients. The less
correlated cepstrum features allow the independence assumption implied by the use of
diagonal covariance Gaussian distributions in the recognizer to be a more reasonable
approximation.
Linear Predictive Analysis
The theory of linear predictive coding(LPC) in speech has been well-understood for
many years . This section provides a brief overview of the autocorrelation method
of calculating LPC cepstra. The reader is referred to for a detailed mathematical
derivation.
A block diagram of the autocorrelation method is shown in Figure 3-4. The first
step is similar to that of the filter bank front-end in that the incoming speech is windowed using a Hamming window. Each frame of speech, s[k], is then autocorrelated
to calculate a set of L + 1 correlation coefficients r[l]:
r[l] = Zs[k]s[k + 1], 1 = O, 1, ...L
The set of autocorrelations is then converted into the LPC coefficients a[p] using
Levinson's recursion. The all-pole filter 1/(1 -
, a[p]z-P ) represents the vocal tract
transfer function under the LPC model. Finally, the LPC cepstral coefficients, x[m],
can be derived from the LPC coefficients a[m] through a recursive relationship .
These coefficients represent the Fourier transform of the log magnitude spectrum of
the LPC filter, and they have been found to be more statistically well-behaved as
speech recognition features than the LPC coefficients.
Frequency Warping
Linearly compressing and expanding the frequency axis of a signal is perhaps most
intuitively done by resampling the signal in the time domain . However, resampling
in the time domain is inefficient, especially in the range of allowable a's. In this
S Levinson's
Figure 3-4: Linear Predictive Analysis
section, we discuss how to incorporate frequency warping into both the LPC and the
filter bank front-ends without modifying the original signal.
Filter Bank Analysis with Frequency Warping
In the filter bank front-end, since the speech spectrum gets passed through a set
of bandpass filters, frequency warping can be implemented by simply varying the
spacing and width of component filters without changing the speech spectrum. That
is, instead of resampling the speech before the front-end processing, the warping
process can be pushed into the filter bank stage. For example, to compress the
speech signal in the frequency domain, we keep the frequency of the signal the same,
but stretch the frequency scale of the filters. Similarly, we compress the filter bank
frequencies to effectively stretch the signal frequency scale. This process is illustrated
in Figure 3-5. It is more efficient than simply resampling the signal in the beginning
because only one single DFT needs to be performed in each frame, and there is no
need to resample the original signal.
LPC Analysis with Frequency Warping
With the LPC front-end, resampling the speech signal can be accomplished by resampling the autocorrelation function, because the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation sequence is simply the magnitude spectrum of the original signal. Therefore,
warping the original speech signal would result in exactly the same warp in the autocorrelation domain. Assuming no aliasing effects, the resampled autocorrelation
mel-scale filterbank
mel-scale filterbank
mel-scale filterbank
Figure 3-5: Mel Filter Bank Analysis With Warping
signal of each speech frame corresponds directly to the autocorrelation of the same
frame of speech sampled at a different rate. The stability of the resulting LPC analysis is therefore not affected. Following the resampling process, standard techniques
using Levinson's recursion and cepstrum calculations are then used to convert the resampled autocorrelations into LPC cepstrum. The entire process is shown in Figure
Resampling the autocorrelation function is more efficient than resampling the original signal for two reasons. First, we are usually interested in only the first 10 points
of the autocorrelation sequence in every frame, compared with 240 speech samples.
Therefore, the interpolation process is shorter for the autocorrelation sequence. Secondly, the process of calculating an autocorrelation from the signal is computationally
intensive, and the method presented here allows us to avoid calculating different autocorrelations for each warping.
Discussion on Bandwidth Differences
When the frequency axis is warped linearly, the bandwidth of the resulting signal
differs from that of the original. For the experiments described in this work, the
sampling rate is fixed at 8 kHz, imposing a limit on the maximum signal bandwidth
of 4 kHz. The telephone channel additionally bandlimits the signal at around 3400
Consequently, with the warping factors ranging between 0.88 and 1.12, the
bandwidths of the warped signals range between 3.52 kHz and 4.48 kHz. Because
Rscomparisons
the "best"
Levinsons tant range between 0
the stretched sigT=.88Tion
Recursionv
is not used.
bandwidths at diffocorrent warping factors represent a son'surce of mismatch
between the warped
Cepstruand
the model.
filter bank energy envelopResamplees for = 0.90,
Levinson's frame of sLPCeech. In
Figure 3-6: LPC Analysis With Warping
comparisons for the "best" warping factor are made over a constant range between 0
and 4 kHz, the compressed signals do not contain useful information over the entire
4 kHz, and the stretched signals contain information above 4 kHz that is not used.
Different bandwidths at different warping factors represent a source of mismatch
between the warped signal and the model.
The LPC and mel-spaced filter bank front-ends exhibit different behavior in the
vicinity of the band-edge. In Figurthe
telephone channel filter. B speech spectrum and mel-spaced
filter bank energy envelopes for al = 0.90, 1.00, and 1.10 in one frame of speech. In
Figure 3-8, we show the speech spectrum and LPC filter envelopes for the same
warping factors in the same speech frame. It is clear that with the LPC front-end,
the spectra obtained for different warping factors differ significantly near the bandedge of the telephone channel (around 3400 Hz). This type of mismatch resulted in
a large amount of instability during the warping factor estimation process. On the
other hand, because of the large spacing and wide bandwidth of the uppermost filters
in the filter bank front-end, the filter bank energy envelopes show much less variance
near the band-edge of the telephone channel filter. Because of this effect, we chose to
use the filter bank front-end in all of the experimental work presented in this thesis.
One possible solution to this problem is to consider warping functions which are
piecewise linear or even nonlinear, such that the bandwidth of the warped signal is
the same as that of the original. For example, a piecewise linear warping function
e 3-7: Mel Filter Bank Envelope with Warping
like the following may be considered:
fo) + afo, fo
< f < fmax
In Equation 3.8, fmax denotes the maximum signal bandwidth, and fo can be
an empirically chosen frequency which falls above the highest significant formant in
speech. The effect of classes of functions like the above should be to reduce the effects
of discontinuities at the band-edge. Preliminary experiments using such a piecewise
linear warping function for speaker normalization suggested that they may indeed be
Filter Bank warping=0.90
Filter Bank warping=1.00
Filter Bank warping=1. 10
Figure 3-8: LPC Spectrum
with Warping
more robust than a simple linear warping . In addition, Oppenheim and Johnson
described a set of nonlinear frequency warping functions which are implementable
by a series of all-pass filters and map the frequency range 0 < w < 27w onto itself
 . However, because such warping functions have no simple correlation to physical
sources of variations, only the linear warping function is used in this thesis, and
exploration of other functions is left for future work.
-PC warping=0.90
LPC warping=1.00
LPC warping=1.10
This chapter presented a set of procedures used to perform speaker vocal tract
length normalization. The criterion for warping factor estimation was presented in a
maximum-likelihood framework. The procedures used to perform speaker normalization during HMM training and recognition were also described. In addition, methods
for performing frequency warping within the filter bank and the LPC feature extraction front-ends were presented. Finally, the issue of different signal bandwidths
resulting from warping the original signal in varying degrees was discussed. Because
the uppermost filters are very wide in the filter bank front-end, this effect is less apparent in the filter bank front-end, and we chose to use the filter bank instead of the
LPC front-end in this work.
Baseline Experiments
This chapter presents an experimental study of the effectiveness of the speaker normalization procedures described in Chapter 3. The principle measure of effectiveness
is speech recognition performance obtained on a connected digit speech recognition
task over the telephone network. Besides speech recognition performance, a number of
issues are investigated and discussed. Experiments were performed to understand the
ability of the speaker normalization procedures to decrease inter-speaker variability,
and to produce normalized HMMs which describe the data more efficiently.
The chapter is divided into six sections. After the task, database, and speech
recognizer are described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, ASR performance before and after
speaker normalization is presented in Section 4.3. Section 4.4 presents a analysis of
the distribution of the chosen warping factors among the speakers in the training
set to verify the effectiveness of ML warping factor estimation procedure. Section
4.5 describes the application of a HMM distance measure to speaker dependent (SD)
HMMs in an attempt to quantitatively measure the amount of inter-speaker variability
among a set of speakers before and after frequency warping. Section 4.6 presents
statistics on the ability of the warping factor estimation procedure to generate reliable
estimates on utterances of only 1 or 2 digits in length. Finally, Section 4.7 describes
speech recognition performance over successive iterations of the training procedure
described in Chapter 3 as empirical evidence of the convergence properties of the
iterative training procedure.
Training Set
Testing set
# utterances
# carbon utts.
# electret utts.
# male spkers
# female spkers
Table 4.1: Database DB1 Description
Task and Databases
Two telephone-based connected digit databases were used in this study. The first,
DB1, was used in all of the speech recognition experiments.
It was recorded in
shopping malls across 15 dialectally distinct regions in the US, using two carbon and
two electret handsets which were tested to be in good working condition. The size
of the vocabulary was eleven words: "one" to "nine", as well as "zero" and "oh".
The speakers read digit strings between 1 and 7 digits in a continuous manner over
a telephone, so that the length of each utterance ranged from about .5 seconds to
4 seconds. The training utterances were endpointed, whereas the testing utterances
were not. All of the data was sampled at 8 kHz. Table 4.1 lists the specifics about
the training and testing sets.
A second connected digit database, DB2, was used to evaluate properties of the
speaker normalization procedures which required more data per speaker than available
in DB1. DB2 was taken from one of the dialectal regions used for DB1, but contains
a larger number of utterances per speaker. In DB2, approximately 100 digit strings
were recorded for each speaker. A total of 2239 utterances, or 6793 digits, were
available from 22 speakers(10 males, 12 females.)
Throughout this thesis, word error rate is used to evaluate the performance of
various techniques. The error rate is computed as follows:
Sub + Del + Ins
% Error = 100 TotaNumberofWords
TotalNumberof Words'
where Sub is the number of substitutions, Del is the number of deletions, and Ins
is the number insertions. These quantities are found using a dynamic programming
algorithm to obtain the highest scoring alignment between the recognized word string
and the correct word string.
Baseline Speech Recognizer
The experiments in this thesis have been conducted using an HMM speech recognition
system built in AT&T Bell Laboratories. Each digit was modeled by 8 to 10 state
continuous-density left-to-right HMMs. In addition, silence was explicitly modeled
by a single-state HMM. The observation densities were mixtures of 8 multi-variate
Gaussian distributions with diagonal covariance matrices. 39-dimensional feature
vectors were used: normalized energy, c -c derived from a mel-spaced filter bank
of 22 filters, and their first and second derivatives. The performance metric used was
word error rate. This configuration is used for all of the experiments described in this
chapter unless otherwise noted.
Speech Recognition Performance
Table 4.2 shows the recognition word error rate on DB1 using only the baseline recognizer, and using the baseline recognizer with the speaker normalization procedures.
The first row reports the word error rate observed when testing unwarped feature
vectors using models trained on unwarped feature vectors. The second row reports
the error rate observed using the speaker normalization training and recognition procedures described in Chapter 3. The models were trained using frequency-normalized
feature vectors obtained after the first iteration of the iterative HMM training procedure. The error rates for utterances through the carbon and electret handsets are
shown separately in the second and third columns, and averaged in the last column.
There are several observations that can be made from Table 4.2. First, it is clear
from the table that the overall word error rate is reduced by approximately 20%
Speaker Normalization
Table 4.2: Word error rate before and after using speaker normalization.
through the use of frequency warping during both HMM training and recognition.
The second observation concerns the relative error rate obtained using carbon and
electret transducers. For both conditions, the error rate for the carbon transdcuers
is significantly lower than that for the electret. These results are consistent with
those observed by , and a possible explanation for the performance discrepancy
was provided in Chapter 2. Finally, this performance difference between carbon and
electret transducers is reduced after speaker normalization.
While it is important that speech recognition performance be the final criterion for
judging the performance of any speaker normalization procedure, it is also important
to understand the behavior of the procedure at a more fundamental level. In the
remaining sections of this chapter, the frequency warping procedure is investigated in
terms of its effect on the distribution of the estimated warping factors and its effect
on the characteristics of the HMM.
Distribution of Chosen Warping Factors
In evaluating the effectiveness of the warping factor estimation procedure, two issues
are of concern. First, while there is no absolute measure of the "correct" warping
factor for each speaker, the chosen warping factors over the entire speaker population
should satisfy our intuition about the distortions caused by vocal tract length variations. Secondly, the normalization procedures should result in speech utterances and
model representations that exhibit reduced inter-speaker variation. These two issues
are addressed in this and the next section.
Histograms of the chosen warping factors for the speakers in the training set are
shown in figure 4-1. On average, about 15 utterances are used to estimate the warping
factor for each speaker. The warping factors chosen for the males are shown on top,
and those for the females shown on the bottom. The value of the estimated warping
factor is displayed along the horizontal axis, and the number of speakers who were
assigned to each given warping factor is plotted on the vertical axis. Warping factors
below 1.00 correspond to frequency compression, and those above 1.00 correspond to
frequency expansion. The mean of warping factors is 1.00 for males, 0.94 for females,
and 0.975 for all of the speakers.
warping factor chosen
warping factor chosen
Figure 4-1: Histogram of warping factors chosen for speakers in the training set
Clearly, the average warping factor among males is higher than that among females. This satisfies our intuition because females tend to have shorter vocal tract
lengths, and higher formant frequencies. As a result, it is reasonable that the normalization procedure chooses to compress the frequency axis more often for female
speech than for male speech.
At the same time, however, the fact that the mean of the estimated warping factors over all speakers is not 1.00 is somewhat surprising, because the iterative training
process was initiated with a model built with unwarped utterances. One explanation
for this result lies in the difference in the effective bandwidth between utterances
whose frequency axes have been compressed or expanded to different degrees. One
side-effect of frequency compression is the inclusion of portions of the frequency spectrum which may have originally been out-of-band. If parts of the discarded spectra
carry information useful for recognition, the ML warping factor estimation is likely to
be biased toward frequency compression. This is perhaps best-illustrated in Figure
The mean of estimated warping factors is not required to be 1.0 under model-based
warping factor estimation because any notion of a "reference" vocal tract length must
be considered in reference to the model parameters. It is the relative differences in
warping factors chosen for different speakers which is most significant to the ability of
the procedure to generate a consistently frequency-normalized feature set. The next
section describes an experiment to measure the HMM model based similarity among
speakers before and after warping factor estimation and frequency warping.
Speaker Variability and HMM Distances
One way to gauge the effectiveness of the warping factor estimation process is to use
a quantitative measure of the degree of similarity between the acoustic spaces of the
speech from two speakers. Such a measure can indicate whether or not the speaker
normalization process reduces the inter-speaker variability in the feature space. This
section describes an experiment in which the HMM distance measure proposed by
Juang and Rabiner in was applied to two sets of speaker-dependent HMMs. The
first set was trained using unwarped feature vectors, and the second was trained using
frequency-normalized feature vectors where the warping factor was found using the
standard ML method. The distances between the SD HMMs within the first and
second sets were then compared as a measure of the inter-speaker variability before
and after speaker normalization. We first describe the HMM distance measure, then
the experimental setup, and finally the results.
Definition of HMM Distance Measure
The HMM distance measure was proposed and derived following the concepts of
divergence and discrimination information in . Given two HMMs A1 and A2, the
resulting metric quantitatively describes the difficulty of discriminating between the
two models. The distance measure is mathematically stated as follows.
Consider two HMMs A1 and A2 . Suppose that X1 is a sequence of T1 observations
generated by A1, and X2 is a sequence of T2 observations generated by A2.
distance between A1 and A2 , D(A1, A2), is then defined as follows:
D(A1, A2) =
1 (logPr(XIAi1) - log Pr(Xi A2))
1 (log Pr(X21 2) - log Pr(X2 J1))
The distance measure shown in equation 4.2 is symmetric with respect to A1 and A2.
It represents a measure of the difficulty of discriminating between two HMMs. Since
a SD HMM represents the feature space distribution of the speech of a particular
speaker, the distance between SD HMMs corresponding to two different speakers can
be taken as a measure of the similarity between the speakers in feature space.
The formulation of the HMM distance measure in assumed that the HMMs
are ergodic. However, it was found in that for left-to-right HMM models, using a
series of restarted sequences as the generated observation sequence for the likelihood
calculations yields reliable distance measurements. In the work presented here, this
is implemented by using a large ensemble of utterances from each speaker to evaluate
the average likelihood used in the distance measure.
Experimental Setup
This experiment was performed using DB2. As mentioned earlier, two sets of SD
HMMs were trained for each speaker: one using unwarped data, and the other using
frequency-warped data. In the second case, the warping factor was determined with
the frequency-normalized SI HMMs used in the baseline recognition experiments re-
ported in Section 4.3. Additionally, the estimation of the warping factor operated
under the HMM training scenario. That is, the known text transcriptions of the utterances were used, and all of the utterances from each speaker were pooled together
to estimate one single warping factor.
For each speaker i, we use the following notation:
* X'j denotes the unwarped feature vectors of the jth utterance of speaker i;
* Xiw denotes the warped feature vectors of the same utterance;
* X' denotes the set of all unwarped feature vectors of speaker i:
Xi = {XU,X 2,...
* XT denotes the set of all warped feature vectors of speaker i:
In this experiment, SD HMMs AY were trained using Xj, and Al were trained using
Xw for all of the speakers. The HMMs consisted of 8-10 states per digit and mixtures
of 2 to 4 Gaussians per state-dependent observation density. The log-likelihoods
log Pr(XilAj) were evaluated using probabilistic alignment. Inter-speaker distance
measures D(AY, A) and D(A', Aý') were computed for all pairs (i,j), i • j. Since
DB2 was used, about 100 utterances were available from each speaker for HMM
training and likelihood evaluations.
Table 4.3 shows averages in the HMM distances before and after speaker normalization
is used. The second column shows the average HMM distances between two male SD
HMMs or two female SD HMMs. The third column shows the average HMM distances
between a male SD HMM and a female SD HMM. The fourth column shows the overall
average for all speaker pairs in the database.
A few interesting observations can be made from the table. First, it is clear that
the average HMM distance between speakers has decreased after speaker normalization. It is also clear that inter-speaker differences within the same gender is much
Within-Gender
Across-Gender
Speaker Normalization
Table 4.3: Average HMM distances before and after using speaker normalization.
smaller than that across genders. The speaker normalization procedure seemed to
have significantly reduced the across-gender differences, although there still remains
a large gap between the first and second columns of the second row. These results
agree with our hypothesis that speaker normalization can produce feature sets which
show less inter-speaker variability. At the same time, however, a large portion of the
variations still remains, perhaps due to the fact that a linear frequency warping is a
very coarse model of the vocal tract length variations, and that many other sources
of variation have been ignored in our method.
Warping Factor Estimation With Short Utterances
A major assumption made in the thesis is that the vocal tract length of the speaker
is a long-term speaker characteristic. Therefore, it is assumed that the variations in
effective vocal tract length due to the production of different sounds do not significantly affect the warping factor estimation process. Under this assumption, with
"sufficient" amounts of data for each utterance, the warping factor estimates should
not vary significantly among different utterances by the same speaker. This section
presents an experiment which attempted to test and better understand this assumption by gathering and examining statistics reflecting how the warping factor estimates
change across utterances of different durations for the same speaker. These statistics
also reflect the ability of the ML-based warping factor estimation method to generate
reliable estimates even when the utterances are very short.
In this experiment, the 3-step speaker normalization recognition procedure depicted in Figure 3-2 was used on the data in DB2, where approximately 100 utterances are available for each of 22 speakers. The set of all utterances Xi from speaker
i is divided roughly evenly into two sets based on the number of digits in each utterance. The set of utterances containing 1 or 2 digits is denoted by Si, and the set of
utterances containing 3 to 7 digits is denoted by Li. For each speaker i, the means
and standard deviations of the warping factor estimates for utterances within each of
Si and Li are computed. The differences between the means computed for Si and Li
are examined to observe any significant differences in the warping factor estimates as
the amount of available data increases. The standard deviations are also compared
to see if the variance of warping factor estimates over different utterances decreases
with longer utterances.
Figure 4-2 shows two plots in which the mean and standard deviation of warping
factor estimates for utterances in Si are plotted against those statistics computed
over Li, for all of the speakers in DB2. In the top plot, the x-axis denotes the mean
of the warping factor estimates among utterances in set Si, and the y-axis denotes
the mean of the warping factor estimates among utterances in set Li. Points marked
by "*"'s correspond to the female speakers, and those marked by "+"'s correspond
to the male speakers. In the bottom plot, the x-axis denotes the standard deviation
of the warping factor estimates among utterances in set Si, and the y-axis denotes
the standard deviation of the warping factor estimates among utterances in set Li.
"X"'s are used to marked the data points. In both plots, the line y = x is drawn as
a reference to aid in discussing the trends in the plotted points.
Two important observations can be made based on the top plot of Figure 4-2.
First, the means of the warping factor estimates of the male speakers are always higher
than those of the female speakers regardless of the length of the utterance. Second, the
mean of the warping factor estimates over the longer utterances is significantly higher
than the mean over the shorter utterances among the male speakers. This difference
ranged from only 1% to almost 7.5%. While the cause of this trend is not clear, one
possible explanation may be that for the shorter utterances, a larger portion of the
available data consists of silences and other non-voiced sounds for which the frequency
Mean of Warping Factor Estimates
Over Short Utterances
(1-2 digits)
Std Dev of Warping Factor Estimates
Over Short Utterances
(1-2 digits)
Figure 4-2: Comparisons of means and standard deviations among utterances of
different lengths
-i -5 0.98
warping compensation model is not appropriate. Since the test utterances are not
endpointed, a large portion of the single-digit utterances is not speech. The computed
likelihood over non-speech frames may be higher for feature vectors corresponding
to frequency compression because frequency compression results in the inclusion of
portions of the frequency spectrum which would have been discarded otherwise.
Two observations can be made from the second plot of Figure 4-2. First, it is clear
that the standard deviation of the warping factor estimates generally decreases for
the set of longer utterances. This implies that the warping factor estimation process
does become more "stable" as the amount of available data increases. Second, the
standard deviation of the warping factor estimates over the shorter utterances is less
than 0.04 for a majority of the speakers. Taking into account that the possible warping
factors are spaced 0.02 apart in the grid search process, we see that the warping factor
estimation process produces estimates which do not vary greatly from utterance to
utterance, depending on the particular phonetic content of the utterance. Hence,
these observations are consistent with our assumption that the vocal tract length of
the speaker does not change significantly with the sound being produced.
Convergence of Model Training Procedure
This section presents an experiment performed to understand the convergence properties of the iterative training procedure. In the standard Baum-Welch HMM training
algorithm, the likelihood of the training data with respect to the models is mathematically guaranteed to increase at the end of each iteration. While the iterative
normalized-HMM training procedure is not guaranteed to converge mathematically,
we study changes in recognition error rate on the training and testing data as the
number of training iterations is increased. This experiment also serves to further test
whether the frequency warping procedures are indeed reducing the speaker variability (at least in the training set), and that the normalized HMMs are becoming more
efficient over the iterations.
Table 4.4 shows how the model likelihood and recognition word error rate on the
No. of Iter.
Model Log-Likelihood
Table 4.4: Average model log-likelihood and word error rate on training and testing
data after 0-3 training iterations where speaker normalization with frequency warping
is applied to the training data.
training and testing data changes as the number of training iteration increases. In the
table, the second column shows the average log-likelihood of the warped training data
with respect to the frequency-normalized model. The third column shows recognition
performance when the frequency-normalized models were used to decode the same
data which was used to train them. The fourth column shows recognition results on
the testing set using the three-step process described in Section 3.3. The model used
for the results shown in the first row, 0 iterations, was built with unwarped data.
From the table, it is clear that multiple iterations increased the likelihood of the
data with respect to the model. The improved performance on the training data
shows that a significant amount of variance among the speakers in the training set
has been reduced. However, while multiple training iterations improved the recognition performance on the training data dramatically, recognition performance on
the test data did not improve. Additionally, it is interesting that using the speaker
normalization procedure during recognition with an unnormalized HMM (first row
of table) still offers a significant improvement over the baseline. This is due to the
fact that the speaker normalization procedure used during recognition is, on its own,
reducing the amount of mismatch between the testing speakers and the models of the
training speakers.
In this chapter, experiments which tested the effectiveness of the speaker normalization procedures are described. Recognition results show that using speaker normalization reduces the word error rate by about 20% on a telephone-based digit recognition
task. The distribution of estimated warping factors across speakers showed that the
ML warping factor estimation criterion does yield results which are consistent with
our simple model of the acoustic effects of vocal tract variations. However, a bias
toward warping factors corresponding to frequency compression is observed, perhaps
due to the fact that a larger portion of the speech spectra is included when signals are
compressed. By using HMM distances as a measure of inter-speaker differences, we
conclude that frequency warping is reducing a portion of the inter-speaker variability.
We also showed that the warping factor estimation process used during recognition
produces estimates which do not vary greatly across different utterances from the
speaker. Finally, observations of changes in recognition performance on the training
and testing data show that while multiple training iterations does incrementally produce models which better represent the training data, it does not help recognition
performance on the test data.
Efficient Approaches to Speaker
Robust Systems
In Chapter 3, a set of procedures for implementing ML-based speaker normalization
with frequency warping was described, and in Chapter 4, recognition results showed
that these procedures can reduce the error rate by 20% on a telephone-based speech
recognition task. Due to the additional computational requirements of these procedures, however, it is important to consider less computationally intensive alternatives
which may also be effective in improving the robustness of the system with respect to
speaker variabilities. This chapter proposes new, less complex methods for warping
factor estimation. It also considers existing methods which were originally designed to
reduce the effects of speaker variability on speech recognition performance. In comparing the frequency warping approach to speaker normalization with these other
techniques, we gain additional insight into the advantages and disadvantages of using
this physiologically-motivated procedure over other statistically-based compensation
and modeling procedures.
The chapter is divided into three sections. In Section 5.1, the high computational
cost and long time latencies that result from the 3-step procedure shown in Figure
3-2 are addressed. A more efficient procedure for estimating the warping factor is
presented, and compared against variations of the existing method described earlier.
A second section studies how speaker normalization procedures compare with
other compensation procedures.
In many speech recognition applications, better
speaker-independent recognition performance has been obtained by training separate
sets of HMMs for different classes of speakers. Also, simply normalizing the speech
feature vectors with respect to long-term spectral averages has been shown to compensate for both speaker-dependent and channel-dependent variabilities. In Section
5.2, the recognition performance of the frequency warping approach to speaker normalization is compared to examples of these two other approaches. Gender-dependent
modeling is investigated as an example of class-dependent models, and cepstral mean
normalization is investigated as an example of compensation using long-term spectral
averaging.
Third, we study whether the effects of speaker normalization can be achieved simply by using more parameters in the HMM. A closely-associated question is whether
the complexity of the HMMs affects the amount of performance gain achieved by
speaker normalization. Experimental results answering these questions are presented
in Section 5.3
Efficient Warping Factor Estimation
In the three-step recognition procedure shown in Figure 3-2, the inefficiency of performing an exhaustive grid search to estimate the warping factor is compounded by
the need to use probabilistic alignment at each possible warping factor. Having to
use two recognition passes at each utterance is an additional computation complexity which causes the entire recognition process to be much slower than using simple
HMM decoding. In this section, two methods to improve the efficiency of warping
factor estimation are proposed and tested. The first method is to use more coarsely
sampled search grids for estimating the warping factor a during recognition. That
is, whereas successive samples of a were originally separated by 2%, we propose to
increase this separation to reduce the total number of sample points. Even though
the a estimates may be less accurate as a result, the recognition performance may be
only marginally degraded.
A second method involves leaving the HMM-based warping factor estimation
paradigm altogether, and estimating warping factors using likelihoods computed from
Gaussian mixtures rather than HMMs. This method is described below.
Mixture-based Warping Factor Estimation
In the earlier chapters, the warping factor is conceptualized simply as a representation of the ratio between a speaker's vocal tract length and some notion of a reference
vocal tract length. However, warping factor estimation can also be considered as a
classification problem. During speaker normalization, each speaker is first classified
according to an estimate of his/her vocal tract length, and class-dependent transformations are then applied to the speech to yield a final feature set which is used
in recognition. From this point of view, speakers are placed into different classes
based on the warping factor estimated using their utterances, and the warping factor
can be better stated as a class identifier. Intuitively, the feature space distributions
of untransformed speech from the different classes of speakers would vary due to the
acoustic differences of speech produced by vocal tracts of different lengths. Therefore,
if statistical models of the feature space distribution of each class are available, it may
be possible to determine the warping factor by finding out which class distribution is
most likely to have generated the given sequence of feature vectors.
The mixture-based warping factor estimation technique described here is motivated by this classification perspective of speaker normalization. In training, after
warping factors have been determined for all of the speakers using the process shown
in Figure 3-1, mixtures of multivariate Gaussians are trained to represent the feature
space distributions of each of the possible classes. That is, for each warping factor, mixtures are trained using the unwarped feature vectors from utterances which
were assigned to that warping factor. Then, during recognition, the probability of the
incoming utterance before frequency warping is evaluated against each of these distributions, and the warping factor is chosen for the distribution which yields the highest
likelihood over the entire utterance. The speech is warped using this estimated warping factor, and the resulting feature vectors are then used for HMM decoding. This
process is diagrammed in Figure 5-1.
This mixture-based method results in faster recognition time, because it eliminates
the need to obtain a preliminary transcription using the unwarped utterance which is
used for performing probabilistic alignment at all of the grid points. However, unlike
the method described in Section 3.3, it does not take advantage of the temporal
information in the signal during warping factor estimation, so that the estimated
warping factor may be less accurate.
Estimation
a=0.88,0.90,...,1.12
i- I INIlU
Unwarped Si
Figure 5-1: Mixture-based optimal factor estimation
Experimental Results
The results of applying the above procedures for improving the efficiency of the recognition procedure are shown in Table 5.1. The first row of the table gives the error rate
for the baseline speech recognizer described in Section 4.2 without frequency warping.
HMM-based search method refers to using probabilistic alignment at each possible
warping factor during recognition. The second through the fifth rows therefore show
the recognition performance when the number of possible warping factor values is
decreased from 13 down to 3 points. The last row of the table shows the recognition
Unwarped S i
error rate when the mixture-based warping factor estimation method is used. Each
of the mixtures used 32 multi-variate Gaussians. This experiment was performed on
Search method
# Search pts.
Error Rate
Baseline(No warping)
Mixture-based
Table 5.1: Performance of more efficient speaker normalization recognition procedures
A comparison among rows 2-5 in Table 5.1 shows that using a successively smaller
number of possible warping factors results in a graceful degradation in performance.
The recognition error rate increased by only about 7.5% when the number of warping
factors decreased from 13 to 3. Compared with the baseline system with no frequency
warping, allowing only 3 possible warping factors still offers a 15% reduction in error
Comparing the second and last rows of the Table 5.1, we see that using the
mixture-based search method also results in about a 7.5% increase in error rate.
This suggests that the temporal information in the speech signal is indeed useful for
determining the warping factor. Despite the slightly higher error rate, however, the
computational complexity of the warping factor estimation stage during recognition
is significantly reduced using the mixture-based method.
Comparison with Other Approaches
As mentioned in Chapter 2, there has been a large body of work on characterizing and compensating for speaker variability in speech recognition. In this section,
speaker normalization is compared with two other approaches to improve an ASR
system's robustness to speaker variability. First, gender-dependent (GD) modeling,
an example of an approach to speaker class-dependent modeling, is implemented and
tested. Second, we investigate cepstral mean normalization (CMN), an example of
a technique which use long-term spectral averages to characterize fixed speaker and
channel characteristics. These techniques are described, and the recognition results
are presented below.
Gender-Dependent Models
Gender-dependent models exemplify the speaker class-dependent modeling techniques
which were briefly described in Chapter 2. This class of procedures can improve
recognition performance because models trained to represent a specific speaker class
are expected to represent less inter-speaker variability, and therefore may provide
"sharper" distributions. In GD modeling, two sets of HMMs are trained: one using
speech from males, and another using speech from females. During the Viterbi search
for the most likely state sequence in recognition, these HMMs are used to create two
separate gender specific networks. Again, the maximum-likelihood criterion is used
to find the best state sequence. Because the average vocal tract length differs significantly between males and females and GD modeling can capture such differences,
GD models can be considered to "approximate" the speaker normalization process.
For this reason, it is important to understand whether the extra computational requirements of speaker normalization results in higher performance.
Cepstral Mean Normalization
Long-term spectral averages have been used to characterize both speaker and channel characteristics . CMN is an example of one of these techniques that has been
successfully used in ASR to compensate for both types of distortions. In our implementation of CMN, the mean of the cepstral vectors in the non-silence portions of
each utterance is assumed to characterize long-term characteristics of the speaker and
channel. Therefore, the cepstral mean is computed and subtracted from the entire
utterance. Two processing steps are taken. First, an energy-based speech activity
detector is used over the entire utterance, and the cepstral mean is computed over
those frames which are marked as speech. Then, new feature vectors are obtained
by subtracting this mean from each cepstral vector in the utterance. In cases where
long delays cannot be tolerated, the estimate of the mean vector can be updated
sequentially by applying a sliding window to the utterance. The use of a speech activity detector is also very important to the successful application of this technique.
Recognition performance has been found to degrade when the mean vector is computed over a large number of silence frames. By forcing the cepstral bias to be zero
for all utterances in training and in testing, CMN compensates for differences in convolutional distortions which may arise from either speaker and channel differences
between training and testing.
Experimental Results
Table 5.2 shows recognition word error rates on DB1 using the baseline models,
speaker normalization, GD models, and CMN. The error rates are shown separately
for utterances spoken through the carbon and electret handsets in the first and second
columns. The third column shows the overall error rate. The baseline and speaker
normalization results are the same as those shown in Table 4.2. All models used 8-10
states per digit, and mixtures of 8 multivariate Gaussians as observation densities.
We note here that since 2 sets of models are used in GD models, the GD models used
twice the number of model parameters as the other methods.
Baseline(no warping)
Speaker Normalization
Table 5.2: Performance of speaker normalization procedures as compared to using no
warping, to using gender-dependent models, and to cepstral mean normalization.
The overall results show that the error rates were reduced by 20% with speaker
normalization, by 15% with GD models, and by 10% with CMN. For all of the conditions in the experiment, recognition performance on the test data spoken through the
carbon transducers is better than that for the electret transducers, even though the
model was trained from data spoken through both carbon and electret tranducers.
This result is consistent with those presented in , and some possible explanations
are presented there.
Speaker Normalization vs. Class-Dependent Models
As described in Chapter 2, class-dependent models can be trained for different speaker
groups according to gender, dialect, or by automatic clustering of speakers .
Using this set of procedures, the separate HMMs are used in parallel during recognition to simultaneously determine the class that the speaker belongs to, as well as
the string transcription of the utterance. It is important to realize that, with enough
data, a similar approach could be taken for the speaker normalization procedures. One
could train different sets of HMMs using training speakers assigned to each warping
factor, and decode using all of the HMMs. However, one common problem in training
class-dependent models is that as the number of classes increases, the models may
become under-trained.
In class-dependent modeling techniques like GD models, no attempt is made to
explicit characterize and compensate for the defining aspects of different classes in
feature space so that the spaces modeled by the class-dependent HMMs can become
more similar. As a result, there is a need to build complete models carrying both
phonetic and classification information for each class. The amount of available training data therefore limits the number of speaker classes. In the speaker normalization
approach, however, the inter-class differences are modeled using a relatively simple
parametrization and transformation. It is possible to transform the data from different classes into the same class, and build a model using all of the data, without
the occurrence of under-trained models even with a large number of classes. The
additional "resolution" in speaker class divisions allows for better recognition performance with speaker normalization. This is clear from rows 2 and 3 in Table 5.2, where
the GD models actually used double the number of model parameters than speaker
normalization. The possibility of dividing the training speaker set into 13 different
classes is a direct consequence of the physical model and simple parametrization of
the transformation process.
HMM Parametrization
This section attempts to determine whether the performance improvements given
by speaker normalization can be observed by simply increasing the complexity of the
HMMs used. When more Gaussians per mixture are used to represent the observation
density in each HMM state, the feature space distribution can be more accurately
described. However, more complex HMMs use more parameters, incurring greater
storage and computational requirements. Moreover, with a limited amount of training
data, there may not be enough data to reliably estimate all of the parameters of highly
complex HMMs, resulting in under-trained models.
In this experiment, the size of the Gaussian mixtures used in the observation densities is increased incrementally, and the performance of using the baseline recognizer
alone and speaker normalization on DB1 is observed. The results are shown in Table
5.3. The rows of the table show the recognition results as the number of Gaussians
used in each observation density mixture is increased. The second and third columns
show the error rates of the baseline and speaker normalization methods. The last
column show the amount of error reduction offered by frequency warping in percent.
# Gaussians/mix.
Baseline Warping
% Improvement
Table 5.3: Performance of speaker normalization over different complexity HMMs
From the baseline case, it is clear that as the number of Gaussians per mixture
increases to 32, the models become under-trained, and no further performance improvements can be observed. It is especially notable from Table 5.3 that in every case,
using frequency warping with a simpler HMM performs better than using no warping
with more complex HMMs. While speaker normalization requires more computation,
it enables higher performance to be achieved with less complex HMMs. In conclusion,
the performance achieved by using frequency warping cannot be achieved by simply
increasing the complexity of the HMMs.
This chapter attempted to present a comparative study of different approaches for
reducing the effect of speaker variabilities on ASR performance in order to determine
how to most efficiently improve the speaker robustness of ASR systems. A mixturebased warping factor estimation procedure was described, and the results show that
a significant amount of computational complexity can be reduced with only a slight
degradation in performance. All of the techniques studied work under the important
constraint that no information outside of the given, possibly short duration, test
utterance is available for the estimation of transformation or classification parameters.
Based on the performance comparisons made here, one sees the advantage that the
frequency warping approach to speaker normalization has over the other techniques.
Due to the simple way that a physical source of variation is explicitly modeled in
speaker normalization, only one single parameter needs to be estimated, and the
form of the transformation is physiologically meaningful. The approaches of GD
modeling and CMN both attempt to improve the statistical properties of the feature
space without explicitly taking advantage of knowledge about the sources of variation.
Simply using more complex HMMs to model the variations without reducing them
also cannot perform better than speaker normalization. The recognition results from
this set of experiments underscore the importance of explicitly exploiting knowledge
about the physical processes of speech production in the design of procedures to
reduce inter-speaker variabilities.
Conclusions
In this thesis, we developed and evaluated a set of speaker normalization procedures
which explicitly model and compensate for the effects of variations in vocal tract
length by linearly warping the frequency axis of speech signals. The degree of warping
applied to each speaker's speech was estimated using the speaker's utterance(s) within
a model-based maximum-likelihood framework. An iterative procedure was used as
a part of the segmental k-means HMM training procedure to alternately choose the
optimal warping factor for each speaker, and then build a model using the warped
training utterances. The recognition process consisted of first estimating the warping
factor based on the unwarped test utterance, and then decoding the utterance using
the warped feature vectors. Frequency warping was implemented in the filter bank
front-end by appropriately warping the frequency axis of the component filters in the
filter bank. Because the filter bank features are less susceptible to varying bandwidths
which result from using a linear warping function, the filter bank front-end was used
instead of the LPC front-end.
The effectiveness of this set of speaker normalization procedures was examined in
an experimental study presented in Chapter 4. The experiments were performed using
a telephone-based digit recognition database in which the utterances are between 1
and 7 digits in length. Recognition results showed that using speaker normalization
reduces the word error rate by about 20% on this task. The best performance obtained
was a word error rate of 2.0%. However, applying frequency warping during HMM
training had less of an effect on performance. While successive training iterations
produced models which both increased the training data likelihood and improved the
recognition rate on the training data, no improvements were observed on the testing
In order to demonstrate that the frequency warping based speaker normalization
procedure does indeed reduce inter-speaker variability, several experiments were performed after the first training iteration. Three observations concerning the optimal
warping factor estimation process were made which showed that the procedures produced results consistent with our simple model of the effects of vocal tract length
variations. First, the procedure generally chose to expand the frequency axis of male
speech and compress the frequency scale of female speech. Second, HMM distance
measures on a set of SD HMMs were reduced after frequency warping. Third, the
warping factor estimates did not vary greatly across different utterances from the same
speaker. These results demonstrated that the frequency warping approach to speaker
normalization is an effective method to improve SI speech recognition performance
by reducing inter-speaker differences.
Two further developments were presented in Chapter 5. First, a new, more efficient, mixture-based method for warping factor estimation was described. Under
this method, each warping factor was represented by a Gaussian mixture trained on
utterances which were assigned to that warping factor. During recognition, the warping factor was chosen for the distribution which yields the highest likelihood over
the input utterance. Recognition results show that this method offers a significant
reduction in computational complexity with only a slight degradation in performance.
The second portion of Chapter 5 compared speaker normalization using frequency
warping to cepstral mean normalization, gender-dependent modeling, and higher complexity HMM parameterizations. CMN performs normalization to correct for variations in average spectral bias, and comparison of the recognition results show that
the vocal tract length normalization procedure is more effective at reducing errors.
GD models and higher complexity HMM parameterizations are statistically- motivated methods which improve recognition performance by using more parameters to
describe the features space. Results show that the physiologically based speaker normalization procedures investigated in this thesis performs significantly better than
these statistically-motivated methods which do not explicitly model the effects of
known physical sources of variation.
Future Work
The experimental study and analysis presented in this thesis have shown the frequency
warping approach to speaker normalization to be a promising way to improve SI
ASR performance.
However, a number of issues were not addressed, and further
investigations into these issues may yield interesting results and insights into improved
speaker normalization techniques. In this section, we give a few ideas into possible
directions of future work.
First, this study applied speaker normalization to a simple baseline HMM system.
It would be interesting to conduct studies applying speaker normalization along with
other procedures which improve the performance of HMM systems. Examples of these
procedures include channel compensation procedures or discriminative training procedures. We did some preliminary work in this direction in combining cepstral mean
normalization with speaker normalization, but observed little change in recognition
performance. More work is needed to understand how to best combine techniques for
which parameters are optimized based on different criteria. Observations on whether
speaker normalization can provide additional performance improvements when used
in conjunction with the other techniques can give additional insights as to the effects
and properties of the frequency warping.
Secondly, one of the weaknesses of the iterative training procedure presented is
that there is no guarantee that successive iterations will produce more accurate models. In fact, perhaps one of the more surprising observations made in the thesis is
that the iterative training procedure improves the recognition rate on the training
set, but not on the test set. Since warping factor estimates for speakers in the training set are not constrained in any manner, it was observed that successive iterations
produced warping factor distributions which incrementally "drifted" lower. Additional constraints on the optimization process may need to be placed on the iterative
training procedure to improve recognition performance on the test set over successive
iterations.
Third, techniques which better discriminate between the effect of vocal tract
length variations on different phonemes should be investigated. It is clear that unvoiced portions of speech are less affected by vocal tract length variations than voiced
speech. Better warping factor estimates may be possible if some phonetic units are
weighed less heavily than others in the determination of the optimal warping factor. Further, it is assumed throughout this thesis that the warping factor is a global
characteristic of the speaker, and that it should be estimated based on data from the
entire utterance. However, more accurate recognition results may be possible if the
warping factor is estimated on a shorter time scale. For example, perhaps different
warping factors can be estimated for different phonetic units. One important tradeoff in considering such a technique is that the amount of data available to estimate
each phonetic unit may not be sufficient to produce reliable estimates. To alleviate
this problem, warping factor estimates over different speech segments from the same
speaker probably should not be considered entirely independently from one another.
Fourth, nonlinear frequency warping functions may be more effective than the
linear frequency warping function. One problem with the linear warping function is
that the warped signals have different bandwidths. It may be beneficial to consider
frequency warpings in which the frequency range of the signal is not changed. Besides
the piecewise linear frequency warping function which was briefly described in Chapter
3, a set of frequency warping functions for digital signals were described by Oppenheim
and Johnson . These monitonically increasing frequency warping functions map
the frequency range 0 < w < 7r onto itself, and the resulting time sequence of the
warped signals can be obtained by passing the original signal through a network of
all-pass filters. Functions such as these may prove to be more appropriate than the
linear warping function for normalization purposes.
Finally, the work in this thesis was done based on an existing feature set, and it
would be interesting to re-design the features such that speaker normalization can
be implemented more effectively and efficiently. First, traditional feature extraction
techniques like the filter-bank front-end use smoothing in the spectral domain to reduce sensitivity to speaker-dependent characteristics. With the inclusion of frequency
warping techniques, it may be beneficial to re-evaluate the amount of frequency resolution which may be better suited for the normalization process. Second, the speaker
normalization procedures considered in this thesis are fairly complex because while the
normalization process requires modifications to the signal in the frequency domain,
the feature vectors are in the cepstral domain. Therefore, normalization procedures or
functions which can be implemented as direct operations on the cepstrum should be
investigated. Such functions would significantly reduce the computational complexity
of the speaker normalization procedure. Conversely, it may be the case that the cepstrum is not the best domain in which to consider speaker normalization procedures.
The development of a new feature space which retains the desirable characteristics
of cepstrum while allowing speaker normalization to take place with simple transformations would be a big step toward finding features sets which are more robust to
inter-speaker variabilities.