Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 1:61–65
 
OPINION PAPER
Emerging challenges in AI and the need for AI ethics education
Jason Borenstein1 · Ayanna Howard2
Received: 15 July 2020 / Accepted: 23 July 2020 / Published online: 6 October 2020
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is reshaping the world in profound ways; some of its impacts are certainly beneficial but widespread and lasting harms can result from the technology as well. The integration of AI into various aspects of human life
is underway, and the complex ethical concerns emerging from the design, deployment, and use of the technology serves
as a reminder that it is time to revisit what future developers and designers, along with professionals, are learning when it
comes to AI. It is of paramount importance to train future members of the AI community, and other stakeholders as well,
to reflect on the ways in which AI might impact people’s lives and to embrace their responsibilities to enhance its benefits
while mitigating its potential harms. This could occur in part through the fuller and more systematic inclusion of AI ethics
into the curriculum. In this paper, we briefly describe different approaches to AI ethics and offer a set of recommendations
related to AI ethics pedagogy.
Keywords  AI ethics · Artificial intelligence · Design ethics · Ethics education · Professional responsibility
1  Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is becoming pervasive. The
technology is reaching into so many facets of our lives that
we have no choice but to confront its impacts. The creation
and deployment of AI is changing our lives and communities in countless ways. These changes are often difficult to
understand and anticipate, and are only accelerating due to
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Although AI provides
observable benefits, the collection, use, and abuse of data
used to train and feed into AI, as well as the algorithm itself,
may expose people to risks that they were not even aware
existed. Employers can monitor workplace performance and
behavior in covert and unexpected ways. And a potential
employee might be turned down for a job because of the
information an automated tool collects while scraping the
person’s social media profile. A local government might use
facial recognition to identify each and every individual that
passes through a public area. It was not that long ago that
such scenarios would seem farfetched. But now we see a
rise in the use of these tools by industry, government, and
even academic institutions as they deploy AI algorithms to
make decisions that alter our lives in direct, and potentially
detrimental, ways. The frequently voiced justification for the
use of such AI tools is that they are “better” than a human
decision-maker. Should not an algorithm be fair and free
of human biases? After all, it shouldn’t be burdened with
the biases derived from our lived experiences, right? Then
again, an algorithm is made by humans, and humans make
mistakes, including during the designing, programming,
calibrating, and evaluating of the algorithm’s performance.
Therein lies a key problem: how can fallible humans design
AI that effectively lives up to its promised benefits while
ensuring its outcomes aren’t biased or otherwise harmful?
Complicating matters is how do imperfect humans even go
about defining “fairness”? It is a messy task, especially considering that the concept has numerous candidate definitions
and what counts as “fair” can fundamentally shift over time.
At times, AI is intensifying societal ills, and it would
be misleading to imply that a single, simple solution is on
the horizon. Fix the bias in the data. Fix the bias within the
algorithms. Fix the bias in the outputs. All of these practices
may get us closer to mitigating part of the problem; but these
* Jason Borenstein
 
Center for Ethics and Technology, School of Public
Policy and Office of Graduate Studies, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
Linda J. and Mark C. Smith Professor and Chair, School
of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA
AI and Ethics 1:61–65
are only necessary but not sufficient conditions for fixing
them. Addressing these and other ethical concerns requires
starting with the root of the problem (i.e., people). Tackling
the problem head-on requires educating ourselves at the
beginning stages of our interaction with AI–irrespective of
whether we are developers, first learning about AI, or users,
just starting to interact with AI. The opportunity to learn
about how data are used to train AI, about the applications
that the AI can enable, etc., should be available to any person
that interacts at any stage with AI. If we focus just on those
designing AI technology, there is tremendous potential to
shape what developers are learning and encourage them to
embrace the crucial message that ethics is intertwined with
the entire design process (before, during, and after). Moreover, ethics should not be a slapped-on component after-thefact, a standalone lesson, or a second thought. It is integral
at every stage when learning about AI. When we teach the
mathematical derivations of a linear regression function for
supervised learning in AI, we can also mention the use of
disparate impact as a metric to evaluate fairness of the output
in the hopes that we move closer to a result that is “correct”
and “fairer”.
The underlying hypothesis we propose is thus based on
the belief that a key measure for potentially adjusting to
a world that is rapidly evolving due, in part to an increasing reliance on AI, is to revisit the instruction that future
generations of developers (e.g., students) are receiving on
AI-related topics. This is especially important given that
they may have a direct role in reshaping society as developers-in-training or future adopters of AI technology. In this
thought piece, our focus is on the rising need to prepare
emerging developers, and working professionals as well,
with the skills needed to grapple with the complex and
multifaceted ethical challenges emerging from the growing
infusion of AI in our day-to-day activities. The educational
community, broadly defined, needs to renew its emphasis on
nurturing the ability to recognize and engage with ethical
issues emerging in relation to AI. Many essential topics are
in this space, including the ethical design of AI algorithms,
mitigating the risks of AI outcomes, and improving data
acquisition and other research practices. Vague concepts of
fairness and bias, separated from context or without understanding that people are more than just data or inputs, are not
helpful. Within this realm, we highlight recent approaches
to AI ethics education, especially as they pertain to current
societal concerns.
2  Emerging ethical challenges in AI
AI technology is filtering into our personal and professional lives in countless ways, and not all of its impacts are
positive. For instance, AI holds a lot of promise in terms
of how it could alter the healthcare landscape. Some claim
that AI algorithms could potentially read medical images
more quickly than a radiologist could (e.g., ). Yet algorithmic bias and other ethical challenges must be overcome
to prevent harm to patients. It has already been found, for
example, that an AI system used for recommending follow-on healthcare services failed black patients by referring them at a lower rate than their white counterparts even
when both groups had a similar diagnosis .
Over the past few years, governments and other entities
have had a surge of interest in facial recognition. Yet the
technology is drawing much scrutiny in part because it is
far less reliable when used to identify people who are not
white males. In addition, the increasing loss of privacy
due to facial recognition is a real worry. During protests
sparked by the death of George Floyd, the US government allegedly used facial recognition to identify protesters . Recently, the use of facial recognition software in
Detroit resulted in a Black man being falsely arrested for
a crime he did not commit . Even though the specific
manner in which it might be used is difficult to discern,
AI, including facial recognition, might come to play a key
role in China’s social credit scoring system , a system
which many find to be ethically problematic. Responses
to the use of facial recognition technology include calls
from civil liberty groups to regulate this AI tool, along
with recent announcements by a number of tech companies
that they will purportedly no longer offer their technology
to police departments . Yet many thorny ethical issues
still need to be resolved.
The contribution of AI to privacy erosion is also intensifying with the advent of tools such as Clearview AI, which
can in principle search Internet sources for all of a person’s
online photos . And given that much of our information is
freely available for anyone to scrub when we post it online,
without the typical safeguards found in physical infrastructures, it is profoundly difficult to even discern who is using
such tools and for which purposes.
Trust in AI technology is another crucial and timely
ethical issue. Going back to the aforementioned medical
imaging example, if an AI algorithm proves itself “trustworthy”, not only could it complement human judgment,
it could become an eventual replacement for that judgment. This could perhaps even extend to cover cases the
algorithm was not designed to handle (somewhat akin to
the practice of “off-label” use of medical products). Or, in
a different scenario, during a conversation with a therapy
chatbot, the person may begin to trust it and think the
technology can provide guidance for circumstances that
go beyond the bounds of its programming. Another important facet of (over)trust is that users might believe AI can
mitigate harm when it does not have the capacity to do
so. For instance, a person wearing a robotic exoskeleton
AI and Ethics 1:61–65
might assume the device will provide warnings in dangerous circumstances when it does not actually possess that
feature .
These examples are only a small fraction of the types of
ethical issues and challenges circulating around AI .
Yet its usage continues to expand. Thus, passively waiting,
in the belief that ethical problems will somehow disappear
or magically resolve themselves, is not a viable option. We
must, instead, be deliberative and proactive in creating not
just good AI applications, but ethically sound practices and
policies surrounding these applications.
3  Attempts to address AI’s ethical
challenges
Many initiatives have arisen to address the ethical challenges emerging in relation to AI technology. This includes
the drafting of AI ethics documents by a variety of stakeholders, including academic institutions, government agencies, NGOs, and industry. The Montreal Declaration, for
example, is largely an initiative from an academic institution and focuses on the responsible development of AI .
The professional organization IEEE has drafted a report
on the ethics of intelligent systems and is in the process of
developing a series of technical standards for such systems.
Many companies are highlighting, through press releases
or other documents, which ethical issues, such as fairness
and transparency, they deem to be important (e.g., Google
 , Deloitte ). A sizeable collection of AI ethics is being
produced around the globe, which has even led to topical
analyses of such documents (e.g., ). Whether these
documents are generating tangible change, including in
terms of new regulations or industry practices, is unclear.
The emergence of organizations such as the Partnership
on AI and AI now, and conferences such as ACM FAccT
with a mission tied to AI ethics-related issues is a relatively
recent occurrence. Funding agencies, such as the National
Science Foundation (NSF ), are supporting efforts to
examine Fairness, Ethics, Accountability, and Transparency
(FEAT) in computing fields. This can be taken as evidence
of the seriousness that AI ethics should warrant.
Even if these attempts are trying to move the needle in
terms of addressing AI’s ethical challenges, the fundamental root of the problem remains: that of human fallibility
and other related human shortcomings, and how they shape
the design and use of technology. While it is doubtful that
most people are intentionally designing AI to be malicious
in nature or want their systems to deliver biased outputs, the
fact remains that they are not consistently being asked to
look in the mirror to identify their own biases and the values
that they are building into the technology.
4  Fostering a professional mindset
As is illustrated by the above discussion, many individuals and
organizations are proposing remedies to the ethical challenges
resulting from AI, but solutions (technical or otherwise) are
hard to identify and implement. Yet a key piece of the puzzle is
enabling developers to understand that the technology they are
building is intertwined with ethical dimensions, and that, as
developers, they have a vital role and responsibility to engage
with ethical considerations. The first aim in establishing an
authentic professional mindset is related to cultivating moral
sensitivity; in other words, they need the ability to recognize
that professional, including “technical”, decision-making is
intertwined with ethical considerations. The view that technology is “value neutral” hides and obscures the reality that ethical issues are fundamentally embedded in the selection, design,
deployment, and use of technology. For example, building a
dating app that only offers a binary option for a user’s gender
is a value-laden choice by the app’s creator. When you then
integrate AI to identify the user’s best match, you are thus constructing a system that has bias woven throughout its design.
A second related point is how those in the AI community
view their professional responsibilities. Oftentimes, developers believe (a view sometimes reinforced through the STEM
curriculum and in other ways) that ethics is someone else’s
problem. They may think something like “We deal with the
technology; let the lawyers or ethicists resolve the ethical
concerns.” However, when making choices during the design
process, those choices not only have ethical ramifications but
they reflect the designer’s ethical values (e.g., whether to err
on the side of a false positive or a false negative with medical imaging or evaluating recidivism). Such choices not only
shape the technology, but they end up shaping individual lives
and society more generally.
Taking the example of medicine, physicians may promise
to uphold the Hippocratic Oath. While a professional oath is
not a panacea, it can serve as a statement of and a commitment
to a social contract between a profession and the public. Even
if physicians do not literally voice the pledge, the Hippocratic
Oath is a reminder of their ethical obligation to improve the
health of the public. When AI provides similar benefits, and
harms, to the public, what should we expect in terms of the
ethical responsibilities of those who develop the technology?
Should their responsibilities be anything less? A key step is
enabling AI developers and the broader computing community
to more fully understand what those responsibilities are.
AI and Ethics 1:61–65
5  AI ethics instruction
Imparting lessons regarding what is means to be a professional and what one’s associated ethical responsibilities are can ideally be achieved through both formal and
informal education. Yet at the present time, AI ethics
education has not fully taken root within the computing
curriculum (e.g., ). According to Brundage et al. ,
“Educational efforts might be beneficial in highlighting the
risks of malicious applications to AI researchers”. In this
regard, education can foster a professional mindset for the
next generations of AI developers. Of course, if ethics is
already taught within the engineering or computing curriculum, this requires evaluating and potentially rethinking how it’s done—because either it is not working or not
pervasive enough to impact a change in mindset.
Some attempts to incorporate ethics into the curriculum
involve a focus on increasing students’ familiarity with
professional codes of ethics. While an important step, it
is not sufficient. Skeptics may point out that just because
one is aware of a code, it does not necessarily mean that it
will influence behavior; for example, according to a study
by McNamara et al. , introducing students to the ACM
code of ethics did not seem to have a tangible impact on
decision-making.
While AI is not the specific target, the Mozilla Foundation is supporting the development of ethics pedagogy in order to try to reshape the computer science curriculum. Funding from the Mozilla program has enabled
a team at Georgia Tech, including one of the authors of
this editorial, to create an autonomous vehicle role-playing scenario for undergraduate CS courses. The scenario
places students in different roles, including ones that are
“technical” such as a computer scientist and ones that are
“non-technical” such as an active transportation advocate.
The students, representing different stakeholders, are supposed to work as a committee to advise a hypothetical city
on whether to permit a fictional company to test a selfdriving bus fleet in the city’s downtown area. We hope
that this kind of approach can foster students’ moral sensitivity and enable them to appreciate a broader range of
perspectives. Yet it is clear that educational efforts must
continue to move beyond drop-in modules or single ethics
courses .
Guided by the aim of nurturing a professional mindset
in those who are part of the AI community, we propose
three elements that could help familiarize students with
the emerging ethical challenges of AI:
1. Teaching the ethical design of AI algorithms; this should
include but not be limited to “FEAT” considerations.
Learning about the importance of participatory design
could also be an important lesson. For example, the new
AI ethics course in the online Master of Science in Computer Science program at Georgia Tech, taught by one
of the authors of this editorial, has the potential to train
a huge generation of AI developers to think through the
ethical design of their algorithms (Howard ).
2. Incorporating fundamental concepts of data science and
the ethics of data acquisition; using real-world data sets
that requires students to address privacy, fairness, and
legal issues while developing AI solutions.
3. Offering ethics-related lessons in multiple ways and at
multiple times; “ethics across the curriculum” is a model
for putting this into practice (e.g., ), but the general
notion is regularly reinforcing the significance of ethics,
including in “technical” courses.
A related point is the importance of having interdisciplinary teams who create AI ethics content and potentially
teach it. The challenges emerging in relation to AI cross
over disciplinary lines and are too complex for any single
type of expertise to handle. Insights from lawyers, sociologists, policy scholars, philosophers, and others along with
scientists and engineers can be especially valuable when
determining how to educate students about AI ethics. This
hopefully will attune students to AI’s ethical challenges and
encourage them to have the willingness to engage with those
challenges seriously. Another key facet of AI ethics education is cultivating critical thinking and ethical reasoning
skills in students that are transferable across different professional contexts. While there are debates about the value of
including ethical theory in professional ethics courses (an
issue we will not seek to resolve here), such courses should
nurture reason and reflection; they are vital components of
the professional mindset.
6  The future of AI ethics
AI is changing our lives in ways that are difficult to anticipate and understand. If the technology is going to be directed
in a more socially responsible way, it is time to dedicate time
and attention to AI ethics education. Not only is it important
for the computing community to more resolutely embrace
ethics as a part of its core identity, but from a practical perspective, jobs are starting to emerge in the realm of AI ethics
(e.g., ). Lewis suggests that some companies may
consider having a chief artificial intelligence ethics officer.
One hopes that this is part of a sincere effort toward taking
ethics more seriously rather than an exercise in “ethics washing” . A pathway towards increasing that likelihood is
making sure that ethics has a central place in AI educational
AI and Ethics 1:61–65