Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 273–283
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Graph-to-Sequence Learning using Gated Graph Neural Networks
Daniel Beck†
Gholamreza Haffari‡
Trevor Cohn†
†School of Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
{d.beck,t.cohn}@unimelb.edu.au
‡Faculty of Information Technology
Monash University, Australia
 
Many NLP applications can be framed
as a graph-to-sequence learning problem.
Previous work proposing neural architectures on this setting obtained promising
results compared to grammar-based approaches but still rely on linearisation
heuristics and/or standard recurrent networks to achieve the best performance.
In this work, we propose a new model
that encodes the full structural information contained in the graph.
Our architecture couples the recently proposed
Gated Graph Neural Networks with an input transformation that allows nodes and
edges to have their own hidden representations, while tackling the parameter explosion problem present in previous work.
Experimental results show that our model
outperforms strong baselines in generation
from AMR graphs and syntax-based neural machine translation.
Introduction
Graph structures are ubiquitous in representations
of natural language. In particular, many wholesentence semantic frameworks employ directed
acyclic graphs as the underlying formalism, while
most tree-based syntactic representations can also
be seen as graphs. A range of NLP applications
can be framed as the process of transducing a
graph structure into a sequence. For instance, language generation may involve realising a semantic
graph into a surface form and syntactic machine
translation involves transforming a tree-annotated
source sentence to its translation.
Previous work in this setting rely on grammarbased approaches such as tree transducers and hyperedge replacement grammars .
A key limitation of
these approaches is that alignments between graph
nodes and surface tokens are required.
alignments are usually automatically generated
so they can propagate errors when building the
grammar. More recent approaches transform the
graph into a linearised form and use off-the-shelf
methods such as phrase-based machine translation
 or neural sequenceto-sequence (henceforth, s2s) models .
Such approaches ignore the full
graph structure, discarding key information.
In this work we propose a model for graph-tosequence (henceforth, g2s) learning that leverages recent advances in neural encoder-decoder
architectures. Speciﬁcally, we employ an encoder
based on Gated Graph Neural Networks , which can incorporate the full
graph structure without loss of information. Such
networks represent edge information as label-wise
parameters, which can be problematic even for
small sized label vocabularies (in the order of hundreds). To address this limitation, we also introduce a graph transformation that changes edges to
additional nodes, solving the parameter explosion
problem. This also ensures that edges have graphspeciﬁc hidden vectors, which gives more information to the attention and decoding modules in
the network.
We benchmark our model in two graph-tosequence problems, generation from Abstract
Meaning Representations (AMRs) and Neural
Machine Translation (NMT) with source dependency information.
Our approach outperforms
strong s2s baselines in both tasks without relying
on standard RNN encoders, in contrast with previous work. In particular, for NMT we show that
we avoid the need for RNNs by adding sequential edges between contiguous words in the dependency tree. This illustrates the generality of our
believe-01
Figure 1: Left: the AMR graph representing the sentence “The boy wants the girl to believe him.”.
Right: Our proposed architecture using the same AMR graph as input and the surface form as output.
The ﬁrst layer is a concatenation of node and positional embeddings, using distance from the root node
as the position. The GGNN encoder updates the embeddings using edge-wise parameters, represented by
different colors (in this example, ARG0 and ARG1). The encoder also add corresponding reverse edges
(dotted arrows) and self edges for each node (dashed arrows). All parameters are shared between layers.
Attention and decoder components are similar to standard s2s models. This is a pictorial representation:
in our experiments the graphs are transformed before being used as inputs (see §3).
approach: linguistic biases can be added to the inputs by simple graph transformations, without the
need for changes to the model architecture.
Neural Graph-to-Sequence Model
Our proposed architecture is shown in Figure 1,
with an example AMR graph and its transformation into its surface form. Compared to standard
s2s models, the main difference is in the encoder,
where we employ a GGNN to build a graph representation. In the following we explain the components of this architecture in detail.1
Gated Graph Neural Networks
Early approaches for recurrent networks on graphs
 assume
a ﬁxed point representation of the parameters and
learn using contraction maps. Li et al. argues that this restricts the capacity of the model
and makes it harder to learn long distance relations between nodes. To tackle these issues, they
propose Gated Graph Neural Networks, which extend these architectures with gating mechanisms
1Our implementation uses MXNet and
is based on the Sockeye toolkit . Code
is available at github.com/beckdaniel/acl2018_
graph2seq.
in a similar fashion to Gated Recurrent Units . This allows the network to be learnt
via modern backpropagation procedures.
In following, we formally deﬁne the version of
GGNNs we employ in this study. Assume a directed graph G = {V, E, LV, LE}, where V is a
set of nodes (v, ℓv), E is a set of edges (vi, vj, ℓe)
and LV and LE are respectively vocabularies for
nodes and edges, from which node and edge labels (ℓv and ℓe) are deﬁned. Given an input graph
with nodes mapped to embeddings X, a GGNN is
v = (1 −zt
v) ⊙h(i−1)
where e = (u, v, ℓe) is the edge between nodes u
and v, N(v) is the set of neighbour nodes for v, ρ
is a non-linear function, σ is the sigmoid function
and cv = cz
v = |Nv|−1 are normalisation
constants.
Our formulation differs from the original
GGNNs from Li et al. in some aspects:
1) we add bias vectors for the hidden state, reset gate and update gate computations; 2) labelspeciﬁc matrices do not share any components; 3)
reset gates are applied to all hidden states before
any computation and 4) we add normalisation constants. These modiﬁcations were applied based on
preliminary experiments and ease of implementation.
An alternative to GGNNs is the model from
Marcheggiani and Titov , which add edge
label information to Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs).
According to Li et al. ,
the main difference between GCNs and GGNNs
is analogous to the difference between convolutional and recurrent networks. More speciﬁcally,
GGNNs can be seen as multi-layered GCNs where
layer-wise parameters are tied and gating mechanisms are added. A large number of layers can
propagate node information between longer distances in the graph and, unlike GCNs, GGNNs
can have an arbitrary number of layers without increasing the number of parameters. Nevertheless,
our architecture borrows ideas from GCNs as well,
such as normalising factors.
Using GGNNs in attentional
encoder-decoder models
In s2s models, inputs are sequences of tokens
where each token is represented by an embedding
vector. The encoder then transforms these vectors into hidden states by incorporating context,
usually through a recurrent or a convolutional network. These are fed into an attention mechanism,
generating a single context vector that informs decisions in the decoder.
Our model follows a similar structure, where the
encoder is a GGNN that receives node embeddings
as inputs and generates node hidden states as outputs, using the graph structure as context. This
is shown in the example of Figure 1, where we
have 4 hidden vectors, one per node in the AMR
graph. The attention and decoder components follow similar standard s2s models, where we use a
bilinear attention mechanism 
and a 2-layered LSTM as the decoder. Note, however, that
other decoders and attention mechanisms can be
easily employed instead. Bastings et al. 
employs a similar idea for syntax-based NMT, but
using GCNs instead.
Bidirectionality and positional
embeddings
While our architecture can in theory be used with
general graphs, rooted directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) are arguably the most common kind in
the problems we are addressing. This means that
node embedding information is propagated in a
top down manner.
However, it is desirable to
have information ﬂow from the reverse direction
as well, in the same way RNN-based encoders
beneﬁt from right-to-left propagation (as in bidirectional RNNs). Marcheggiani and Titov 
and Bastings et al. achieve this by adding
reverse edges to the graph, as well as self-loops
edges for each node. These extra edges have speciﬁc labels, hence their own parameters in the network.
In this work, we also follow this procedure to
ensure information is evenly propagated in the
graph. However, this raises another limitation: because the graph becomes essentially undirected,
the encoder is now unaware of any intrinsic hierarchy present in the input. Inspired by Gehring
et al. and Vaswani et al. , we tackle
this problem by adding positional embeddings to
every node. These embeddings are indexed by integer values representing the minimum distance
from the root node and are learned as model parameters.2 This kind of positional embedding is
restricted to rooted DAGs: for general graphs, different notions of distance could be employed.
Levi Graph Transformation
The g2s model proposed in §2 has two key deﬁciencies. First, GGNNs have three linear transformations per edge type. This means that the number of parameters can explode: AMR, for instance,
has around 100 different predicates, which correspond to edge labels. Previous work deal with this
problem by explicitly grouping edge labels into a
single one but this is not an ideal solution
since it incurs in loss of information.
2Vaswani et al. also proposed ﬁxed positional embeddings based on sine and cosine wavelengths. Preliminary
experiments showed that this approach did not work in our
case: we speculate this is because wavelengths are more suitable to sequential inputs.
believe-01
believe-01
Figure 2: Top: the AMR graph from Figure 1
transformed into its corresponding Levi graph.
Bottom: Levi graph with added reverse and self
edges (colors represent different edge labels).
The second deﬁciency is that edge label information is encoded in the form of GGNN parameters in the network.
This means that each
label will have the same “representation” across
all graphs.
However, the latent information in
edges can depend on the content in which they
appear in a graph.
Ideally, edges should have
instance-speciﬁc hidden states, in the same way
as nodes, and these should also inform decisions
made in the decoder through the attention module. For instance, in the AMR graph shown in Figure 1, the ARG1 predicate between want-01 and
believe-01 can be interpreted as the preposition “to” in the surface form, while the ARG1
predicate connecting believe-01 and boy is
realised as a pronoun. Notice that edge hidden
vectors are already present in s2s networks that
use linearised graphs: we would like our architecture to also have this beneﬁt.
Instead of modifying the architecture, we propose to transform the input graph into its equivalent Levi graph . Given a graph G = {V, E, LV, LE},
a Levi graph3 is deﬁned as G = {V′, E′, LV′, LE′},
where V′ = V ∪E, LV′ = LV ∪LE and LE′ = ∅.
The new edge set E′ contains a edge for every
(node, edge) pair that is present in the original
graph. By deﬁnition, the Levi graph is bipartite.
Intuitively, transforming a graph into its Levi
graph equivalent turns edges into additional nodes.
While simple in theory, this transformation addresses both modelling deﬁciencies mentioned
above in an elegant way. Since the Levi graph
has no labelled edges there is no risk of parameter explosion: original edge labels are represented
as embeddings, in the same way as nodes. Furthermore, the encoder now naturally generates hidden
states for original edges as well.
In practice, we follow the procedure in §2.3
and add reverse and self-loop edges to the Levi
graph, so the practical edge label vocabulary is
LE′ = {default, reverse, self}. This still keeps
the parameter space modest since we have only
three labels. Figure 2 shows the transformation
steps in detail, applied to the AMR graph shown
in Figure 1. Notice that the transformed graphs
are the ones fed into our architecture: we show the
original graph in Figure 1 for simplicity.
It is important to note that this transformation
can be applied to any graph and therefore is independent of the model architecture. We speculate
this can be beneﬁcial in other kinds of graph-based
encoder such as GCNs and leave further investigation to future work.
Generation from AMR Graphs
Our ﬁrst g2s benchmark is language generation from AMR, a semantic formalism that represents sentences as rooted DAGs . Because AMR abstracts away from syntax,
graphs do not have gold-standard alignment information, so generation is not a trivial task. Therefore, we hypothesize that our proposed model is
ideal for this problem.
Experimental setup
Data and preprocessing
We use the latest AMR
corpus release (LDC2017T10) with the default
split of 36521/1368/1371 instances for training,
3Formally, a Levi graph is deﬁned over any incidence
structure, which is a general concept usually considered in
a geometrical context. Graphs are an example of incidence
structures but so are points and lines in the Euclidean space,
for instance.
development and test sets. Each graph is preprocessed using a procedure similar to what is performed by Konstas et al. , which includes
entity simpliﬁcation and anonymisation. This preprocessing is done before transforming the graph
into its Levi graph equivalent. For the s2s baselines, we also add scope markers as in Konstas
et al. . We detail these procedures in the
Supplementary Material.
Our baselines are attentional s2s models which take linearised graphs as inputs. The
architecture is similar to the one used in Konstas
et al. for AMR generation, where the encoder is a BiLSTM followed by a unidirectional
LSTM. All dimensionalities are ﬁxed to 512.
For the g2s models, we ﬁx the number of layers
in the GGNN encoder to 8, as this gave the best
results on the development set. Dimensionalities
are also ﬁxed at 512 except for the GGNN encoder
which uses 576. This is to ensure all models have
a comparable number of parameters and therefore
similar capacity.
Training for all models uses Adam with 0.0003 initial learning rate and 16
as the batch size.4 To regularise our models we
perform early stopping on the dev set based on
perplexity and apply 0.5 dropout on the source embeddings. We detail additional model and training hyperparameters in the
Supplementary Material.
Evaluation
Following previous work, we evaluate our models using BLEU and perform bootstrap resampling to check
statistical signiﬁcance.
since recent work has questioned the effectiveness of
BLEU with bootstrap resampling , we also report results using sentence-level
CHRF++ , using the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test to check signiﬁcance. Evaluation
is case-insensitive for both metrics.
Recent work has shown that evaluation in neural models can lead to wrong conclusions by
just changing the random seed . In an effort to make our conclusions more robust, we run each model 5 times
using different seeds. From each pool, we report
4Larger batch sizes hurt dev performance in our preliminary experiments.
There is evidence that small batches
can lead to better generalisation performance (Keskar et al.,
While this can make training time slower, it was
doable in our case since the dataset is small.
Single models
Previous work (early AMR treebank versions)
Previous work (as above + unlabelled data)
Table 1: Results for AMR generation on the test
set. All score differences between our models and
the corresponding baselines are signiﬁcantly different (p<0.05). “(-s)” means input without scope
KIYCZ17, PKH16, SPZWG17 and
FDSC16 are respectively the results reported in
Konstas et al. , Pourdamghani et al. ,
Song et al. and Flanigan et al. .
results using the median model according to performance on the dev set (simulating what is expected from a single run) and using an ensemble
of the 5 models.
Finally, we also report the number of parameters used in each model. Since our encoder architectures are quite different, we try to match the
number of parameters between them by changing the dimensionality of the hidden layers (as explained above). We do this to minimise the effects
of model capacity as a confounder.
Results and analysis
Table 1 shows the results on the test set.
the s2s models, we also report results without
the scope marking procedure of Konstas et al.
 . Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms
the s2s baselines both with individual models and
ensembles, while using a comparable number of
parameters. In particular, we obtain these results
without relying on scoping heuristics.
On Figure 3 we show an example where our
model outperforms the baseline. The AMR graph
contains four reentrancies, predicates that refer-
Original AMR graph
(p / propose-01
:ARG0 (c / country
:wiki "Russia"
:name (n / name
:op1 "Russia"))
:ARG1 (c5 / cooperate-01
:ARG1 (a / and
:op1 (c2 / country
:wiki "India"
:name (n2 / name
:op1 "India"))
:op2 (c3 / country
:wiki "China"
:name (n3 / name
:op1 "China"))))
:purpose (i / increase-01
:ARG1 (s / security)
:location (a2 / around
:op1 (c4 / country
:wiki "Afghanistan"
:name (n4 / name
:op1 "Afghanistan")))
:purpose (b / block-01
:ARG0 (a3 / and
:op1 c :op2 c2 :op3 c3
:ARG1 (s2 / supply-01
:ARG1 (d / drug)))))
Reference surface form
Russia proposes cooperation with India and China to increase security around Afghanistan to block drug supplies.
s2s output (CHRF++ 61.8)
Russia proposed cooperation with India and China to increase security around the Afghanistan to block security
around the Afghanistan , India and China.
g2s output (CHRF++ 78.2)
Russia proposed cooperation with India and China to increase security around Afghanistan to block drug supplies.
Figure 3: Example showing overgeneration due to
reentrancies. Top: original AMR graph with key
reentrancies highlighted. Bottom: reference and
outputs generated by the s2s and g2s models,
highlighting the overgeneration phenomena.
ence previously deﬁned concepts in the graph. In
the s2s models including Konstas et al. ,
reentrant nodes are copied in the linearised form,
while this is not necessary for our g2s models.
We can see that the s2s prediction overgenerates
the “India and China” phrase. The g2s prediction avoids overgeneration, and almost perfectly
matches the reference. While this is only a single example, it provides evidence that retaining the
full graphical structure is beneﬁcial for this task,
which is corroborated by our quantitative results.
Table 1 also show BLEU scores reported in previous work. These results are not strictly comparable because they used different training set
versions and/or employ additional unlabelled corpora; nonetheless some insights can be made. In
particular, our g2s ensemble performs better than
many previous models that combine a smaller
training set with a large unlabelled corpus. It is
also most informative to compare our s2s model
with Konstas et al. , since this baseline is
very similar to theirs.
We expected our single
model baseline to outperform theirs since we use
a larger training set but we obtained similar performance. We speculate that better results could
be obtained by more careful tuning, but nevertheless we believe such tuning would also beneﬁt our
proposed g2s architecture.
The best results with unlabelled data are obtained by Konstas et al. using Gigaword
sentences as additional data and a paired trained
procedure with an AMR parser. It is important to
note that this procedure is orthogonal to the individual models used for generation and parsing.
Therefore, we hypothesise that our model can also
beneﬁt from such techniques, an avenue that we
leave for future work.
Syntax-based Neural Machine
Translation
Our second evaluation is NMT, using as graphs
source language dependency syntax trees. We focus on a medium resource scenario where additional linguistic information tends to be more beneﬁcial. Our experiments comprise two language
pairs: English-German and English-Czech.
Experimental setup
Data and preprocessing
We employ the same
data and settings from Bastings et al. ,5
which use the News Commentary V11 corpora
from the WMT16 translation task.6 English text
is tokenised and parsed using SyntaxNet7 while
German and Czech texts are tokenised and split
into subwords using byte-pair encodings (8000 merge operations).
5We obtained the data from the original authors to ensure
results are comparable without any inﬂuence from preprocessing steps.
6 
translation-task.html
7 
tree/master/syntaxnet
We refer to Bastings et al. for further information on the preprocessing steps.
Labelled dependency trees in the source side are
transformed into Levi graphs as a preprocessing
step. However, unlike AMR generation, in NMT
the inputs are originally surface forms that contain
important sequential information. This information is lost when treating the input as dependency
trees, which might explain why Bastings et al.
 obtain the best performance when using an
initial RNN layer in their encoder. To investigate
this phenomenon, we also perform experiments
adding sequential connections to each word in
the dependency tree, corresponding to their order
in the original surface form (henceforth, g2s+).
These connections are represented as edges with
speciﬁc left and right labels, which are added after the Levi graph transformation. Figure 4 shows
an example of an input graph for g2s+, with the
additional sequential edges connecting the words
(reverse and self edges are omitted for simplicity).
Our s2s and g2s models are almost
the same as in the AMR generation experiments
(§4.1). The only exception is the GGNN encoder
dimensionality, where we use 512 for the experiments with dependency trees only and 448 when
the inputs have additional sequential connections.
As in the AMR generation setting, we do this to
ensure model capacity are comparable in the number of parameters. Another key difference is that
the s2s baselines do not use dependency trees:
they are trained on the sentences only.
In addition to neural models, we also report results for Phrase-Based Statistical MT (PB-SMT),
using Moses . The PB-SMT
models are trained using the same data conditions
as s2s (no dependency trees) and use the standard
setup in Moses, except for the language model,
where we use a 5-gram LM trained on the target
side of the respective parallel corpus.8
Evaluation
We report results in terms of BLEU
and CHRF++, using case-sensitive versions of both
metrics. Other settings are kept the same as in
the AMR generation experiments (§4.1). For PB-
SMT, we also report the median result of 5 runs,
obtained by tuning the model using MERT 5 times.
8Note that target data is segmented using BPE, which is
not the usual setting for PB-SMT. We decided to keep the
segmentation to ensure data conditions are the same.
There is a deeper issue at stake .
Figure 4: Top: a sentence with its corresponding
dependency tree. Bottom: the transformed tree
into a Levi graph with additional sequential connections between words (dashed lines). The full
graph also contains reverse and self edges, which
are omitted in the ﬁgure.
Results and analysis
Table 2 shows the results on the respective test set
for both language pairs. The g2s models, which
do not account for sequential information, lag behind our baselines. This is in line with the ﬁndings
of Bastings et al. , who found that having a
BiRNN layer was key to obtain the best results.
However, the g2s+ models outperform the baselines in terms of BLEU scores under the same parameter budget, in both single model and ensemble scenarios. This result show that it is possible to
incorporate sequential biases in our model without
relying on RNNs or any other modiﬁcation in the
architecture.
English-German
Single models
Results from 
English-Czech
Single models
Results from 
Table 2: Results for syntax-based NMT on the test
sets. All score differences between our models and
the corresponding baselines are signiﬁcantly different (p<0.05), including the negative CHRF++
result for En-Cs.
Interestingly, we found different trends when
analysing the CHRF++ numbers. In particular, this
metric favours the PB-SMT models for both language pairs, while also showing improved performance for s2s in En-Cs. CHRF++ has been shown
to better correlate with human judgments compared to BLEU, both at system and sentence level
for both language pairs , which
motivated our choice as an additional metric. We
leave further investigation of this phenomena for
future work.
We also show some of the results reported by
Bastings et al. in Table 2. Note that their
results were based on a different implementation,
which may explain some variation in performance.
Their BoW+GCN model is the most similar to
ours, as it uses only an embedding layer and a
GCN encoder.
We can see that even our simpler g2s model outperforms their results. A key
difference between their approach and ours is the
Levi graph transformation and the resulting hidden
vectors for edges. We believe their architecture
would also beneﬁt from our proposed transformation. In terms of baselines, s2s performs better
than their BiRNN model for En-De and comparably for En-Cs, which corroborates that our baselines are strong ones. Finally, our g2s+ single
models outperform their BiRNN+GCN results, in
particular for En-De, which is further evidence
that RNNs are not necessary for obtaining the best
performance in this setting.
An important point about these experiments is
that we did not tune the architecture: we simply
employed the same model we used in the AMR
generation experiments, only adjusting the dimensionality of the encoder to match the capacity of
the baselines. We speculate that even better results would be obtained by tuning the architecture
to this task. Nevertheless, we still obtained improved performance over our baselines and previous work, underlining the generality of our architecture.
Related work
Graph-to-sequence modelling
Early NLP approaches for this problem were based on Hyperedge Replacement Grammars . These grammars assume the transduction problem can be split into rules that map
portions of a graph to a set of tokens in the output sequence. In particular, Chiang et al. 
deﬁnes a parsing algorithm, followed by a complexity analysis, while Jones et al. report
experiments on semantic-based machine translation using HRGs. HRGs were also used in previous work on AMR parsing .
The main drawback of these grammar-based approaches though is the need for alignments between graph nodes and surface tokens, which are
usually not available in gold-standard form.
Neural networks for graphs
Recurrent networks on general graphs were ﬁrst proposed un-
der the name Graph Neural Networks . Our work is based
on the architecture proposed by Li et al. ,
which add gating mechanisms. The main difference between their work and ours is that they focus on problems that concern the input graph itself such as node classiﬁcation or path ﬁnding
while we focus on generating strings. The main
alternative for neural-based graph representations
is Graph Convolutional Networks , which have been applied in a range of problems. In NLP, Marcheggiani and Titov use
a similar architecture for Semantic Role Labelling.
They use heuristics to mitigate the parameter explosion by grouping edge labels, while we keep
the original labels through our Levi graph transformation. An interesting alternative is proposed
by Schlichtkrull et al. , which uses tensor
factorisation to reduce the number of parameters.
Applications
Early work on AMR generation
employs grammars and transducers . Linearisation approaches include and
 , which showed that graph
simpliﬁcation and anonymisation are key to good
performance, a procedure we also employ in our
work. However, compared to our approach, linearisation incurs in loss of information. MT has a
long history of previous work that aims at incorporating syntax . This idea has also been investigated in the
context of NMT. Bastings et al. is the most
similar work to ours, and we benchmark against
their approach in our NMT experiments. Eriguchi
et al. also employs source syntax, but using constituency trees instead. Other approaches
have investigated the use of syntax in the target
language . Finally, Hashimoto and Tsuruoka
 treats source syntax as a latent variable,
which can be pretrained using annotated data.
Discussion and Conclusion
We proposed a novel encoder-decoder architecture for graph-to-sequence learning, outperforming baselines in two NLP tasks:
generation
from AMR graphs and syntax-based NMT. Our
approach addresses shortcomings from previous
work, including loss of information from linearisation and parameter explosion. In particular, we
showed how graph transformations can solve issues with graph-based networks without changing the underlying architecture. This is the case
of the proposed Levi graph transformation, which
ensures the decoder can attend to edges as well
as nodes, but also to the sequential connections
added to the dependency trees in the case of NMT.
Overall, because our architecture can work with
general graphs, it is straightforward to add linguistic biases in the form of extra node and/or edge
information. We believe this is an interesting research direction in terms of applications.
Our architecture nevertheless has two major
limitations. The ﬁrst one is that GGNNs have a
ﬁxed number of layers, even though graphs can
vary in size in terms of number of nodes and
edges. A better approach would be to allow the
encoder to have a dynamic number of layers, possibly based on the diameter (longest path) in the
input graph. The second limitation comes from
the Levi graph transformation: because edge labels are represented as nodes they end up sharing the vocabulary and therefore, the same semantic space. This is not ideal, as nodes and edges
are different entities. An interesting alternative is
Weave Module Networks ,
which explicitly decouples node and edge representations without incurring in parameter explosion. Incorporating both ideas to our architecture
is an research direction we plan for future work.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council (DP160102686).
The research
reported in this paper was partly conducted at
the 2017 Frederick Jelinek Memorial Summer
Workshop on Speech and Language Technologies, hosted at Carnegie Mellon University and
sponsored by Johns Hopkins University with unrestricted gifts from Amazon, Apple, Facebook,
Google, and Microsoft. The authors would also
like to thank Joost Bastings for sharing the data
from his paper’s experiments.