Scalable and Sustainable Deep Learning
via Randomized Hashing
Ryan Spring
Rice University
Department of Computer Science
Houston, TX, USA
 
Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University
Department of Computer Science
Houston, TX, USA
 
Current deep learning architectures are growing larger in
order to learn from complex datasets. These architectures
require giant matrix multiplication operations to train millions of parameters. Conversely, there is another growing
trend to bring deep learning to low-power, embedded devices. The matrix operations, associated with both training
and testing of deep networks, are very expensive from a
computational and energy standpoint. We present a novel
hashing based technique to drastically reduce the amount of
computation needed to train and test deep networks. Our
approach combines recent ideas from adaptive dropouts and
randomized hashing for maximum inner product search to
select the nodes with the highest activation eﬃciently. Our
new algorithm for deep learning reduces the overall computational cost of forward and back-propagation by operating
on signiﬁcantly fewer (sparse) nodes. As a consequence, our
algorithm uses only 5% of the total multiplications, while
keeping on average within 1% of the accuracy of the original
model. A unique property of the proposed hashing based
back-propagation is that the updates are always sparse. Due
to the sparse gradient updates, our algorithm is ideally suited
for asynchronous and parallel training leading to near linear
speedup with increasing number of cores. We demonstrate
the scalability and sustainability (energy eﬃciency) of our
proposed algorithm via rigorous experimental evaluations on
several real datasets.
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning is revolutionizing big-data applications, after being responsible for groundbreaking improvements in
image classiﬁcation and speech recognition . With
the recent upsurge in data, at a much faster rate than our
computing capabilities, neural networks are growing larger
to process information more eﬀectively. In 2012, state-ofthe-art convolutional neural networks contained at most 10
layers. Afterward, each successive year has brought deeper
architectures with greater accuracy. Last year, Microsoft’s
deep residual network , which won the ILSVRC 2015
competition with a 3.57% error rate, had 152 layers and
11.3 billion FLOPs. To handle such large neural networks,
researchers usually train them on high-performance graphics
cards or large computer clusters.
The basic building block of a neural network is a neuron.
Each neuron activates when a speciﬁc feature appears in its
input. The magnitude of a neuron’s activation is a measure
of the neuron’s conﬁdence for the presence or absence of
a feature. In the ﬁrst layer of deep network, the neurons
detect simple edges in an image. Each successive layer learns
more complex features. For example, the neurons will ﬁnd
parts of a face ﬁrst, such as the eyes, ears, or mouth, before distinguishing between diﬀerent faces. For classiﬁcation
tasks, the ﬁnal layer is a classic linear classiﬁer - Softmax or
SVM. Multiple layers combine to form a complex, non-linear
function capable of representing any arbitrary function .
Adding more neurons to a network layers increases its expressive power. This enhanced expressive power has made
massive-sized deep networks a common practice in large
scale machine learning systems, which has shown some very
impressive boost over old benchmarks.
Due to the growing size and complexity of networks, ef-
ﬁcient algorithms for training massive deep networks in a
distributed and parallel environment is currently the most
sought after problem in both academia and the commercial
industry. For example, Google used a 1-billion parameter neural network, which took three days to train on a
1000-node cluster, totaling over 16,000 CPU cores. Each
instantiation of the network spanned 170 servers. In distributed computing environments, the parameters of giant
deep networks are required to be split across multiple nodes.
However, this setup requires costly communication and synchronization between the parameter server and processing
nodes in order to transfer the gradient and parameter updates. The sequential and dense nature of gradient updates
prohibits any eﬃcient splitting (sharding) of the neural network parameters across computer nodes. There is no clear
way to avoid the costly synchronization without resorting to
some ad-hoc breaking of the network. This ad-hoc breaking
of deep networks is not well understood and is likely to hurt
performance. Synchronization is one of the major hurdles in
scalability. Asynchronous training is the ideal solution, but
it is sensitive to conﬂicting, overlapping parameter updates,
which leads to poor convergence.
While deep networks are growing larger and more complex,
there is also push for greater energy eﬃciency to satisfy
the growing popularity of machine learning applications on
 
mobile phones and low-power devices. For example, there
is recent work by aimed at leveraging the vast data
of mobile devices.
This work has the users train neural
networks on their local data, and then periodically transmit
their models to a central server. This approach preserves the
privacy of the user’s personal data, but still allows the central
server’s model to learn eﬀectively. Their work is dependent
on training neural networks locally. Back-propagation is
the most popular algorithm for training deep networks. Each
iteration of the back-propagation algorithm is composed of
giant matrix multiplications. These matrices are very large,
especially for massive networks with millions of nodes in the
hidden layer, which are common in industrial practice. Large
matrix multiplications are parallelizable on GPUs, but not
energy-eﬃcient. Users require their phones and tablets to
have long battery life. Reducing the computational costs of
neural networks, which directly translates into longer battery
life, is a critical issue for the mobile industry.
The current challenges for deep learning illustrate a great
demand for algorithms that reduce the amount of computation and energy usage. To reduce the bottleneck matrix
multiplications, there has been a ﬂurry of works around reducing the amount of computations associated with them.
Most of them revolve around exploiting low-rank matrices or
low precision updates. We review these techniques in details
in Section 2. However, updates with these techniques are
hard to parallelize making them unsuitable for distributed
and large scale applications. On the contrary, our proposal
capitalizes on the sparsity of the activations to reduce computations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
proposal that exploits sparsity to reduce the amount of computation associated with deep networks. We further show
that our approach admits asynchronous parallel updates
leading to perfect scaling with increasing parallelism.
Recent machine learning research has focused on techniques for dealing with the famous problem of over-ﬁtting
with deep networks. A notable line of work improved the accuracy of neural networks by only updating the
neurons with the highest activations. Adaptive dropout 
sampled neurons in proportion to an aﬃne transformation
of the neuron’s activation. The Winner-Take-All (WTA)
approach kept the top-k% neurons, by calculating a
hard threshold from mini-batch statistics. It was found that
such a selective choice of nodes and sparse updates provide
a natural regularization . However, these approaches rely
on ineﬃcient, brute-force techniques to ﬁnd the best neurons.
Thus, these techniques are equally as expensive as the standard back-propagation method, leading to no computational
We propose a hashing-based indexing approach to train
and test neural networks, which capitalizes on the rich theory of randomized sub-linear algorithms from the database
literature to perform adaptive dropouts eﬃciently while
requiring signiﬁcantly less computation and memory overhead. Furthermore, hashing algorithms are embarrassingly
parallel and can be easily distributed with small communications, which is perfect for large-scale, distributed deep
Our idea is to index the neurons (the weights of each neuron as a vector) into a hash table using locality sensitive
hashing. Such hash tables of neurons allow us to select the
neurons with the highest activations, without computing all
of the activations, in the sub-linear time leading to signiﬁcant computational savings. Moreover, as we show, since our
approach results in a sparse active set of neurons randomly,
the gradient updates are unlikely to overwrite. Such updates
are ideal for asynchronous and parallel gradient updates. It
is known that asynchronous stochastic gradient descent 
(ASGD) will converge if the number of simultaneous parameter updates is small. We heavily leverage this sparsity which
unique to our proposal. On several deep learning benchmarks, we show that our approach outperforms standard
algorithms including vanilla dropout at high sparsity
levels and matches the performance of adaptive dropout 
and winner-take-all while needing less computation
(only 5%).
Our Contributions
1. We present a scalable and sustainable algorithm for
training and testing of fully-connected neural networks.
Our idea capitalized on the recent successful technique
of adaptive dropouts combined with the smart data
structure (hash tables) based on recently found locality
sensitive hashing (LSH) for maximum inner product
search (MIPS) . We show signiﬁcant reductions in
the computational requirement for training deep networks, without any signiﬁcant loss in accuracy (within
1% of the accuracy of the original model on average).
In particular, our method achieves the performance
of other state-of-the-art regularization methods such
as Dropout, Adaptive Dropout, and Winner-Take-All
when using only 5% of the neurons in a standard neural
2. Our proposal reduces computations associated with
both the training and testing (inference) of deep networks by reducing the multiplications needed for the
feed-forward operation.
3. The key idea in our algorithm is to associate LSH
hash tables with every layer. These hash tables support constant-time O(1) insertion and deletion
operations.
4. Our scheme naturally leads to sparse gradient updates.
Sparse updates are ideally suited for massively parallelizable asynchronous training . We demonstrate
that this sparsity opens room for truly asynchronous
training without any compromise with accuracy. As a
result, we obtain near-linear speedup when increasing
number of processors.
RELATED WORK
There have been several recent advances aimed at improving the performance of neural networks. reduced the
number of ﬂoating point multiplications by mapping the
network’s weights stochastically to {-1, 0, 1} during forward
propagation and performing quantized back-propagation that
replaces ﬂoating-point multiplications with simple bit-shifts.
Reducing precision is an orthogonal approach, and it can be
easily integrated with any other approaches.
 uses structured matrix transformations with low-rank
matrices to reduce the number of parameters for the fullyconnected layers of a neural network. This low-rank constraint leads to a smaller memory footprint. However, such
an approximation is not well suited for asynchronous and
parallel training limiting its scalability. We instead use random but sparse activations, leveraging database advances in
approximate query processing, because they can be easily
parallelized. [See Section 3 for more details]
We brieﬂy review dropouts and its variants, which are
popular sparsity promoting techniques relying on sparse activations. Although such randomized sparse activations have
been found favorable for better generalization of deep networks, to the best of our knowledge, this sparsity has not
been adequately exploited to make deep networks computationally cheap and parallelizable. We provide ﬁrst such
Dropout is primarily a regularization technique that
addresses the issue of over-ﬁtting randomly dropping half
of the nodes in a hidden layer while training the network.
The nodes are independently sampled for every stochastic
gradient descent epoch . We can reinterpret Dropout as a
technique for reducing the number of multiplications during
forward and backward propagation phases, by ignoring nodes
randomly in the network which computing the feed-forward
pass. It is known that the network’s performance becomes
worse when too many nodes are dropped from the network.
Usually, only 50% of the nodes in the network are dropped
when training the network. At test time, the network takes
the average of the thinned networks to form a prediction
from the input data, which uses full computations.
Adaptive dropout is an evolution of the dropout technique that adaptively chooses the nodes based on their activations. The methodology samples few nodes from the network,
where the sampling is done with probability proportional
to the node activations which are dependent on the current
input. Adaptive dropouts demonstrate better performance
than vanilla dropout . A notable feature of adaptive
dropouts was that it was possible to drop signiﬁcantly more
nodes compared to dropouts while still retaining superior
performance. Winner-Take-All is an extreme form of
adaptive dropouts that uses mini-batch statistics to enforce a
sparsity constraint. With this technique, only the k% largest,
non-zero activations are used during the forward and backward phases of training. This approach requires computing
the forward propagation step before selecting the k% nodes
with a hard threshold. Unfortunately, all these techniques require full computation of the activations to selectively sample
nodes. Therefore, they are only intended for better generalization and not reducing computations. Our approach uses
the insight that selecting a very sparse set of hidden nodes
with the highest activations can be reformulated as dynamic
approximate query processing problem, which can solve eﬃciently using locality sensitive hashing. The diﬀerentiating
factor between adaptive dropout and winner-take-all and
our approach is we use sub-linear time randomized hashing
to determine the active set of nodes instead computing the
inner product for each node individually.
There is also another orthogonal line of work which uses
hashing to reduce memory. introduced a new type of
deep learning architecture called Hashed Nets. Their objective was to decrease the number of parameters in the given
neural network by using a universal random hash function
to tie node weights. Network connections that map to the
same hash value (hash collisions) are restricted to have same
values. The architecture has the virtual appearance of a
regular network while maintaining only a small subset of real
weights. We point out that hashed nets are complementary
to our approach because we focus on reducing the computational cost involved in using deep nets rather than its size in
LOW-RANK VS SPARSITY
The low-rank (or structured) assumption is very convenient for reducing the complexity of general matrix operations. However, low-rank and dense updates do not promote
sparsity and are not friendly for distributed computing. The
same principle holds with deep networks. We illustrate it
with a simple example.
Consider a layer of the ﬁrst network (left) shown in Figure 3.
The insight is that if the weight matrix W ∈Rmxn for a hidden layer has low-rank structure where rank r ≪min(m, n),
then it has a representation W = UV where U ∈Rmxr and
V ∈Rrxn. This low-rank structure improves the storage
requirements and matrix-multiplication time from O(mn) to
O(mr + rn). As shown in Figure 3, there is an equivalent
representation of the same network using an intermediate
hidden layer that contains r nodes and uses the identity activation function. The weight matrices for the hidden layers in
the second network (right) map to the matrix decomposition,
U and V . uses structured matrix transformations with
low-rank matrices to reduce the number of parameters for
the fully-connected layers of a neural network.
The new network structure and the equivalent structure
matrices require a dense gradient update, which is not ideally
suited for data parallelism .
For example, they need
sequential gradient descent updates. In this work, we move
away from the low-rank assumption and instead make use of
randomness and sparsity to reduce computations. We will
later show that due to sparsity, our approach is well suited for
Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (ASGD), leading
to near-linear scaling.
It should be noted that our methodology is very diﬀerent
from the notions of making networks sparse by thresholding
(or sparsifying) node weights permanently . Our
approach makes use of every node weight but picks them
selectively for diﬀerent inputs. On the contrary, permanent
sparsiﬁcation only has a static set of weights which are used
for every input and rest are discarded.
BACKGROUND
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Neural networks are built from layers of neurons. The
combination of multiple hidden layers creates a complex,
non-linear function capable of representing any arbitrary
function . The forward propagation equation is
al = f(W lal−1 + bl)
where al−1 is the output from the previous layer l −1, W l
is an [NxM] weight matrix for layer l, bl is the bias term for
layer l, and f is the activation function. Common non-linear
activation functions are sigmoid, tanh, ReLU. Neural networks are trained using stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
- θt+1 = θt −η∇J(θ). The gradient for the neural network
∇J(θ) is calculated layer-by-layer using the back-propagation
algorithm. The Momentum technique calculates the parameter update from a weighted sum of the previous momentum term and the current gradient - νt+1 = γνt + η∇J(θ).
It reduces the training time of neural networks by mitigating
Figure 1: Illustration of why the Low-Rank assumption for neural networks naturally leads to fewer parameters:
(1) This network contains two layers with m and n neurons
respectively. The weighted connections between the layers are
characterized by the weight matrix W ∈Rmxn of constrained
rank r such that W = UV with U ∈Rmxr and V ∈Rrxn.
(2) An equivalent network contains three layers each with m,
r, and n neurons. The top two layers are represented with
the matrix U ∈Rmxr, while the bottom two layers are characterized with the matrix V ∈Rrxn. The intermediate layer
uses the identity activation function I such that the output
from network 2 equals that of network 1. a = f(W T x) =
f((UV )T x) = f((V T U T )x) = f(V T I(U T x)) where a is the
layer’s output and f is a non-linear activation function.
the stochastic nature of SGD. Adaptive gradient descent
(Adagrad) is a variant of SGD that adapts the learning
rate for each parameter. The global learning rate is normalized by the sum of squared gradients. It favors larger
learning rates for infrequent or small parameter updates.
Adaptive Dropout
Adaptive Dropout is a recently proposed dropout technique that selectively samples nodes with probability proportional to some monotonic function of their activations.
To achieve this, authors in chose a Bernoulli distribution.
The idea was that given an input al−1 to a layer l, we generate a Bernoulli random variable for every node in the layer
with Bernoulli probability q being a monotonic function of
the activation. Then, the binary variable sampled from this
distribution is used to determine if the associated neuron’s
activation is kept or set to zero. This adaptive selectivity allows fewer neurons to be activated in the hidden layer and to
improve neural network performance over standard Dropout
 . The Winner-Take-All approach is an extreme case
of Adaptive Dropout that takes only the top k% activations
in a hidden layer, which also performs very well.
Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) is a
popular, sublinear time algorithm for approximate nearestneighbor search. The high-level idea is to map similar items
into the same bucket with high probability. An LSH hash
function maps an input data vector to an integer key - h :
x ∈RD 7→[0, 1, 2, . . . , N].
A collision occurs when the
hash values for two data vectors are equal - h(x) = h(y).
The probability of collision for an LSH hash function is
proportional to the similarity distance between the two data
vectors - Pr[h(x) = h(y)] ∝sim(x, y). Essentially, similar
items are more likely to collide with the same hash ﬁngerprint
and vice versa.
Sub-linear Search with (K, L) LSH Algorithm
To be able to answer approximate nearest-neighbor queries
in sub-linear time, the idea is to create hash tables, (see
Figure 2). Given the collection C, which we are interested
in querying for the nearest-neighbor items, the hash tables
are generated using the locality sensitive hash (LSH) family.
We assume that we have access to the appropriate locality
sensitive hash (LSH) family H for the similarity of interest. In the classical (K, L) parameterized LSH algorithm,
we generate L diﬀerent hash functions given by Bj(x) =
[h1j(x); h2j(x); ...; hKj(x)].
Here hij, i ∈{1, 2, ..., K} and
j ∈{1, 2, ..., L}, are KL diﬀerent evaluations of the appropriate locality sensitive hash (LSH) function. Each of these
hash functions is formed by concatenating K sampled hash
values from H.
The overall algorithm works in two phases (See for
1. Pre-processing Phase: We construct L hash tables
from the data by storing all elements x ∈C, at location
Bj(x) in hash-table j (See Figure 2 for an illustration).
We only store pointers to the vector in the hash tables,
as storing data vectors is very memory ineﬃcient.
2. Query Phase: Given a query Q, we will search for
its nearest-neighbors. We report the union of all the
points in the buckets Bj(Q) ∀j ∈{1, 2, ..., L}, where
the union is over L hash tables. Note, we do not scan
all the elements in C, we only probe L diﬀerent buckets,
one from each hash table.
 shows that having an LSH family for a given similarity
measure and an appropriate choice of K and L, the above
algorithm is provably sub-linear.
In practice, it is nearconstant time because the query only requires few bucket
Hashing Inner Products
It was recently shown that by allowing asymmetric hash
functions, the same algorithm can be converted into a sublinear time algorithm for Maximum Inner Product Search
(MIPS) .
In locality sensitive hashing, self-similarity
Pr[h(x) = h(x)] = 1 is the closest nearest-neighbor for
a query x.
However, self-similarity does not necessarily
correspond with the highest inner product xT x = ||x||2
Therefore, an asymmetric transformation is necessary to
map maximum inner product search (MIPS) to the standard
nearest-neighbor search (LSH). Our work heavily leverages
these algorithms. For the purpose of this paper, we will
assume that we can create a very eﬃcient data structure,
which can be queried for large inner products. See for
Multi-Probe LSH
One common complaint with classical LSH algorithm is that
it requires a signiﬁcant number of hash tables.
increases the hashing time and memory cost.
solution was to probe multiple "close-by" buckets in every
hash table rather than probing only one bucket . Thus,
for a given query Q, in addition to probing Bj(Q) in hash
table j, we also generate several new addresses to probe
by slightly perturbing values of Bj(Q). This simple idea
signiﬁcantly reduces the number of tables needed with LSH,
and we can work with only a few hash tables. See for
more details.
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
Winner-Take-All technique shows that we should
only consider a few nodes (top k%) with large activations for
a given input and ignore the rest while computing the feedforward pass. Furthermore, the back-propagation updates
should only be performed on those few chosen weights. Let
us denote AS (Active Set) to be the top k% nodes having
signiﬁcant activations. Let n denote the total number of
nodes in the neural network with AS ≪n. For one gradient
update, Winner-Take-All needs to perform ﬁrst O(n log n)
work to compute AS, followed by updating O(AS) weights.
O(nlogn) seems quite wasteful. In particular, given the input,
ﬁnding the active set AS is a search problem, which can be
solved eﬃciently using smart data structures. Furthermore, if
the data structure is dynamic and eﬃcient, then the gradient
updates will also be eﬃcient.
For a node i with weight wi and input x, its activation
is a monotonic function of the inner product wT
i x. Thus,
given x, selecting nodes with large activations (the set AS)
is equivalent to searching wi, from a collection of weight
vectors, have large inner products with x. Equivalently from
query processing perspective, if we treat input x as a query,
then the search problem of selecting top k% nodes can be
done eﬃciently, in sub-linear time in the number of nodes,
using the recent advances in maximum inner product search
Our proposal is to create hash tables with indexes
generated by asymmetric locality sensitive hash functions
tailored for inner products. With such hash tables, given the
query input x, we can very eﬃciently approximate the active
There is one more implementation challenge.
have to update the nodes (weights associated with them)
in AS during the gradient update. If we can perform these
updates in O(AS) instead of O(n), then we save signiﬁcant
computation. Thus, we need a data structure where updates
are eﬃcient as well. With years of research in data structures,
there are many choices which can make update eﬃcient. We
describe our system in details in Section 5.3.
Equivalence with Adaptive Dropouts
It turns out that using randomized asymmetric locality
sensitive hashing for ﬁnding nodes with large inner products is formally, in a statistical sense, equivalent to adaptive
dropouts with a non-trivial sampling distribution.
Adaptive Dropout technique uses the Bernoulli distribution (Section 4.2) to adaptively sample nodes with large
activation. In theory, any distribution assigning probabilities
in proportion to nodes activation is suﬃcient. We argue
that Bernoulli is a sub-optimal choice. There is another
non-intuitive, but a very eﬃcient choice. This choice comes
from the theory of Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) ,
which is primarily considered a black box technique for fast
sub-linear search. Our core idea comes from the observation
that, for a given search query q, the (K, L) parametrized LSH
algorithm inherently samples, in sub-linear time, points
from datasets with probability proportional to 1 −(1 −pK)L.
Here p, is the collision probability, a monotonic function of
the similarity between the query and the retrieved point. See
 for details. The expression holds for any K and L. K
controls the sparsity of buckets. With a reasonable choice
of K, we can always make buckets arbitrarily sparse. Even
if the buckets are heavy, we can always do a simple random
sampling, in the buckets, and adding only a constant factor
in the probability p, keeping the monotonicity intact.
Theorem 1. Hash-Based Sampling - For a given input x to any layer, any (K, L) parametrized hashing algorithm
selects a node i, associated with weight vector wi, with probability proportional to 1 −(1 −pK)L. Here p = Pr(h(I) =
h(wi)) is the collision probability of the associated locality
sensitive hash function. The function 1 −(1 −pK)L is monotonic in p.
Proof. The probability of ﬁnding node i in any hash table
is pK (all K bits collide where each bit occurs with probability
p), so the probability of missing node i in L independent
hash tables is (1 −pK)L. If we further choose to sample the
buckets randomly by another constant factor r < 1, then
eﬀective collision probability becomes p′ = rp.
With recent advances in hashing inner products, we can
make p a monotonic function of inner products .
Translating into deep network notation, given the activation
vector of previous layer al−1 as the query and layer’s weights
W l as the search space, we can sample with probability
proportional to
g(W l) = 1 −(1 −f(W lal−1)K)L
which is a monotonic function of node activation. Thus,
we can naturally integrate adaptive dropouts with hashing.
Overall, we are simply choosing a speciﬁc form of adaptive
dropouts, which leads to eﬃcient sampling in time sub-linear
in the number of neurons (or nodes).
Corollary 1. Adaptive Dropouts are Eﬃcient - There
exists an eﬃcient family of sampling distributions for adaptive dropouts, where the sampling and updating cost is sublinear in the number of nodes. In particular, we can construct
an eﬃcient sampling scheme such that for any two nodes i
and j, in any given layer l, the probability of choosing node i
is greater than the probability of choosing node j if and only
if the current activation of node i is higher than that of j.
Proof. Since asymmetric LSH functions have
a collision probability p that is a monotonic function of the
inner product, it is also a montonic function of the neuron’s
activation. All activation functions including sigmoid ,
tanh , and ReLU are monotonic functions of inner
products. Composing monotonic functions retains monotonicity. Therefore, the corollary follows because 1−(1−pK)L
is monotonic with respect to p. In addition, monotonicity
goes in both direction as the inverse function exists and it is
also monotonic.
Hash Table 1
Hash Table 2
Figure 2: A visual representation of a neural network using randomized hashing (1) Build the hash
tables by hashing the weights of each hidden layer
(one time operation) (2) Hash the layer’s input using
the layer’s randomized hash function (3) Query the
layer’s hash table(s) for the active set AS (4) Only
perform forward and back-propagation on the neurons in the active set. The solid-colored neurons in
the hidden layer are the active neurons. (5) Update
the AS weights and the hash tables by rehashing the
updated weights to new hash locations.
Hashing Based Back-Propagation
As argued, our approach is simple. We use randomized
hash functions to build hash tables from the nodes in each
hidden layer. We sample nodes from the hash table with
probability proportional to the node’s activation in sub-linear
time. We then perform forward and back propagation only
on the active nodes retrieved from the hash tables.
later update the hash tables to reorganize only the modiﬁed
Figure 2 illustrates an example neural network with two
hidden layers, ﬁve input nodes, and two output nodes. Hash
tables are built for each hidden layer, where the weighted
connections for each node are hashed to place the node in
its corresponding bucket. Creating hash tables to store all
the initial parameters is a one-time operation which requires
cost linear in the number of parameters.
During a forward propagation pass, the input to the hidden
layer is hashed with the same hash function used to build
the hidden layer’s hash table. The input’s ﬁngerprint is used
to collect the active set AS nodes from the hash table. The
hash table only contains pointers to the nodes in the hidden
layer. Then, forward propagation is performed only on the
nodes in the active set AS. The rest of the hidden layer’s
nodes, which are not part of the active set, are ignored and
are automatically switched oﬀwithout even touching them.
On the back propagation pass, the active set is reused to
determine the gradient and to update the parameters. We
rehash the nodes in each hidden layer to account for the
changes in the network during training.
Algorithm 1 Deep Learning with Randomized Hashing
// HFl - Layer l Hash Function
// HTl - Layer l Hash Tables
// ASl - Layer l Active Set
AS - Layer l Active Set parameters
Randomly initialize parameters W l, bl for each layer l
HFl = constructHashFunction(k, L)
HTl = constructHashTable(W l, HFl)
while not stopping criteria do
for each training epoch do
// Forward Propagation
for layer l = 1 . . . N do
ﬁngerprintl = HFl(al)
ASl = collectActiveSet(HTl, ﬁngerprintl)
for each node i in ASl do
// Backpropagation
for layer l = 1 . . . N do
AS) = computeGradient(θl
AS = updateParameters(θl
AS, ∆J(θAS))
for each Layer l -> updateHashTables(HFl, HTl, θl)
In detail, the hash function for each hidden layer is composed of K randomized hash functions. We use the sign of
an asymmetrically transformed random projection (see 
for details) to generate the K bits for each data vector. The
K bits are stored together eﬃciently as an integer, forming
a ﬁngerprint for the data vector. We create a hash table
of 2K buckets, but we only keep the nonempty buckets to
minimize the memory footprint (analogous to hash-maps
in Java). Each bucket stores pointers to the nodes whose
ﬁngerprints match the bucket’s id instead of the node itself.
In ﬁgure 2, we showed only one hash table, which is likely to
miss valuable nodes in practice. In our implementation, we
generate L hash tables for each hidden layer, and each hash
table has an independent set of K random projections. Our
ﬁnal active set from these L hash tables is the union of the
buckets selected from each hash table. For each layer, we
have L hash tables. Eﬀectively, we have two tunable parameters, K bits and L tables to control the size and the quality
of the active sets. The K bits increase the precision of the
ﬁngerprint, meaning the nodes in a bucket are more likely
to generate higher activation values for a given input. The
L tables increase the probability of ﬁnding useful nodes that
are missed because of the randomness in the hash functions.
Efﬁcient Query and Updates
Our algorithm critically depends on the eﬃciency of the
query and update procedure. The hash table is one of the
most eﬃcient data structures, so this is not a diﬃcult challenge. Querying a single hash table is a constant time operation when the bucket size is small. Bucket size can be
controlled by K and by sub-sampling the bucket. There is always a possibility of crowded buckets due to bad randomness
or because of too many near-duplicates in the data. These
crowded buckets are not very informative and can be safely
ignored or sub-sampled.
We never need to store weights in the hash tables. Instead,
we only store references to the weight vectors, which makes
hash tables a very light entity. Further, we reduce the number
of diﬀerent hash tables required by using multi-probe LSH
Updating a weight vector wi associated with a node i
can require changing the location of wi in the hash table, if
the updates lead to a change in the hash value. With the
hash table data structure, the update is not an issue when
the buckets are sparse. Updating a weight only requires
one insertion and one deletion in the respective buckets.
There are plenty of choices for eﬃcient insert and delete
data structure for buckets. In theory, even if buckets are
not sparse, we can use a red-black-tree to ensure both
insertion and deletion cost is logarithmic in the size of the
However, using simple arrays when the buckets
are sparse is preferable because they are easy to parallelize.
With arrays insertion is O(1) and deletion is O(b), where b
is the size of buckets. Controlling the size of b can be easily
achieved by sub-sampling the bucket. Since we create L
independent hash tables, even for reasonably large L, the
process is quite robust to cheap approximations. We further
reduce the size of L using multi-probing . Multi-probe
with binary hash function is quite straightforward. We just
have to randomly ﬂip few bits of the K-bit hash to generate
more addresses.
There are plenty of other choices than can make hashing
signiﬁcantly faster, such as cheap re-ranking . See ,
where authors show around 500x reduction in computations
for image search by incorporating diﬀerent algorithmic and
systems choices.
Overall Cost
In every layer, during every Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) update, we compute K ×L hashes of the input, probe
around 10L buckets, and take their union. In our experiments, we use K = 6 and L = 5, i.e. 30 hash computations
only. There are many techniques to further reduce this hashing cost . We probe around 10 buckets in
each hash tables for obtaining 5% of active nodes, leading to
the union of 50 buckets in total. The process gives us the
active set AS of nodes, which is usually signiﬁcantly smaller
when compared to the number of nodes n. During SGD, we
update all of the weights in AS along with the hash table.
Overall, the cost is of the order of the number of nodes in
AS, which in our experiments show can go as low as 5%.
For 1000 node in the layer, we have to update around 10-50
nodes only. The bottleneck cost is calculations of activations
(actual inner products) of these nodes in the AS which for
every node is around 1000 ﬂoating point multiplications each.
The beneﬁts will be even more signiﬁcant for larger networks.
Bonus: SparseUpdatescanbeParallelized
As mentioned, we only need to update the set of weights
associated with nodes in the active set AS. If the AS is
very sparse, then it is unlikely that multiple SGD updates
will overwrite the same set of weights. Intuitively, assuming
enough randomness in the data vector, we will have a small
active set AS chosen randomly from among all the nodes. It
is unlikely that multiple active sets of randomly selected data
vectors will have signiﬁcant overlaps. Small overlaps imply
fewer conﬂicts while updating. Fewer conﬂicts while updating
is an ideal ground where SGD updates can be parallelized
without any overhead. In fact, it was both theoretically and
experimentally that random and sparse SGD updates can
be parallelized without compromising with the convergence
 . Parallel SGD updates is one the pressing challenges in
large-scale deep learning systems . Vanilla SGD for deep
networks is sequential, and parallel updates lead to poor
convergence due to signiﬁcant overwrites. Our experimental
results, in Section 6.3, support these known phenomena.
Exploiting this unique property, we show near linear scaling
of our algorithm with increasing processors without hurting
convergence.
EVALUATIONS
We design experiments to answer the following six important questions:
1. How much computation can we reduce without aﬀecting
the vanilla network’s accuracy?
2. How eﬀective is adaptive sampling compared to a random sampling of nodes?
3. How does approximate hashing compare with expensive
but exact approaches of adaptive dropouts and
Winner-Takes-all in terms of accuracy?
particular, is hashing working as intended?
4. How is the network’s convergence aﬀected by increasing number of processors as we perform parallel SGD
updates using our approach?
5. Is sparse update necessary? Is there any deterioration
in performance, if we perform vanilla dense updates in
6. What is the wall clock decrease in training time, as a
function of increasing number of processors?
For evaluation, we implemented the following ﬁve approaches to compare and contrast against.
• Standard (NN) : A full-connected neural network
• Dropout (VD) : A neural network that disables
the nodes of a hidden layer using a ﬁxed probability
• Adaptive Dropout (AD) : A neural network that
disables the nodes of a hidden layer using a probability
threshold based on the inner product of the node’s
weights and the input.
• Winner Take All (WTA) : A neural network
that sorts the activations of a hidden layer and selects
the k% largest activations
• Randomized Hashing (LSH): A neural network that
selects nodes using randomized hashing. A hard threshold limits the active node set to k% sparsity
To test our neural network implementation, we used four
publicly available datasets - MNIST8M , NORB ,
CONVEX, and RECTANGLES . The statistics of these
datasets are summarized in Table 3. The MNIST8M, CON-
VEX, and RECTANGLES datasets contain 28x28 images,
forming 784-dimensional feature vectors. The MNIST8M
Train Size
Rectangles
Figure 3: Dataset - Training + Test Size
task is to classify each handwritten digit in the image correctly. It is derived by applying random deformations and
translations to the MNIST dataset. The CONVEX dataset
objective is to identify if a single convex region exists in
the image. The goal for the RECTANGLES dataset is to
discriminate between tall and wide rectangles overlaid on a
black and white background image. The NORB dataset 
contains images of 50 toys, belonging to 5 categories under
various lighting conditions and camera angles. Each data
point is a 96x96 stereo image pair. We resize the image from
96x96 to 32x32 and concatenate the image pairs together to
form a 2048-dimensional feature vector.
Sustainability
Experimental Setting
All of the experiments for our approach and the other
techniques were run on a 6-core Intel i7-3930K machine with
16 GB of memory. Our approach uses stochastic gradient descent with Momentum and Adagrad . Since our approach
uniquely selects an active set of nodes for each hidden layer,
we focused on a CPU-based approach to simplify combining randomized hashing with neural networks. The ReLU
activation function was used for all methods. The learning
rate for each approach was set using a standard grid search
and ranged between 10−2 and 10−4. The parameters for
the randomized hash tables were K = 6 bits and L = 5
tables with multi-probe LSH creating a series of probes
in each hash tables. We stop early if we ﬁnd that we have
samples enough nodes even before exhausting all buckets.
Since we evaluate all levels of selection, in order to increase
the percentage of nodes retrieved we increase the number of
probes in the buckets. For the experiments, we use a ﬁxed
threshold to cap the number of active nodes selected from
the hash tables to guarantee the amount of computation is
within a certain level.
Effect of computation levels
Figures 4, 5 show the accuracy of each method on neural
networks with 2 (Top panel) and 3 (Bottom Panel) hidden
layers with the percentage of active nodes ranging from [0.05,
0.10, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9]. The standard neural network is our
baseline in these experiments and is marked with a dashed
black line. Each hidden layer contains 1000 nodes. The x-axis
represents the average percentage of active nodes per epoch
selected by each technique. Our approach only performs the
forward and back propagation steps on the nodes selected
in each hidden layer. The other baseline techniques except
for Dropout (VD) perform the forward propagation step
for each node ﬁrst to compute all the activations, before
setting node activations to zero based on the corresponding
algorithm. Thus on VD and our proposal requires a lesser
number of multiplications compared to a standard neural
network training procedure.
Figures 4 and 5 summarizes the accuracy of diﬀerent approaches at various computations levels. From the ﬁgures,
we conclude the following.
• The plots are consistent across all data-sets and architectures with diﬀerent depths.
• Our method (LSH) gives the best overall accuracy with
the fewest number of active nodes. The fact that our
approximate method is even slightly better than WTA
and adaptive dropouts is not surprising, as it is long
known that a small amount of random noise leads to
better generalization. For examples, see .
• As the number of active nodes decreases from 90% to
5%, LSH experiences the smallest drop in performance
and less performance volatility.
• VD experiences the greatest drop in performance when
reducing the number of active nodes from 50% to 5%.
• As the number of hidden layers increases in the network,
the performance drop for VD becomes steeper.
• WTA performed better than VD when the percentage
of active nodes is less than 50%
• The number of multiplications is a constant multiple of
the percentage of active nodes in a hidden layer. The
parameters, alpha, and beta determine how many nodes
are kept active. We used alpha α = 1.0 and beta β =
[-1.5, -1.0, 0, 1.0, 3.5] for our experiments. Our model
diverged when the number of active nodes dropped below 25%, so we do not have data for Adaptive Dropout
at the 5% and 10%.
• The performance for each method stabilizes, as the
computation level approaches 100%.
Lowering the computational cost of running neural networks by running fewer operations reduces the energy consumption and heat produced by the processor. However,
large neural networks provide better accuracy and arbitrarily
reducing the amount of computation hurts performance. Our
experiments show that our method (LSH) performs well at
low computation levels, providing the best of both worlds
- high performance and low processor computation. This
approach is ideal for mobile phones, which have a thermal
power design (TDP) of 3-4 Watts, because reducing the
processor’s load directly translates into longer battery life.
Scalability
Experimental Setting
We now show experiments to demonstrate the scalability of
our approach to large-scale, distributed computing environments. Speciﬁcally, we are testing if our approach maintains
accuracy and improves training time, as we increase the number of processors. We use asynchronous stochastic gradient
descent with momentum and adagrad . Our implementation runs the same model, with similar initializations,
on multiple training examples concurrently. The gradient is
applied without synchronization or locks to maximize performance. We run all of the experiments on an Intel Xeon
ES-2697 machine with 56 cores and 256 GB of memory. The
ReLU activation was used for all models, and the learning
rate ranged between 10−2 and 10−3.
% Active Nodes
Standard NN
Randomized Hashing
Vanilla Dropout
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
Rectangles
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
Rectangles
Figure 4: Classiﬁcation accuracy under diﬀerent levels of active nodes with networks on the MNIST (1st),
NORB (2nd), Convex (3rd) and Rectangles (4th) datasets. The standard neural network (dashed black line)
is our baseline accuracy. We can clearly see that adaptive sampling with hashing (LSH) is signiﬁcantly more
eﬀective than random sampling (VD). 1. Top Panels: 2 hidden Layers. 1. Bottom Panels: 3 hidden Layers
Results with different numbers of processors
Figure 6 shows how our method performs with asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) using only
5% of the neurons of a full-sized neural network. The neural network has three hidden layers, and each hidden layer
contains 1000 neurons. The x-axis represents the number of
epochs completed, and the y-axis shows the test accuracy for
the given epoch. We compare how our model converges with
multiple processors working concurrently. Since our ASGD
implementation does not use locks, it depends on the sparsity
of the gradient to ensure the model converges and performs
well . From our experiments, we see that our method
converges at a similar rate and obtains the same accuracy
regardless of the number of processors running ASGD.
Figure 8 illustrates how our method scales with multiple
processors. The inherent sparsity of our randomized hashing
approach reduces the number of simultaneous updates and allows for more asynchronous models without any performance
penalty. We show the corresponding drop in wall-clock computation time per epoch while adding more processors. We
achieve roughly a 31x speed up while running ASGD with
56 threads.
ASGD PerformanceComparisonwithStandard
Neural Network
Figure 7 compares the performance of our LSH approach
against a standard neural network (STD) when running
ASGD with 56-cores. We used a standard network with a
mini-batch of size 32. We clearly out-perform the standard
network for all of our experimental datasets. However, since
there is a large number of processors applying gradients to
the parameters, those gradients are constantly being overridden, preventing ASGD from converging to an optimal
local minimum. Our approach produces a spare gradient
that reduces the conﬂicts between the diﬀerent processors,
while keeping enough valuable nodes for ASGD to progress
towards the local minimum eﬃciently.
From Figures 6, 7 and 8, we conclude the following.
1. The gradient updates are quite sparse with 5% LSH
and running multiple ASGD updates in parallel does
not aﬀect the convergence rate of our hashing based
approach. Even when running 56 cores in parallel, the
convergence is indistinguishable from the sequential
update (1 core) on all the four datasets.
2. If we instead run vanilla SGD in parallel, then the
convergence is eﬀected. The convergence is in general
slower compared the sparse 5% LSH. This slow convergence is due to dense updates which leads to overwrites.
Parallelizing dense updates aﬀects the four datasets
diﬀerently. For convex dataset, the convergence is very
3. As expected, we obtain near-perfect decrease in the wall
clock times with increasing the number of processors
with LSH-5%. Note, if there are too many overwrites,
then atomic overwrites are necessary, which will create
additional overhead and hurt the parallelism. Thus,
near-perfect scalability also indicates fewer gradient
overwrites.
4. On the largest dataset - MNIST8M, the running time
per epoch for the 1-core implementation is 50,254
seconds. The 56-core implementation runs in 1,637
seconds. Since the convergence is not aﬀected, this
amounts to about a 31x speedup in the training process with 56 processors.
5. We see that the gains of parallelism become ﬂat with
the Convex and Rectangle datasets, especially while
using a large number of processors. This poor scaling is
% Active Nodes
Standard NN
Randomized Hashing
Winner-Take-All
Adaptive Dropout
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
Rectangles
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
% Active Nodes
Rectangles
Figure 5: Classiﬁcation accuracy under diﬀerent levels of active nodes with networks on the MNIST (1st),
NORB (2nd), Convex (3rd) and Rectangles (4th) datasets. The standard neural network (dashed black line)
is our baseline accuracy. WTA and AD (dashed red + yellow lines) perform the same amount of computation
as the standard neural network. Those techniques select nodes with high activations, after full computations,
to achieve better accuracy. We compare our LSH approach to determine whether our randomized algorithm
achieves comparable performance while reducing the total amount of computation. We do not have data for
adaptive dropout at the 5% and 10% computation levels because those models diverged when the number of
active nodes dropped below 25%. 1. Top Panels: 2 hidden Layers. 1. Bottom Panels: 3 hidden Layers
because the two datasets have fewer training examples,
and so there is less parallel work for a large number of
processor, especially when working with 56 cores. We
do not see such behaviors with MNIST8M which has
around 8 million training examples.
DISCUSSIONS
Machine learning with a huge parameter space is becoming
a common phenomenon. SGD remains the most promising
algorithm for optimization due its eﬀectiveness and simplicity. SGD that updates from a single data point is unlikely to
change the entire parameter space signiﬁcantly. Each SGD
iteration is expected to change only a small set (the active
set) of parameters, depending on the current sample. This
sparse update occurs because there is not enough information in one data point. However, identifying that small set
of active parameters is a search problem, which typically
requires computations on the order of parameters. We can
exploit the rich literature in approximate query processing to
ﬁnd this active set of parameters eﬃciently. Of course, the
approximate active set contains a small amount of random
noise, which is often good for generalization. Sparsity and
randomness enhance data parallelism because sparse, and
random SGD updates are unlikely to overwrite each other.
Approximate query processing already sits on decades of
research from the systems and database community, which
makes the algorithm scalable over a variety of distributed
systems. Thus, we can forget about the systems challenges
by reformulating the machine learning problem into an approximate query processing problem and levering the ideas
and implementation from a very rich literature. We have
demonstrated one concrete evidence by showing how deep
networks can be scaled-up. We believe that such integration of sparsity with approximate query processing, which
is already eﬃcient over diﬀerent systems, is the future of
large-scale machine learning.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our randomized hashing approach is designed to minimize the amount of computation necessary to train a neural
network eﬀectively.
Training neural networks requires a
signiﬁcant amount of computational resources and time, limiting the scalability of neural networks and its sustainability
on embedded, low-powered devices. Our results show that
our approach performs better than the other methods when
using only 5% of the nodes executed in a standard neural
network. The implication is that neural networks using our
approach can run on mobile devices with longer battery life
while maintaining performance. We also show that due to
inherent sparsity our approach scales near-linearly with asynchronous stochastic gradient descent running with multiple
processors.
Our future work is to optimize our approach for diﬀerent
mobile processors. We have many choices to choose from
including the Nvidia Tegra and Qualcomm Snapdragon platforms. Recently, Movidius released plans for a specialized
deep learning processor called the Myriad 2 VPU (visual
processing unit) . The processor combines the best aspects
of GPUs, DSPs, and CPUs to produce 150 GFLOPs and
while using about 1 W of power. We plan to leverage the
diﬀerent platform architectures to achieve greater eﬃciency
with our randomized hashing approach.
Rectangles
The convergence of our randomized hashing approach (LSH-5%) over several training epochs
using asynchronous stochastic gradient with 1, 8, 56 threads. We used a (3 hidden layer) network on the
MNIST (1st), NORB (2nd), Convex (3rd) and Rectangles (4th) datasets. Only 5% of the standard network’s
computation was performed in this experiment.
Rectangles
Figure 7: Performance comparison between our randomized hashing approach and a standard network using
asynchronous stochastic gradient descent on an Intel Xeon ES-2697 machine with 56-cores.
We used (3
hidden layer) networks on MNIST (1st), NORB (2nd), Convex (3rd) and Rectangles (4th).
All networks
were initialized with the same settings for this experiment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of Ryan Spring was supported from NSF Award
1547433. This work was supported by Rice Faculty Initiative
Award 2016.