HAL Id: inria-00548231
 
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Aﬀine-Invariant Local Descriptors and Neighborhood
Statistics for Texture Recognition
Svetlana Lazebnik, Cordelia Schmid, Jean Ponce
To cite this version:
Svetlana Lazebnik, Cordelia Schmid, Jean Ponce. Aﬀine-Invariant Local Descriptors and Neighborhood Statistics for Texture Recognition.
9th IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV ’03), Oct 2003, nice, France. pp.649–655, ￿10.1109/ICCV.2003.1238409￿. ￿inria-00548231￿
Afﬁne-Invariant Local Descriptors and Neighborhood Statistics
for Texture Recognition
Svetlana Lazebnik
Cordelia Schmid
Jean Ponce
Beckman Institute
Inria Rhˆone-Alpes
Beckman Institute
University of Illinois, Urbana, USA
Montbonnot, France
University of Illinois, Urbana, USA
 
 
 
This paper presents a framework for texture recognition
based on local afﬁne-invariant descriptors and their spatial layout. At modeling time, a generative model of local
descriptors is learned from sample images using the EM algorithm. The EM framework allows the incorporation of
unsegmented multi-texture images into the training set. The
second modeling step consists of gathering co-occurrence
statistics of neighboring descriptors. At recognition time,
initial probabilities computed from the generative model
are reﬁned using a relaxation step that incorporates cooccurrence statistics. Performance is evaluated on images
of an indoor scene and pictures of wild animals.
Introduction
Texture representations that are invariant to a wide
range of geometric and photometric transformations are
desirable for many applications, including wide-baseline
matching , texture-based retrieval in image
databases , segmentation of natural scenes ,
recognition of materials , and recognition of semantic
texture categories, e.g., natural vs. man-made . In this
paper, we investigate a texture representation that is invariant to any geometric transformations that can be locally approximated by an afﬁne model, from perspective distortions
to non-rigid deformations.
Recently, several afﬁne-invariant region detectors have
been developed for the applications of wide-baseline matching, indexing, and retrieval . As demonstrated in our
earlier work , such detectors can also make effective texture analysis tools. In this paper, we use a texture representation based on a sparse set of afﬁne-invariant regions to
perform retrieval and segmentation of multi-texture images.
This task is more challenging than the recognition of singletexture images: instead of comparing distributions of local
features gathered over a large ﬁeld, we are forced to classify each local feature individually. Since it is not always
possible to unambiguously classify a small image region,
we must augment the local representation with a description of the spatial relationship between neighoring regions.
The systems developed by Malik et al. and Schmid 
are examples of this two-layer architecture, with intensitybased descriptors at the ﬁrst level and histograms of texton
distributions at the second.
This paper describes a conceptually similar two-stage
approach to texture modeling. The ﬁrst stage consists in estimating the distribution of local intensity descriptors. Unlike most existing methods, which use ﬁxed-size windows
to compute these descriptors, ours employs shape selection:
the area over which the descriptors are computed is determined automatically using an afﬁne adaptation process .
We represent the distribution of descriptors in each class
by a Gaussian mixture model where each component corresponds to a “sub-class”. This generative model is used to assign the most likely sub-class label to each region extracted
from a training image. At the second stage of the modeling process, co-occurrence statistics of different sub-class
labels are computed over neighborhoods adaptively deﬁned
using the afﬁne shape of local regions. Test images (which
may contain multiple textures) are also processed in two
stages. First, the generative model is used to assign initial
probability estimates of sub-class membership to all feature
vectors. These estimates are then reﬁned using a relaxation
step that incorporates co-occurrence statistics.
The most basic form of the modeling process is fully supervised, i.e., the training data contains only single-texture
images. However, we show in Section 2.2 that a weaker
form of supervision is possible: the training data may include unsegmented multi-texture images. In Section 3, we
evaluate the proposed texture representation on two data
sets. The ﬁrst set consists of photographs of textured surfaces taken from different viewpoints and featuring signiﬁcant scale changes and perspective distortions. The second
set consists of images of animals whose appearance can be
adequately modeled by texture-based methods.
Modeling Textures
Feature Extraction
At the feature extraction stage, our implementation uses
an afﬁne-adapted Laplacian blob detector based on the scale
and shape selection framework developed by Lindeberg et
al. . The detector begins by ﬁnding the locations in
scale space where a normalized Laplacian measure attains
a local maximum. Informally, the spatial coordinates of the
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 2-Volume Set
0-7695-1950-4/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
maximum deﬁne the center of a circular “blob”, and the
scale at which the maximum is achieved becomes the characteristic scale of the blob. The second stage applies an
afﬁne adaptation process based on the second-moment matrix. The regions found by the detector are ellipses deﬁned
by (p −p0)T M(p −p0) ≤1, where p0 is the center of
the ellipse, and M is a 2 × 2 symmetric local shape matrix
(see for details). We can normalize the patch deﬁned
by M by applying to it any transformation that maps the
ellipse onto a unit circle. It can be shown that if two image patches are initially related by an afﬁne transformation,
then the respective normalized patches are related by a rotation . We eliminate this ambiguity by representing
each normalized patch by a rotationally invariant descriptor.
The descriptors used in this work are intensity domain
spin images inspired by the spin images used by Johnson
and Hebert for matching range data. An intensity domain spin image is a two-dimensional histogram of brightness values in an afﬁne-normalized patch. The two dimensions of the histogram are d, the distance from the center of
the normalized patch, and i, the intensity value. Thus the
“slice” of the spin image corresponding to a ﬁxed d is simply the histogram of the intensity values of pixels located at
a distance d from the center. In this work, the size of spin
images is 10 × 10. Before using spin images as input to
the density estimation process described in the next section,
we rescale them to have a constant norm and “ﬂatten” them
into 100-dimensional feature vectors denoted x below.
Density Estimation
In the supervised framework, the training data consists of
single-texture sample images from classes with labels Cℓ,
ℓ= 1, . . . , L. The class-conditional densities p(x|Cℓ) can
be estimated using all the feature vectors extracted from the
images belonging to class Cℓ. We model class-conditional
densities as p(x|Cℓ) = M
m=1 p(x|cℓm) p(cℓm), where
the components cℓm, m = 1, . . . , M, are thought of as
sub-classes. Each p(x|cℓm) is assumed to be a Gaussian
with mean µℓm and covariance matrix Σℓm. The EM algorithm is used to estimate the parameters of the mixture
model, namely the means µℓm, covariances Σℓm, and mixing weights p(cℓm). EM is initialized with the output of the
K-means algorithm. In this work, we use the same number of mixture components for each class (M = 15 and
M = 10, respectively, for the experiments reported in Sections 3.1 and 3.2). We limit the number of free parameters
and control numerical behavior by using spherical Gaussians with covariance matrices of the form Σℓm = σ2
The EM framework provides a natural way of incorporating unsegmented multi-texture images into the training set.
Our approach is inspired by the work of Nigam et al. ,
who have proposed techniques for using unlabeled training
data in text classiﬁcation. Suppose we are given a multitexture image annotated with the set L of class indices that
it contains—that is, each feature vector x extracted from
this image has a label set of the form CL = {Cℓ|ℓ∈L}.
To accommodate label sets, the density estimation framework needs to be modiﬁed: instead of partitioning the training data into subsets belonging to each class and separately
estimating L mixture models with M components each, we
now use all the data simultaneously to estimate a single mixture model with L × M components. The estimation process must start by selecting some initial values for model
parameters. During the expectation or E-step, we use the
parameters to compute probabilistic sub-class membership
weights given the feature vectors x and the label sets CL:
p(cℓm|x, CL) ∝p(x|cℓm) p(cℓm|CL), where p(cℓm|CL) =
0 for all ℓ/∈L and 
m=1 p(cℓm|CL) = 1. During
the maximization or M-step, we use the computed weights
to re-estimate the parameters by maximizing the expected
likelihood of the data in the standard fashion .
Overall, the incorporation of incompletely labeled data
requires only a slight modiﬁcation of the EM algorithm used
for estimating class-conditional densities.
However, this
modiﬁcation is of great utility, since the task of segmenting training examples by hand becomes an odious chore
even for moderately-sized data sets. In situations where it is
difﬁcult to obtain large amounts of fully labeled examples,
training on incompletely labeled or unlabeled data helps to
improve classiﬁcation performance .
In the subsequent experiments, we exercise the EM
framework in two different ways. The data set of Section
3.1 contains both single- and multi-texture training images,
which are used respectively to initialize and reﬁne the parameters of the generative model. The data set of Section
3.2 consists entirely of unsegmented multi-texture images.
Neighborhood Statistics
This section describes the second layer of our representation, which accumulates information about the distribution
of pairs of sub-class labels in neighboring regions. After the
density estimation step, each region in the training image
is assigned the sub-class label that maximizes the posterior
probability p(cℓm|x, CL). Next, we need a method for computing the neighborhood of a region centered at location p0
and having local shape matrix M. The simplest approach
is to deﬁne the neighborhood as the set of all points p such
that (p −p0)T M(p −p0) ≤α for some constant α. However, in practice this deﬁnition produces poor results: points
with small ellipses get too few neighbors, and points with
large ellipses get too many. A better approach is to “grow”
the ellipse by adding a constant absolute amount (15 pixels in the implementation) to the major and minor axes, and
to let the neighborhood consist of all points that fall inside
this enlarged ellipse. In this way, the size and shape of the
neighborhood still depends on the afﬁne shape of the region,
but the neighborhood structure is more balanced.
Once we have deﬁned the neighborhood structure, we
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 2-Volume Set
0-7695-1950-4/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
can think of the image as a directed graph with arcs emanating from the center of each region to other centers within its
neighborhood. The existence of an arc from a region with
sub-class label c to another region with label c′ is a joint
event (c, c′) (note that the order is important since the neighborhood relation is not symmetric). We ﬁnd the relative frequencies p(c, c′) for all pairs (c, c′), and also compute the
marginals ˆp(c) = 
c′ p(c, c′) and ˇp(c′) = 
c p(c, c′). Finally, we compute the values
r(c, c′) =
p(c, c′) −ˆp(c) ˇp(c′)
ˆp(c) −ˆp2(c)
ˇp(c′) −ˇp2(c′)
representing the correlations between the events that the labels c and c′, respectively, belong to the source and destination nodes of the same arc. The values of r(c, c′) must lie
between −1 and 1; negative (resp. positive) values indicate
that c and c′ rarely (resp. frequently) co-occur as labels at
endpoints of the same edge.
In our experiments, we have found that the values of
r(c, c′) are reliable only when c and c′ are sub-classes of the
same class. Part of the difﬁculty in estimating correlations
across classes is the lack of data in the training set. Even
if the set contains multi-texture images, only a few arcs actually fall across texture boundaries. Unless the number of
texture classes is very small, it is quite difﬁcult to create
a training set that would include samples of every possible boundary. Thus, whenever c and c′ belong to different classes, we set r(c, c′) to a constant negative value that
serves as a “smoothness constraint” in the relaxation algorithm described in the next section (we use values between
−0.5 and −1, all of which tend to produce similar results).
Relaxation
We have implemented the classic relaxation algorithm of
Rosenfeld et al. . The initial estimate of the probability
that the ith region has label c, denoted p(0)
i (c), is obtained
from the learned mixture model as the posterior p(c|xi).
Note that since we run relaxation on unlabeled test data,
these probabilities must be computed for all L × M subclass labels corresponding to all possible classes. At each
iteration, new estimates p(t+1)
(c) are obtained by updating
the current probabilities p(t)
i (c) using the equation
r(c, c′) p(t)
The scalars wij are weights that indicate how much inﬂuence region j exerts on region i. We treat wij as a binary
indicator variable that is nonzero if and only if the jth region
belongs to the ith neighborhood. The weights are required
to be normalized so that 
j wij = 1 .
The update equation (1) can be justiﬁed in qualitative
terms as follows. Note that p(t)
j (c′) has no practical effect
i (c) when the ith and jth regions are not neighbors,
when c and c′ are uncorrelated, or when the probability
j (c′) is low. However, the effect is signiﬁcant when the
jth region belongs to the ith neighborhood and the value
j (c′) is high. The correlation r(c, c′) expresses how
“compatible” the labels c and c′ are at nearby locations.
Thus, p(t)
i (c) is increased (resp. decreased) by the largest
amount when r(c, c′) has a large positive (resp. negative)
value. Overall, the probabilities of different sub-class labels at neighboring locations reinforce each other in an intuitively satisfying fashion. Even though the iteration of (1)
has no convergence guarantees, we have found it to behave
well on our data. To obtain the results of Sections 3.1 and
3.2, we run relaxation for 200 iterations.
Classiﬁcation and Retrieval
Individual regions are classiﬁed by assigning them to the
class that maximizes pi(Cℓ) = M
m=1 pi(cℓm). To perform
classiﬁcation and retrieval at the image level, we need to
deﬁne a “global” score for each class. In the experiments
of the next section, the score for class Cℓis computed by
summing the probability of Cℓover all N regions found in
the image: N
m=1 pi(cℓm), where the pi(cℓm) are the
probability estimates following relaxation. Classiﬁcation of
single-texture images is carried out by assigning the image
to the class with the highest score, and retrieval for a given
texture model proceeds from highest scores to lowest.
Experimental Results
The Indoor Scene
Our ﬁrst data set contains seven different textures present
in a single indoor scene (Figure 1). To test the invariance of
our representation, we have gathered images over a wide
range of viewpoints and scales. The data set is partitioned
as follows: 10 single-texture training images of each class;
10 single-texture validation images of each class; 13 twotexture training images; and 45 multi-texture test images.
Table 1 shows classiﬁcation results for the single-texture
validation images following training on single-texture images only. The columns labeled “image” show the fraction
of images classiﬁed correctly using the score described in
Section 2.5. As can be seen from the ﬁrst column, successful classiﬁcation at the image level does not require relaxation: good results are achieved in most cases by using the
probabilities output by the generative model. Interestingly,
for class T6 (marble), the classiﬁcation rate actually drops
as an artifact of relaxation. When the right class has relatively low initial probabilities, the self-reinforcing nature of
relaxation often serves to diminish these probabilities further. The columns labeled “region”, which show the fraction of all individual regions in the validation images that
were correctly classiﬁed based on the probabilities pi(Cℓ),
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 2-Volume Set
0-7695-1950-4/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
T1 (Brick)
T2 (Carpet)
T3 (Chair)
T4 (Floor 1)
T5 (Floor 2)
T6 (Marble)
Figure 1: Samples of the texture classes used in the experiments of Section 3.1.
Before relaxation
After relaxation
Table 1: Classiﬁcation rates for single-texture images.
are much more indicative of the impact of relaxation: for all
seven classes, classiﬁcation rates improve dramatically.
Next, we evaluate the performance of the system for retrieval of images containing a given texture. Figure 2 shows
the results in the form of ROC curves that plot the positive detection rate (the number of correct images retrieved
over the total number of correct images) against the false
detection rate (the number of false positives over the total
number of negatives in the data set). The top row shows
results obtained after fully supervised training using singletexture images only, as described in Section 2.2. The bottom
row shows the results obtained after re-estimating the generative model following the incorporation of 13 two-texture
images into the training set. Following relaxation, a modest improvement in performance is achieved for most of the
classes. A more signiﬁcant improvement could probably be
achieved by using more multi-texture training samples .
For the majority of test images, our system succeeds in
providing an accurate segmentation of the image into regions of different texture. Part (a) of Figure 3 shows a typical example of the difference made by relaxation in the
assignment of class labels to individual regions. Part (b)
shows more examples where the relaxation was successful.
Note in particular the top example of part (b), where the perceptually similar classes T4 and T5 are unambiguously separated. Part (c) of Figure 3 shows two examples of segmentation failure. In the bottom example, classes T2 (carpet)
and T3 (chair) are confused, which can be partly explained
by the fact that the scales at which the two textures appear
in this image are not well represented in the training set.
Overall, we have found the relaxation process to be sensitive to initialization, in the sense that poor initial probability
estimates lead to artifacts in the ﬁnal assignment.
Our second data set consists of unsegmented images of
three kinds of animals: cheetahs, giraffes, and zebras. The
training set contains 10 images from each class, and the test
set contains 20 images from each class, plus 20 “negative”
images not containing instances of the target animals. To
account for the lack of segmentation, we introduce an additional “background” class, and each training image is labeled as containing the appropriate animal and the background. To initialize EM on this data, we randomly assign
each feature vector either to the appropriate animal class,
or to the background. The ROC curves for each class are
shown in Figure 4, and segmentation results are shown in
Figure 5. Overall, our system appears to have learned very
good models for cheetahs and zebras, but not for giraffes.
We conjecture that several factors account for the weakness of the giraffe model.
Some of the blame can be
placed on the early stage of feature extraction. Namely, the
Laplacian-based afﬁne region detector is not well adapted
to the giraffe texture whose blobs have a relatively complex shape. At the learning stage, the system also appears
to be “distracted” by background features, such as sky and
trees, that occur more commonly in training samples of giraffes than of the other animals. In the bottom image of
Figure 5, “giraffe-ness” is associated with some parts of the
background, as opposed to the animals themselves. The artiﬁcial “background” class is simply too inhomogeneous to
be successfully represented in the mixture framework. A
principled solution to this problem would involve partitioning the background into a set of natural classes (e.g., grass,
trees, water, rocks, etc.) and building larger training sets
that would include these classes in different combinations.
Overall, our results (though somewhat uneven) are
promising. Unlike many other methods suitable for modeling natural textures, ours does not require negative examples. The EM framework shows surprising aptitude for
automatically separating positive areas of the image from
negative ones, without the need for specially designed signiﬁcance scores such as the ones used by Schmid .
Discussion and Future Work
The texture representation method proposed in this paper
offers several important advantages over other methods proposed in recent literature . The use of an interest
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 2-Volume Set
0-7695-1950-4/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
Figure 2: ROC curves for retrieval in the test set of 45 multi-texture images. The dashed (resp. solid) line represents performance before
(resp. after) relaxation. Top row: single-texture training images only, bottom row: single-texture and two-texture training images.
Figure 4: ROC curves for the animal dataset. The dashed (resp.
solid) line represents performance before (resp. after) relaxation.
point detector leads to a sparse representation that selects
the most perceptually salient regions in an image, while the
shape selection process provides afﬁne invariance. Another
important advantage of shape selection is the adaptive determination of both levels of image structure: the window size
over which local descriptors are computed, and the neighborhood relationship between adjacent windows.
In the future, we will pursue several directions for the
improvement of our system. We have found that the performance of relaxation is sensitive to the quality of the initial
probability estimates; therefore, we need to obtain the best
estimates possible. To this end, we plan to investigate the effectiveness of discriminative models, e.g. neural networks,
that output conﬁdence values interpretable as probabilities
of class membership. Relaxation can also be made more effective by the use of stronger geometric neighborhood relations that take into account afﬁne shape while preserving the
maximum amount of invariance. Finally, we plan to extend
our work to modeling complex texture categories found in
natural imagery, e.g., cities, forests, and oceans.
Acknowledgments. This research was partially funded by
the UIUC Campus Research Board, the National Science
Foundation grants IRI-990709 and IIS-0308087, the European Project LAVA , and by a UIUC-
CNRS collaboration agreement.