Ontological User Profiling in Recommender
STUART E. MIDDLETON, NIGEL R. SHADBOLT AND DAVID C. DE ROURE
Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia Group, University of Southampton
________________________________________________________________________
We explore a novel ontological approach to user profiling within recommender systems, working on the
problem of recommending on-line academic research papers. Our two experimental systems, Quickstep and
Foxtrot, create user profiles from unobtrusively monitored behaviour and relevance feedback, representing the
profiles in terms of a research paper topic ontology. A novel profile visualization approach is taken to acquire
profile feedback. Research papers are classified using ontological classes and collaborative recommendation
algorithms used to recommend papers seen by similar people on their current topics of interest. Two small-scale
experiments, with 24 subjects over 3 months, and a large-scale experiment, with 260 subjects over an academic
year, are conducted to evaluate different aspects of our approach. Ontological inference is shown to improve
user profiling, external ontological knowledge used to successfully bootstrap a recommender system and profile
visualization employed to improve profiling accuracy. The overall performance of our ontological recommender
systems are also presented and favourably compared to other systems in the literature.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.2.6 [Artificial Intelligence]: Learning - Knowledge acquisition; I.2.11
[Artificial Intelligence]: Distributed Artificial Intelligence - Intelligent agents; H.3.3 [Information Storage
and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval - Information filtering, Relevance feedback
General Terms: Algorithms, Measurement, Design, Experimentation
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Agent, Machine learning, Ontology, Personalization, Recommender
systems, User profiling, User modelling
________________________________________________________________________
1. INTRODUCTION
The mass of content available on the World-Wide Web raises important questions over
its effective use. The web is largely unstructured, with pages authored by many people on
a diverse range of topics, making simple browsing too time consuming to be practical.
Web page filtering has thus become necessary for most web users.
Search engines are effective at filtering pages that match explicit queries.
Unfortunately, people find articulating what they want explicitly difficult, especially if
forced to use a limited vocabulary such as keywords. As such search queries are often
________________________________________________________________________
This research was supported by EPSRC studentship award number 99308831 and the Interdisciplinary Research
Collaboration In Advanced Knowledge Technologies (AKT) project GR/N15764/01.
Authors' addresses: Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia Group, Department of Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
Authors’ email: {sem99r,nrs,dder}@ecs.soton.ac.uk.
Submitted 3/10/02, Revision 6/4/03, Final revision 29/9/03
Permission to make digital/hard copy of part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice,
the title of the publication, and its date of appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the ACM,
Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
© 2001 ACM 1073-0516/01/0300-0034 $5.00
poorly formulated, and result in large lists of search results that contain only a handful of
useful pages.
The semantic web offers the potential for help, allowing more intelligent search
queries based on web pages marked up with semantic metadata. Semantic web technology
is, however, very dependant on the degree to which authors annotate their web pages, and
automatic web page annotation is still in its infancy. Annotation requires selflessness in
authors because the annotations provided will only help other people searching their web
pages. Because of this, the vast majority of web pages are not annotated, and in the
foreseeable future will remain so. The semantic web can thus only be of limited benefit to
the problem of effective searching.
Recommender systems go some way to addressing these issues. We present a novel
ontological approach to user profiling within recommender systems. Two recommender
systems are build, called Quickstep and Foxtrot, and three experiments conducted to
evaluate different aspects of their performance. Quickstep uses ontological inference to
improve profiling accuracy and integrates an external ontology for profile bootstrapping.
Foxtrot enhances the Quickstep system by employing the novel idea of visualizing user
profiles to acquire direct profile feedback.
This section discusses our chosen problem domain and our general approach to
ontological recommendation, along with related work. In section 2 we describe the
Quickstep recommender system and an experiment to show how inference can improve
user profiling and hence recommendation accuracy. Section 3 details an integration
between the Quickstep recommender system and an external ontology, along with an
experiment to demonstrate its effectiveness at bootstrapping profiles. In section 4 the
Foxtrot recommender system is described, with an experiment to demonstrate how profile
visualization can be used to acquire feedback and hence improve profile accuracy. Lastly,
in section 5 we bring this work together, collating the evidence found to support
ontological to user profiling within recommender systems, and discuss future work.
1.1 Recommender systems
People find articulating what they want hard, but they are very good at recognizing it
when they see it. This insight has led to the utilization of relevance feedback, where
people rate web pages as ‘interesting’ or ‘not interesting’ and the system tries to find
pages that match the ‘interesting’, positive examples and do not match the ‘not
interesting’, negative examples. With sufficient positive and negative examples, modern
machine learning techniques can classify new pages with impressive accuracy; in some
cases text classification accuracy exceeding human capability has been demonstrated
[Larkey 1998].
Obtaining sufficient examples is difficult however, especially when trying to obtain
negative examples. The problem with asking people for examples is that the cost, in terms
of time and effort, of providing the examples generally outweighs the reward people will
eventually receive. Negative examples are particularly unrewarding, since there could be
many irrelevant items to any typical query.
Unobtrusive monitoring provides positive examples of what the user is looking for,
without interfering with the users normal work activity. Heuristics can also be applied to
infer negative examples from observed behaviour, although generally with less
confidence. This idea has led to content-based recommender systems, which
unobtrusively watch user behaviour and recommend new items that correlate with a
user’s profile.
Another way to recommend items is based on the ratings provided by other people
who have liked the item before. Collaborative recommender systems do this by asking
people to rate items explicitly and then recommend new items that similar users have
rated highly. An issue with collaborative filtering is that there is no direct reward for
providing examples since they only help other people. This leads to initial difficulties in
obtaining a sufficient number of ratings for the system to be useful, a problem known as
the cold-start problem [Maltz and Ehrlich 1995].
Hybrid systems, attempting to combine the advantages of content-based and
collaborative recommender systems, have proved popular to-date. The feedback required
for content-based recommendation is shared, allowing collaborative recommendation as
1.2 User profiling
User profiling is typically either knowledge-based or behaviour-based. Knowledge-based
approaches engineer static models of users and dynamically match users to the closest
model. Questionnaires and interviews are often employed to obtain this user knowledge.
Behaviour-based approaches use the user’s behaviour as a model, commonly using
machine-learning techniques to discover useful patterns in the behaviour. Behavioural
logging is employed to obtain the data necessary from which to extract patterns. [Kobsa
1993] provides a good survey of user modelling techniques.
The user profiling approach used by most recommender systems is behaviour-based,
commonly using a binary class model to represent what users find interesting and
uninteresting. Machine-learning techniques are then used to find potential items of
interest in respect to the binary model. There are a lot of effective machine learning
algorithms based on two classes. A binary profile does not, however, lend itself to sharing
examples of interest or integrating any domain knowledge that might be available.
[Sebastiani 2002] provides a good survey of current machine learning techniques.
1.3 Ontologies
An ontology is a conceptualisation of a domain into a human-understandable, but
machine-readable format consisting of entities, attributes, relationships, and axioms
[Guarino and Giaretta 1995]. Ontologies can provide a rich conceptualisation of the
working domain of an organisation, representing the main concepts and relationships of
the work activities. These relationships could represent isolated information such as an
employee’s home phone number, or they could represent an activity such as authoring a
document, or attending a conference.
We use the term ontology to refer to the classification structure and instances within a
knowledge base.
1.4 Problem domain
The web is increasingly becoming the primary source of research papers to the modern
researcher. With millions of research papers available over the web from thousands of
web sites, finding the right papers and being informed of newly available papers is a
problematic task. Browsing this many web sites is too time consuming and search queries
are only fully effective if an explicit search query can be formulated for what you need.
All too often papers are missed.
We address the problem of recommending on-line research papers to the academic
staff and students at the University of Southampton. Academics need to search for
explicit research papers and be kept up-to-date on their own research areas when new
papers are published. We examine an ontological recommender system approach to
support these two activities. Unobtrusive monitoring methods are preferred because
researchers have their normal work to perform and would not welcome interruptions from
a new system. Very high accuracy on recommendations is not required since users will
have the option to simply ignore poor recommendations.
Real world knowledge acquisition systems are both tricky and complex to evaluate
[Shadbolt et al. 1999]. A lot of evaluations are performed with user log data, simulating
real user activity, or with standard benchmark collections, such as newspaper articles over
a period of one year, that provide a basis for comparison with other systems. Although
these evaluations are useful, especially for technique comparison, it is important to back
them up with real world studies so we can see how the benchmark tests generalize to the
real world setting. Similar problems are seen in the agent domain where, as Nwana
[Nwana 1996] argues, it has yet to be conclusively demonstrated that people really benefit
from agent-based information systems.
This is why a real problem has been chosen upon which to evaluate our work.
1.5 Related work
Group Lens [Konstan et al. 1997] is an example of a collaborative filter, recommending
newsgroup articles based on a Pearson-r correlation of other users’ ratings. Fab
[Balabanović and Shoham 1997] is a content-based recommender, recommending web
pages based on a nearest-neighbour algorithm working with each individual user’s set of
positive examples. The Quickstep and Foxtrot systems are hybrid recommender systems,
combining both these types of approach.
Personal web-based agents such as NewsDude and Daily Learner [Billsus and Pazzani
2000], Personal WebWatcher [Mladenić 1996] and NewsWeeder [Lang 1995] build
profiles from observed user behaviour. These systems filter news stories/web pages and
recommend unseen ones based on content, using k-Nearest Neighbour, naïve Bayes and
TF-IDF machine learning techniques. Individual sets of positive and negative examples
are maintained for each user’s profile. In contrast, by using an ontology to represent user
profiles we pool these limited training examples, sharing between users examples of each
Ontologies are used to improve content-based search, as seen in OntoSeek [Guarino et
al. 1999]. Users of OntoSeek navigate the ontology in order to formulate queries.
Ontologies are also used to automatically construct knowledge bases from web pages,
such as in Web-KB [Craven et al. 1998]. Web-KB takes manually labelled examples of
domain concepts and applies machine-learning techniques to classify new web pages.
Both systems do not, however, capture dynamic information such as user interests.
Digital libraries classify and store research papers, such as CiteSeer [Bollacker et al.
1998]. Typically such libraries are manually created and manually categorized. While our
systems are digital libraries, the content is dynamically and autonomously updated from
the browsing behaviour of its users.
[Mladenić and Stefan 1999] provides a good survey of text-learning and agent
systems, including content-based and collaborative approaches. The systems most related
to Quickstep and Foxtrot are Entrée [Burke 2000], which uses a knowledge base and
case-based reasoning to recommend restaurant data, and RAAP [Delgado et al. 1998] that
uses simple categories to represent user profiles with unshared individual training sets for
each user. None of these systems use an ontology to explicitly represent user profiles.
Of note is that very few systems in the recommender system literature perform user
trials using real users. To test classifier accuracy, most use either labelled benchmark
document collections, such as Reuters news feed collection, or logged user data, such as
Usenet logs.
1.6 Overview of approach
Our ontological approach to recommender systems uses a hybrid recommender system,
employing both collaborative and content-based recommendation techniques and
representing user profiles in ontological terms. Two experimental systems have been built
that follow this approach, called Quickstep and Foxtrot. Quickstep is a recommender
system for a set of researchers within a computer science laboratory, while Foxtrot is a
searchable database and recommender system for a computer science department. Figure
1 shows the generic structure of our ontological recommender systems.
Classifier
Recommender
Research Paper
Recommendation
World-Wide
World-Wide
Visualized
Classifier
Recommender
Research Paper
Recommendation
World-Wide
World-Wide
Visualized
Fig. 1. Our ontological approach to recommender systems
A web proxy is used to unobtrusively monitor each user’s web browsing, adding new
research papers to the central database as users discover them. The research paper
database thus acts as a pool of shared knowledge, available to all users via search and
recommendation. The database of research papers is classified using a research paper
topic ontology and a set of training examples.
Recorded web browsing and relevance feedback elicited from users is used to
compute daily profiles of user’s research interests. Interest profiles are represented in
ontological terms, allowing other interests to be inferred that go beyond that just seen
from directly observed behaviour. The interest profiles are visualized to allow elicitation
of direct profile feedback, providing an additional source of information from which
profiles can be computed.
Recommendations are compiled daily using collaborative filtering techniques to find
sets of interesting papers. These papers are then constrained to match the top topics of
interest within the content-based profiles. The papers left are used to create the
recommendations.
Users can view their recommendations via a web page or weekly email message, look
at and comment on visualizations of their profile via a web page or just search the
research paper database for specific papers of interest. Quickstep, the earlier system,
supports only web page recommendation while Foxtrot supports all the interface features.
1.7 Empirical evaluation
This paper describes three experiments performed using our two recommender systems.
The first uses the Quickstep system to measure the effectiveness of using ontological
inference in user profiling. Two 1.5 month trials were run using 24 members from the
IAM research laboratory, comparing use of ontological profiles and inference to that of
using unstructured profiles.
The second experiment integrated the Quickstep system with an external personnel
and publication ontology. This experiment measured how effectively an external ontology
can bootstrap a recommender system to reduce the recommender system cold-start
problem. Behaviour logs from the previous experiment were used as the basis for this
evaluation.
The third experiment took the Foxtrot recommender system and measures its overall
effectiveness and the performance increase obtained when profiles are visualized and
profile feedback acquired. A trial was run using 260 staff and students from the computer
science department of the University of Southampton for an academic year, comparing
performance of those subjects who provided profile feedback to those who did not.
2. ONTOLOGICAL USER PROFILING AND PROFILE INFERENCE
Our ontological approach to recommender systems, shown in figure 2, involves various
sub-processes. Our first experimental recommender system, called Quickstep [Middleton
et al. 2001], implements all these processes but with just a web page interface. Quickstep
is thus just a recommender system, without any search, email or visualization facilities. It
was built to help researchers in a computer science laboratory setting, representing user
profiling with a research topic ontology and using ontological inference to assist the
profiling process. An experiment was run to compare the recommendation performance
for subjects whose profiler used ontological inference with those whose profiler did not.
2.1 Overview of the Quickstep recommender system
Quickstep unobtrusively monitors user browsing behaviour via a web proxy, logging
each URL browsed during normal work activity. A machine-learning algorithm classifies
browsed URLs overnight, using classes within a research paper topic ontology, and saves
each classified paper in a central paper store. Explicit relevance feedback and browsed
topics form the basis of the interest profile for each user. Is-a relationships within the
research paper topic ontology are also exploited to infer general interests when specific
topics are observed.
Each day a set of recommendations is computed, based on correlations between user
interest profiles and classified paper topics. These recommendations are accessible to
users via a web page. Any feedback offered on these recommendations is recorded when
the user looks at them. Users can provide new examples of topics and correct paper
classifications where wrong. In this way the training set improves over time as well as the
Classifier
Recommender
Research Paper
Recommendation
World-Wide
World-Wide
Recommendation
Recommendation
Classifier
Recommender
Research Paper
Recommendation
World-Wide
World-Wide
Recommendation
Recommendation
Fig. 2. The Quickstep system
2.2 Approach of the Quickstep recommender system
The Quickstep system uses a java-based web proxy, which records time-stamped URLs
for each user. This proxy could handle about 30 users. The system ran on a Solaris
platform and was mostly written in Java.
2.2.1 Ontology
The research paper topic ontology is based on the computer science classifications
made by the dmoz open directory project [dmoz] and some minor customisations. We
chose to re-use an existing taxonomy to speed development time and provide a potential
route for system integration with other external ontologies in the future. Our simple
ontology holds is-a relationships between research paper topics, and has 27 classes; for
the second trial this ontology was extended to 32 classes. Figure 3 shows a section from
the ontology. Pre-trial interviews formed the basis of which additional topics would be
added to the ontology to customize it for the target researchers. An expert review by two
domain experts validated the ontology for correctness before use in our experiment.
Artificial
Intelligence
Hypermedia
E-Commerce
Interface Agents
Mobile Agents
Multi-Agent-Systems
Recommender Systems
Belief Networks
Game Theory
Genetic Algorithms
Genetic Programming
Knowledge Representation
Information Filtering
Information Retrieval
Machine Learning
Natural Language
Neural Networks
Philosophy [AI]
Robotics [AI]
Speech [AI]
Vision [AI]
Text Classification
Ontologies
Adaptive Hypermedia
Hypertext Design
Industrial Hypermedia
Literature [hypermedia]
Open Hypermedia
Spatial Hypertext
Taxonomic Hypertext
Visualization [hypertext]
Web [hypermedia]
Content-Based Navigation
Architecture [open hypermedia]
Fig. 3. Section from the Quickstep research paper topic ontology
2.2.2 Research paper representation
Research papers are represented using term vectors. We use ‘term’ to mean a single
word within the text of a paper, thus all words that appear in the training set of example
papers add one dimension to our term vectors. Term vector weights are computed from
the term frequency (TF) divided by total number of terms, representing the normalized
frequency in which a word appears within a research paper. Since many words are either
too common or too rare to have useful discriminating power to a classifier, we use a few
dimensionality reduction techniques to reduce the number of dimensions of the term
vectors. Porter stemming [Porter 1980] is used to remove term suffixes and the SMART
[SMART Staff 1974] stop list is used to remove very common words like “the” and “or”.
Term frequencies below 2 are removed since they have little discriminating power.
Dimensionality reduction is common in information system; [Sebastiani 2002] provides a
good discussion of the issues.
Most on-line research papers are in HTML, PS or PDF formats, with many papers
being compressed. We support all these formats for maximum coverage in our problem
domain, converting the papers to plain text and using this text to create the term vectors.
Unusual or corrupt formats are ignored. Several heuristics are used to determine if the
research papers are converted to text correctly and look like a typical research paper with
terms such as ‘abstract’ and ‘references’. In the later experiments, term vectors for papers
had around 15,000 dimensions after dimensionality reduction.
2.2.3 Classifier
Research papers in the central database are classified by an IBk [Aha et al. 1991]
classifier, which is boosted by the AdaBoostM1 [Freund and Schapire 1996] algorithm.
The IBk classifier is a k-Nearest Neighbour type classifier that uses example documents,
called a training set, added to a term-vector space. Example documents in the training set
are manually labelled using the class names within the research paper topic ontology.
Figure 4 shows the basic k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm. The closeness of an unclassified
vector to its neighbour vectors within the term-vector space determines its classification.
w(da,db) = √
____________
(tja – tjb)2
kNN distance between document a and b
document vectors
number of terms in document set
weight of term j document a
Fig. 4. k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm
Classifiers like k-Nearest Neighbour allow more training examples to be added to
their term-vector space without the need to re-build the entire classifier. They also
degrade well, so even when incorrect the class returned is normally in the right
“neighbourhood” and so at least partially relevant. This makes k-Nearest Neighbour a
robust choice of algorithm for research paper classification.
Boosting works by repeatedly running a weak learning algorithm on various
distributions of the training set, and then combining the specialist classifiers produced by
the weak learner into a single composite classifier. The “weak” learning algorithm here is
the IBk classifier. Figure 5 shows the AdaBoostM1 algorithm.
Initialise all values of D to 1/N
Do for t=1..T
call weak-learn(Dt)
calculate error et
calculate βt = et/(1-et)
calculate Dt+1
class weight distribution on iteration t
number of classes
number of iterations
weak-learn(Dt)
weak learner with distribution Dt
weak_learn error on iteration t
error adjustment value on iteration t
classifier
final boosted classifier
all classes
classifier = argmax Σ
t = all iterations
with result class c
Initialise all values of D to 1/N
Do for t=1..T
call weak-learn(Dt)
calculate error et
calculate βt = et/(1-et)
calculate Dt+1
class weight distribution on iteration t
number of classes
number of iterations
weak-learn(Dt)
weak learner with distribution Dt
weak_learn error on iteration t
error adjustment value on iteration t
classifier
final boosted classifier
all classes
classifier = argmax Σ
t = all iterations
with result class c
classifier = argmax Σ
t = all iterations
with result class c
Fig. 5. AdaBoostM1 boosting algorithm
AdaBoostM1 has been shown to improve the performance of weak learner algorithms
[Freund and Schapire 1996], particularly for the stronger learning algorithms like k-
Nearest Neighbour. It is thus a sensible choice to boost our IBk classifier.
Other types of classifier were considered, including the naïve Bayes classifier and the
C4.5 decision tree, and informal tests run to evaluate their performance. The boosted IBk
classifier was found to give superior performance for this domain.
2.2.4 Web page interface
Recommendations are presented to the user via a browser web page, shown in figure
6. The web page applet loads the current recommendation set and records any feedback
the user provides. Research papers can be jumped to, opening a new browser window to
display the paper URL. If the user likes or dislikes a paper topic, the interest feedback
combo-box allows “interested” or “not interested” to replace the default “no comment”.
Fig. 6. Quickstep’s web-based interface
Clicking on the topic and selecting a new one from a popup menu can change the
topic of each paper, should the user feel the classification is incorrect. In the experiment
later the ontology group has a hierarchical popup menu, and the flat list group has a single
level popup menu. Figure 7 shows the hierarchical popup menu.
Fig. 7. Topic popup menus
New examples can be added via the interface, with users providing a paper URL and a
topic label. These are added to the groups training set, allowing users to teach the system
new topics or improve classification of old ones.
All feedback is stored in log files, ready for the profile builders run. The feedback logs
are also used as the primary metric for evaluation. Interest feedback, topic corrections and
jumps to recommended papers are all recorded.
2.2.5 Profiler
Interest profiles are computed daily by correlating previously browsed research papers
with their classification. User profiles thus hold a set of topics and interest values in these
topics for each day of the trial. User feedback also adjusts the interest of topics within the
profile and a time decay function weights recently seen papers as being more important
than older ones. Ontological relationships between topics of interest are used to infer
other topics of interest, which might not have been browsed explicitly; an instance of an
interest value for a specific class adds 50% of its value to the super-class. Figure 8 shows
the profiling algorithm.
1..no of instances
Interest value(n) / days old(n)
Topic interest =
interest values
Paper browsed = 1
Recommendation followed = 2
Topic rated interesting = 10
Topic rated not interesting = -10
Interest value for
super-class per instance = 50% of sub-class
1..no of instances
Interest value(n) / days old(n)
Topic interest =
interest values
Paper browsed = 1
Recommendation followed = 2
Topic rated interesting = 10
Topic rated not interesting = -10
Interest value for
super-class per instance = 50% of sub-class
Fig. 8. Profiling algorithm
Profile feedback details a level of interest in a topic over a period of time. The user
defines the exact level and duration of interests when they draw interest bars onto the
time/interest graph via the profile interface. The profiling algorithm automatically adjusts
the daily profiles to match any topic interest levels declared via profile feedback.
Event interest values were chosen to favour explicit feedback over implicit, and the
50% value used to represent the reduction in confidence you get the further from the
direct observation you are.
Other profiling algorithms exist such as time-slicing and curve fitting, but the timedecay function appeared in informal tests to produce a good result; we found it to be a
robust function for finding current interests.
2.2.6 Recommender
Recommendations are formulated from a correlation between the users’ current topics
of interest and papers classified as belonging to those topics. A paper is only
recommended if it does not appear in the users browsed URL log, ensuring that
recommendations have not been seen before. For each user, the top three interesting
topics are selected with 10 recommendations made in total. Papers are ranked in order of
the recommendation confidence before being presented to the user.
Recommendation confidence =classification confidence *
topic interest value
Fig. 9. Quickstep recommendation algorithm
The classification confidence is computed from the AdaBoostM1 algorithm’s class
probability value for a paper, a value between 0 and 1.
2.3 Evaluation of ontological inference in user profiling
We used the Quickstep recommender system to compare subjects whose profiles were
computed using ontological inference with subjects whose profiles did not use
ontological inference. The experiment took place over a 3-month period in the IAM
laboratory using 24 computer science researchers. An overall evaluation of the Quickstep
recommender system was also performed. The Quickstep recommender system and this
experiment are published in more detail in [Middleton et al. 2001].
2.3.1 Experimental design
Two identical trials were conducted, the first with 14 subjects and the second with 24
subjects, both over 1.5 months. Some interface improvements were made for the second
trial and 5 more ontological classes were added.
Subjects were divided into two groups, one using an ontological approach to user
profiling with a topic ontology and the other using a flat, unstructured list of topics. Both
groups had their own separate training set of examples, which diverged from the
bootstrap training set as the trial progressed when users corrected the classification of
papers and hence provided new examples. The classifier algorithm was identical for both
groups; only the training set changed.
The system interface used by both groups was identical, except for the popup menu
for choosing paper topics. The ontology group had a hierarchical menu that used the topic
ontology; the flat list group had a single level menu.
The system recorded each time the user declared an interest in a topic by selecting it
“interesting” or “not interesting”, jumped to a recommended paper or corrected the topic
of a recommended paper. These feedback events were date stamped and recorded in a log
file for later analysis, along with a log of all recommendations made.
2.3.2 Experimental results
Topic interest feedback is where the user comments on a recommended topic,
declaring it “interesting” or “not interesting”, and is an indication of the accuracy of the
current profile. When a recommended topic is correct for a period of time, a user will tend
to become content with it and stop rating it as “interesting”. On the other hand, an
uninteresting topic is likely to always attract a “not interesting” rating. Good topics are
defined as either “no comment” or “interesting” topics. The cumulative frequency figures
for good topics are presented in figure 10 as a ratio of the total number of topics
recommended.
Number of days into trial
Good topics / total topics
Trial 2, Ontology
Trial 2, Flat list
Trial 1, Ontology
Trial 1, Flat list
Fig. 10. Ratio of good topics / total topics
The two ontological groups have a 7% and 15% higher topic acceptance. In addition
to this trend, the first trial ratios are about 10% lower than the second trial ratios.
A jump is where the user jumps to a recommended paper by opening it via the web
browser. Jumps are correlated with topic interest feedback, so a good jump is a jump to a
paper on a good topic. Recommendation accuracy is the ratio of good jumps to
recommendations, and is an indication of the quality of the recommendations being made
as well as the accuracy of the profile. Figure 11 shows the recommendation accuracy
Number of days into trial
Recommendation accuracy
Trial 2, Ontology
Trial 2, Flat list
Trial 1, Ontology
Trial 1, Flat list
Fig. 11. Recommendation accuracy
There is a small 1% improvement in recommendation accuracy by the ontology group.
Both trials show between 8-10% of recommendations leading to good jumps.
A cross-validation test was run on each group’s final training set to assess the
accuracy and coverage of the classifier. The results are shown in table I. The accuracy
value is a ratio of how many correctly classified papers there were over the number
classified. The coverage value is a ratio of how many papers were classified over the total
number of papers.
Table I. Quickstep classifier accuracy and coverage
Trial 1 Ontology
Trial 1 Flat list
Trial 2 Ontology
Trial 2 Flat list
2.3.3 Discussion
From the experimental data of both trials, several suggestive trends are apparent. The
initial ratios of good topics were lower than the final ratios, reflecting the time it takes for
enough log information to be accumulated to let the profiles settle down. The ontology
users were 7-15% happier overall with the topics suggested to them.
A hypothesis for the ontology group’s apparently superior performance is that the is-a
hierarchy produces a rounder, more complete profile by including general super class
topics when a specific topic is browsed by a user. This in turn helps the profile to acquire
a broad range of interests, rather than just latching onto one correct topic.
The first trial showed fewer good topics than the second trial with a 10% difference
seen by both groups. This is probably because of interface improvements made for the
second trial, where the topic feedback interface was made less confusing. Subjects were
sometimes rating interesting topics as not interesting if the paper quality was poor. Since
there are more poor quality papers than good quality ones, this introduced a bias to not
interesting topic feedback resulting in a lower overall ratio.
About 10% of recommendations led to good jumps. Since 10 recommendations were
given to the users at a time, on average one good jump was made from each set of
recommendations received. As with the topic feedback, the ontology group again was
marginally superior but only by a 1% margin; this trend is promising but not statistically
significant even though it appears in both trials. This smaller difference is probably due to
people having time to follow only 1 or 2 recommendations. Thus, although the ontology
group had more good topics, only the top topic of the three recommended was really be
looked at; the result was a smaller difference between the good jumps made and the good
topics seen.
These results are not statistically significant due to the sample size. Nevertheless, the
trend in the data appears to be encouraging.
2.4 Conclusions
The results suggest how using ontological inference in the profiling process results in
superior performance over using a flat list of unstructured topics. The ontology users
tended to have more “rounder” profiles, including topics of interest that were not directly
browsed. This increased the accuracy of the profiles, and hence usefulness of the
recommendations.
Very few systems in the recommender system literature perform user trials using real
users, making direct comparison difficult. Most use either labelled benchmark document
collections to test classifier accuracy or logged user data taken from sources such as
newsgroups. NewsWeeder reports a 40-60% classification accuracy with real users, while
Personal WebWatcher [Mladenić 1996] reports a 60-90% classification accuracy using
benchmark data. Quickstep’s classifier is on the low side with 40-50% accuracy, but this
appears much better when the number of classes used in classification is taken into
account and the potential this allows for improving profiling via inference and profile
The Daily Learner [Billsus and Pazzani 2000] system recommends news stories via a
wireless hand held receiver. They used a k-NN algorithm for short-term profiles and a
naïve Bayes algorithm for longer-term profiles. Over a 10-day trial, involving 300 users,
they reported a precision of 33%, recall 29%, for the top 4 recommendations based on
recording which stories were selected by users to read. This provided a small increase in
performance compared to a edited news service, Yahoo! news.
The Entrée [Burke 2000] restaurant recommender system, which uses a knowledgebased approach to recommendation, reports a recommendation accuracy of 38%, for 15
item profiles, to 70%, for 5 item profiles, based on analysis of historically logged user
activity of a web site.
An informal result was seen in the nearest neighbour classifier’s robustness. Even
when it made a mistake, 50-60% of the time in fact, the class it chose was normally in the
correct area. For example, for an “interface agent” paper the classification would more
likely be “agent” than “human computer interaction”. The users liked this as it showed the
system was at least making a reasonable attempt at classification, even if it was getting
things wrong.
3. BOOTSTRAPPING USING AN EXTERNAL ONTOLOGY
Having a recommender system which represents user profiles in ontological terms offers
the potential for communication and knowledge sharing with other, external ontologies.
This section examines our integration of the Quickstep recommender system with an
external ontology built from a publication database and personnel database. The
integration is made possible because the external ontology uses the same research paper
topic ontology as the Quickstep system. The experiment we ran bootstrapped the
Quickstep recommender system with knowledge about the researchers who wanted to use
it, thus reducing the cold-start problem, a problem inherent to all recommender systems.
Details of this work have been published in [Middleton et al. 2002].
3.1 Integrating an external ontology with the Quickstep recommender system
One difficult problem commonly faced by recommender systems is the cold-start
problem [Maltz and Ehrlich 1995], where recommendations are required for new items or
users for whom little or no information has yet been acquired. Poor performance resulting
from a cold-start can deter user uptake of a recommender system. This effect is thus selfdestructive, as the recommender never achieves good performance since users never use
it for long enough. We examine two types of cold-start problem.
The new-system cold-start problem is where there are no initial ratings by users, and
hence no profiles of users. In this situation most recommender systems have no basis on
which to recommend, and hence perform very poorly.
The new-user cold-start problem is where the system has been running for a while and
a set of user profiles and ratings exist, but no information is available about a new user.
Most recommender systems perform poorly in this situation too.
Collaborative recommender systems fail to help in cold-start situations, since they
cannot discover similar user behaviour because there is not enough previously logged
behaviour data upon which to base any correlations. Content-based and hybrid
recommender systems perform a little better since they need just a few examples of user
interest in order to find similar items.
External ontological sources of knowledge complement well the behavioural
information held within the recommender systems, by providing initial knowledge about
users and their domains of interest. Of particular interest to our academic problem domain
is knowledge about departmental publications, the projects a researcher has worked on
and the position a researcher has within the department. It should thus be possible to
bootstrap the initial learning phase of a recommender system with such knowledge,
easing the cold-start problem.
In return for any bootstrap information the recommender system could provide details
of dynamic user interests to the ontology. This would reduce the effort involved in
acquiring and maintaining knowledge of people’s research interests. To this end we
investigate the integration of Quickstep, a web-based recommender system, and an
external ontology built from a publication database and personnel database.
3.2 Approach to integrating the external ontology
We integrate the Quickstep recommender system and external ontology using a
synergistic arrangement. The external ontology initially bootstraps the recommender
system, and after the cold-start is over the user profiles held within the recommender
system are sent to the external ontology as an additional knowledge source. Figure 12
shows the integrated system.
The synergy of this relationship is fully explored in [Middleton et al. 2002].
A relationship analysis tool, Ontocopi [Alani et al. 2003], is used to uncover each user’s
communities of practice by applying a set of ontology-based network analysis techniques
that examine the connectivity of instances in the knowledge base with respect to the type,
density, and weight of these connections. Ontocopi applies an expansion algorithm that
generates the community of practice for a selected instance by identifying the set of close
instances and ranking them according to the weight of their relationships. It applies a
breadth-first spreading activation search, traversing the semantic relationships between
instances until a defined threshold is reached. Semantic distance is thus used to indicate
similarity between users.
The external ontology used in this work was designed to represent the academic
domain, and was developed by Southampton’s Advanced Knowledge Technologies
(AKT) project team [O’Hara et al. 2001]. It models people, projects, papers, events and
research interests. The ontology itself is implemented in Protégé 2000 [Eriksson et al.
1999], a graphical tool for developing knowledge-based systems. It is populated with
information extracted automatically from a departmental personnel database and
publication database. The ontology consists of around 80 classes, 40 slots, over 13000
instances and is focused on people, projects, and publications.
User interest
publications
Ontological
relationships
Similar users
Relationship
analysis tool
User interest
publications
Ontological
relationships
Similar users
Relationship
analysis tool
Fig. 12. Integration of Quickstep and an external ontology
3.2.1 Bootstrapping algorithms
Upon start-up, the ontology provides the recommender system with an initial set of
publications for each of its registered users. Each user’s known publications are then
correlated with the recommender systems classified paper database, and a set of historical
interests compiled for that user. These historical interests form the basis of an initial
profile, overcoming the new-system cold-start problem. Figure 13 details the new-system
initial profile algorithm. As in the Quickstep profiling algorithm, fractional interest in a
topic super-classes is inferred when a specific topic is added.
1.. publications
belonging to class t
1 / publication age(n)
topic interest(t) =
t = <research paper topic>
new-system initial profile = (t, topic interest(t))*
1.. publications
belonging to class t
1 / publication age(n)
topic interest(t) =
t = <research paper topic>
new-system initial profile = (t, topic interest(t))*
Fig. 13. New-system initial profile algorithm
When the recommender system is up and running and a new user is added, the
ontology provides the historical publication list for the new user and the relationship
analysis tool provides a ranked list of similar users. The initial profile of the new user is
formed from a correlation between historical publications and any similar user profiles.
This algorithm is detailed in figure 14, and addresses the new-user cold-start problem.
t = research paper topic
γ = weighting constant >= 0
Nsimilar = number of similar users
Npubs t = number of publications belonging to class t
confidence = confidence in user similarity
topic interest(t) =
1.. Npubs t
1 / publication age(n)
1.. Nsimilar
profile interest(u,t)
profile interest(u,t) = interest of user u in topic t * confidence
new-user initial profile = (t, topic interest(t))*
t = research paper topic
γ = weighting constant >= 0
Nsimilar = number of similar users
Npubs t = number of publications belonging to class t
confidence = confidence in user similarity
topic interest(t) =
1.. Npubs t
1 / publication age(n)
1.. Npubs t
1 / publication age(n)
1.. Nsimilar
profile interest(u,t)
profile interest(u,t) = interest of user u in topic t * confidence
new-user initial profile = (t, topic interest(t))*
Fig. 14. New-user initial profile algorithm
3.3 Experiment to evaluate bootstrapping performance
We used the integration of the Quickstep recommender system with an external ontology
to evaluate how using ontological knowledge could reduce the cold-start problem. The
external ontology used was the AKT ontology described earlier, based on a publication
database and personnel database, coupled with a tool for performing relationship analysis
of ontological relationships to discover similar users. The behavioural log data from the
previous experiment was used to simulate the bootstrapping effect both the new-system
and new-user initial profiling algorithms would have. Both the integration and
experiment are published in more detail in [Middleton et al. 2002].
3.3.1 Experimental design
Subjects were selected from those who participated in the previous Quickstep
experiment and had entries within the external ontology. We selected nine subjects in
total, with each subject typically having one or two publications.
The URL browsing logs of these users, extracted from the 3 months of browsing
behaviour recorded during the Quickstep trials, were broken up into weekly log entries.
Seven weeks of browsing behaviour were taken from the start of the Quickstep trials, and
an empty log created to simulate the very start of the trial where no behaviour has yet
been recorded.
Eight iterations of the integrated system were thus run, the first simulating the start of
the trial and others simulating the following weeks 1 to 7. Interest profiles were recorded
after each iteration. Two complete runs were made, one with the ‘new-system initial
profiling’ algorithm and a control run with no bootstrapping. The control run without the
‘new-system initial profiling’ algorithm started with blank profiles for each of its users.
An additional iteration was run to evaluate the effectiveness of the ‘new-user initial
profile’ algorithm.
In order to evaluate the algorithms effect on the cold-start problem, all recorded
profiles were compared to the benchmark week 7 profile. This allowed measurement of
how quickly profiles converge to the stable state existing after a reasonable amount of
behaviour data has been accumulated. The quicker the profiles move to this state the
quicker they will have overcome the cold-start. Week 7 was chosen as the cut-off point of
our analysis since after about 7 weeks of use the behaviour data gathered by Quickstep
dominated the user profiles and the cold-start was over.
3.3.2 Experimental results
Two measurements were made when comparing profiles to the benchmark week 7
profile. The first, profile precision, measures how many topics were mentioned in both
the current profile and benchmark profile. Profile precision is an indication of how
quickly the profile is converging to the final state, and thus how quickly the effects of the
cold-start are overcome. The second, profile error rate, measures how many topics appear
in the current profile that do not appear within the benchmark profile. Profile error rate is
an indication of the errors introduced by the two bootstrapping algorithms. Figure 15
describes these metrics.
It should be noted that the absolute precision and error rate of the profiles are not
measured – only the relative precision and error rate compared to the week 7 steady state
profiles. Absolute profile precision is a subjective measurement.
Number of user topics that appear in current
profile and benchmark profile
Number of user topics that appear in benchmark
profile but not in current profile
Nincorrect
Number of user topics that appear in current
profile but not in benchmark profile
Total number of users
profile error rate =
______________________
Ncorrect + Nincorrect + Nmissing
Nincorrect
profile precision =
Ncorrect + Nmissing
_____________
1.. Nusers
1.. Nusers
Number of user topics that appear in current
profile and benchmark profile
Number of user topics that appear in benchmark
profile but not in current profile
Nincorrect
Number of user topics that appear in current
profile but not in benchmark profile
Total number of users
profile error rate =
______________________
Ncorrect + Nincorrect + Nmissing
Nincorrect
______________________
Ncorrect + Nincorrect + Nmissing
Nincorrect
profile precision =
Ncorrect + Nmissing
_____________
Ncorrect + Nmissing
Ncorrect + Nmissing
_____________
1.. Nusers
1.. Nusers
Fig. 15. Bootstrapping evaluation metrics
The results of our experiment are detailed in figure 16. The new-user results consist of
a single iteration, so appear on the graph as a single point.
At the start, week 0, no browsing behaviour log data is available to the system so the
profiles without bootstrapping are empty. The new-system algorithm, however, can
bootstrap the initial user profiles and achieves a reasonable precision of 0.35 and a low
error rate of 0.06. We found that the new-system profiles accurately captured interests
users had a year or so ago, but tended to miss current interests. This is because
publications are generally not available for up-to-date interests.
As expected, once the weekly behaviour logs become available to the system the
profiles adjust accordingly, moving away from the initial bootstrapping. On week 7 the
profiles fully converge to the benchmark profile, the cold-start being over. This is the
reason the precision graph converges at week 7. Bootstrapping is most effective during
week one, where no information about users is available and when the users are most
likely to stop using the system due to poor performance.
The new-user algorithm result show a more dramatic increase in precision to 0.84, but
comes at the price of a significant error rate of 0.55. The profiles produced by the newuser algorithm tended to be very inclusive, taking the set of similar user interests and
producing a union of these interests. While this captures many of the new users real
interests, it also included a large number of interests not relevant to the new user but
which were interesting to the people similar to the new user.
Profile precision relative to benchmark profile
new-system bootstrap
no bootstrap
new-user bootstrap
Fig. 16. Bootstrapping profile precision
3.3.3 Discussion
The new-system algorithm produced profiles with a low error rate and a reasonable
precision of 0.35. This reflects the fact that previous publications are a good indication of
users current interests, and so can produce a good starting point for a bootstrap profile.
Where the new-system algorithm fails is for more recent interests, which make up the
remaining 65% of the topics in the final benchmark profile. To discover these more recent
interests, it is possible that the new-system algorithm could be extended to take some of
the other information available within the ontology into account, such as the projects a
user is working on. To what degree these relationships will help is difficult to predict
however, since the ontology itself has great difficulty in acquiring knowledge of recent
interests.
For the purposes of this experiment, those users who had some entries within the
external ontology were selected. There were some users who had not entered their
publications into the ontology or who had yet to publish their work. For these users there
is little information within the ontology, making any new-system initial profiles of little
use. In a larger scale system, more sources of information would be needed from the
ontology to build the new-system profiles. This would allow some redundancy, and hence
improve robustness in the realistic situation where information is sparsely available.
The new-user algorithm achieved good precision of 0.84 at the expense of a
significant error rate. This was partly because the new-user algorithm included all
interests from the similar users. An improvement would be to only use those interests held
by the majority of the similar people. This would exclude some of the less common
interests that would otherwise be included into the new-user profile.
3.4 Related work
The cold-start problem is discussed by [Claypool et al 1999] who examines a hybrid
approach to recommendation, using a content-based overlap coefficient technique
coupled with a collaborative Pearson-r approach that takes over when sufficient ratings
have been acquired. The hybrid concept is also adopted by [Melville et. al 2002] with a
content-boosted approach, where pseudo ratings are generated by a naïve Bayes classifier
to supplement real ratings. There is still a need to acquire initial examines of content,
however, before recommendation can occur.
Some metrics for measuring recommendation performance are suggested by [Schein
et. Al 2002], along with a discussion of the cold-start problem. They apply a CROC curve
based metric on a naïve Bayes classifier.
Several heuristic-based item selection strategies are compared by [Rashid et al. 2002]
using the Movie Lens dataset. Focus is given to reducing user effort during sign-up as
well as recommendation accuracy.
3.5 Conclusions
Cold-starts in recommender systems are a significant problem. If initial recommendations
are inaccurate, user confidence in the recommender system may drop with the result that
users give up on the system and thus not enough usage data is gathered to ever overcome
the cold-start.
This experiment suggests that using an ontology to bootstrap user profiles can
significantly reduce the impact of the recommender system cold-start problem. It is
particularly useful for the new-system cold-start problem, where the alternative is to start
with no information at all.
A question still remains as to just how good an initial profile must be to fully
overcome the effects of the cold-start problem. If initial recommendations are poor users
will not use the recommender system and hence it will never get a chance to improve. We
have shown that improvements can be made to initial profiles, but further empirical
evaluation would be needed to evaluate exactly how much improvement is needed before
the system is “good enough” for users to give it a chance.
4. THE FOXTROT RECOMMENDER SYSTEM
Our second experimental recommender system, called Foxtrot, extended the Quickstep
system by implementing a research paper search interface, profile visualization interface
and email notification in addition to the web page recommendation interface. Profile
visualization is made possible because profiles are represented in ontological terms
understandable to the users. Foxtrot was built to help researchers in a computer science
department, allowing researchers to search the database of research papers in addition to
receiving recommendations. A large-scale experiment was run to evaluate the overall
approach, and to compare the recommendation performance of subjects who provided
profile feedback to the performance of those subjects who just provided relevance
4.1 Overview of the Foxtrot recommender system
Foxtrot is an evolution of the Quickstep system, and fully follows the architecture shown
earlier in figure 1. Foxtrot differs from Quickstep in the following ways. The number of
interfaces supported is increased, providing a research paper search interface, profile
visualization and feedback facility and email notification support. A static research paper
ontology with many more classes is used, along with increased dimensionality reduction
to cope with the increase in classes and hence term dimensions. The profiler takes profile
feedback into account allowing users control over their own profiles. Lastly, a more
collaborative recommendation algorithm is employed, talking into account the profiles of
other similar users when deciding what to recommend.
4.2 Approach of the Foxtrot recommender system
The Foxtrot system used a Squid proxy, which can handle hundreds of users across the
whole computer science department at the University of Southampton. Each user ran an
Identd server so the Squid proxy could identify their usernames, and a modified Squid
logging function was used to record time-stamped URLs for each user. The system ran on
a dedicated LINUX platform and like Quickstep was mostly written in Java.
Since Foxtrot is an evolution of the Quickstep system, only the processes that changed
are detailed. All other processes, for example the classifier, work in the way described for
the Quickstep system.
4.2.1 Research paper topic ontology
Foxtrot uses a research paper topic ontology to represent the research interests of its
users. A class is defined for each research topic and is-a relationships defined where
appropriate. The ontology is based on the CORA [McCallum et al. 2000] digital library,
since it classifies computers science topics and has example papers for each class. Figure
17 shows some of the classes within the ontology. An existing ontology was chosen for
re-use to speed development time and provide a source of example papers.
Human-Computer Interaction
Data Structures Algorthms & Theory
Information Retrieval
Networking
Encryption & Compression
Operating Systems
Hardware & Architecture
Programming
E-Commerce
Interface Agents
Mobile Agents
Multi-Agent-Systems
Recommender Systems
Data Mining
Expert Systems
Games and Search
Knowledge Representation
Machine Learning
Natural Language Processing
Theorem Proving
Vision & Pattern Recognition
Case-Based [machine learning]
Genetic Algorithms
Neural Networks
Probabilistic Methods
Reinforcement Learning
Rule Learning
Theory [machine learning]
Artificial Intelligence
Cooperative [hci]
Hypermedia
Multimedia
Graphics & Virtual Reality
Interface Design
Wearable Computers
User Modelling
Fig. 17. Section from the Foxtrot research paper topic ontology
Labelled examples of research papers were manually added to the classifier training
set, many taken from the results of the Quickstep trial and papers downloaded from the
CORA system. There were a total of 97 classes and 714 training examples. The ontology
remained fixed throughout the Foxtrot trial, but could in theory be updated as time goes
on to reflect changes in the research domain. We decided not to allow users to add classes
to the ontology since with a large number of users there are bound to be classification
mistakes, and these could adversely effect the classification accuracy. For every
ontological class a set of 5-10 example papers was provided at the start of the trial.
4.2.2 Research paper representation
Research papers are represented as term vectors, just as in the Quickstep system.
Because of the increased number of classes an additional dimensionality reduction
technique is employed to keep the number of terms within the vectors manageable. Each
class was constrained to have only its top 50 terms, ranked by document frequency; the
union of each classes most discriminating terms was thus used for term vectors. In the
Foxtrot experiment, term vectors had 1152 dimensions.
4.2.3 Interface
Users primarily interact with Foxtrot via a web page. The basic interface is shown in
figure 18. A web search engine metaphor, familiar to most computer scientists, was used
for the interface design, allowing users to enter search queries via edit boxes and a search
button used to initiate a search.
Fig. 18. Foxtrot’s recommendation and search interface
Search results are returned in the area below the edit boxes, showing the details of
each research paper found. Two sets of radio buttons appear below each search result to
allow users to provide relevance and quality feedback if they so desire. When users first
go to the Foxtrot web page their daily recommendations are automatically presented in
the search result area. In this way, users can choose to read the recommendations or just
enter a search query and use the system normally.
Users who are in the profile group can visualize their interest profiles by clicking on a
profile tab. Figure 19 shows the profile interface. Profiles are displayed as a time/interest
graph, showing what the system thinks their top few interests are over the period of the
trial. Direct profile feedback can be drawn onto this graph by using the controls to the
side. A drawing package metaphor is used here, and users can draw coloured horizontal
bars to represent a level of interest in a topic over a period of time. In this way users can
literally draw their own profiles.
Fig. 19. Foxtrot’s profile visualization interface
In addition to the Foxtrot web page, a weekly email notification feature was added 3
months from the end of the trial. This provided a weekly email stating the top 3
recommendations from the current set of 9 recommendations. Users could then jump to
these papers or load the Foxtrot web page and review all 9 recommendations. Figure 20
shows the email notification message.
Fig. 20. Foxtrot’s email notification interface
4.2.4 Recommendation agent
Daily recommendations are formulated by a hybrid recommendation approach. A list
of similar people to a specific user is compiled, using a Pearson-r correlation on the
content-based user profiles. Recommendations for a user are then taken from those papers
on the current topics of interest, which have also been read by people similar to that user.
Figure 21 shows the recommendation algorithm. During the Foxtrot trial 3 papers were
recommended each day on the 3 most interesting topics, making a total of 9
recommended papers. Previously read papers were not recommended twice and if more
than three papers were available for a topic they were ranked by average quality rating.
(Ib(t) – Ib)2
(Ia(t) – Ia)2
(Ib(t) – Ib)
(Ia(t) – Ia)
Pearson r coefficientab =
= User a’s interest in topic t
= User a’s mean interest value over all topics
Pearson r coefficientab = similarity of user a’s profile to user b’s profile
Recommended papers = papers on user’s current interests ∩papers read by similar user’s
3 papers recommended on the 3 most interesting topics, totalling 9 papers per day
If more than 3 papers meet above criteria, papers ranked by quality rating
(Ib(t) – Ib)2
(Ia(t) – Ia)2
(Ib(t) – Ib)2
(Ib(t) – Ib)2
(Ia(t) – Ia)2
(Ia(t) – Ia)2
(Ib(t) – Ib)
(Ia(t) – Ia)
* (Ib(t) – Ib)
(Ib(t) – Ib)
(Ia(t) – Ia)
(Ia(t) – Ia)
Pearson r coefficientab =
= User a’s interest in topic t
= User a’s mean interest value over all topics
Pearson r coefficientab = similarity of user a’s profile to user b’s profile
Recommended papers = papers on user’s current interests ∩papers read by similar user’s
3 papers recommended on the 3 most interesting topics, totalling 9 papers per day
If more than 3 papers meet above criteria, papers ranked by quality rating
Fig. 21. Foxtrot’s recommendation algorithm
4.3 Experiment to evaluate profile visualization and feedback
Our third experiment used the Foxtrot recommender system to compare subjects who
could visualize their profiles and provide profile feedback with subjects who could only
use traditional relevance feedback. Profile visualization and feedback is only possible
because profiles are represented using an ontology, which contains concepts users can
understand. This experiment took place over an academic year with 260 staff and
students of the computer science department at the University of Southampton. An
overall evaluation of the Foxtrot recommender system was also performed.
4.3.1 Experimental design
The experimental trial took place over the academic year 2002, starting in November
and ending in July. Of the 260 subjects registered to use the system, 103 used the web
page, and of these 37 subjects used the system 3 or more times; this makes the uptake rate
14% All 260 subjects used the web proxy and hence their browsing was recorded and
daily profiles built. As such 260 subjects contributed, by way of the web proxy
monitoring their web browsing, to the growth of the research paper database but there
were only 37 active users during the experiment. By the end of the trial the research paper
database had grown from 6,000 to 15,792 documents as a result of subject web browsing.
Subjects were divided into two groups. The first ‘profile feedback’ group had full
access to the system and its profile visualization and profile feedback options; the second
‘relevance feedback’ group were denied access to the profile interface. It was found that
many in the ‘profile feedback’ group did not provide any profile feedback at all, so in the
later analysis these subjects are moved into the ‘relevance feedback’ group. A total of 9
subjects provided profile feedback.
Towards the end of the trial an additional email feature was added to the recommender
system. This email feature sent out weekly emails to all users who had used the system at
least once, detailing the top three papers in their current recommendation set. Email
notification was started in May and ran for the remaining 3 months of the trial.
The feedback data obtained from the trial occurs at irregular time intervals, based on
when subjects looked at recommendations or browsed the web. For ease of analysis data
is collated into weekly figures by summing interactions throughout each week. Group
data is computed by summing the weekly contribution of each subject within a group.
Figure 22 shows the metrics measured.
<future papers> = browsed/jumped papers in the 4 weeks after profile
<papers> = browsed/jumped papers over duration of profile (normally 1 day)
<top topics> = top 3 topics of profile
Predicted profile accuracy = No of <future papers> matching <top topics>
No of <future papers>
Profile accuracy = No of <papers> matching <top topics>
No of <papers>
Web page rec accuracy = No of recommended papers browsed or jumped to
No of recommended papers
Email rec accuracy = No of emailed papers browsed or jumped to
No of emailed papers
Jumps to recommendations = No of jumps to recommended papers
No of jumps
Jumps to profile topics = No of jumps to papers matching <top topics>
No of jumps
Fig. 22. Measured metrics
4.3.2 Experimental results
The recommendation accuracy metric takes explicit feedback and computes accuracy
figures for both web page and email recommendations. A simple ratio is used to obtain
the number of recommendations followed as a fraction of the total number of
recommendations; this provides a measure of the effectiveness of the recommendations.
Figure 23 shows the recommendation accuracy for web page and email recommendations.
Web page and email recommendation accuracy
Profile feedback [w eb page]
Relevance feedback [w eb page]
Profile feedback [email]
Relevance feedback [email]
Final week 95% confidence intervals
Profile [web page]
Relevance [web page]
Profile [email]
Relevance [email]
Fig. 23. Web page and email recommendation accuracy
The small number of subjects within the ‘profile feedback’ group accounts for the
larger confidence intervals. While not statistically significant, there is an apparent trend
for more accurate recommendation when using profile feedback, especially in the early
weeks. Email recommendations appeared to be preferred by the ‘relevance feedback’
group, slightly out performing the ‘profile feedback’ group.
The above results compare the profile feedback users with relevance feedback users.
To show that the profile feedback user group was not “self selected”, containing only the
active users, figure 24 shows the original grouping’s accuracy figures for only active
users; active users are defined as those who used the system three or more times. There
were 16 active users in the relevance feedback group and 21 active users in profile
feedback group. The profile feedback group’s recommendation accuracy is still higher,
though not by as much since the results are averaged in the profile feedback group
between those who did provide a profile and those that only used relevance feedback.
In addition to recommendation accuracy, the proportion of jumps to recommendations
and jumps to papers with a top 3 topic was computed. Jumps to recommendations
measure the degree to which subjects use the recommendation facility as opposed to just
using the search facility of the database. Jumps to papers with a top 3 profile topic
measures how well the profiles fitted the subject’s actual interests. Figure 25 shows these
Web page rec accuracy for active users & original groups
Original relevance feedback group
Original profile feedback group
Final week 95% confidence intervals
Original profile feedback group
Original relevance feedback group
Fig. 24. Web page recommender accuracy for original group’s active subjects
The ‘profile feedback’ group made a greater proportion of jumps to recommendations
than the ‘relevance feedback’ group; this trend is statistically significant. A similar trend
is seen in jumps to papers on top profile topics, but is less clear.
Jumps to recommendations and profile topics
Profile feedback [topic]
Relevance feedback [topic]
Profile feedback [rec]
Relevance feedback [rec]
Final week 95% confidence intervals
Profile [topic]
Relevance [topic]
Profile [rec]
Relevance [rec]
Fig. 25. Jumps to recommendations and profile topics
Since user browsing is recorded, both the profile accuracy and profile predictive
accuracy can be measured. Profile accuracy measures the number of papers jumped to or
browsed that match the top 3 profile topics for the duration of that profile; since profiles
are updated daily, the average duration of a profile is one day. This is a good measure of
the accuracy of the current interests within a profile at any given time. Profile predictive
accuracy measures the number of papers jumped to or browsed that match the top 3
profile topics in a 4 week period after the profile was created. This measures the ability of
a profile to predict subject interests. Metrics are measured for every profile computed
over the period of the trial, providing a view on how the quality of the profiles varies over
the length of the trial. Figure 26 shows the figures for the profile metrics.
While not statistically significant, there is a trend for the ‘profile feedback’ group to
have profiles that are better at predicting future browsing interests. This trend is not
reflected in the daily profile accuracy figures however, where the two groups are similar.
This would appear to show that the two groups are profiling slightly different interest sets,
with the ‘profile feedback’ interests of a longer-term nature.
Profile accuracy and profile predictive accuracy
Profile feedback [profile]
Relevance feedback [profile]
Profile feedback [predictive]
Relevance feedback [predictive]
Final week 95% confidence intervals
Profile [profile]
Relevance [profile]
Profile [predictive]
Relevance [predictive]
Fig. 26. Profile accuracy and profile predictive accuracy
In addition to measuring subject group interactions with the system, the AdaBoostM1
boosted IBk classifier performance was computed. A standard cross-validation test was
applied to the classifier training set, to obtain the figures for accuracy and coverage. Table
II shows the results. The accuracy value is a measure of how many correctly classified
documents there were as a proportion of the number classified. The coverage value is a
measure of how many documents were classified as a proportion of the total number of
documents.
Table II. Classifier accuracy and coverage
Classifier
A post trial questionnaire was sent out via email to every subject who used the system
at least once. Table III shows the results of this survey, completed by 13 subjects. It
shows that the search facility was most useful to the subjects, with the recommendation
facility being only partially used. This is borne out by the relatively small amount of
feedback provided by users during the trial. The most positive comments were from those
users who were interested in general papers in an area, such as PhD students performing a
literature review. The more negative comments came from those subjects wanting papers
on very specific topics of much finer granularity than the research topic ontology offered.
Table III. Foxtrot post trial questionnaire results
How useful did you find the Foxtrot database?
How much did you use the recommendation facility?
How accurate were the recommended topics?
How useful were the recommended papers?
4.3.3 Discussion
The ‘profile feedback’ group outperformed the ‘relevance feedback’ group for most of
the metrics, and the experimental data revealed several trends.
Web page recommendations, and jumps to those recommendations, were better for the
‘profile feedback’ group, especially early on in the first few weeks after registering. This
is probably because the ‘profile feedback’ users tended to draw interest profiles when
they first registered with the system, and only update them occasionally afterwards. This
has the effect that the profiles are most accurate early on and become out-dated as time
goes by. This aging effect on the profile accuracy is shown by the ‘profile feedback’
group performance gradually falling towards that of the ‘relevance feedback’ group. One
interesting observation is that the initial performance enhancement gained using profile
feedback appears to help overcome the cold-start problem, a problem inherent to all
recommender systems.
Email recommendation appeared to be preferred by the ‘relevance feedback’ group,
and especially by those users who did not regularly check their web page
recommendations. A reason for this could be that since the ‘profile feedback’ group used
the web page recommendations more, they needed to use the email recommendations
less. There is certainly a limit to how many recommendations any user needs over a given
time period; in our case nobody regularly checked for recommendations more than once a
The overall recommendation accuracy was about 1%, or 2-5% for the profile feedback
group. This may appear low, especially when compared to other recommendation systems
such as Quickstep, but it reflects the nature of the recommendation service offered. Users
had the choice to simply ignore recommendations if they did not help to achieve their
current work goal. This optional nature of the system assisted system uptake and
acceptance on a wide scale.
The profile accuracy of both groups was similar, but there was a significant difference
between the accuracy of profile predictions. This reflects the different types of interests
held in the profiles of the two groups. The ‘profile feedback’ group’s profiles appeared to
be longer term, based on knowledge of the users general research interests provided via
the profile interface. The ‘relevance feedback’ profiles were based solely on the browsing
behaviour of the users current task, hence contained shorter-term interests. Perhaps a
combination of profile feedback-based longer-term profiles and behaviour-based shortterm profiles would be most successful.
The overall profile accuracy was around 30%, reflecting the difficulty of predicting
user interests in a real multi-task environment. Integrating some knowledge of which task
the user is performing would allow access to some of the other 70% of their research
interests. These interests were in the profile but did not make it to the top 3 topics of
current interest.
Profile feedback users tended to regularly check recommendations for about a week or
two after drawing a profile. This appeared to be because users had acquired a conceptual
model of how the system worked, and wanted to keep checking to see if it had done what
they expected. If a profile was required to be drawn before registering on the system, this
behaviour pattern could be exploited to increase system uptake and gain some early
feedback. This may in turn increase initial profile accuracy and would certainly leave
users with a better understanding of how the system worked, beneficial for both gaining
user trust and encouraging effective use of the system.
In order to perform such a large trial, involving the monitoring of subject webbrowsing behaviour over a significant period of time, a number of things had to be done
concerning subject privacy rights. Firstly every subject was informed of the trial, and
what it involved, via email and a web site. All aspects of the profiling and monitoring
process were explained in detail. User’s names were encrypted using a one-way
encryption algorithm so that if someone were to examine the web browsing logs they
would not be able to trace usernames to network account names, and hence real people.
The key to this one-way encryption was destroyed after the trial finished. Finally, in
accordance with the UK’s data protection act the trial was for purely research purposes. A
commercial system would likely need written consent from each subject under UK law.
A post-hoc power analysis was considered after the initial experimental analysis was
completed, but not performed after consultation with a statistics expert due to reservations
about its value. Post analysis of the data collected would also be problematic due to the
encrypted nature of the user identifiers, and lack of easy correlations between the various
logged data sources other than those that were pre-planned into the experimental design.
4.4 Conclusions
This experiment shows that profile visualization and profile feedback can significantly
improve the profiling accuracy and the recommendation process. Our ontological
approach makes this possible because user profiles are represented in terms the users can
understand.
The previous section on Quickstep compared performance to reported systems in the
literature, and points out the lack of published experimental results for systems with real
users. As such the Quickstep system is an ideal candidate for result comparison.
The Quickstep [Middleton et al. 2001] system had a recommendation accuracy of
about 10% with real users, while Foxtrot manages a 2-5% recommendation accuracy,
reflecting the different types of subjects involved in the two experiments. The Quickstep
subjects were willing researchers taken from a computer science laboratory, while the
Foxtrot subjects were staff and students of a large department who would only be willing
to use the system if it was perceived to offer direct benefits to their work. A
recommendation accuracy of 5% means that on average 1 in 2 sets of recommendations
contained a paper that was downloaded, while 10% means on average every set of
recommendations contains a downloaded paper. While initially appearing low, this result
is good when the problem domain is taken into account; most systems in the literature do
not attempt such a hard and realistic problem.
Individual aspects of the Foxtrot system could be enhanced further to gain a relatively
small performance increase, such as increasing the training set size, fine tuning the
ontological relationships and trying alternative classification algorithms. However, the
main problem is that the system’s profiler is not capturing about 70% of the user’s
interests. We expect major progress to come from expanding the ontology and using a
task model for profiling, which are discussed in the next section.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Our ontological approach to recommender systems offers many advantages and a few
disadvantages. The two experimental systems and three experiments conducted with
them provide evidence for this. Due to the attenuating nature of real world trials with
noisy data and varying levels of subject activity, some of the trends seen are not
significant statistically. However, we do feel the power and consistency of the trends seen
are significant, and it is our opinion that the advantages of our ontological approach
clearly outweigh the disadvantages.
Ontological user profiles allow inference to be employed, allowing interests to be
discovered that were not directly observed in the user’s behaviour. Constraining examples
of user interest to a common ontology also allows examples of ontological classes to be
shared among all users, increasing the size of the classifiers training set. Multi-class
classification is, however, inherently less accurate that binary class classification, which
reduces classification accuracy. Our first experiment quantifies these effects and
demonstrates that profile inference compensates for the lower classifier accuracy.
Once profiles are represented using an ontology, they can communicate with other
ontologies which share similar concepts. This allows external knowledge bases to be
employed to help bootstrap the recommender system and reduce the cold-start problem
inherent to all recommender systems. Our second experiment demonstrates this, using a
publication and personnel ontology to bootstrap our recommender system with significant
One last advantage of using an ontological user profile is that the profiles themselves
can be visualized. Since our research paper ontology contains terms understandable to
users, the profile visualizations are understandable too. Traditional binary profiles are
often represented as term vector spaces, neural network patterns etc. that are difficult to
understand by users. The ontological representation allows users to provide feedback on
their own profiles, which is used to significantly improve profile accuracy. Our third
experiment demonstrates this.
There is a lack of experimental results in the literature for systems using real people.
This is a failing of this research field, and it makes direct comparison of systems that
address real problems hard. Our final experiment is particularly valuable in that it shows
how a recommender system performs in a large scale, realistic situation. We feel that
more large-scale trials are needed in the literature so that the utility of the recommender
system paradigm can be quantified for a variety of work domains.
5.2 Future work
Expanding the ontology to include more relationships than just is-a links between topics
would allow much more powerful inference, and thus give a significant boost to profiling
accuracy. Knowledge of the projects people are working on, common technologies in
research areas and linked research areas would all help. This technology could also help
the cold-start problem.
Knowledge of a user’s current task would allow the profiler to distinguish between
short and long-term tasks, separate concurrently running tasks and adjust
recommendations accordingly. While 70% of users’ browsing interests were not in the
current profile’s top 3 topics, they were in the profile somewhere at a lower level of
relevance. Having separate profiles for each user task would allow a finer grained
profiling approach, significantly improving performance. This is far from easy to achieve
in practice, but it appears to be an important aspect of user profiling and one that future
versions of this system may well investigate. Papers such as [Budzik, J. et al. 2001]
examine the use of contextual information in task modelling.
An agent-based metaphor can easily be applied to our ontological recommender
system and would allow extra information to come from external agents, via free
exchange or trading. It is easy to see a situation where external agents, with ontologies
containing personal information, interact with profile agents to share knowledge about
specific interests with the goal of improving each other’s profiles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is funded by EPSRC studentship award number 99308831 and the
Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration In Advanced Knowledge Technologies (AKT)
project GR/N15764/01.