Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4098–4109
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Bottom-Up Abstractive Summarization
Sebastian Gehrmann
Yuntian Deng
Alexander M. Rush
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
{gehrmann, dengyuntian, srush}@seas.harvard.edu
Neural network-based methods for abstractive
summarization produce outputs that are more
ﬂuent than other techniques, but which can be
poor at content selection. This work proposes
a simple technique for addressing this issue:
use a data-efﬁcient content selector to overdetermine phrases in a source document that
should be part of the summary. We use this
selector as a bottom-up attention step to constrain the model to likely phrases. We show
that this approach improves the ability to compress text, while still generating ﬂuent summaries. This two-step process is both simpler
and higher performing than other end-to-end
content selection models, leading to signiﬁcant
improvements on ROUGE for both the CNN-
DM and NYT corpus. Furthermore, the content selector can be trained with as little as
1,000 sentences, making it easy to transfer a
trained summarizer to a new domain.
Introduction
Text summarization systems aim to generate natural language summaries that compress the information in a longer text. Approaches using neural networks have shown promising results on this
task with end-to-end models that encode a source
document and then decode it into an abstractive summary. Current state-of-the-art neural abstractive summarization models combine extractive and abstractive techniques by using pointergenerator style models which can copy words
from the source document . These end-to-end models produce
ﬂuent abstractive summaries but have had mixed
success in content selection, i.e. deciding what to
summarize, compared to fully extractive models.
There is an appeal to end-to-end models from a
modeling perspective; however, there is evidence
that when summarizing people follow a two-step
Source Document
german chancellor angela merkel [did] not [look] too
pleased about the weather during her [annual] easter
holiday [in italy.] as britain [basks] in [sunshine] and
temperatures of up to 21c, mrs merkel and her husband[,
chemistry professor joachim sauer,] had to settle for a
measly 12 degrees. the chancellor and her [spouse] have
been spending easter on the small island of ischia, near
naples in the mediterranean for over a [decade.]
[not so sunny:]
angela merkel [and] her husband[,
chemistry professor joachim sauer,] are spotted on their
[annual] easter trip to the island of ischia[,] near naples[.
the] couple [traditionally] spend their holiday at the ﬁvestar miramare spa hotel on the south of the island [,
which comes] with its own private beach [, and balconies overlooking the] ocean [.]...
• angela merkel and husband spotted while on italian
island holiday.
Baseline Approach
• angela merkel and her husband, chemistry professor
joachim sauer, are spotted on their annual easter trip
to the island of ischia, near naples.
Bottom-Up Summarization
• angela merkel and her husband are spotted on their
easter trip to the island of ischia, near naples.
Figure 1: Example of two sentence summaries with and
without bottom-up attention. The model does not allow copying of words in [gray], although it can generate words. With bottom-up attention, we see more
explicit sentence compression, while without it whole
sentences are copied verbatim.
approach of ﬁrst selecting important phrases and
then paraphrasing them . A similar argument
has been made for image captioning.
Anderson et al. develop a state-of-the-art model
with a two-step approach that ﬁrst pre-computes
bounding boxes of segmented objects and then applies attention to these regions.
This so-called
bottom-up attention is inspired by neuroscience research describing attention based on properties in-
herent to a stimulus .
Motivated by this approach,
we consider
bottom-up attention for neural abstractive summarization. Our approach ﬁrst selects a selection
mask for the source document and then constrains
a standard neural model by this mask.
approach can better decide which phrases a model
should include in a summary, without sacriﬁcing
the ﬂuency advantages of neural abstractive summarizers.
Furthermore, it requires much fewer
data to train, which makes it more adaptable to
new domains.
Our full model incorporates a separate content
selection system to decide on relevant aspects of
the source document. We frame this selection task
as a sequence-tagging problem, with the objective of identifying tokens from a document that
are part of its summary.
We show that a content selection model that builds on contextual word
embeddings can identify correct tokens with a recall of over 60%, and a precision of over 50%.
To incorporate bottom-up
attention into abstractive summarization models,
we employ masking to constrain copying words
to the selected parts of the text, which produces
grammatical outputs. We additionally experiment
with multiple methods to incorporate similar constraints into the training process of more complex end-to-end abstractive summarization models, either through multi-task learning or through
directly incorporating a fully differentiable mask.
Our experiments compare bottom-up attention
with several other state-of-the-art abstractive systems. Compared to our baseline models of See
et al. bottom-up attention leads to an improvement in ROUGE-L score on the CNN-Daily
Mail (CNN-DM) corpus from 36.4 to 38.3 while
being simpler to train. We also see comparable or
better results than recent reinforcement-learning
based methods with our MLE trained system. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the content selection model
is very data-efﬁcient and can be trained with less
than 1% of the original training data. This provides opportunities for domain-transfer and lowresource summarization. We show that a summarization model trained on CNN-DM and evaluated on the NYT corpus can be improved by over 5
points in ROUGE-L with a content selector trained
on only 1,000 in-domain sentences.
Related Work
There is a tension in document summarization between staying close to the source document and
allowing compressive or abstractive modiﬁcation.
Many non-neural systems take a select and compress approach. For example, Dorr et al. 
introduced a system that ﬁrst extracts noun and
verb phrases from the ﬁrst sentence of a news article and uses an iterative shortening algorithm to
compress it. Recent systems such as Durrett et al.
 also learn a model to select sentences and
then compress them.
In contrast, recent work in neural network based
data-driven extractive summarization has focused
on extracting and ordering full sentences . Nallapati et al. use a classiﬁer to determine
whether to include a sentence and a selector that
ranks the positively classiﬁed ones. These methods often over-extract, but extraction at a word
level requires maintaining grammatically correct
output , which is difﬁcult. Interestingly, key phrase extraction while ungrammatical often matches closely in content with
human-generated summaries .
A third approach is neural abstractive summarization with sequence-to-sequence models
 .
These methods have been applied to tasks such as
headline generation and article
summarization . Chopra
et al. show that attention approaches that
are more speciﬁc to summarization can further improve the performance of models. Gu et al. 
were the ﬁrst to show that a copy mechanism, introduced by Vinyals et al. , can combine
the advantages of both extractive and abstractive
summarization by copying words from the source.
See et al. reﬁne this pointer-generator approach and use an additional coverage mechanism
 that makes a model aware of its
attention history to prevent repeated attention.
Most recently, reinforcement learning (RL) approaches that optimize objectives for summarization other than maximum likelihood have been
shown to further improve performance on these
tasks . Paulus et al. approach
the coverage problem with an intra-attention in
which a decoder has an attention over previously
generated words. However RL-based training can
be difﬁcult to tune and slow to train. Our method
does not utilize RL training, although in theory
this approach can be adapted to RL methods.
multi-pass
extractive-abstractive
summarization.
Nallapati et al. create a new source document
comprised of the important sentences from the
source and then train an abstractive system. Liu
et al. describe an extractive phase that
extracts full paragraphs and an abstractive one
that determines their order.
Finally Zeng et al.
 introduce a mechanism that reads a source
document in two passes and uses the information
from the ﬁrst pass to bias the second. Our method
differs in that we utilize a completely abstractive
model, biased with a powerful content selector.
Other recent work explores alternative approaches to content selection. For example, Cohan
et al. use a hierarchical attention to detect
relevant sections in a document, Li et al. 
generate a set of keywords that is used to guide the
summarization process, and Pasunuru and Bansal
 develop a loss-function based on whether
salient keywords are included in a summary. Other
approaches investigate the content-selection at the
sentence-level. Tan et al. describe a graphbased attention to attend to one sentence at a time,
Chen and Bansal ﬁrst extract full sentences
from a document and then compress them, and
Hsu et al. modulate the attention based on
how likely a sentence is included in a summary.
Background: Neural Summarization
Throughout this paper, we consider a set of pairs
of texts (X, Y) where x ∈X corresponds to
source tokens x1, . . . , xn and y ∈Y to a summary
y1, . . . , ym with m ≪n.
Abstractive summaries are generated one word
at a time. At every time-step, a model is aware of
the previously generated words. The problem is to
learn a function f(x) parametrized by θ that maximizes the probability of generating the correct
sequences. Following previous work, we model
the abstractive summarization with an attentional
sequence-to-sequence model. The attention distribution p(aj|x, y1:j−1) for a decoding step j, calculated within the neural network, represents an
embedded soft distribution over all of the source
tokens and can be interpreted as the current focus
of the model.
The model additionally has a copy mecha-
Masked Source
Content Selection
Bottom-Up Attention
Figure 2: Overview of the selection and generation processes described throughout Section 4.
nism to copy words from
the source. Copy models extend the decoder by
predicting a binary soft switch zj that determines
whether the model copies or generates. The copy
distribution is a probability distribution over the
source text, and the joint distribution is computed
as a convex combination of the two parts of the
p(yj | y1:j-1, x) =
p(zj = 1 | y1:j-1, x) × p(yj | zj = 1, y1:j-1, x)+
p(zj = 0 | y1:j-1, x) × p(yj | zj = 0, y1:j-1, x)
where the two parts represent copy and generation
distribution respectively. Following the pointergenerator model of See et al. , we reuse the
attention p(aj|x, y1:j−1) distribution as copy distribution, i.e. the copy probability of a token in the
source w through the copy attention is computed
as the sum of attention towards all occurrences of
w. During training, we maximize marginal likelihood with the latent switch variable.
Bottom-Up Attention
We next consider techniques for incorporating a
content selection into abstractive summarization,
illustrated in Figure 2.
Content Selection
We deﬁne the content selection problem as a wordlevel extractive summarization task. While there
has been signiﬁcant work on custom extractive
summarization (see related work), we make a simplifying assumption and treat it as a sequence tagging problem. Let t1, . . . , tn denote binary tags
for each of the source tokens, i.e. 1 if a word is
copied in the target sequence and 0 otherwise.
While there is no supervised data for this task,
we can generate training data by aligning the summaries to the document. We deﬁne a word xi as
copied if (1) it is part of the longest possible subsequence of tokens s = xi−j:i:i+k, for integers
j ≤i; k ≤(n −i), if s ∈x and s ∈y, and
(2) there exists no earlier sequence u with s = u.
We use a standard bidirectional LSTM model
trained with maximum likelihood for the sequence
labeling problem. Recent results have shown that
better word representations can lead to signiﬁcantly improved performance in sequence tagging
tasks .
Therefore, we ﬁrst
map each token wi into two embedding channels
The e(w) embedding represents a
static channel of pre-trained word embeddings,
e.g. GLoVE . The e(c) are
contextual embeddings from a pretrained language
model, e.g. ELMo which uses
a character-aware token embedding followed by two bidirectional LSTM layers h(1)
i . The contextual embeddings are
ﬁne-tuned to learn a task-speciﬁc embedding e(c)
as a linear combination of the states of each LSTM
layer and the token embedding,
with γ and s0,1,2 as trainable parameters. Since
these embeddings only add four additional parameters to the tagger, it remains very data-efﬁcient
despite the high-dimensional embedding space.
Both embeddings are concatenated into a single vector that is used as input to a bidirectional
LSTM, which computes a representation hi for a
word wi. We can then calculate the probability
qi that the word is selected as σ(Wshi + bs) with
trainable parameters Ws and bs.
Bottom-Up Copy Attention
Inspired by work in bottom-up attention for images which restricts attention to predetermined bounding boxes within an
image, we use these attention masks to limit the
available selection of the pointer-generator model.
As shown in Figure 1, a common mistake made
by neural copy models is copying very long sequences or even whole sentences.
In the baseline model, over 50% of copied tokens are part
of copy sequences that are longer than 10 tokens,
whereas this number is only 10% for reference
summaries. While bottom-up attention could also
be used to modify the source encoder representations, we found that a standard encoder over the
full text was effective at aggregation and therefore
limit the bottom-up step to attention masking.
Concretely, we ﬁrst train a pointer-generator
model on the full dataset as well as the content
selector deﬁned above. At inference time, to generate the mask, the content selector computes selection probabilities q1:n for each token in a source
document. The selection probabilities are used to
modify the copy attention distribution to only include tokens identiﬁed by the selector. Let ai
j denote the attention at decoding step j to encoder
word i. Given a threshold ϵ, the selection is applied as a hard mask, such that
j|x, y1:j−1) =
j|x, y1:j−1)
To ensure that Eq. 1 still yields a correct probability distribution, we ﬁrst multiply p(˜aj|x, y1:j−1)
by a normalization parameter λ and then renormalize the distribution. The resulting normalized
distribution can be used to directly replace a as the
new copy probabilities.
End-to-End Alternatives
Two-step BOTTOM-UP attention has the advantage of training simplicity. In theory, though, standard copy attention should be able to learn how to
perform content selection as part of the end-to-end
training. We consider several other end-to-end approaches for incorporating content selection into
neural training.
Method 1: (MASK ONLY): We ﬁrst consider
whether the alignment used in the bottom-up approach could help a standard summarization system. Inspired by Nallapati et al. , we investigate whether aligning the summary and the
source during training and ﬁxing the gold copy attention to pick the ”correct” source word is beneﬁcial. We can think of this approach as limiting the
set of possible copies to a ﬁxed source word. Here
the training is changed, but no mask is used at test
Method 2 (MULTI-TASK): Next, we investigate
whether the content selector can be trained alongside the abstractive system. We ﬁrst test this hypothesis by posing summarization as a multi-task
problem and training the tagger and summarization model with the same features. For this setup,
we use a shared encoder for both abstractive summarization and content selection. At test time, we
apply the same masking method as bottom-up attention.
Method 3 (DIFFMASK):
Finally we consider training the full system end-to-end with
the mask during training.
Here we jointly optimize both objectives, but use predicted selection probabilities to softly mask the copy attention
j|x, y1:j−1) = p(ai
j|x, y1:j−1)×qi, which leads
to a fully differentiable model. This model is used
with the same soft mask at test time.
Several authors have noted that longer-form neural
generation still has signiﬁcant issues with incorrect length and repeated words than in short-form
problems like translation. Proposed solutions include modifying models with extensions such as a
coverage mechanism or intra-sentence attention
 .
We instead stick to
the theme of modifying inference, and modify
the scoring function to include a length penalty
lp and a coverage penalty cp, and is deﬁned as
s(x, y) = log p(y|x)/lp(x) + cp(x; y).
Length: To encourage the generation of longer
sequences, we apply length normalizations during
beam search. We use the length penalty by Wu
et al. , which is formulated as
lp(y) = (5 + |y|)α
(5 + 1)α ,
with a tunable parameter α, where increasing α
leads to longer summaries. We additionally set a
minimum length based on the training data.
Repeats: Copy models often repeatedly attend
to the same source tokens, generating the same
phrase multiple times. We introduce a new summary speciﬁc coverage penalty,
cp(x; y) = β
Intuitively, this penalty increases whenever the
decoder directs more than 1.0 of total attention
within a sequence towards a single encoded token. By selecting a sufﬁciently high β, this penalty
blocks summaries whenever they would lead to
repetitions. Additionally, we follow and restrict the beam search to never repeat
Data and Experiments
We evaluate our approach on the CNN-DM corpus ,
and the NYT corpus , which are
both standard corpora for news summarization.
The summaries for the CNN-DM corpus are bullet points for the articles shown on their respective
websites, whereas the NYT corpus contains summaries written by library scientists.
summaries are full sentences, with on average 66
tokens (σ = 26) and 4.9 bullet points. NYT summaries are not always complete sentences and are
shorter, with on average 40 tokens (σ = 27) and
1.9 bullet points. Recent work has used both the
anonymized and the non-anonymized versions of
on CNN-DM, so direct comparison can be dif-
Following See et al. , we use the
non-anonymized version of this corpus and truncate source documents to 400 tokens and the target
summaries to 100 tokens in training and validation
sets. For experiments with the NYT corpus, we
use the preprocessing described by Paulus et al.
 , and additionally remove author information and truncate source documents to 400 tokens
instead of 800. These changes lead to an average
of 326 tokens per article, a decrease from the 549
tokens with 800 token truncated articles. The target (non-copy) vocabulary is limited to 50,000 tokens for all models.
The content selection model uses pre-trained
GloVe embeddings of size 100, and ELMo with
size 1024. The bi-LSTM has two layers and a hidden size of 256. Dropout is set to 0.5, and the
model is trained with Adagrad, an initial learning
rate of 0.15, and an initial accumulator value of
0.1. We limit the number of training examples to
100,000 on either corpus, which only has a small
impact on performance.
For the jointly trained
content selection models, we use the same conﬁguration as the abstractive model.
For the base model, we re-implemented the
Pointer-Generator model as described by See et al.
 . To have a comparable number of parameters to previous work, we use an encoder with
256 hidden states for both directions in the onelayer LSTM, and 512 for the one-layer decoder.
The embedding size is set to 128. We found that
increasing model size or changing the model to
the Transformer can lead
to slightly improved performance, but at the cost
of increased training time and parameters.
Pointer-Generator 
Pointer-Generator + Coverage 
ML + Intra-Attention 
ML + RL 
Saliency + Entailment reward 
Key information guide network 
Inconsistency loss 
Sentence Rewriting 
Pointer-Generator (our implementation)
Pointer-Generator + Coverage Penalty
Pointer-Generator + Mask Only
Pointer-Generator + Multi-Task
Pointer-Generator + DiffMask
Bottom-Up Summarization
Table 1: Results of abstractive summarizers on the CNN-DM dataset.2 The ﬁrst section shows encoder-decoder
abstractive baselines trained with cross-entropy. The second section describes reinforcement-learning based approaches. The third section presents our baselines and the attention masking methods described in this work.
model is trained with the same Adagrad conﬁguration as the content selector. Additionally, the
learning rate halves after each epoch once the validation perplexity does not decrease after an epoch.
We do not use dropout and use gradient-clipping
with a maximum norm of 2.
All inference parameters are tuned on a 200 sentence subset of the validation set. Length penalty
parameter α and copy mask ϵ differ across models
and baselines, with α ranging from 0.6 to 1.4, and
ϵ ranging from 0.1 to 0.2. The minimum length
of the generated summary is set to 35 for CNN-
DM and 6 for NYT. While the Pointer-Generator
uses a beam size of 5 and does not improve with
a larger beam, we found that bottom-up attention
requires a larger beam size and set it to 10. The
coverage penalty parameter β is set to 10, and the
copy attention normalization parameter λ to 2 for
both approaches.
We use AllenNLP for
the content selector, and the abstractive models
are implemented in OpenNMT-py . The best results on the
anonymized version are R1:41.69 R2:19.47 RL:37.92 from
 . We compare to their DCA model
on the NYT corpus.
Table 1 shows our main results on the CNN-DM
corpus, with abstractive models shown in the top,
and bottom-up attention methods at the bottom.
We ﬁrst observe that using a coverage inference
penalty scores the same as a full coverage mechanism, without requiring any additional model parameters. We found that none of our end-to-end
models lead to improvements, indicating that it is
difﬁcult to apply the masking during training without hurting the training process. The Mask Only
model with increased supervision on the copy
mechanism performs very similar to the Multi-
Task model. On the other hand, bottom-up attention leads to a major improvement across all three
scores. While we would expect better content selection to primarily improve ROUGE-1, the fact
all three increase hints that the ﬂuency is not being hurt speciﬁcally. Our cross-entropy trained approach even outperforms all of the reinforcementlearning based approaches in ROUGE-1 and 2,
while the highest reported ROUGE-L score by
Chen and Bansal falls within the 95% con-
ﬁdence interval of our results.
Table 2 shows experiments with the same systems on the NYT corpus. We see that the 2 point
improvement compared to the baseline Pointer-
Generator maximum-likelihood approach carries
over to this dataset. Here, the model outperforms
Point.Gen. + Coverage Pen.
Bottom-Up Summarization
Table 2: Results on the NYT corpus, where we compare to RL trained models. * marks models and results
by Paulus et al. , and † results by Celikyilmaz
et al. .
the RL based model by Paulus et al. in
ROUGE-1 and 2, but not L, and is comparable
to the results of except
for ROUGE-L. The same can be observed when
comparing ML and our Pointer-Generator.
suspect that a difference in summary lengths due
to our inference parameter choices leads to this
difference, but did not have access to their models or summaries to investigate this claim. This
shows that a bottom-up approach achieves competitive results even to models that are trained on
summary-speciﬁc objectives.
The main beneﬁt of bottom-up summarization
seems to be from the reduction of mistakenly
copied words.
With the best Pointer-Generator
models, the precision of copied words is 50.0%
compared to the reference.
This precision increases to 52.8%, which mostly drives the increase
in R1. An independent-samples t-test shows that
this improvement is statistically signiﬁcant with
t=14.7 (p < 10−5). We also observe a decrease
in average sentence length of summaries from 13
to 12 words when adding content selection compared to the Pointer-Generator while holding all
other inference parameters constant.
Domain Transfer
While end-to-end training
has become common, there are beneﬁts to a twostep method. Since the content selector only needs
to solve a binary tagging problem with pretrained
vectors, it performs well even with very limited
training data. As shown in Figure 3, with only
1,000 sentences, the model achieves an AUC of
over 74. Beyond that size, the AUC of the model
increases only slightly with increasing training
To further evaluate the content selection, we
consider an application to domain transfer.
this experiment, we apply the Pointer-Generator
AUC with increasing training data
[thousands]
Figure 3: The AUC of the content selector trained
on CNN-DM with different training set sizes ranging
from 1,000 to 100,000 data points.
Results of the domain transfer experiment. AUC numbers are shown for content selectors.
ROUGE scores represent an abstractive model trained
on CNN-DM and evaluated on NYT, with additional
copy constraints trained on 1/10/100k training examples of the NYT corpus.
trained on CNN-DM to the NYT corpus. In addition, we train three content selectors on 1, 10,
and 100 thousand sentences of the NYT set, and
use these in the bottom-up summarization. The
results, shown in Table 3, demonstrates that even
a model trained on the smallest subset leads to an
improvement of almost 5 points over the model
without bottom-up attention. This improvement
increases with the larger subsets to up to 7 points.
While this approach does not reach a comparable performance to models trained directly on the
NYT dataset, it still represents a signiﬁcant increase over the not-augmented CNN-DM model
and produces summaries that are quite readable.
We show two example summaries in Appendix A.
This technique could be used for low-resource domains and for problems with limited data availability.
Analysis and Discussion
Extractive Summary by Content Selection?
Given that the content selector is effective in conjunction with the abstractive model, it is interesting to know whether it has learned an effective
extractive summarization system on its own. Table 4 shows experiments comparing content selec-
NEUSUM 
Top-3 sents (Cont. Select.)
Oracle Phrase-Selector
Content Selector
Results of extractive approaches on the
CNN-DM dataset. The ﬁrst section shows sentenceextractive scores. The second section ﬁrst shows an
oracle score if the content selector selected all the correct words according to our matching heuristic. Finally,
we show results when the Content Selector extracts all
phrases above a selection probability threshold.
tion to extractive baselines. The LEAD-3 baseline
is a commonly used baseline in news summarization that extracts the ﬁrst three sentences from an
article. Top-3 shows the performance when we
extract the top three sentences by average copy
probability from the selector. Interestingly, with
this method, only 7.1% of the top three sentences
are not within the ﬁrst three, further reinforcing
the strength of the LEAD-3 baseline. Our naive
sentence-extractor performs slightly worse than
the highest reported extractive score by Zhou et al.
 that is speciﬁcally trained to score combinations of sentences. The ﬁnal entry shows the
performance when all the words above a threshold
are extracted such that the resulting summaries are
approximately the length of reference summaries.
The oracle score represents the results if our model
had a perfect accuracy, and shows that the content selector, while yielding competitive results,
has room for further improvements in future work.
This result shows that the model is quite effective at ﬁnding important words (ROUGE-1) but
less effective at chaining them together (ROUGE-
2). Similar to Paulus et al. , we ﬁnd that the
decrease in ROUGE-2 indicates a lack of ﬂuency
and grammaticality of the generated summaries. A
typical example looks like this:
a man food his ﬁrst hamburger wrongfully for 36 years. michael hanline, 69,
was convicted of murder for the shooting of truck driver jt mcgarry in 1980 on
judge charges.
This particular ungrammatical example has a
ROUGE-1 of 29.3.
This further highlights the
beneﬁt of the combined approach where bottom-
Vanilla S2S
Pointer-Generator
Bottom-Up Attention
Table 5: %Novel shows the percentage of words in a
summary that are not in the source document. The last
three columns show the part-of-speech tag distribution
of the novel words in generated summaries.
up predictions are chained together ﬂuently by
the abstractive system.
However, we also note
that the abstractive system requires access to the
full source document. Distillation experiments in
which we tried to use the output of the contentselection as training-input to abstractive models
showed a drastic decrease in model performance.
Analysis of Copying
While Pointer-Generator
models have the ability to abstract in summary, the
use of a copy mechanism causes the summaries
to be mostly extractive. Table 5 shows that with
copying the percentage of generated words that are
not in the source document decreases from 6.6% to
2.2%, while reference summaries are much more
abstractive with 14.8% novel words. Bottom-up
attention leads to a further reduction to only a half
percent. However, since generated summaries are
typically not longer than 40-50 words, the difference between an abstractive system with and
without bottom-up attention is less than one novel
word per summary. This shows that the beneﬁt
of abstractive models has been less in their ability to produce better paraphrasing but more in the
ability to create ﬂuent summaries from a mostly
extractive process.
Table 5 also shows the part-of-speech-tags of
the novel generated words, and we can observe an
interesting effect. Application of bottom-up attention leads to a sharp decrease in novel adjectives
and nouns, whereas the fraction of novel words
that are verbs sharply increases. When looking
at the novel verbs that are being generated, we
notice a very high percentage of tense or number
changes, indicated by variation of the word “say”,
for example “said” or “says”, while novel nouns
are mostly morphological variants of words in the
Figure 4 shows the length of the phrases that are
being copied. While most copied phrases in the
Pointer-Generator
Bottom-Up Attention
Copy actions of different lengths
Figure 4: For all copied words, we show the distribution over the length of copied phrases they are part of.
The black lines indicate the reference summaries, and
the bars the summaries with and without bottom-up attention.
reference summaries are in groups of 1 to 5 words,
the Pointer-Generator copies many very long sequences and full sentences of over 11 words. Since
the content selection mask interrupts most long
copy sequences, the model has to either generate the unselected words using only the generation probability or use a different word instead.
While we observed both cases quite frequently
in generated summaries, the fraction of very long
copied phrases decreases. However, either with
or without bottom-up attention, the distribution of
the length of copied phrases is still quite different
from the reference.
Inference Penalty Analysis
We next analyze
the effect of the inference-time loss functions. Table 6 presents the marginal improvements over
the simple Pointer-Generator when adding one
penalty at a time. We observe that all three penalties improve all three scores, even when added on
top of the other two. This further indicates that the
unmodiﬁed Pointer-Generator model has already
learned an appropriate representation of the abstractive summarization problem, but is limited by
ineffective content selection and inference methods.
Conclusion
This work presents a simple but accurate content selection model for summarization that identiﬁes phrases within a document that are likely included in its summary. We showed that this content selector can be used for a bottom-up attention that restricts the ability of abstractive summarizers to copy words from the source.
combined bottom-up summarization system leads
to improvements in ROUGE scores of over two
points on both the CNN-DM and NYT corpora. A
Pointer Generator
+ Length Penalty
+ Coverage Penalty
+ Trigram Repeat
Table 6: Results on CNN-DM when adding one inference penalty at a time.
comparison to end-to-end trained methods showed
that this particular problem cannot be easily solved
with a single model, but instead requires ﬁnetuned inference restrictions. Finally, we showed
that this technique, due to its data-efﬁciency, can
be used to adjust a trained model with few data
points, making it easy to transfer to a new domain. Preliminary work that investigates similar
bottom-up approaches in other domains that require a content selection, such as grammar correction, or data-to-text generation, have shown some
promise and will be investigated in future work.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Barbara J. Grosz for helpful discussions and feedback on early stages of
this work. We further thank the three anonymous
reviewers. This work was supported by a Samsung Research Award. YD was funded in part by
a Bloomberg Research Award. SG was funded in
part by NIH grant 5R01CA204585-02.