I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
Published Online May 2012 in MECS ( 
DOI: 10.5815/ijitcs.2012.05.08
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search
Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Abdesslem Layeb
MISC Lab, Computer science department, Mentouri university of Constantine,
Constantine, Algeria.
Email: 
Seriel Rayene Boussalia
Computer science department, Mentouri University of Constantine,
Constantine, Algeria.
Email: 
Abstract— The Bin Packing Problem (BPP) is one of
the most known combinatorial optimization problems.
This problem consists to pack a set of items into a
minimum number of bins. There are several variants of
this problem; the most basic problem is the onedimensional bin packing problem (1-BPP). In this paper,
we present a new approach based on the quantum
inspired cuckoo search algorithm to deal with the 1-
BPP problem. The contribution consists in defining an
appropriate quantum representation based on qubit
representation to represent bin packing solutions. The
second contribution is proposition of a new hybrid
quantum measure operation which uses first fit heuristic
to pack no filled objects by the standard measure
operation. The obtained results are very encouraging
and show the feasibility and effectiveness of the
proposed approach.
Index Terms— Bin Packing Problem, Heuristics,
Cuckoo Search Algorithm, Quantum Computing,
Hybrid Algorithms
1. Introduction
The combinatorial optimization plays a very
important role in operational research, discrete
mathematics and computer science. The aim of this
field is to solve several combinatorial optimization
problems that are difficult to solve. Bin packing
problem (BPP) is very known NP-Hard optimization
problem. There are three main variants of BPP
problems: one, two and three dimensional Bin Packing
Problems. They have several real applications such as
container loading, cutting stock, packaging design and
resource allocation, etc. In this paper, we deal with the
one-dimensional Bin Packing Problem (1-BPP) .
The 1-BPP consists to pack a set of items having
different weights into a minimum number of bins which
may have also different capacities. Although, this
problem seems to be quite simple to define, it has been
shown to be NP-hard, because it cannot be solved
accurately and optimally in a reasonable time. This is
the reasons, why several approximate methods have
been proposed to solve this problem, which are
generally based on heuristics or metaheuristics. Among
the most popular heuristics used to solve the bin
packing problem, the First Fit algorithm (FF) which
places each item into the first bin in which it will fit.
The second popular heuristic algorithm is the Best Fit
(BF) which puts each element into the filled bin in
which it fits. Moreover, the FF and BF heuristics can be
improved by applying a specific order of items like in
First Fit Decreasing (FFD) and Best Fit Decreasing
(BFD), etc . Moreover, many kinds of
metaheuristics have been used to solve the bin packing
problems like genetic algorithms , Ant colony ,
Evolutionary computation has been proven to be
an effective way to solve complex engineering
problems. It presents many interesting features such as
adaptation, emergence and learning . Artificial neural
networks, genetic algorithms and swarm intelligence are
examples of bio-inspired systems used to this end .
In recent years, optimizing by swarm intelligence has
become a research interest to many research scientists
of evolutionary computation fields. There are many
algorithms based swarm intelligence like Ant Colony
optimization , eco-systems optimization ,
etc. The main algorithm for swarm intelligence is
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) , which is
inspired by the paradigm of birds grouping. PSO was
used successfully in various hard optimization problems.
One of the most recent variant of PSO algorithm is
Cuckoo Search algorithm (CS). CS is an optimization
algorithm developed by Xin-She Yang and Suash Deb
in 2009 . It was inspired by the obligate brood
parasitism of some cuckoo species by laying their eggs
in the nests of other host birds (of other species). Some
bird’s host can involve direct conflicts with the
intruding cuckoos. For example, if a bird’s host
discovers that the eggs are strange eggs, it will either
throw these alien eggs away or simply abandon its nest
and build a new nest elsewhere . The cuckoo’s
behavior and the mechanism of Lévy flights 
have leading to design of an efficient inspired algorithm
performing optimization search . The recent
applications of Cuckoo Search for optimization
problems have shown its promising effectiveness.
algorithm is recently proposed to deal with knapsack
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
problems .
Quantum Computing (QC) is a new research field
that induced intense researches in the last decade, and
that covers investigations on quantum computers and
quantum algorithms . QC relies on the principles of
quantum mechanics like qubit representation and
superposition of states. QC is able of processing huge
numbers of quantum states simultaneously in parallel.
QC brings new philosophy to optimization due to its
underlying concepts. Recently, a growing theoretical
and practical interest is devoted to researches on
evolutionary
computation
computing . The aim is to get benefit from quantum
computing capabilities to enhance both efficiency and
speed of classical evolutionary algorithms. This has led
to the design of several quantum inspired algorithms
such as quantum inspired genetic algorithm ,
quantum differential algorithm , quantum inspired
scatter search , etc. Unlike pure quantum computing,
quantum inspired algorithms don’t require the presence
of a quantum machine to work. Quantum inspired
algorithms have been used to solve successfully many
combinatorial optimization problems . Recently
a new hybrid algorithm called Quantum Inspired
Cuckoo Search algorithm (QICSA) is proposed to cope
with combinatorial optimization problems .The
proposed algorithm combines Cuckoo Search algorithm
and quantum computing in new one. The features of the
proposed algorithm consist in adopting a quantum
representation of the search space. The other feature of
QICSA is the integration of the quantum operators in
the cuckoo search dynamics in order to optimize a
defined objective function.
The present study was designed to investigate the
use of the QICSA algorithm to deal with the one
dimensional bin packing problem. The main features of
the proposed approach are the use of the qubit
representation to represent the search space and a set of
quantum operators operating on this search space.
Moreover, we have proposed a new hybrid quantum
measure operation based on both the standard quantum
measure operation and the First Fist heuristic. We have
tested our algorithm on some popular data sets and
the results are promising.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In section 2, a formulation of the tackled problem is
given. In section 3, on overview of quantum computing
is presented. In section 4, the cuckoo search algorithm
search presented. The proposed method is described in
section 5. Experimental results are discussed in section
6. Finally, conclusions and future work are drawn.
2. Problem formulation
Bin packing problem is an important task in
solving many real problems such as the loading of
tractor trailer trucks, cargo airplanes and ships, etc. For
example, the container loading problem consists to
design an affective loading plan for containers. It
consists of finding the most economic storage of articles
that have all the same dimensions but with different
weights in containers (also called bins) of equal
capacity. The constraint is that the bins do not exceed
its capacity. This problem can be modeled as a onedimensional bin packing problem. The principal
objective is to minimize the number of bins used for
storing the set of all items. Formally, the bin packing
problem can be stated as follows:
Subject to constraints:
yi= 1 if the bin i is used; else 0
xij= 1 if the item j is stocked in bin i.
In the above model the objective function is to
minimize the total number of bins used to pack all items
which have the same capacity ( eq.1). The first
constraint guarantees that the weights of items (wi)
filled in the bin j do not exceed the bin capacity. The
second constraint ensures that each item is placed only
in one bin. It appears to be impossible to obtain exact
solutions in polynomial time. The main reason is that
the required computation grows exponentially with the
size of the problem. Therefore, it is often desirable to
find near optimal solutions to these problems. Efficient
heuristic algorithms offer a good alternative to
accomplish this goal. Within this perspective, we are
interested in applying a QICSA algorithm.
3. Overview of Quantum Computing
Quantum computing is a new theory which has
emerged as a result of merging computer science and
quantum mechanics. Its main goal is to investigate all
the possibilities a computer could have if it followed the
laws of quantum mechanics. The origin of quantum
computing goes back to the early 80 when Richard
Feynman observed that some quantum mechanical
During the last decade, quantum computing has
attracted widespread interest and has induced intensive
investigations and researches since it appears more
powerful than its classical counterpart. Indeed, the
parallelism that the quantum computing provides
reduces obviously the algorithmic complexity. Such an
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
ability of parallel processing can be used to solve
combinatorial optimization problems which require the
exploration of large solutions spaces. The basic
definitions and laws of quantum information theory are
beyond the scope of this paper. For in-depth theoretical
insights, one can refer to .
The qubit is the smallest unit of information stored
in a two-state quantum computer. Contrary to classical
bit which has two possible values, either 0 or 1, a qubit
will be in the superposition of those two values. The
state of a qubit can be represented by using the bracket
|Ψ = α |0+ β |1
where |Ψ denotes more than a vector 
vector space. |0 and |1 represent the classical bit
values 0 and 1 respectively; a and b are complex
numbers such that:
| a |2 + | b |2 = 1
a and b are complex number that specify the
probability amplitudes of the corresponding states.
When we measure the qubit’s state we may have ‘0’
with a probability | a |2 and we may have ‘1’ with a
probability | b |2. A system of m-qubits can represent 2m
states at the same time. Quantum computers can
perform computations on all these values at the same
time. It is this exponential growth of the state space
with the number of particles that suggests exponential
speed-up of computation on quantum computers over
classical computers. Each quantum operation will deal
with all the states present within the superposition in
parallel. When observing a quantum state, it collapses
to a single state among those states.
Algorithms
successively a series of quantum operations on a
quantum system. Quantum operations are performed
using quantum gates and quantum circuits. It should be
noted that designing quantum algorithms is not easy at
all. Yet, there is not a powerful quantum machine able
algorithms.
Therefore, some researchers have tried to adapt some
properties of quantum computing in the classical
algorithms. Since the late 1990s, merging quantum
computation and evolutionary computation has been
proven to be a productive issue when probing complex
problems. Like any other EA, a Quantum Evolutionary
Algorithm (QEA) relies on the representation of the
individual, the evaluation function and the population
dynamics. The particularity of QEA stems from the
quantum representation they adopt which allows
representing the superposition of all potential solutions
for a given problem. It also stems from the quantum
operators it uses to evolve the entire population through
generations. QEA has been successfully applied on
many problems .
4. Cuckoo Search Algorithm
In order to solve complex problems, ideas gleaned
from natural mechanisms have been exploited to
heuristics.
optimization
algorithms has been extensively investigated during the
last decade paving the way for new computing
paradigms such as neural networks, evolutionary
computing, swarm optimization, etc. The ultimate goal
is to develop systems that have ability to learn
incrementally, to be adaptable to their environment and
to be tolerant to noise. One of the recent developed
bioinspired algorithms is the Cuckoo Search (CS) 
which is based on style life of Cuckoo bird. Cuckoos
use an aggressive strategy of reproduction that involves
the female hack nests of other birds to lay their eggs
fertilized. Sometimes, the egg of cuckoo in the nest is
discovered and the hacked birds discard or abandon the
nest and start their own brood elsewhere. The Cuckoo
Search proposed by Yang and Deb 2009 is based
on the following three idealized rules:
Each cuckoo lays one egg at a time, and dumps
it in a randomly chosen nest;
The best nests with high quality of eggs
(solutions) will carry over to the next
generations;
The number of available host nests is fixed,
and a host can discover an alien egg with a
probability pa א . In this case, the host
bird can either throw the egg away or abandon
the nest so as to build a completely new nest in
a new location.
The last assumption can be approximated by a
fraction pa of the n nests being replaced by new nests
(with new random solutions at new locations). The
generation of new solutions x(t+1) is done by using a
Lévy flight (eq.7). Lévy flights essentially provide a
random walk while their random steps are drawn from a
Lévy distribution for large steps which has an infinite
variance with an infinite mean (eq.8). Here the
consecutive jumps/steps of a cuckoo essentially form a
random walk process which obeys a power-law steplength distribution with a heavy tail .
where α > 0 is the step size which should be related to
the scales of the problem of interest. Generally we take
α = O(1). The product ْ means entry-wise
multiplications. This entry-wise product is similar to
those used in PSO, but here the random walk via Lévy
ﬂight is more eﬃcient in exploring the search space as
its step length is much longer in the long run.
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
The main characteristics of CS algorithm it’s its
simplicity. In fact, comparing with other population or
agent-based metaheuristic algorithms such as particle
swarm optimization and harmony search, there are few
parameters to set. The applications of CS into
engineering optimization problems have shown its
encouraging efficiency. For example, a promising
discrete cuckoo search algorithm is recently proposed to
solve nurse scheduling problem . Another binary
version of cuckoo search is proposed in to sole the
knapsack problems. An efficient computation approach
based on cuckoo search has been proposed for data
fusion in wireless sensor networks . In more details,
the proposed cuckoo search algorithm can be described
as follow:
Objective function f(x), x =(x1,..,
Initial a population of n host nests xi
(i = 1, 2, ..., n);
while (t < MaxGeneration) or (stop
criterion);
 Get a cuckoo (say i) randomly by
Lévy flights;
 Evaluate its quality/fitness Fi;
 Choose a nest among n (say j)
 if (Fi > Fj),
Replace j by the new solution;
 Abandon a fraction (pa) of worse
 build new ones at new locations
via Lévy flights;
 Keep the best solutions (or nests
with quality solutions);
 Rank the solutions and find the
current best;
Fig. 1. Cuckoo Search Schema.
4.1 Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search
In section, we present the Quantum Inspired
Cuckoo Search (QICSA) which integers the quantum
computing principles such as qubit representation,
measure operation and quantum mutation, in the core
the cuckoo search algorithm. This proposed model will
focus on enhancing diversity and the performance of the
cuckoo search algorithm .
architecture,
developed to solve combinatorial problems, is explained
in the Figure 2. Our architecture contains three essential
modules. The first module contains a quantum
representation of cuckoo swarm. The particularity of
quantum inspired cuckoo search algorithm stems from
the quantum representation it adopts which allows
representing the superposition of all potential solutions
for a given problem. Moreover, the generation of a new
cuckoo depends on the probability amplitudes a and b
of the qubit function Ψ (eq.5). The second module
contains the objective function and the selection
operator. The selection operator is similar to the elitism
strategy used in genetic algorithms. Finally, the third
module, which is the most important, contains the main
quantum cuckoo dynamics. This module is composed of
4 main operations inspired from quantum computing
and cuckoo search algorithm: Measurement, Mutation,
Interference, and Lévy flights operations. QICSA uses
these operations to evolve the entire swarm through
generations .
Fig. 2. Architecture of the QICSA algorithm 
5. The proposed approach for solving the bin
packing problem
The development of the suggested approach called
QICSABP is based mainly on a quantum representation
of the searchspace associated with the problem and a
QICSA dynamic used to explore this space by operating
on the quantum representation by using quantum
operations. In order to show how quantum computing
concepts have been tailored to the problem at hand, we
need first to derive a representation scheme which
includes the definition of an appropriate quantum
representation of potential pin packing solutions and the
definition of quantum operators. Then, we describe how
these defined concepts have been integrated in cuckoo
search algorithm
representation
of cuckoo swarm
Quantum Cuckoo
Measurement
Interference
Lévy flights
Best solution
Evaluation &
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
5.1 Quantum representation of variable order
In order to easily apply quantum principles on bin
packing problem, we need to map potential solutions
into a quantum representation that could be easily
manipulated by quantum operators. The bin packing
solution is represented as binary matrix (Figure.3)
satisfying the following criteria:
 For N objects, the size of the binary matrix is
N*N. The columns represent the bins and the
rows represent the objects.
 The presence of 1 in the position (i,j) indicates
that the object i is filled in the bin i
 In each row there is a single 1, i.e. the object is
filled in one bin.
The following example shows a binary solution for
bin packing instance of 4 objects. According to the
example the objects 2 and 3 are packed in the bin 2, the
object 2 is filled in the bin 1, and the object 4 is filled in
the bin 3. So the number of bins used is 3, the last bin is
Fig. 3. Binary representation of bin packing solution.
In terms of quantum computing, each variable
emplacement is represented as a quantum register as
shown in Figure 4. One quantum register contains a
superposition of all possible variable positions. Each
represents a single qubit and corresponds
to the binary digit 1 or 0. The probability amplitudes ai
and bi are real values satisfying
. For each
qubit, a binary value is computed according to its
probabilities
, and the bin capacity.
can be interpreted as the probabilities to have
respectively 0 or 1. Consequently, all feasible variable
orders can be represented by a quantum matrix QM
(Figure 5) that contains the superposition of all possible
variable permutations. This quantum matrix can be
viewed as a probabilistic representation of all potential
bin packing solutions. When embedded within a cuckoo
search algorithm framework, it plays the role of a nest.
A quantum representation offers a powerful way to
represent the solution space and reduces consequently
the required number of cuckoo. Only one quantum
matrix is needed to represent the entire swarm.
Fig.4. Quantum register encoding a row in the binary matrix.
Fig. 5. Quantum representation of variable ordering.
5.2 Quantum operators
The quantum inspired cuckoo search algorithm
uses some of quantum inspired operations like
measurement,
interference,
integration helps to increase the optimization capacities
of the cuckoo search.
5.2.1 Measurement
This operation transforms by projection the
quantum vector into a binary vector (figure 6).
Therefore, there will be a solution among all the
solutions present in the superposition. But contrary to
the pure quantum theory, this measurement does not
destroy the superposition. That has the advantage of
preserving the superposition for the following iterations
knowing that we operate on traditional machines. The
binary values for a qubit are computed according to its
probabilities
For the bin packing problem, this operation is
accomplished as follows: for each qubit, we generate a
random number Pr between 0 and 1; the value of the
corresponding bit is 1 if the value
is greater than
Pr, and otherwise the bit value is 0. However, the use
the standard measure operation defined in can lead
infeasible
computational time of the algorithm to find good
solutions. By using the standard measure, we can get an
overloaded bin or unpacked item (we can get a zero
vector for variable emplacement). In order to delete this
kind of solutions, we have introduced bin capacity in
the measure operation. So, the value 1 is obtained if the
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
is greater than the random number Pr, and
the item weight is less than the bin capacity. To correct
the unpacked item, we have introduced the FF in the
core the measure operation heuristic to pack the unfilled
object. The FF algorithm is used if we have a zero
vector for a given object.
It should be noted that, the measurement operation
can be seen also as a diversification operator. Indeed,
two successive measurements do not give necessarily
the same solution which increases the diversification
capacities of our approach. The obtained binary vector
translated
Consequently, with one quantum Matrix, we can get
several different solutions for the bin packing problem,
which gives a great diversity to the cuckoo search
algorithm.
Fig.6. Quantum measurement.
5.2.2 Quantum interference
This operation amplifies the amplitude of the best
solution and decreases the amplitudes of the bad ones. It
primarily consists in moving the state of each qubit in
the direction of the corresponding bit value in the best
solution in progress. The operation of interference is
useful to intensify research around the best solution and
it plays the role of local search method. This operation
can be accomplished by using a unit transformation
which achieves a rotation whose angle is a function of
the amplitudes ai, bi (figure 7). The rotation angle’s
value should be well set in order avoid premature
convergence. A big value of the rotation angle can lead
to premature convergence or divergence; however a
small value to this parameter can increase the
convergence time. Consequently, the angle is set
experimentally and its direction is determined as a
function of the values of ai, bi and the corresponding
element’s value in the binary vector (table 1). In our
algorithm, we have set the rotation angle = pi/20.
However, we can use a dynamic value of the rotation
angle in order to increase the performance of the
interference operation .
Fig. 7. Quantum interference.
Table 1. Lookup table of the rotation angle
Reference bit
5.2.3 Mutation operator
This operator is inspired from the evolutionary
mutation. It allows moving from the current solution to
one of its neighbours. This operator allows exploring
new solutions and thus enhances the diversification
capabilities of the search process. In each generation,
the mutation is applied with some probability. We
distinguish two types of quantum mutations:
 Inter-qubit Mutation: this operator performs
permutation between two qubits. It consists first in
selecting randomly a register in the quantum
matrix. Then, pairs of qubits are chosen randomly
according to a defined probability (figure 8).
 Intra-qubit Mutation: it consists in selecting
randomly a qubit according to a defined
probability, next we make a permutation between
the qubit amplitudes ai et bi as it is shown on
View that the quantum inspired cuckoo search
characteristics
diversity;
recommended to use small values for the of mutation
probability in order to keep good performance of the
quantum inspired cuckoo search.
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
Fig. 8. inter-qubit quantum mutation.
Fig. 9. intra-qubit quantum mutation.
5.3 Outlines of the proposed algorithm
Now, we describe how the representation scheme
representation
operators has been embedded within a cuckoo search
algorithm and resulted in a hybrid stochastic algorithm
used to solve the bin packing problem. Firstly, a swarm
of p host nest is created at random positions to represent
all possible solutions. The developed algorithm called
QICSABP progresses through a number of generations
according to the QICSA dynamics. During each
iteration, the following main tasks are performed. A
new cuckoo is built using the Lévy flights operator
followed by the quantum mutation which is applied
with some probability prm. The next step is to evaluate
the current cuckoo. For that, we apply the measure
operation in order to get a binary solution which
represents a potential solution. The binary solution is
evaluated by using the number of used bins as objective
function. After this step, we apply the interference
operation according to the best current element. We
replace some worst nests by the current cuckoo if it is
better or by new random nests generated by the Lévy
flight. The selection phase in QICSA of the best nests or
solutions is comparable to some form of elitism
selection used in genetic algorithms, which ensures the
best solution is kept always in the next iteration.
Finally, the global best solution is then updated if a
better one is found and the whole process is repeated
until reaching a stopping criterion. In more details, the
proposed QICSA can be described as in figure 10.
The particularity of QICSA algorithm stems from
the quantum representation it adopts which allows
representing the superposition of all potential solutions
for a given problem. Moreover, the position of a nest
depends on the probability amplitudes a and b of the
qubit function. The probabilistic nature of the quantum
measure offers a good diversity to the cuckoo search
algorithm, while the interference operation helps to
intensify the search around the good solutions.
Input: Problem data
Output: problem solution
Construct an initial population of p host
while (stop criterion)
 Apply Lévy flights operator to get
cuckoo randomly;
 Apply randomly a quantum mutation
 Apply measurement operator;
 Evaluate the quality/fitness of this
 Apply Interference operator;
 replace some nests among n randomly
by the new solution according to its
 A fraction (pa) of the worse nests are
abandoned and new ones are built via
Lévy flights;
 Keep the best solutions (or nests
with quality solutions);
current best;
Fig. 10. Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Schema.
6. Implementation and Validation
We have implemented our approach in Matlab 7.7
and tested on home PC with core duo processor and 2.2
GB of memory. In order to evaluate the proposed
approach, we have used a set of benchmark data sets
 The benchmark data sets
are divided into three classes: easy, medium and hard
class instances. In all experiment, we have used 5000
iterations and 6 nests in the population.
The obtained results are summarized in Table 1.,
Table 2., and Table 3., the first column is the name of
the instance, the second column contains the number of
variables, the third contains the bin capacity, the fourth
column contains the results of the first fit decreasing
heuristic (FFD), the fifth column contains the results
our approach (QICSABP), and the last column contains
the best know results. Moreover, we have used the
Friedman tests for comparing statistically the found
solutions.
In term of rapidity, the proposed algorithm is
slower than the FFD algorithm. However, in terms of
solutions quality, the QICSABP algorithm is better than
the FFD in some instances of medium and hard classes
of tests (Table 3, table 4) as it’s showed by the
Freidman tests (Figures 11, 12). Table 1 shows the
results of the first series of easy-type instances, the
obtained results of our algorithm and those of FFD are
completely identical to the best known solutions. In the
second series of medium instances, our algorithm is
better than the FFD heuristic in 5 instances, while this
later is better than our algorithm in only one test. In the
Freidman test, our approach is the closest to the best
know solutions compared to the FFD algorithm . Indeed, our algorithm has found 4 best solutions
(table). Finally, Table 3 shows the results for the third
series of hard instances. Our algorithm ranks second in
the Friedman test after the best known solutions (figure
12). In this class, our algorithm is better than the FFD
in three instances. Moreover, the differences between
our results and the best known results are between 2 and
The effectiveness of our approach is explained by
the good combination between the diversification of the
intensification of the interference operation which leads
the algorithm to explore effectively the search space
and locate a good solution.
Table 2: The bin packing results for the easy class, n: number of
items, C: bin capacity.
Table 3: The bin packing results for the medium class, n: number of
items, C: bin capacity.
Fig. 11. Friedman test for medium-type instances.
Table 4: The bin packing results for the Hard class, n: number of
items, C: bin capacity.
Fig.12. Friedman test for HARD-type instances.
7. Conclusion
We have tackled in this paper the one-dimensional
bin packing problem. The importance of this problem
lies in its widespread applications in transport, loading
and industry. Unfortunately, this problem belongs to the
class of NP-hard problems. To solve this problem, we
have proposed in this paper, a new stochastic method
based on the quantum inspired cuckoo search algorithm.
The main contributions of our approach are the use a
new hybrid measure operation which integrates the FF
heuristic in the core of the standard measure operation.
The FF is applied if the measure operation doesn’t
succeed to pack an item in a bin. The great feature of
A Novel Quantum Inspired Cuckoo Search Algorithm for Bin Packing Problem
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2012, 5, 58-67
this hybrid measure is its great ability to generate
different good random solutions. The proposed
algorithm reduces efficiently the population size and the
number of iterations to have the optimal solution,
thanks to quantum representation, solutions allows the
coding of all the potential solutions with a certain
probability. Moreover, the interference allows to
intensify the search is around the best solutions. The
quantum levy flight helps also to apply a random walk
around the best solution. The results are very
encouraging and clearly show the effectiveness of our
approach. As perspective, we want to test the
effectiveness of the use of local search methods such as
tabu search, variable neighbourhood search, etc. we can
also use other heuristics to build the initial solution like
FFD or BFD.