The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
Risi Kondor
 
Department of Computer Science and Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
Horace Pan
 
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
Many real world graphs, such as the graphs of
molecules, exhibit structure at multiple different
scales, but most existing kernels between graphs
are either purely local or purely global in character. In contrast, by building a hierarchy of nested
subgraphs, the Multiscale Laplacian Graph kernels (MLG kernels) that we deﬁne in this paper can account for structure at a range of different scales. At the heart of the MLG construction is another new graph kernel, called the Feature Space Laplacian Graph kernel (FLG kernel),
which has the property that it can lift a base kernel deﬁned on the vertices of two graphs to a kernel between the graphs. The MLG kernel applies
such FLG kernels to subgraphs recursively. To
make the MLG kernel computationally feasible,
we also introduce a randomized projection procedure, similar to the Nystr¨om method, but for
RKHS operators.
1. Introduction
There is a wide range of problems in applied machine
learning from web data mining to
protein function prediction where
the input space is a space of graphs. A particularly important application domain is chemoinformatics, where the
graphs capture the structure of molecules. In the pharamceutical industry, for example, machine learning algorithms
are regularly used to screen candidate drug compounds
for safety and efﬁcacy against speciﬁc diseases , a number of different graph kernels have been appeared in the literature
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).
 ). In general, a graph kernel k(G1, G2) must satisfy the following
three requirements:
(a) The kernel should capture the right notion of similarity between G1 and G2. For example, if G1 and G2 are
social networks, then k might capture to what extent
clustering structure, degree distribution, etc. match up
between them. If, on the other hand, G1 and G2 are
molecules, then we are probably more interested in
what functional groups are present in both, and how
they are arranged relative to each other.
(b) The kernel is usually computed from the adjacency
matrices A1 and A2 of the two graphs, but (unless
the vertices are explicitly labeled), it must be invariant to their ordering. In other words, writing the kernel explicitly in terms of A1 and A2, we must have
k(A1, A2) = k(A1, PA2P ⊤) for any permutation matrix P.
(c) The kernel should be efﬁciently computable. The time
complexity of many graph kernels is O(n3), where n is
the number of vertices of the larger of the two graphs.
However, when dealing with large graphs, we might
only be able to afford O(n2) or even O(n) complexity.
On the other hand, in chemoinformatics applications,
n might only be on the order of a 100, permitting the
use of more expensive kernels.
Of these three requirements, the second one (permutation
invariance) has proved to be the central constraint around
which much of the graph kernels literature is organized.
In combinatorics, any function φ(A) that is invariant to reordering the vertices (i.e., φ(PAP ⊤) = φ(A) for any permutation matrix P) is called a graph invariant . The permutation invariance requirement effectively
stipulates that graph kernels must be built out of graph invariants. In general, efﬁciently computable graph invariants offered by the mathematics literature tend to fall in
one of two categories:
(a) Local invariants, which can often be reduced to simply
counting some local properties, such as the number of
triangles, squares, etc. that appear in G as subgraphs.
(b) Spectral invariants, which can be expressed as func-
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
tions of the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix or the
graph Laplacian.
Correspondingly, while different graph kernels are motivated in very different ways from random walks through shortest paths to Fourier transforms on the symmetric group , ultimately most
graph kernels also reduce to computing a function of the
two graphs that is either purely local or purely spectral.
For example all kernels based on the “subgraph counting”
idea ) are local. On the
other hand, most of the random walk based kernels are reducable to a spectral form involving the eigenvalues of either the two graphs individually, or their Kronecker product
 and therefore are really only
sensitive to the large scale structure of graphs.
In practice, it would be desirable to have a kernel that is
inbetween these two extremes, in the sense that it can take
structure into account at multiple different scales. A kernel between molecules, for example, must be sensitive to
the overall large-scale shape of the graphs (whether they
are more like a chain, a ring, a chain that branches, etc.),
but also to what smaller structures (e.g., functional groups)
are present in the graphs, and how they are related to the
global structure (e.g., whether a particular functional group
is towards the middle or one of the ends of the chain).
For the most part, such a multiscale graph kernel has
been missing from the literature. One notable exception is
the Weisfeiler–Lehman kernel ,
which uses a combination of message passing and hashing
to build summaries of the local neighborhood vertices at
different scales. However, in practice, the message passing step is usually only iterated a relatively small number
of times, so the Weisfeiler–Lehman kernel is still mostly
local. Moreover, the hashing step is somewhat ad-hoc and
does not give rise to well behaved, local summaries: perturbing the edges by a small amount leads to completely
different hash features.
In this paper we present a new graph kernel, the Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel (MLG kernel), which, we
believe, is the ﬁrst kernel in the literature that can truly
compare structure in graphs simultaneously at multiple different scales. We begin by deﬁning a simpler graph kernel,
called the Feature Space Laplacian Graph Kernel (FLG kernel) that only operates at a single scale (Section 2). The
FLG kernel combines two sources of information: a partial
labeling of the nodes in terms of vertex features, and topological information about the graph supplied by its Laplacian. An important property of the the FLG kernel is that
it can work with vertex labels provided implicitly, in terms
of a “base kernel” on the vertices. Crucially, this makes it
possible to apply the FLG kernel recursively.
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel (MLG kernel),
which is the central object of the paper and is deﬁned in
Section 3, uses exactly this recursive property of the FLG
kernel to build a hierarchy of subgraph kernels that are not
only sensitive to the topological relationships between individual vertices, but also between subgraphs of increasing
sizes. Each kernel is deﬁned in terms of the preceding kernel in the hierarchy.
Efﬁcient computability is a major concern in our paper,
and recursively deﬁned kernels, especially on combinatorial data structures, can be very expensive. Therefore, in
Section 4 we describe a strategy based on a combination
of linearizing each level of the kernel (relative to a given
dataset) and a randomized low rank projection, that reduces
every stage of the kernel computation to simple operations
involving small matrices, leading to a very fast algorithm.
Finally, section 5 presents experimental comparisons of our
kernel with competing methods.
2. Laplacian Graph Kernels
Let G be a weighted undirected graph with vertex set V =
{v1, . . . , vn} and edge set E. Recall that the graph Laplacian of G is an n × n matrix LG, with
if {vi, vj} ∈E
j : {vi,vj}∈E wi,j
otherwise,
where wi,j is the weight of edge {vi, vj}. The graph Laplacian is positive semi-deﬁnite, and in terms of the adjacency
matrix A and the weighted degree matrix D, it can be expressed as L = D−A.
Spectral graph theory tells us that the low eigenvalue eigenvectors of LG (the “low frequency modes”) are informative
about the overall shape of G. One way of seeing this is to
note that for any vector z ∈Rn
wi,j(zi −zj)2,
so the low eigenvalue eigenvectors are the smoothest functions on G, in the sense that they vary the least between
adjacent vertices. An alternative interpretation emerges if
we use G to construct a Gaussian graphical model (Markov
Random Field or MRF) over n variables x1, . . . , xn with
clique potentials φ(xi, xj) = e−wi,j(xi−xj)2/2 for each
edge and ψ(xi) = e−ηx2
i /2 for each vertex. The joint distribution of x = (x1, . . . , xn)⊤is then
e−wi,j(xi−xj)2/2 Y
e−x⊤(L+ηI)x/2,
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
showing that the covariance matrix of x is (LG + ηI)−1.
Note that the ψ factors were only added to ensure
that the distribution is normalizable, and η is typically
just a small constant “regularizer”: LG actually has a
zero eigenvalue eigenvector (namely the constant vector
n−1/2(1, 1, . . . , 1)⊤), so without adding ηI we would not
be able to invert it. In the following we will call LG + ηI
the regularized Laplacian, and denote it simply by L.
Both the above views suggest that if we want deﬁne a kernel between graphs that is sensitive to their overall shape,
comparing the low eigenvalue eigenvectors of their Laplacians is a good place to start. Following the MRF route,
given two graphs G1 and G2 of n vertices, we can de-
ﬁne the kernel between them to be a kernel between the
corresponding distributions p1 = N(0, L−1
1 ) and p2 =
2 ). Speciﬁcally, we use the Bhattacharyya kernel
k(p1, p2) =
because for Gaussian distributions it can be computed in
closed form , giving
k(p1, p2) =
If some of the eigenvalues of L−1
are zero or very
close to zero, along certain directions in space the two distributions in (2) become very ﬂat, leading to vanishingly
small kernel values (unless the “ﬂat” directions of the two
Gaussians are perfectly aligned). To remedy this problem,
similarly to , we “soften” (or regularize) the kernel by adding some small constant γ times
the identity to L−1
2 . This leads to what we call the
Laplacian Graph Kernel.
Deﬁnition 1. Let G1 and G2 be two graphs of n vertices
with (regularized) Laplacians L1 and L2, respectively. We
deﬁne the Laplacian graph kernel (LG kernel) with parameter γ between G1 and G2 as
kLG(G1, G2) =
|S1|1/4 |S2|1/4
where S1 = L−1
1 +γI and S2 = L−1
By virtue of (2), the LG kernel is guaranteed to be positive
semi-deﬁnite, and because the value of the overlap integral
(2) is largely determined by the extent to which the subspaces spanned by the largest eigenvalue eigenvectors of
are aligned, it effectively captures similarity
between the overall shapes of G1 and G2. However, the LG
kernel does suffer from three major limitations:
1. It assumes that both graphs have exactly the same number of vertices.
2. It is only sensitive to the overall structure of the two
graphs, and not to how the two graphs compare at more
local scales.
3. It is not invariant to permuting the vertices.
Our goal for the rest of this paper is to overcome each of
these limitations, while retaining the LG kernel’s attractive
spectral interpretation.
2.1. Feature space LG kernel
In the probabilistic view of the LG kernel, every graph
generates random vectors x = (x1, . . . , xn)⊤according
to (1), and the kernel between two graphs is determined
by comparing the corresponding distributions. The invariance problem arises because the ordering of the variables
x1, . . . , xn is arbitrary: even if G1 and G2 are topologically
the same, kLG(G1, G2) might be low if their vertices happen
to be numbered differently.
One of the central ideas of this paper is to address this
issue by transforming from the “vertex space variables”
x1, . . . , xn to “feature space variables” y1, . . . , ym, where
j ti,j(xj), and each ti,j only depends on j through
local and reordering invariant properties of vertex vj. If
we then compute an analogous kernel to the LG kernel, but
now between the distributions of the y’s rather than the x’s,
the resulting kernel will be permutation invariant.
In the simplest case, each ti,j is linear, i.e., ti,j(xj) =
φi(vj) · xj, where (φ1, . . . , φm) is a collection of m local (and permutation invariant) vertex features. For example, φi(vj) may be the degree of vertex vj, or the value
of hβ(vj, vj), where h is the diffusion kernel on G with
length scale parameter β ). In the
chemoinformatics setting, the φi’s might be some way of
encoding what type of atom is located at vertex vj.
The linear transform of a multivariate normal random variable is multivariate normal. In particular, in our case, letting U = (φi(vj))i,j, we have E(y) = 0 and Cov(y, y) =
U Cov(x, x)U ⊤= UL−1U ⊤, leading to the following kernel, which is the workhorse of the present paper.
Deﬁnition 2. Let G1 and G2 be two graphs with regularized
Laplacians L1 and L2, respectively, γ ≥0 a parameter,
and (φ1, . . . , φm) a collection of m local vertex features.
Deﬁne the corresponding feature mapping matrices
[U1]i,j = φi(vj)
[U2]i,j = φi(v′
(where vj is the j’th vertex of G1 and v′
j is the j’th vertex
of G2). The corresponding Feature space Laplacian graph
kernel (FLG kernel) is
kFLG(G1, G2) =
|S1|1/4 |S2|1/4
where S1 = U1L−1
1 +γI and S2 = U2L−1
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
Since the φ1, . . . , φm vertex features, by deﬁnition, are local and invariant to vertex renumbering, the FLG kernel is
permutation invariant. Moreover, because the distributions
p1 and p2 now live in the space of features rather than the
space deﬁned by the vertices, there is no problem with applying the kernel to two graphs with different numbers of
Similarly to the LG kernel, the FLG kernel also captures
information about the global shape of graphs. However,
whereas, intuitively, the former encodes information such
as “G is an elongated graph with vertex number i towards
one and and vertex number j at the other”, the FLG kernel
can capture information more like “G is elongated with low
degree vertices at one end and high degree vertices at the
other”. The major remaining shortcoming of the FLG kernel is that it cannot take into account structure at multiple
different scales.
2.2. The “kernelized” LG kernel
The key to boosting kFLG to a multiscale kernel is that it
itself can be “kernelized”, i.e., it can be computed from
just the inner products between the feature vectors of the
vertices (which we call the base kernel) without having to
know the actual φi(vj) features values.
Deﬁnition 3. Given a collection φ = (φ1, . . . , φm)⊤of local vertex features, we deﬁne the corresponding base kernel κ between two vertices v and v′ as the dot product of
their feature vectors: κ(v, v′) = φ(v) · φ(v′).
Note that in this deﬁnition v and v′ may be two vertices
of the same graph, or of two different graphs. We ﬁrst
show that, similarly to the Representer Theorem for other
kernel methods , to compute
kFLG(G1, G2) one only needs to consider the subspace of
Rm spanned by the feature vectors of their vertices.
Proposition 1. Let G1 and G2 be two graphs with vertex
sets V1 = {v1 . . . vn1} and V2 = {v′
1 . . . v′
n2}, and let
{ξ1, . . . , ξp} be an orthonormal basis for the subspace
φ(v1), . . . , φ(vn1), φ(v′
1), . . . , φ(v′
Then, (4) can be rewritten as
kFLG(G1, G2) =
|S1|1/4 |S2|1/4
where [S1]i,j = ξ⊤
i S1ξj and [S2]i,j = ξ⊤
i S2ξj. In other
words, S1 and S2 are the projections of S1 and S2 to W.
Proof. The proposition hinges on the fact that (4) is invariant to rotation. In particular, if we extend {ξ1, . . . , ξp} to
an orthonormal basis {ξ1, . . . , ξm} for the whole of Rm,
let O = [ξ1, . . . , ξm] (the change of basis matrix) and set
˜S1 = O⊤S1O, and ˜S2 = O⊤S2O, then (4) can equivalently
be written as
kFLG(G1, G2) =
| ˜S1|1/4 | ˜S2|1/4
However, in the {ξ1, . . . , ξm} basis ˜S1 and ˜S2 take on a
special form. Writing S1 in the outer product form
1 ]a,b φ(vb)⊤+ γI
and considering that for i > p, ⟨φ(va), ξi⟩= 0 shows that
˜S1 splits into a direct sum ˜S1 = S1 ⊕bS1 of two matrices:
a p×p matrix S1 whose (i, j) entry is
⟨ξi, φ(v1,a)⟩[L−1
1 ]a,b⟨φ(v1,b), ξj⟩+ γδi,j,
where δi,j is the Kronecker delta; and an (n−p)×(n−p)
dimensional matrix bS1 = γIn−p (where In−p denotes the
n −p dimensional identity matrix). Naturally, ˜S2 decomposes into S2 ⊕bS2 in an analogous way.
Recall that for any pair of square matrices M1 and M2,
| M1 ⊕M2 | = |M1| · |M2| and (M1 ⊕M2)−1 = M −1
2 . Applying this to (6) then gives
kFLG(G1, G2) =
γ(n−p)/4 γ(n−p)/4
Similarly to kernel PCA or the Bhattacharyya kernel, the easiest way to get a basis for W as
required by (5) is to compute the eigendecomposition of
the joint Gram matrix of the vertices of the two graphs.
Proposition 2. Let G1 and G be as in Proposition 1, V =
{v1, . . . , vn1+n2} be the union of their vertex sets (where it
is assumed that the ﬁrst n1 vertices are {v1, . . . , vn1} and
the second n2 vertices are
1, . . . , v′
), and deﬁne the
joint Gram matrix K ∈R(n1+n2)×(n1+n2) as
Ki,j = κ(vi, vj) = φ(vi)⊤φ(vj).
Let u1, . . . , up be (a maximal orthonormal set of) the
non-zero eigenvalue eigenvectors of K with corresponding
eigenvalues λ1, . . . , λp. Then the vectors
[ui]ℓφ(vℓ)
form an orthonormal basis for W. Moreover, deﬁning Q =
u1, . . . , λ1/2
up] ∈Rp×p and setting Q1 = Q1:n1, :
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
and Q2 = Qn1+1:n2, : (the ﬁrst n1 and remaining n2 rows
of Q, respectively), the matrices S1 and S2 appearing in
(5) can be computed as
1 Q1 + γI,
2 Q2 + γI.
Proof. For i ̸= j,
[ui]k φ(vk)⊤φ(vℓ)
(λiλj)−1/2 u⊤
i Kuj = (λj/λi)1/2u⊤
while for i = j, ξ⊤
i ξj = λ−1
i Kui = u⊤
i ui = 1, showing that {ξ1, . . . , ξp} is an orthonormal set. At the same
time, p = rank(K) = dim(W) and ξ1, . . . , ξp ∈W, proving that {ξ1, . . . , ξp} is an orthonormal basis for W.
To derive the form of S1, simply plug (8) into (7):
[ui]k φ(vk)⊤φ(va)
1 ]a,b φ(vb)⊤φ(vℓ)
[uj]ℓ+ γδi,j =
(λiλj)−1/2 u⊤
i KL−1Kuj + γδi,j =
(λiλj)1/2 u⊤
i L−1uj + γδi,j,
and similarly for S2.
As in other kernel methods, the signiﬁcance of Propositions
1 and 2 is not just that they show show how kFLG(G1, G2)
can be efﬁciently computed when φ is very high dimensional, but that they also make it clear that the FLG kernel
can really be induced from any base kernel, regardless of
whether it corresponds to actual ﬁnite dimensional feature
vectors or not. For completeness, we close this section with
this generalized deﬁnition of the FLG kernel.
Deﬁnition 4. Let G1 and G2 be two graphs. Assume that
each of their vertices comes from an abstract vertex space
V and that κ: V × V →R is a symmetric positive semideﬁnite kernel on V. The generalized FLG kernel induced
from κ is then deﬁned as
FLG(G1, G2) =
|S1|1/4 |S2|1/4
where S1 and S2 are as deﬁned in Proposition 2.
3. Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernels
By a multiscale graph kernel we mean a kernel that is able
to capture similarity between graphs not just based on the
topological relationships between their individual vertices,
but also the topological relationships between subgraphs.
The key property of the FLG kernel that allows us to build
such a kernel is that it can be applied recursively. In broad
terms, the construction goes as follows:
1. Given a graph G, divide it into a large number of small
(typically overlapping) subgraphs and compute the FLG
kernel between any two subgraphs.
2. Each subgraph is attached to some vertex of G (for example, its center), so we can reinterpret the FLG kernel
as a new base kernel between the vertices.
3. We now divide G into larger subgraphs, compute the
new FLG kernel between them induced from the new
base kernel, and recurse L times.
Finally, to compute the actual kernel between two graphs G
and G′, we follow the same process for G′ and then compute
kFLG(G, G′) induced from their top level base kernels. The
following deﬁnitions formalize this construction.
Deﬁnition 5. Let G be a graph with vertex set V , and κ
a positive semi-deﬁnite kernel on V . Assume that for each
v ∈V we have a nested sequence of L neighborhoods
v ∈N1(v) ⊆N2(v) ⊆. . . ⊆NL(v) ⊆V,
and for each Nℓ(v), let Gℓ(v) be the corresponding induced subgraph of G. We deﬁne the Multiscale Laplacian
Subgraph Kernels (MLS kernels), K1, . . . , KL : V × V →
R as follows:
1. K1 is just the FLG kernel kκ
FLG induced from the base
kernel κ between the lowest level subgraphs:
K1(v, v′) = kκ
FLG(G1(v), G1(v′)).
2. For ℓ= 2, 3, . . ., L, the MLS kernel Kℓis the FLG kernel induced from Kℓ−1 between Gℓ(v) and Gℓ(v′):
Kℓ(v, v′) = kKℓ−1
FLG (Gℓ(v), Gℓ(v′)).
Deﬁnition 5 deﬁnes the MLS kernel as a kernel between
different subgraphs of the same graph G. However, if two
graphs G1 and G2 share the same base kernel, the MLS kernel can also be used to compare any subgraph of G1 with
any subgraph of G2. This is what allows us to deﬁne an
L+1’th FLG kernel, which compares the two full graphs.
Deﬁnition 6. Let G be a collection of graphs such that
all their vertices are members of an abstract vertex space
V endowed with a symmetric positive semi-deﬁnite kernel
κ: V × V →R. Assume that the MLS kernels K1, . . . , KL
are deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 5, both for pairs of subgraphs
within the same graph and across pairs of different graphs.
We deﬁne the Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel (MLG
kernel) between any two graphs G1, G2 ∈G as
K(G1, G2) = kKL
FLG(G1, G2).
Deﬁnition 6 leaves open the question of how the neighborhoods N1(v), . . . , NL(v) are to be deﬁned. In the simplest
case, we set Nℓ(v) to be the ball Br(v) (i.e., the set of vertices at a distance at most r from v), where r = r0ηℓ−1 for
some η > 1. The η = 2 case is particularly easy, because
we can then construct the neighborhoods as follows:
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
1. For ℓ= 1, ﬁnd each N1(v) = Br0(v) separately.
2. For ℓ= 2, 3, . . . , L, for each v ∈G set
3.1. Computational complexity and caching
Deﬁnitions 5 and 6 suggest a recurisve approach to computing the MLG kernel: computing K(G1, G2) ﬁrst requires
computing KL(v, v′) between all
pairs of top level
subgraphs across G1 and G2; each of these kernel evaluations requires computing KL−1(v, v′) between up to O(n2)
level L−1 subgraphs, and so on. Following this recursion
blindly would require up to O(n2L+2) kernel evaluations,
which is clearly infeasible.
The recursive strategy is wasteful because it involves evaluating the same kernel entries over and over again in different parts of the recursion tree. An alternative solution
that requires only O(Ln2) kernel evaluations would be to
ﬁrst compute K1(v, v′) for all (v, v′) pairs, then compute
K2(v, v′) for all (v, v′) pairs, and so on. But this solution
is also wasteful, because for low values of ℓ, if v and v′
are relatively distant, then they will never appear together
in any level ℓ+1 subgraph, so Kℓ(v, v′) is not needed at all.
The natural compromise between these two approaches is
to use a recursive “on demand” kernel computation strategy, but once some Kℓ(v, v′) has been computed, store it in
a hash table indexed by (v, v′), so that Kℓ(v, v′) does not
need to be recomputed from scratch.
A further source of redundancy is that in many real world
graph datasets certain subgraphs (e.g., functional groups)
recur many times over. This leads to potentially large collections of kernel evaluations {Kℓ(v, v′
1), . . . , Kℓ(v, v′
1 . . . v′
corresponding
1), . . . , Gℓ(v′
z) subgraphs are isomorphic (including
the feature vectors), so the kernel values will all be the
same. Once again, the solution is to maintain a hash table of all unique subgraphs seen so far, so that when a
new subgraph is processed, our code can quickly determine
whether it is identical to some other subgraph for which
kernel evaluations have already been computed.
this process perfectly would require isomorphism testing,
which is, of course, infeasible. In practice, a weak test that
only detects a subset of isomorphic subgraph pairs already
makes a large difference to performance.
4. Linearized Kernels and Low Rank
Approximation
Even with caching, MLS and MLG kernels can be expensive to compute. The main reason for this is that they involve expressions like (3), where S1 and S2 are initially
given in different bases. To ﬁnd a common basis for the
two matrices via the method of Proposition 2 requires a
potentially large number of lower level kernel evaluations,
which require even lower level kernel evaluations, and so
on. Unfortunately, this process has to be repeated anew
for each {G1, G2} pair, because in all Kℓ(v, v′) evaluations
where v is from one graph and v′ is from the other, the
common basis will involve both graphs. Consequently, the
cost of the basis computations cannot be amortized into a
per-graph precomputation stage.
In the previous section we saw that computing the MLG
kernel between two graphs may involve O(Ln2) kernel
evaluations. At the top levels of the hierarchy each Gℓ(v)
might have Θ(n) vertices, so the cost of a single FLG kernel evaluation can be as high as O(n3). Somewhat pessimistically, this means that the overall cost of computing
kFLG(G1, G2) is O(Ln5). Given a dataset of M graphs,
computing their Gram matrix requires repeating this for
all {G1, G2} pairs, giving O(LM 2n5), which is even more
problematic.
The solution that we propose is to compute for each level
ℓ= 1, 2, . . . , L+1 a single joint basis for all subgraphs at
the given level across all graphs G1, . . . , GM. For concreteness, we go back to the deﬁnition of the FLG kernel.
Deﬁnition 7. Let G = {G1, . . . , GM} be a collection
of graphs, V1, . . . , VM their vertex sets, and assume that
V1, . . . , VM ⊆V for some general vertex space V. Further, assume that κ: V × V →R is a positive semi-deﬁnite
kernel on V, Hκ is its Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space,
and φ: V →Hκ is the corresponding feature map satisfying κ(v, v′) = ⟨φ(v), φ(v′)⟩for any v, v′ ∈V. The joint
vertex feature space of {G1, . . . , GM} is then
WG is just the generalization of the W space deﬁned in
Proposition 1 from two graphs to M. In particular, for any
{G, G′} pair (with G, G′ ∈G) the corresponding W space
will be a subspace of WG. The following generalization of
Propositions 1 and 2 is then immediate.
Proposition 3. Let N = PM
i=1 | Vi |, V = (v1, . . . , vN)
be the concatination of the vertex sets V1, . . . , VM, and K
the corresponding Gram matrix
Ki,j = κ(vi, vj) = ⟨φ(vi), φ(vj)⟩.
Let u1, . . . , uP be a maximal orthonormal set of non-zero
eigenvalue eigenvectors of K with corresponding eigenvalues λ1, . . . , λP . Then the vectors
[ui]ℓφ(vℓ)
i = 1, . . . , P
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
form an orthonormal basis for WG. Moreover, deﬁning
u1, . . . , λ1/2
up] ∈RP ×P , and setting Q1 to be
the submatrix of Q composed of its ﬁrst |V1| rows; Q2 be
the submatrix composed of the next |V2| rows, and so on,
for any Gi, Gj ∈G, the generalized FLG kernel induced
from κ (Deﬁnition 4) can be expressed as
kFLG(Gi, Gj) =
|Si|1/4 |Sj |1/4
where Si = Q⊤
i Qi + γI and Sj = Q⊤
j Qj + γI.
The signiﬁcance of Proposition 3 is that S1, . . . , SM are
now ﬁxed matrices that do not need to be recomputed for
each kernel evaluation. Once we have constructed the joint
basis {ξ1, . . . , ξP }, the Si matrix of each graph Gi can be
computed independently, as a precomputation step, and individual kernel evaluations reduce to just plugging them
into (13). At a conceptual level, what Proposition 3 does
it to linearize the kernel κ by projecting everything down
to WG. In particular, it replaces the {φ(vi)} RKHS vectors
with explicit ﬁnite dimensional feature vectors given by the
corresponding rows of Q, just like we had in the “unkernelized” FLG kernel of Deﬁnition 2.
For our multiscale kernels this is particularly important, because linearizing not just kκ
FLG, but also kK1
FLG, . . ., allows us to compute the MLG kernel level by level, without
recursion. After linearizing the base kernel κ, we can attach explicit, ﬁnite dimensional vectors to each vertex of
each graph. Then we compute compute kK1
FLG between all
pairs of lowest level subgraphs, and linearizing this kernel
as well, each vertex effectively just gets an updated feature
vector. Then we repeat the process for kK2
FLG . . . kKL
ﬁnally we compute the MLG kernel K(G1, G2).
4.1. Randomized low rank approximation
The difﬁculty in the above approach of course is that at
each level (12) is a Gram matrix between all vertices of all
graphs, so storing it is already very costly, let along computing its eigendecomposition. Morever, P = dim(WG)
is also very large, so managing the S1, . . . , SM matrices
(each of which is of size P × P) becomes infeasible. The
natural alternative is to replace WG by a smaller, approximate joint features space, deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 8. Let G, κ, Hκ and φ be deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 7. Let ˜V = (˜v1, . . . , ˜v ˜
N) be ˜N ≪N vertices sampled
from the joint vertex set V = (v1, . . . , vN). Then the corresponding subsampled vertex feature space is
˜WG = span{ φ(˜v) | ˜v ∈˜V }.
Similarly to before, we construct an orthonormal basis
{ξ1, . . . , ξP } for ˜W by forming the (now much smaller)
Gram matrix ˜Ki,j = κ(˜vi, ˜vj), computing its eigenvalues
and eigenvectors, and setting ξi =
ℓ=1[ui]ℓφ(˜vℓ).
The resulting approximate FLG kernel is
kFLG(Gi, Gj) =
| ˜Si|1/4 | ˜Sj |1/4
where ˜Si = ˜Q⊤
˜Qi + γI and ˜Sj = ˜Q⊤
are the projections of Si and Sj to ˜
WG. We introduce a
further layer of approximation by restricting ˜WG to be the
space spanned by the ﬁrst ˜P < P basis vectors (ordered by
descending eigenvalue), effectively doing kernel PCA on
{φ(˜v)}˜v∈˜V , equivalently, a low rank approximation of ˜K.
Assuming that vg
j is the j’th vertex of Gg, in constrast to
Proposition 2, now the j’th row of ˜Qs consists of the coordinates of the projection of φ(vg
j ) onto ˜
[ ˜Qg]j,i =
j ), φ(˜vN)
The above procedure is similar to the popular Nystr¨om approximation for kernel matrices , except that in our case the ultimate goal is not to approximate the Gram matrix (12) itself, but the S1, . . . , SM matrices used to form the FLG
kernel. In practice, we found that the eigenvalues of K
usually drop off very rapidly, suggesting that W can be
safely approximated by a surprisingly small dimensional
subspace ( ˜P ∼10), and correspondingly the sample size
˜N can be kept quite small as well (on the order of 100).
The combination of these two factors makes computing the
entire stack of kernels very fast, reducing the complexity
of computing the Gram matrix for a dataset of M graphs of
θ(n) vertices each to O(ML ˜N 2 ˜P 3 + ML ˜N 3 + M 2 ˜P 3).
As an example, for the ENZYMES dataset, comprised of
600 graphs, the FLG kernel between all pairs of graphs can
be computed in about 2 minutes on a 16 core machine.
Note that Deﬁnition 8 is noncommittal to the sampling distribution used to select (˜v1, . . . , ˜v ˜
N): in our experiments
we used uniform sampling without replacement. Also note
that regardless of the approximations, S1, . . . , SM matrices are always positive deﬁnite, and this fact alone, by the
deﬁnition of the Bhattacharyya kernel, guarantees that the
resulting FLG, MLS and MLG kernels are positive semideﬁnite kernels. For a high level pseudocode of the resulting algorithm, see the Supplementary Materials.
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel
Table 1. Classiﬁcation Results (Accuracy ± Standard Deviation)
MUTAG 
PTC 
ENZYMES 
PROTEINS 
NCI1 
NCI109 
84.50(±2.16)
59.97(±1.60)
53.75(±1.37)
75.49(±0.57)
84.76(±0.32)
85.12(±0.29)
82.94(±2.33)
60.18(±2.19)
52.00(±0.72)
74.78(±0.59)
84.65(±0.25)
85.32(±0.34)
85.50(±2.50)
59.53(±1.71)
42.31(±1.37)
75.61(±0.45)
73.61(±0.36)
73.23(±0.26)
82.44(±1.29)
55.88(±0.31)
10.95(±0.69)
71.63(±0.33)
62.40(±0.27)
62.35(±0.28)
80.33(±1.35)
59.85(±0.95)
28.17(±0.76)
71.67(±0.78)
TIMED OUT(>24hrs)
TIMED OUT(>24hrs)
87.94(±1.61)
63.26(±1.48)
61.81(±0.99)
76.34(±0.72)
81.75(±0.24)
81.31(±0.22)
Table 2. Summary of the datasets used in our experiments
2 (125 vs 63)
2 (192 vs 152)
6 (100 each)
2 (663 vs 450)
2 
2 
Table 3. Runtime of MLG on different Datasets
Wall clock time
0min 0.86s
1min 11.18s
0min 36.65s
4min 41.2s
3min 19.8s
48min 23.0s
5min 36.3s
84min 4.8s
5min 42.6s
84min 35.9s
5. Experiments
We compared the efﬁcacy of the MLG kernel with some
of the top performing graph kernels from the literature:
the Weisfeiler–Lehman Kernel, the Weisfeiler–Lehman
Edge Kernel , the Shortest Path
Kernel , the Graphlet Kernel
 , and the p-random Walk Kernel , on standard benchmark
datasets(Table 2).
We perform classiﬁcation using a binary C-SVM solver
 to test our kernel method. We tuned
the SVM slack parameter through 10-fold cross-validation
using 9 folds for training and 1 for testing, repeated 10
times. All experiments were done on a 16 core Intel E5-
2670 @ 2.6GHz processor with 32 GB of memory. Our
prediction accuracy and standard deviations are shown in
Table 1 and runtimes in Table 3.
The parameters for each kernel were chosen as follows: for
the Weisfeiler–Lehman kernels, the height parameter h is
chosen from {1, 2, ..., 5}, the random walk size p for the
p-random walk kernel was chosen from {1, 2, ..., 5}, for
the Graphlets kernel the graphlet size n was chosen from
{3, 4, 5} as outlined in . For the
parameters of the MLG kernel: we chose η and γ from
{0.01, 0.1, 1}, radius size n from {1, 2, 3, 4}, number of
levels l from {1, 2, 3, 4}. We used the given discrete node
labels to create a one-hot binary feature vector for each
node and used the dot product between nodes’ binary feature vector labels as the base kernel for the MLG kernel.
We achieve the highest prediction accuracy for all datasets
except NCI1 and NCI109, where it performs better than
all non-Weisfeiler Lehman kernels. Across all datasets, we
found the optimal number of levels to be 2 or 3 and likewise
for the radius size. As can be seen from the average number of nodes and average diameter values in Table 2, the
graphs in each dataset are small enough that a 2 or 3 level
deep MLG kernel is sufﬁcient to effectively characterize
the similarity between graphs. The optimal η and γ values
were either 0.01 or 0.1 in all cases. In general, these two
parameters can be set through cross validation over a small
set of values. For two graphs G and ˆG, that are reasonably
similar with only slight differences(ex: ˆG is similar to G
in degree distribution, connectivity, etc), increasing the η
and/or γ value will have the effect of artiﬁcially increasing the value of kF LG(G, ˆG), smoothing out their differences. This sort of smoothing is not desirable for all pairs
of graphs, so typically the optimal η and γ values will be
small, often between 0.01 and 1.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we have proposed two new graph kernels: (1)
The FLG kernel, which is a very simple single level kernel that combines information attached to the vertices with
the graph Laplacian; (2) The MLG kernel, which is a multilevel, recursively deﬁned kernel that captures topological
relationships between not just individual vertices, but also
subgraphs. Clearly, designing kernels that can optimally
take into account the multiscale structure of actual chemical compoundsis a challenging task that will require further
work and domain knowledge. However, it is encouraging
that even just “straight out of the box”, tuning only one
or two parameters, such as the number of levels, the MLG
kernel performed on par with, or even slightly better than
the other well known kernels in the literature. Beyond just
graphs, the general idea of multiscale kernels is of interest
for other types of data as well (such as images) that have
multiresolution structure, and the way that the MLG kernel
chains together local spectral analysis at multiple scales is
potentially applicable to these domains as well, which will
be the subject of further research.
Acknowledgements
This work was completed in part with computing resources
provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center.
The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel