A SURVEY ON EVALUATION METHODS FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China
This paper studies different methods proposed so far for segmentation evaluation. Most methods can be
classified into three groups: the analytical, the empirical goodness and the empirical discrepancy groups. Each
group has its own characteristics. After a brief description of each method in every group, some comparative
discussions about different method groups are first carried out. An experimental comparison for some empirical
(goodness and discrepancy) methods commonly used is then performed to provide a rank of their evaluation
abilities. In addition, some special methods are also discussed. This study is helpful for an appropriate use of
existing evaluation methods and for improving their performance as well as for systematically designing new
evaluation methods.
Image analysis, Image segmentation, Segmentation evaluation, Analytical and empirical study, Performance
assessment, Criteria function, Algorithm comparison, Image quality measure, Method characterization.
INTRODUCTION
Image analysis usually refers to processing of images by computer with the goal of finding what objects
are presented in the image. Image segmentation is one of the most critical tasks in automatic image analysis. It
consists of subdividing an image into its constituent parts and extracting these parts of interest (objects). A great
variety of segmentation algorithms have been developed in the last decades and this number continually
increases each year. Several survey papers for segmentation techniques have been presented in the literature. Since none of the proposed segmentation algorithms are generally applicable to all images and different
algorithms are not equally suitable for a particular application, the performance evaluation of segmentation
algorithms is indispensable and thus an important subject in the study of segmentation. More generally,
performance evaluation is critical for all computer vision algorithms from research to application, while image
segmentation is an essential and important step of low-level vision.
While development of segmentation algorithms has attracted significant attention, relatively fewer efforts
have been spent on their evaluation, although many newly developed algorithms are (most often subjectively)
compared with some particular algorithms with few particular images. Moreover, most efforts spent on
evaluation are just for designing new evaluation methods and only very few authors have attempted to
characterize the different evaluation methods existed. The present paper will review different existing
methods for segmentation evaluation, as well as discuss and compare their applicability, advantages and
limitations.
Segmentation algorithms can be evaluated analytically or empirically, so the evaluation methods can be
divided into two categories: the analytical methods and the empirical methods. The analytical methods directly
examine and assess the segmentation algorithms themselves by analysing their principles and properties. The
empirical methods indirectly judge the segmentation algorithms by applying them to test images and measuring
the quality of segmentation results. Various empirical methods have been proposed. Most of them can still be
classified into two types: goodness methods and discrepancy methods. In the first category some desirable
properties of segmented images, often established according to human intuition, are measured by "goodness"
parameters. The performances of segmentation algorithms under investigation are judged by the values of
goodness measures. In the second category some references that present the ideal or expected segmentation
results are first found. The actual segmentation results obtained by applying a segmentation algorithm,
sometimes preceded by preprocessing and/or followed by postprocessing processes, are compared with the
references by counting their differences. The performances of segmentation algorithms under investigation are
then assessed according to the discrepancy measures. Following this discussion, three groups of methods can be
distinguished.
The above classification for evaluation methods can be seen more clearly in Fig.1, where a general
scheme for segmentation and its evaluation is presented. The input image obtained by sensing is first (optionally)
preprocessed to produce the segmenting image for the segmentation (in its strict sense) procedure. The
segmented image can then be (optionally) postprocessed to produce the output image. Further processes, such as
feature extraction and measurement, will be based on these output images. In Fig.1 the part enclosed by the
rounded square with thin line corresponds to the segmentation procedure in its narrow-minded sense, while the
part enclosed by the rounded square with point line corresponds to the segmentation procedure in its general
form. The black arrows indicate the processing directions of segmentation. The access points for the three
groups of evaluation methods are depicted with gray arrows in Fig.1. Note that there is an or condition between
both arrows leading to the boxes containing segmented image” and output image” both from the empirical
goodness method” and empirical discrepancy method”. Moreover, there is an and condition between the arrow
from empirical discrepancy method” to reference image” and the two (or) arrows going to eegmented image”
and output image”. The analysis methods treat the algorithms for segmentation directly. The empirical goodness
methods judge the segmented image or output image so as to indirectly assess the performance of algorithms.
For applying empirical discrepancy methods, the reference image is necessary. It can be obtained manually or
automatically from the input image or segmenting image. The empirical discrepancy methods compare the
segmented image or output image to the reference image and use their difference to assess the performance of
algorithms.
Each method group has its own particularities so as to be distinguished from other groups. Each method
has also its own characteristics so as to be identified. In the following three sections a brief description of the
methods belonging to the three groups will be provided. They are arranged according to the above method
classification. The justification of the classification of methods into analytical and empirical ones as well as the
separation of empirical methods into goodness and discrepancy groups will be made clear by the comparative
discussion of different method groups in Section 5. In addition, an experimental comparison of several
commonly used empirical methods will be carried out in Section 6. These representative methods are compared
according to their ability and behavior in evaluating the same series of segmented images. A rank among them is
then obtained. In Section 7 several special evaluation methods that do not fall clearly into the above three groups
and some common problems for most existing evaluation methods are discussed. Finally, some concluding
remarks are given in Section 8.
ANALYTICAL METHODS
The analytical methods directly treat the segmentation algorithms themselves by considering the
principles, requirements, utilities, complexity, etc., of algorithms. Using the analytical methods to evaluate
segmentation algorithms avoids the concrete implementation of these algorithms and the results could be
exempted from the influence caused by the arrangement of evaluation experiments as the empirical methods do.
However, not all properties of segmentation algorithms can be obtained by analytical studies. The difficulty, up
to now, is the lack of general theory for image segmentation. Although some initial attempts in the direction of
a unified theory about segmentation were reported, for example, in the relation of image models and
segmentation, no formal solution has been found yet. Until now, the analytical methods work only with some
particular models or desirable properties of algorithms.
One analytical method has been proposed by Liedtke et al. They presented an evaluation study of
several algorithms by taking into account the type and amount of a priori knowledge that has been incorporated
into different segmentation algorithms. Such knowledge for certain segmentation algorithms is ready to be
analysed, which is mainly determined by the nature of the algorithms. However, such knowledge is usually
heuristic information and different types of a priori knowledge are hardly comparable. The information provided
by this method is then rough and qualitative. On the other side, not only "the amount of relevant a priori
knowledge that can be incorporated into the segmentation algorithm is decisive for the reliability of the
segmentation methods", but it is also very important for the performance of the algorithm how such a priori
knowledge has been incorporated into the algorithm. 
The analytical methods can in certain cases provide quantitative information about segmentation
algorithms. Abdou and Pratt analysed the performance of several edge detectors with a detection probability
ratio in a statistical design procedure. Let T be the edge decision threshold, Pc the probability of correct
detection and Pf the probability of false detection:
p t edge dt
the plot of Pc versus Pf in terms of T can provide a performance index of detectors. Such an index should be
useful for evaluating the segmentation algorithms based on edge detection [for example, see reference (9)]. In
contrast to the a priori knowledge discussed above, this index can be precisely defined and calculated for simple
edge detectors. 
Other properties of segmentation algorithms that can be obtained by analysis include the processing
strategy, processing complexity and efficiency and segmentation resolution of algorithm. These properties
could be helpful for selecting suitable algorithms in particular applications. For example, the processing strategy
of segmentation algorithms can be parallel, sequential, iterative or mixed. The parallel algorithms are suitable for
fast implementation. However, for images that are severely contaminated by noise, the performance of parallel
algorithms is often poorer than that of sequential methods. 
EMPIRICAL GOODNESS METHODS
The methods in this group evaluate the performance of algorithms by judging the quality of segmented
images. To carry out this work certain quality measures should be defined. Most measures are established
according to human intuition about what conditions should be satisfied by an "ideal" segmentation (for example,
a pretty picture). In other words, the quality of segmented images is assessed by some "goodness" measures.
These methods characterize different segmentation algorithms by simply computing the goodness measures
based on the segmented image without the a priori knowledge of the correct segmentation. The application of
these evaluation methods exempts the requirement for references, so that they can be used for on-line evaluation.
Different types of goodness measures have been proposed.
Goodness based on intra-region uniformity
Weszka and Rosenfeld proposed a threshold evaluation method that uses a busyness measure as the
criterion to judge thresholded images. To apply the busyness measure they assume that the images are
composed of objects and background of compact shapes and not strongly textured. Under these assumptions, the
thresholded images should look smooth rather than busy. In practice, they compute the amount of busyness for a
thresholded image by using the gray-level co-occurrence matrix of the image. That is, those entries of the cooccurrence matrix representing the percentage of object-background adjacencies are summarized. The lower the
busyness, the smoother the thresholded images and the better the segmentation result. In consequence, the better
the segmentation results, the higher the performance of applied algorithms.
Similar to Weszka and Rosenfeld, Nazif and Levine also believe that an adequate segmentation should
produce images having higher intra-region uniformity, which is related to the similarity of property about region
element. The uniformity of a feature over a region can be computed on the basis of the variance of that feature
evaluated at every pixel belonging to that region. In particular, for a gray-level image f(x,y), let Ri be ith
segmented region, Ai be the area of Ri, then the gray-level uniformity measure (GU) of f(x,y) is:
A normalized uniformity measure (NU) has been proposed by Sahoo et al.: 
where C is a normalization factor. Generally, other features can also be used.
The intra-region uniformity, as a desired property of segmented images, can also be measured by the
higher-order local entropy based on information theory. Pal and Pal proposed a thresholding method that
maximizes the second-order local entropy of the object and background regions. This entropy H2, for an
assumed threshold T, is computed by:
where pij is the probability of occurrence of the pair (i,j) within the object/background. This entropy is also used
by Pal and Bhandari as a measure of the region homogeneity in segmented images for the performance
evaluation of segmentation results.
Goodness based on inter-region contrast
Except for intra-region uniformity, Levine and Nazif also believe that an adequate segmentation should in
addition produce images having higher contrast across adjacent regions. In a simple case that a gray-level
image f(x,y) consists of the object with average gray-level fo and the background with average gray-level fb, a
gray-level contrast measure (GC) can be computed by:
Note that the similar idea has been already used by Otsu for evaluating the "goodness" of threshold
values in the development of a histogram based threshold selection algorithm. By maximizing the betweenregion variance, a threshold value producing the highest region separability can be obtained.
Goodness based on region shape
Not only the gray level but also the form of a segmented region can be taken into account to design
goodness measures for satisfying the human intuition on an "ideal" segmentation. Sahoo et al. proposed a
shape measure (SM) for evaluating several threshold selection algorithms, which is defined as:
g x y Sgn f x y
where fN(x,y) is the average gray value of the neighborhood N(x,y) of a pixel located at (x,y) with gray level
f(x,y) and gradient value g(x,y), T is the threshold value selected for segmentation, C is a normalization factor
and Sgn(.) is the unit step function.
EMPIRICAL DISCREPANCY METHODS
In practical segmentation applications, some errors in the segmented image can be tolerated. On the other
side, if the segmenting image is complex and the algorithm used is fully automatic, the error is inevitable. The
disparity between an actually segmented image and a correctly/ideally segmented image (reference image) that is
the best expected result can be used to assess the performance of algorithms. Both (actually segmented and
reference) images are obtained from the same input image. The reference image is sometimes called gold
standard [e.g., reference (27)]. In cases that the test images are synthetic images, the reference images can be
simply obtained from image generation procedure, while in cases that the test images are real images,
manually (with the help of visual inspection) segmented images are often used as references. The methods in this
group take into account the difference (measured by various discrepancy parameters) between the actually
segmented and reference images, i.e. these methods try to determine how far the actually segmented image is
from the reference image. A higher value of the discrepancy measure would imply a bigger error in the actually
segmented image relative to the reference image and this indicates the lower performance of applied
segmentation algorithms.
In image encoding, the disparity between the original image and the decoded image has often been used
to objectively assess the performance of coding algorithms. A commonly used discrepancy measure is the meansquare signal-to-noise ratio [see, e.g., reference (29)]. However, in contrast to image encoding, image
segmentation is a process that changes the image unit. In other words, image encoding is an image processing
process, while image segmentation is an image analysis process, in which the input and output are different
matters. So many other discrepancy measures have been proposed and used.
Discrepancy based on the number of mis-segmented pixels
Considering image segmentation as a pixel classification process, the percentage of pixel mis-classified is
the discrepancy measure that comes most readily to mind . Suppose an image consists of N pixel classes, a
confusion matrix C of dimension N can be constructed, with each entry Cij represents the number of class j
pixels classified as class i by the segmentation algorithms. Two error types can thus be computed for each pixel
class k, which can both be used to describe the class-by-class performance of these algorithms . The multiclass Type I error is defined as:
where the numerator represents the number of pixels of class k not classified as k and the denominator is the total
number of pixels of class k.
The multi-class Type II error is defined as:
where the numerator represents the number of pixels of other classes called class k. The denominator is the total
number of pixels of other classes. In equations (8) and (9), each pixel class is weighted equally.
Weszka and Rosenfeld used a similar approach to measure the difference between an "ideal"
(correct) image and a thresholded image. Under the assumption that the image consists of objects and
background each having a specified distribution of gray level, they compute, for any given threshold value, the
probability of mis-classifying an object pixel as background, or vice versa. This probability in turn provides an
index of segmentation results, which can be used for evaluating threshold selection algorithms. In their work,
such a probability is minimized in the process of selecting an appropriate threshold.
Recently, a discrepancy measure based on the same principle has been defined. It is termed the
probability of error (PE). For a two-class problem PE can be calculated by: 
where P(B|O) is the probability of error in classifying objects as background, P(O|B) is the probability of error
in classifying background as objects, P(O) and P(B) are a priori probabilities of objects and background in
images. For multi-class problem, a general definition of PE can be found in reference (32).
The idea of computing discrepancy based on the number of error pixels is also reflected in some edge
detection evaluation schemes. For example, a maximum likelihood estimate of the fraction of correctly detected
edges has been used by Fram and Deutsch. Such a measure could be readily extended to measure what
fractions of the segmented object pixels were actually object pixels so as to be applied for segmentation
evaluation.
Discrepancy based on the position of mis-segmented pixels
The discrepancy measures based only on the number of mis-segmented pixels do not take into account the
spatial information of these pixels. It is thus possible that images segmented differently can have the same
discrepancy measure values if these measures only count the number of mis-segmented pixels. To address this
problem, some discrepancy measures based on pixel position error have been proposed.
One way is to use the distance between the mis-segmented pixel and the nearest pixel that actually
belongs to the mis-segmented class. Let N be the number of mis-segmented pixels for the whole image and d(i)
be a distance metric from the ith mis-segmented pixel and the nearest pixel that actually is of the mis-classified
class; a discrepancy measure (D) based on this distance is defined by Yasnoff et al. as: 
In equation (11), each distance is squared. This measure is further normalized (ND), to exempt the
influence of image size and to give it a suitable value range by: 
where A is the total number of pixels in the image (i.e. a measure of area).
In the evaluation of edge detectors a commonly used discrepancy measure is the mean-square distance
figure of merit (FOM) proposed by Pratt: 
where N=max(Ni,Na) and Ni and Na denote the number of ideal and actually detected edge pixels, respectively,
d(i) denotes the distance between the ith detected edge pixel and its correct position and p is a scaling parameter.
This measure has been shown insensitive to correlation in false alarms and missed edges. Strasters and
Gerbrands used FOM for evaluating segmentation results with N denoting the number of pixel in image and d(i)
denoting the distance between the ith pixel and its correct class. In addition, they defined a modified version
of FOM named FOMe to expand the FOM value range in the near perfect segmentation:
where Ne denotes the number of mis-segmented pixels.
Discrepancy based on the number of objects in the image
For perfect segmentation a necessary condition is that an equal number of objects of each class among a
reference image and a segmented image should be met. A substantial disagreement of the object number
indicates a large discrepancy between the reference and segmented images. Yasnoff and Bacus proposed to
compute the object-count-agreement (OCA) based on probability theory. Let Ri be the number of objects of class
i in the reference image and Si be the number of objects of class i in the segmented image, they use the
probability FOCA that the two numbers Ri and Si represent samples from the same distribution for measuring the
In equation (15), M=N-1 denotes the number of degrees of freedom, Γ(.) denotes the Gamma function
and L can be computed by:
where N is the number of object classes and p is a correction parameter.
On the basis of the similar idea, another weighting scheme called fragmentation (FRAG) is defined
where TN is the true object number in the reference image and AN is the actual object number in the segmented
image, p and q are scaling parameters.
Discrepancy based on the feature values of segmented objects
Image analysis is concerned with the extraction of information from an image, an image in yields data
out. Here the data are the measurement values of object features obtained from segmented images. One
fundamental question in image analysis is whether a measurement made on the objects from segmented images is
as accurate as one made on the original images. According to this measure, a segmented image has the highest
quality if the object features extracted from it precisely match the features in the original. In practice, an image
has high quality if the decision made on it is unchanged from that made on the original image. The ultimate
goal of image segmentation in the context of image analysis is to obtain measurements of object features. The
accuracy of these measurements obtained from the segmented image with respect to the reference image
provides useful discrepancy measures. This accuracy can be termed "ultimate measurement accuracy" (UMA) to
reflect the ultimate goal of segmentation. The UMA is feature dependent and so can be denoted as UMAf. Let Rf
denote the feature value obtained from the reference image and Sf denotes the feature value measured from the
segmented image, the absolute UMAf (AUMAf) and relative UMAf (RUMAf) are defined as: 
Both AUMAf and RUMAf can represent a number of discrepancy measures when different object features
are used. The features can be densitometric, statistic or geometric features. Some examples of geometric features
are the area, bending energy, eccentricity, form factor, normalized mean absolute curvature, perimeter and
sphericity of objects. Among them, the area of objects is more suitable than others to appraise the quality of
differently segmented images. 
Discrepancy based on miscellaneous quantities
There are other discrepancy measures that can describe the difference between the reference image and
the segmented image. The discrepancy measure proposed by Levine and Nazif is a 2-D (two-dimensional)
distance measure based on two components. One is an under merging error measure and another is an over
merging error measure. The former component is proportional to the amount by which the regions in the
segmented image overlap the regions in the reference image. The latter component signifies the amount by which
the segmented regions partition the reference regions.
Not only the spatial information, but also the gray-level information can be used to describe the
difference between the segmented image and the reference image. Strasters and Gerbrands defined a figure of
certainty (FOC) for taking into account this information. Let fi be the gray level of the ith pixel in the reference
image and gi be the representative gray level of a region comprising the ith pixel in the segmented image (note
that both images are taken as masks here to extract fi and gi from the image to be segmented), the FOC is
defined as:
where N denotes the total number of pixels in the image and p and q are scaling parameters.
If we consider both the segmented image and the reference image as probability distributions, the
difference between them would be reflected by their divergence. Suppose that the segmented image has N
regions and p'i represents the a posterior probability of a pixel to be in the ith region, while p"i is that in the
reference image, Pal and Bhandari proposed to use the symmetric divergence (SD):
as a measure of performance for the segmentation algorithms.
COMPARISON OF METHOD GROUPS
The three method groups for segmentation evaluation described in the above sections have their own
characteristics. In the following, their advantages and limitations are discussed.
Generality for evaluation
One desirable property of an evaluation method is its generality to be applied for studying various
properties of different segmentation algorithms. To apply analytical methods some formal models of an image
should be first defined. The behavior of the algorithm on such an image can then be analysed (mathematically) in
terms of the parameters of the image and the algorithm. Certain properties of segmentation algorithms can be
easily obtained just by analysis, such as the processing strategy of algorithms and the resolution of segmentation
results. However, some other properties can not be precisely analysed since no formal model exists. For
example, there is no quantitative measure for a priori knowledge about images that can be incorporated into
segmentation algorithms, so various types of knowledge are hardly to be compared. In addition, there are
methods that can only be applicable to certain segmentation algorithms. For instance, the method based on
detection probability ratio is merely suitable for studying simple edge detectors. 
Empirical methods, as described in Sections 3 and 4, are mainly used to study the correctness of
segmentation algorithms by taking into account the accuracy of segmentation results. One reason is that other
properties of algorithms, such as computation cost, have been partially overcome by the progress of technology.
Another reason is that the accuracy of segmentation is often the primary concern in real applications and is
difficult to be studied by analytical methods. From the point of view that only one property is studied, the
empirical methods can be thought of as somewhat limited. However, most of them can be considered as
relatively general, because they can evaluate different types of segmentation algorithms. The studies presented in
reference (9, 23, 43-44) are some examples in which quite different types of algorithms are treated. In most
empirical studies, only the images to segment and segmented are needed and no matter which type of algorithms
is used. A few exceptions are the methods based on busyness and shape measure. Since the threshold value
is necessary for calculating these measures other types of algorithms can not be evaluated.
Qualitative versus quantitative and subjective versus objective
Two more desirable properties of an evaluation method are the abilities to evaluate segmentation
algorithms in a quantitative way and on an objective basis. Quantitative study can provide precise results
reflecting the exactness of evaluation. Objective study will exempt the influence of human factor and provide
consistency and no bias results. Generally, analytical methods are more ready to apply, but they often provide
only qualitative properties of algorithms. Empirical methods are normally quantitative as the values of quality
measures can be numerically computed. Among them, goodness methods based on subjective measures of image
quality are less suitable for an objective evaluation of segmented algorithms. Discrepancy methods can be both
objective (the gold standard available yields objective results ) and quantitative.
Complexity for evaluation
The complexities for applying the above three groups of methods in segmentation evaluation increase
progressively. Applying empirical methods for evaluation is usually more complicated than just algorithm
analysis, because the algorithms are necessary to be concretely implemented and some extra efforts are needed to
segment test images and to calculate the values of quality measure parameters. The computational cost of
different empirical methods is first determined by the quality measures they used. For example, the object count
agreement can be easily obtained, while the uniformity measure and shape measure need much more
computation.
Among empirical methods, goodness methods are less complicated for applying than discrepancy
methods and they can be used for on-line evaluation. One particular requirement associated with the
application of discrepancy methods is the reference image. Many studies use real images as test images and
manually segment them to obtain the references [for example, see reference (31)]. This process greatly increases
the complexity of applying discrepancy methods. In addition, since only real images from particular task
domains were used in these studies, the evaluation results may be not appropriate for other applications. One
possible and effective alternation is to use synthetic images. The two problems associated with real images, as
discussed above, can be overcome by using well-designed synthetic images. Other advantages of synthetic
images include that they can be easily controlled and they can be reproduced by all users. 
Consideration of segmentation applications
The effective use of domain-dependent knowledge in computer vision can help to make different
processes reliable and efficient [see, for example, reference (45)]. To effectively evaluate segmentation
algorithms, the consideration of segmentation applications in which algorithms are applied is also important.
The above three method groups are different in the extent to which they explicitly consider the
applications for which the segmentation algorithms are used. At one extreme are the analytical studies that do not
consider the nature and goal of application. The evaluation results depend only on the analysis of algorithms
themselves. The empirical goodness methods in which some desirable properties of segmented images are
quantified by goodness measures begin to address the application issue as the choice of which goodness measure
should be used is related to the application goal. The empirical discrepancy methods, which take both the
reference and segmented images into consideration, attempt to capture the application through the discrepancy
measures. The need to have a reference forces the evaluation to be connected to the actual applications. 
COMPARISON OF SOME EMPIRICAL METHODS
In empirical studies the segmentation algorithm is applied to test images and statistics of its performance
are gathered with the help of some measurements from segmentation results. Most empirical evaluation methods
are developed independently and no comparison of performance or behavior with other methods has been made.
Since a number of methods have been proposed, as described in the above sections, their comparison becomes
important and necessary.
The performance of different empirical methods can be compared according to their behavior in judging
the same sequences of segmented image. This sequence of images can be obtained by thresholding an image with
a number of ordered threshold values. As we know, the quality of thresholded images would be better if an
appropriate threshold value is used and the quality of thresholded images would be worse if the selected
threshold values are too high or too low. In other words, if the threshold value increases or decreases in one
direction, the probability of erroneously classifying the background pixels as object pixels goes down, but the
probability of erroneously classifying the object pixels as background pixels goes up, or vice versa. Since
different evaluation methods using different measures to assess this quality, they will behave differently for the
same sequence of images. By comparing the behavior of different methods in such a case, the performance of
different methods can be revealed and ranked.
On the basis of this idea, a comparative study of different empirical methods has been carried out. The
five methods studied (and the measures they based on) are the following:
G-GU:Goodness based on Gray level Uniformity [see equation (3) in Subsection 3.1];
G-GC: Goodness based on Gray level Contrast [see equation (6) in Subsection 3.2];
D-PE: Discrepancy based on Probability of Error [see equation (10) in Subsection 4.1];
D-ND:Discrepancy based on Normalized Distance [see equation (12) in Subsection 4.2];
D-AA:Discrepancy based on Absolute UMAf with Area as feature [see equation (18) in Subsection 4.4].
These five methods belong to five different method subgroups. They are considered for the comparative
study mainly because the measures these methods based on are quite general for use and so are comparable. The
methods in other subgroups and the measures they based on are less general. For example, the method based on
shape measure defined in equation (7) of Subsection 3.3 can only count the local smoothness of region boundary
and cannot even distinguish a circle from a square. On the other side, the measure based on the number of
objects in the image is only meaningful when the segmentation results are quite poor. In near perfect
segmentation, the number of objects in the reference image and segmented image are often the same and the
discrimination power of this measure will be lost.
The whole experiment can be divided into several steps: define test images, segment test images, apply
evaluation methods, measure quality parameters and compare evaluation results. It is arranged similar to the
study of object features in the context of image segmentation evaluation. A similar process has also been
discussed by Haralick for characterizing computer vision algorithms.
Test images are synthetically generated with the system described in reference (28). Since our main
concern is to compare different evaluation methods with the same segmented images so some simple images are
synthesized. They are 256x256 with 256 gray levels. The objects are centered discs of various sizes with gray level 144.
The background is homogeneous with gray level 112. These images are then added by independent zero-mean
Gaussian noise with various standard deviations. To cope with the random nature of noise, for each standard deviation
five noise samples are generated independently and added separately to noise free images in this study. Five test images
thus generated form a test group. Fig.2 gives an example.
Test images are segmented by thresholding them as described above. A sequence of 14 threshold values
are taken to segment each group of images. The five evaluation methods are then applied to the segmented
images. The values of their corresponding measures are obtained by averaging the results of five measurements
over each group. In Table 1 comparison results of the five methods for one experiment are presented as
examples. The labels correspond to the sequence of segmented images. In other words each column in Table 1
indicates a different threshold applied to a group of images. The measure values have been normalized to the
range for easy comparison. In Fig. 3 the curves corresponding to different measure values listed in Table 1
are plotted. These curves can be analysed by comparing their forms. Firstly, as the worst segmentation results
give the value one for all measures, the valley values that correspond to the best segmentation results determine
the margin between the two extremes. The deeper the valley, the larger the dynamic range of measures for
assessing the best and worst segmentation results. Comparing the depth of valleys, these methods can be ranked
in the order D-AA, D-PE, D-ND, G-GU, G-GC. Note that G-GC curve is almost unity for all segmented images
(can be seen more clearly from Table 1), so that different segmentation results can hardly be distinguished in
such a case.
Second, for evaluation purposes, a good method should be capable of detecting very small variations in
segmented images. The sharper the curves, the higher the measure's discrimination capability to distinguish small
segmentation degradation. The ranking of these five methods according to this point is the same as above.
Looking more closely, though D-AA and D-PE curves are parallel or even overlapped for most cases in Fig. 3,
the form of the D-AA curve is much sharper than that of D-PE curve near the valley. This means that D-AA has
more power than D-PE to distinguish those slightly different and near-best segmentation results, which is more
interesting in practice. It is clear that D-AA should not be confused with D-PE as made by Beghdadi et al. 
On the other side, the flatness of G-GC and G-GU curves around valley show that the methods based on
goodness measures such as GC and GU should be less appropriate in segmentation evaluation.
The effectiveness of evaluation methods is largely determined by their employed image quality measures.
From this comparative study, it becomes evident that the evaluation methods using discrepancy measures such as
that based on the feature values of segmented objects and that based on the number of mis-segmented pixels
should be more powerful than the evaluation methods using other measures. Moreover, as the methods compared
in this study are representative of various method subgroups, it seems that the empirical discrepancy methods
surpass the empirical goodness methods in evaluation.
FURTHER DISCUSSIONS
Special evaluation methods
There are also few particular evaluation methods that do not fall clearly in any one of the above three
groups. The following is a critical review of them.
For a general segmentation procedure, preprocessing and postprocessing are often needed (see Fig. 1). In
practical applications, based on an automatically segmented image that is not perfect, some manually
editing operations are often needed to bring the results to a certain level satisfying the desired quality. 
The amount of such operations or the cost to do these operations can also provide an index of how the
segmented image deviates from the desired quality. This index has been used by Graaf et al. to
validate segmentation results and to judge the performance of algorithms. Since the desired quality level
of a segmentation is determined by the particular processing task, such a method makes a task-directed
evaluation and depends on the tools available for image editing. More generally, one tries to estimate
the requirement for pre- and/or post-processing to obtain satisfactory segmentation results from the raw
images. In a sense, it is not the segmentation algorithms but the pre- and/or post-processing algorithms
are studied.
In image analysis the size of a region is obtained by counting the number of pixels belonging to this
region. The mis-segmented pixels modify the size of regions in segmented images. This size change
can easily be observed by human eyes. Instead of defining numerical discrepancy measures MacAulay
and Palcic proposed a qualitative evaluation method. In their study for comparing four simple
thresholding algorithms, a segmentation is determined to be acceptable if the area of segmented objects
matches within a margin of 5% to the area of visually detected object. If a large number of images are
processed, a statistic study of the results can help to compare the performance of the tested algorithms.
This method is quite similar to the methods described in Subsection 4.1, except that the discrepancy is
qualitatively and visually measured. Most subjective comparison studies are based on similar principles.
To select an appropriate threshold value for segmentation Brink proposed a thresholding technique
that uses a gray-level correlation measure. An optimum threshold is selected by maximizing the
correlation between the original image and the thresholded bi-level image. The value of correlation
measure provides an index about the dissimilarity between these two images. This measure has been used
in the evaluation of thresholding algorithms by Pal and Bhandari. In contrast to discrepancy methods
described in Section 4, this method takes the image to segment directly as the "reference" image.
Although this correlation measure is seemed different in appearance than other measures, it has been
proved that the square of the correlation coefficient used in Brink's method is just the class separability
quotient used by Otsu in the "goodness" measure for threshold selection. This method should thus have
a behavior similar to that based on inter-region contrast.
Taking the image to segment as the reference is also followed by Beghdadi et al. They proposed to use
a measure termed the blurring effect for segmentation comparison. A noise-free synthetic image is
generated and is then blurred with a Gaussian filter. The authors unusually set the blurred boundary pixels
as object pixels and thus curiously take enlarged objects as references. The blurring effect is measured by
the location difference between the detected boundary and the reference boundary. Such a use of
synthetic images loses their advantages in evaluation. In addition, the noisy effect, a very important and
common degradation factor influencing the performance of algorithms, cannot be studied by such a
Different from all the above methods, Bryant and Bouldin proposed another interesting evaluation
procedure based on relative grading for edge detectors. The principle may be extended for evaluating
segmentation algorithms. No precise quality measure or criterion is defined in this procedure. It consists
of comparing the output of an algorithm to the consensus results of other algorithms. In other words, it
compares the output of a number of algorithms and rates each algorithm by how often it agrees with the
consensus of the others. This can be considered as an interesting idea, but it is unconscious to errors made
by all algorithms and may even penalize a good algorithm that does not produce errors made by a
majority of bad algorithms. 
Common problems for most existing methods
There are still two main problems associated with most of existing evaluation methods.
Each evaluation method determines the performance of algorithms according to certain criteria. If the
same criterion used for segmentation is also used for evaluation then some biased results will be
produced. For example, the second-order local entropy that was maximized for selecting threshold
values in the new algorithm proposed by Pal and Pal and was also computed for comparing the
performance of this algorithm with that of other algorithms by Pal and Bhandari. It is expected that the
new algorithm should produce quite high entropy values. In many applications, images are modeled as a
mosaic of regions of uniform intensity corrupted by additive Gaussian white noise [e.g. reference (53)].
Therefore the region homogeneity is a commonly used criterion for designing various segmentation
algorithms [e.g., Otsu algorithm ]. The method using the goodness measure based on uniformity takes
the same criterion for evaluation. When this criterion is used to compare a number of thresholding
algorithms, it is not surprising that the Otsu algorithm ranks at the first place. When other criteria
were used, however, the ranking order becomes completely different. 
To strengthen certain aspects in the quality measures, some scaling/weighting parameters are often used.
For example, the parameter p in FOM [see equation (13)] provides a relative penalty between smeared
edges and isolated but offset edges , while the parameters p and q in FOC [see equation (20)]
determine the contribution of the large deviation relative to a small deviation. There exists no suitable
guideline or rule for choosing these parameters. In practice, they are often selected on the basis of human
intuition or judgment. This makes an expected objective evaluation to be unpleasantly influenced by
subjective factors.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper most methods proposed for segmentation evaluation and comparison so far are reviewed. A
method classification scheme is introduced. Comparative studies for different method groups and for different
methods are also carried out, both analytically and experimentally. Segmentation evaluation is indispensable for
improving the performance of existing segmentation algorithms and for developing new powerful segmentation
algorithms. This study attempts to stimulate the work in this direction. To make segmentation get off trial-anderror status further studies and more efforts for segmentation evaluation are needed.
From this study some results concerning the performance of different evaluation methods are obtained.
As there is currently no general segmentation theory, the empirical methods are more suitable and useful than the
analytical methods for performance evaluation of segmentation algorithms. Among empirical methods, the
discrepancy methods are better for objectively assessing segmentation algorithms than the goodness methods,
although the former is somewhat complex in application than the latter due to the requirement for reference.
According to the experimental comparison made in this paper, the method D-AA is more powerful for evaluation
than other methods. More general studies are still carrying on.
Each method studied in this paper has advantages and limitations. From an application point of view,
those that belong to different groups are more complementary than competitive. Besides, the performance of
segmentation algorithms is influenced by many factors, so only one evaluation method would be not enough to
judge all properties of an algorithm and different methods should be cooperated. One early work of this type is
made by Yasnoff et al., who combined two error measures they proposed, namely pixel spatial distribution
and pixel class proportion, into one generalized measure. Later they incorporated another component, the
object count agreement together. Other evaluation studies using several measures can be found in references
(23,25,36,43,44). Generally, for a complete evaluation and comparison of segmentation techniques, a set of
performance measures should be necessary . How to form such a set will be a promising research subject in
segmentation evaluation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are very grateful to the reviewer for his helpful comments and valuable suggestions to improve the
presentation of this paper.