The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)
Cross-Lingual Natural Language Generation via Pre-Training
Zewen Chi,†∗Li Dong,‡ Furu Wei,‡ Wenhui Wang,‡ Xian-Ling Mao,† Heyan Huang†
†Beijing Institute of Technology
‡Microsoft Research
{czw, maoxl, hhy63}@bit.edu.cn
{lidong1, fuwei, Wenhui.Wang}@microsoft.com
In this work we focus on transferring supervision signals of
natural language generation (NLG) tasks between multiple
languages. We propose to pretrain the encoder and the decoder of a sequence-to-sequence model under both monolingual and cross-lingual settings. The pre-training objective
encourages the model to represent different languages in the
shared space, so that we can conduct zero-shot cross-lingual
transfer. After the pre-training procedure, we use monolingual data to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained model on downstream
NLG tasks. Then the sequence-to-sequence model trained
in a single language can be directly evaluated beyond that
language (i.e., accepting multi-lingual input and producing
multi-lingual output). Experimental results on question generation and abstractive summarization show that our model
outperforms the machine-translation-based pipeline methods for zero-shot cross-lingual generation. Moreover, crosslingual transfer improves NLG performance of low-resource
languages by leveraging rich-resource language data. Our
implementation and data are available at 
CZWin32768/xnlg.
Introduction
Learning natural language generation (NLG) models heavily relies on annotated training data. However, most available datasets are collected in a single language (typically
English), which restricts deploying the applications to other
languages. In this work, we aim at transferring the supervision of a monolingual NLG dataset to unseen languages, so
that we can boost performance for the low-resource settings.
Various methods have been proposed over the years to
learn cross-lingual word embeddings or
sentence encoders , which try to encode multilingual texts into a shared vector space. Despite achieving
promising results on cross-lingual classiﬁcation problems,
cross-lingual pre-trained models purposed for NLG tasks remains relatively understudied.
∗Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Pre-Trained XNLG
Many-to-Many
Cross-Lingual
Monolingual NLG Data
(E.g. Summarization)
Figure 1: We use a monolingual (such as English) NLG
dataset to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained model XNLG, and then
evaluate it beyond the language for both source and target
sides (e.g., Chinese, and French).
The cross-lingual generation problem is challenging due
to the following reasons. First, it requires the models to
understand multilingual input texts, and generate multilingual target sequences. So both the encoder and the decoder
should be pre-trained together. Second, the many-to-many
nature of cross-lingual NLG increases language pairs with
the square of the number of languages. Third, the prediction space of cross-lingual NLG is much larger than classi-
ﬁcation tasks, which makes knowledge transfer of decoders
quite critical.
Previous work mainly relies on machine translation (MT)
to map texts to different languages. The ﬁrst strand of research directly uses MT in a pipeline manner . For example, the inputs written in other languages are ﬁrst translated to English, and fed into the NLG
model that is trained by English data. Then the generated English texts are translated back to the target language. Another
strand of work uses MT to generate pseudo training data for
other language pairs that are lack of annotations . However, such methods have
to use multiple MT systems, which renders them suffering from error propagation. Moreover, because the pipelinebased methods do not explicitly share the same parameter
space across languages, we can not directly transfer the taskspeciﬁc supervision to other low-resource languages.
In this paper, we propose a cross-lingual pre-trained
model (named as XNLG) in order to transfer monolingual
NLG supervision to other pre-trained languages by ﬁnetuning. Speciﬁcally, XNLG shares the same sequence-to-
sequence model across languages, and is pre-trained with
both monolingual and cross-lingual objectives. The model
not only learns to understand multilingual input, but also is
able to generate speciﬁc languages by conditioning on the
encoded semantics. Figure 1 demonstrates how to use XNLG
to perform cross-lingual transfer for downstream tasks. The
proposed model enables us to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained
model on monolingual NLG training data, and then evaluate it beyond a single language, including zero-shot crosslingual generation. Besides, we explore several ﬁne-tuning
strategies to make a compromise between cross-lingual ability and task ability. In addition, we introduce two crosslingual NLG datasets (i.e., question generation, and abstractive summarization) for evaluation, which includes three languages, namely English, Chinese, and French. Experimental
results on the NLG tasks show that XNLG achieves competitive performance compared with the machine-translationbased pipeline model in zero-shot cross-lingual settings.
Related Work
Cross-Lingual NLG
Several previous methods have been
proposed for cross-lingual abstractive summarization. Shen
et al. and Duan et al. use translated documents
or summaries as pseudo training data. Junnan et al. 
incorporate monolingual summarization and machine translation to improve cross-lingual summarization. However, the
systems only conduct experiments that generate summaries
with different languages from the input language, rather than
transferring supervision signals across all language pairs.
Kumar et al. use training data annotated in multiple languages to jointly train a sequence-to-sequence model
for question generation. In contrast, our method can also be
applied to zero-shot settings across languages.
Monolingual Pre-Training
Various training objectives
are designed to pretrain text encoders used for generalpurpose representations, such as language modeling , auto-encoding , and machine translation .
Apart from pre-training encoders, several pre-trained models are proposed for
generation tasks. In comparison, our goal is to investigate a
pre-training method for cross-lingual NLG tasks.
Cross-Lingual Pre-Training
By pre-training BERT on corpus of multiple languages, it
shows a surprising ability to produce cross-lingual representations . More recently, Lample and Conneau extend mask language modeling
pre-training to cross-lingual settings, which shows signiﬁcant improvements on cross-lingual classiﬁcation and unsupervised machine translation. By comparison, we pretrain both encoder and decoder for cross-lingual generation tasks, rather than only focusing on encoder. Artetxe
and Schwenk use the sequence encoder of the multilingual translation model to produce
cross-lingual sentence embeddings. However, as shown in
the experiments (Section 4), it is difﬁcult to control the target language by directly ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained translation model on downstream NLG tasks.
As shown in Figure 2, XNLG is a pre-trained sequence-tosequence model, which is based on Transformer . Both the encoder and the decoder are supposed
to support multiple languages. Following , we use language tag embeddings to distinguish
the source and target languages. Given a sentence and its
corresponding language tag, XNLG encodes the input into
vector representations. By conditioning on the encoding vectors and a speciﬁc language tag, the decoder generates the
output sequence in the target language.
Pre-Training Tasks
Monolingual MLM
The masked language modeling
(MLM) task aims at predicting the randomly masked words according to their context. The objective pretrains the bidirectional encoder to obtain contextual representations. Following , we randomly mask 15% of the tokens in a monolingual sentence.
For each masked token, we substitute it with a special token
[M], a random token, or the unchanged token with probabilities of 0.8, 0.1, and 0.1, respectively. Let x denote a sentence from the monolingual training corpus, and Mx the set
of randomly masked positions. The monolingual MLM loss
is deﬁned as:
log p(xi|x\Mx)
where x\Mx is the masked version of input x. The language
tags are fed into the model for all pre-training tasks.
Denoising Auto-Encoding (DAE)
We use the denoising
auto-encoding (DAE) objective to pretrain the encoder-decoder attention mechanism. Given sentence x from the monolingual corpus, we use three types
of noise to obtain the randomly perturbed text ˆx. First, the
word order is locally shufﬂed. Second, we randomly drop
tokens of the sentence with a probability of 0.1. Third, we
substitute tokens with the special padding token [P] with
a probability of 0.1. The pre-training objective is to recover
the original sentence x by conditioning on ˆx. The DAE loss
is computed via:
DAE = −log p(x|ˆx) = −
log p(xi|ˆx, x<i)
where x<i = x1, · · · , xi−1.
Cross-Lingual MLM (XMLM)
Similar to monolingual
MLM, the masked token prediction task can be extended to
cross-lingual settings . To be
speciﬁc, given a parallel corpus, we concatenate the pair of
bilingual sentences (x, y) to a whole sequence, and use it
as the input of MLM. The language tags are also fed into
Figure 2: Overview of the pre-training tasks and the pre-training protocol designed for XNLG.
the model to indicate the languages of tokens. During training, we adopt the same masking strategy as monolingual
MLM. Apart from using monolingual context to predict the
masked tokens, XMLM encourages the model to utilize the
alignment of bilingual sentences, so that the model learns to
map cross-lingual texts into a shared vector space. Similar
to Equation (1), the cross-lingual MLM loss is:
log p(xi|x\Mx, y\My)
log p(yi|x\Mx, y\My)
where Mx, My represent the masked positions of x and y,
respectively.
Cross-Lingual Auto-Encoding (XAE)
If only DAE is
used as the pre-training task for the decoder, we found that
the model ignores the target language tag while generating
just the same language as the input, caused by the spurious
correlation issue . In other words, the DAE
loss captures the spurious correlation between the source
language tag and the target sentences, but we expect the language of generated sentences can be controlled by the target
language tag. To solve the above problem, we use machine
translation as the cross-lingual auto-encoding (XAE) task,
which decreases mutual information between the target sentences and the source language tag. XAE can be viewed as
the multilingual-version DAE task in the sense that both of
them recover the sentence by conditioning on the encoded
representations. The cross-lingual auto-encoding loss is:
XAE = −log p(y|x) −log p(x|y)
where (x, y) is a pair of sentences in the parallel corpus.
Pre-Training Protocol
As shown in Figure 2(b), we propose a two-stage pretraining protocol for XNLG. The ﬁrst stage pretrains the encoding components, where the model learns to encode multilingual sentences to a shared embedding space. We consider using MLM and XMLM as the pre-training tasks. The
objective of the ﬁrst stage is to minimize:
where Dp indicates the parallel corpus, and Dm is the monolingual corpus.
Although the pre-trained encoder in the ﬁrst stage enables the model to encode multilingual sentences. However,
it cannot directly be used in cross-lingual NLG because: 1)
encoder-decoder attention is not pre-trained; 2) the decoding algorithm is different between masked language modeling and autoregressive decoding, resulting in the mismatch
between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. Therefore, we conduct
decoding pre-training in the second stage by using DAE and
XAE as the tasks. Besides, we only update decoder parameters and keep the encoder ﬁxed. The objective of the second
stage is to minimize:
Fine-Tuning on Downstream NLG Tasks
In the ﬁne-tuning procedure, let us assume that we only have
English training data for downstream NLG tasks. According
to whether the target language is English, the directions of
NLG can be categorized into two classes: any languages to
non-English languages (Any-to-Others), and any languages
to English (Any-to-English).
Table 1: Evaluation results of monolingual supervised question generation for English and Chinese. BL is short for
BLEU, MTR for METEOR, and RG for ROUGE. The results with “†” are reported on different data splits.
PIPELINE (XLM)
w/ Google Translator
Table 2: Evaluation results of zero-shot Chinese-Chinese
question generation. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
Fine-Tuning for Any-to-Others NLG
Ideally, the model
can be ﬁne-tuned towards a new task without losing its
cross-lingual ability. However, we observe the catastrophic
forgetting of target language controllability, if we ﬁne-tune
all the model parameters for Any-to-Others NLG. So we
keep the decoder and the word embeddings frozen and only
update the encoder parameters during ﬁne-tuning. In practice, we found that the proposed ﬁne-tuning method prevents
the model from only decoding English words for the Anyto-Others setting.
Fine-Tuning for Any-to-English NLG
For the Any-to-
English NLG transfer, the decoder always generates English.
So we can freeze the encoder parameters, and update the decoder parameters to retain the cross-lingual ability. As an
alternative way, we can also ﬁne-tune all the parameters to
obtain the best results on the English dataset while having a
slight drop in performance.
Experiments
We conduct experiments over two cross-lingual NLG downstream tasks, i.e., cross-lingual question generation, and
cross-lingual abstractive summarization. We compare XNLG
with state-of-the-art cross-lingual pre-trained models, and
machine-translation-based pipelines.
Training Details
Pre-Training
We use a pre-trained XNLG with a 10-layer
encoder and a 6-layer decoder. For every Transformer layer,
we use 1024 hidden units, 8 attention heads, and GELU
activations . In the ﬁrst pretraining stage, we directly use the 15-language pre-trained
PIPELINE (XLM)
w/ Google Translator
Table 3: Human evaluation results of zero-shot Chinese-
Chinese question generation. Rel is short for relatedness, Flu
for ﬂuency, and Corr for correctness. “*” indicates the improvements are signiﬁcant at p < 0.05.
PIPELINE (XLM)
Table 4: Human evaluation results of zero-shot English-
Chinese question generation. “*” indicates the improvements are signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. Same shorthands apply
as in Table 3.
XLM to initialize the parameters of our encoder and decoder. In the second stage,
we use Wikipedia as the monolingual data for the DAE
objective, and MultiUN as the parallel data for the XAE objective. The DAE loss is trained with a weight of 0.5. We
train a two-language (English/Chinese) and a three-language
(English/French/Chinese) XNLG for two downstream NLG
tasks, respectively. Following ,
we use the tokenizer provided by for Chinese, and Moses1 for other languages, respectively. Then the words in all languages are split with a
shared subword vocabulary learned by BPE . We use Adam optimizer with a linear
warm-up over the ﬁrst 4,000 steps and linear decay for later
steps, and the learning rate is set to 10−4. The pre-training
batch size is 64, and the sequence length is set to 256. It
takes about 30 hours to run 23,000 steps for the pre-training
procedure by using 4 Nvidia Telsa V100-16GB GPUs.
Fine-Tuning
For ﬁne-tuning on downstream NLG tasks,
we use Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 5 × 10−6.
We set the batch size as 16 and 32 for question generation
and abstractive summarization, respectively. When the target language is the same as the language of training data,
we ﬁne-tune all parameters. When the target language is different from the language of training data, we ﬁne-tune the
Transformer layers of the encoder. We truncate the input
sentences to the ﬁrst 256 tokens. During decoding, we use
beam search with a beam size of 3, and limit the length of
the target sequence to 80 tokens.
1 
PIPELINE (XLM)
Table 5: Human evaluation results of zero-shot Chinese-
English question generation. “*”: the improvements are signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. Same shorthands apply as in Table 3.
Table 6: Evaluation results of supervised monolingual summarization. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
Question Generation
We evaluate our model on zero-shot cross-lingual answeraware question generation (QG). The goal is to generate a
question that asks towards the answer with the given passage and the expected answer. In the following experiments,
we extend the QG task to the cross-lingual setting. By only
using English QG training data, our goal is to generate questions in English or Chinese with the given passage-answer
pair in English or Chinese.
We use SQuAD 1.1 as the English QG dataset. It is a popular English question answering
dataset containing over 100,000 questions and their corresponding annotated passages. Following ,
we regard the original development set as the test set, and
sample 5000 examples from the training data of two datasets
as the development sets. For Chinese QG, we follow the default data splits of WebQA . We regard the
provided annotated evidence sentences as the input passages
instead of entire documents. To construct the input sequence,
we view the whole input passage as a single sentence, and
concatenate the passage and the answer into one sequence
with a special token [S] between them. During decoding
Chinese, we utilize a subset of vocabulary, which is obtained
from the passage sentences of the WebQA dataset.
English-English Question Generation
We ﬁrst conduct
experiments on the supervised English-English QG setting.
We compare our model to the following baselines:
• COREFNQG An attentional
sequence-to-sequence model with a feature-rich encoder.
• MP-GSN A sequence-to-sequence
model with self-attention and maxout pointer mechanism.
 State-of-the-art
cross-lingual pre-trained Transformer. We initialize the
PIPELINE (XLM)
w/ Google Translator
Table 7: Evaluation results of zero-shot French abstractive
summarization. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
PIPELINE (XLM)
w/ Google Translator
Table 8: Evaluation results of zero-shot Chinese abstractive
summarization. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
sequence-to-sequence model with pre-trained XLM.
We evaluate models with BLEU-4 (BL-4), ROUGE (RG)
and METEOR (MTR) metrics. As shown in Table 1, XNLG
outperforms the baselines, which demonstrates that our pretrained model provides a good initialization for NLG.
Chinese-Chinese Question Generation
We conduct experiments on zero-shot Chinese-Chinese QG to evaluate the
cross-lingual transfer ability. In this task, models are trained
with English QG data but evaluated with Chinese QG examples. We include the following models as our baselines:
• XLM Fine-tuning XLM with the English QG data.
• PIPELINE (XLM) The pipeline of translating input Chinese sentences into English ﬁrst, then performing En-En-
QG with the XLM model, and ﬁnally translating back to
the Chinese. We use the Transformer as the translator,
which is also trained on the MultiUN dataset.
• PIPELINE (XLM) with Google Translator Utilizing
Google Translator in PIPELINE (XLM) for translation.
We evaluate models by both automatic evaluation metrics
and human experts. The automatic metrics scores are computed by regarding each Chinese character as a token. For
human evaluation, we consider three metrics: relatedness,
ﬂuency, and correctness, which are represented as integers
ranged from 1 to 3. We randomly select 100 passage-answer
pairs from the English QG test set, and use the models to
generate questions. Then we present these examples to three
experts to ask for the above scores. In Table 2 and Table 3,
we present the results for the zero-shot Zh-Zh-QG. The results of monolingual supervised models are also reported in
Table 1 as reference. In the automatic evaluation, our model
consistently performs better than baselines in both zero-shot
and monolingual supervised setting. In the human evaluation, our model also obtains signiﬁcant improvements in
terms of relatedness and correctness.
Table 9: Ablations for pre-training objectives, where models
are evaluated on zero-shot Chinese-Chinese question generation. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
English-Chinese
Generation
zeroshot English-Chinese question generation experiments,
we use XLM and PIPELINE (XLM) as our baselines.
PIPELINE (XLM) is a pipeline method that uses En-En-QG
with XLM to generate questions, and then translates the results to Chinese. Because there are no annotations for En-
Zh-QG, we perform human evaluation studies for this setting. Table 4 shows the human evaluation results, where our
model surpasses all the baselines especially in terms of relatedness and correctness.
Chinese-English Question Generation
We also conduct
experiments for zero-shot Chinese-English question generation, and adopt the same evaluation procedure to En-Zh-QG.
PIPELINE (XLM) ﬁrst translates Chinese input to English,
and then conduct En-En-QG with XLM. As shown in Table 5, human evaluation results indicate that XNLG achieves
signiﬁcant improvements on the three metrics.
Abstractive Summarization
We conduct experiments on cross-lingual abstractive summarization (AS). AS is the task of converting the input
sentences into summaries while preserving the key meanings. For evaluation, we use English/French/Chinese Gigaword2 to extract the ﬁrst sentence and the headline of
each article, and regard them as input document and predicted summaries, respectively. For each language, we sample 500k/5k/5k examples for training/validation/test.
Zero-Shot Summarization
In the zero-shot setting, we
only use English data for training, and directly evaluate the
model on other languages. In Table 7 and Table 8, we present
the results for French/Chinese AS, which are evaluated by
the ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L metrics. We also
report the results of supervised AS in Table 6 for reference.
We ﬁnd that XNLG outperforms all the baseline models on
both French and Chinese AS. Comparing with French, there
is a larger gap between baselines and our model on zero-shot
Chinese AS, which indicates that the error propagation issue
is more serious on distant language pairs.
Ablation Studies
2LDC2011T07, LDC2011T10, LDC2011T13
Supervised En-En-QG
Zero-Shot Zh-Zh-QG
Table 10: Effects of different ﬁne-tuning strategies. Dec, Enc
and ET represent ﬁne-tuning the parameters of the decoder,
the encoder, and the Transformer layers of the encoder, respectively. Same shorthands apply as in Table 1.
Figure 3: ROUGE-2 scores for few-shot French/Chinese abstractive summarization with different training data sizes.
Effects of Pre-Training
We conduct ablation studies for
pre-training objectives, and the results can be seen in Table 9. We observe that our model greatly beneﬁts from the
DAE objective for the zero-shot Chinese question generation task. The results also demonstrate that combining DAE
and XAE can alleviate the spurious correlation issue and improves cross-lingual NLG.
Effects of Fine-Tuning Strategies
As shown in Table 10,
we use the En-En-QG and Zh-Zh-QG tasks to analyze the
effects of using different ﬁne-tuning strategies. It can be observed that ﬁne-tuning encoder parameters, our model obtain an impressive performance for both English and Chinese QG, which shows the strong cross-lingual transfer ability of our model. When ﬁne-tuning all the parameters, the
model achieves the best score for English QG, but it suffers a performance drop when evaluating on Chinese QG.
We ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning decoder hurts cross-lingual decoding, and the model learns to only decode English words.
For only ﬁne-tuning decoder, the performance degrades by a
Figure 4: Examples of generated questions by XNLG and the baselines in four directions (En-En,En-Zh,Zh-En and Zh-Zh). “*”:
Because XLM is not designed for cross-lingual NLG, it is hard to produce meaningful sentences for En-Zh-QG and Zh-Zh-QG.
large margin for both languages because of the underﬁtting
issue, which indicates the necessity of ﬁne-tuning encoder.
Effects of Cross-Lingual Transfer
We examine whether
low-resource NLG can beneﬁt from cross-lingual transfer.
We consider English as the rich-resource language, and conduct experiments for few-shot French/Chinese AS. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst ﬁne-tune XNLG on the English AS data, and
then ﬁne-tune it on the French or Chinese AS data. We compare with the monolingual supervised model that XNLG is
only ﬁne-tuned on the dataset of the target language. As
shown in Figure 3, we can observe that the cross-lingual
supervision improves performance for few-shot abstractive
summarization. As the training data size becomes larger, the
performances of the two models are getting closer.
Case Studies
As shown in Figure 4, we present some examples generated by XNLG and the baselines in four directions (En-En,
En-Zh, Zh-En, and Zh-Zh). When decoding on an unseen
language, XLM tends to generate random output, because
it is not designed for cross-lingual NLG. In terms of the
pipeline model, we can observe that it suffers from the error propagation issue, especially when the source and target
languages are all different from the training data. For example, when the pipeline model performs Zh-Zh-QG, keywords are translated twice, increasing the risk of mistranslation. In the second example, “atomic bomb” is mistranslated
to “nuclear bomb”, resulting in its low correctness. On the
contrary, by directly transferring English supervision signals
to the other generation directions, the generated questions of
XNLG match the references better than baselines.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a pre-training method for crosslingual natural language generation (NLG) that can transfer monolingual NLG supervision signals to all pre-trained
languages. With the pre-trained model, we achieve zeroshot cross-lingual NLG on several languages by only ﬁnetuning once. Experimental results show that our model outperforms the machine-translation-based pipeline model on
several cross-lingual NLG tasks. For future work, we would
like to improve our pre-training method towards the fully
unsupervised setting.
Acknowledgements
Prof. Heyan Huang is the corresponding author. The
work is supported by NKRD (No. 2018YFB1005100),
61751201),
Z181100008918002), Major Project of Zhijiang Lab (No.
2019DH0ZX01), and Open fund of BDAlGGCNEL and
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co., Ltd (No. w-