Vol. 23 no. 19 2007, pages 2507–2517
BIOINFORMATICS
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btm344
Gene expression
A review of feature selection techniques in bioinformatics
Yvan Saeys1,*, In˜ aki Inza2 and Pedro Larran˜ aga2
1Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium and Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Genomics
group, Department of Molecular Genetics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium and 2Department of Computer
Science and Artificial Intelligence, Computer Science Faculty, University of the Basque Country, Paseo Manuel de
Lardizabal 1, 20018 Donostia - San Sebastia´ n, Spain
Received on April 17, 2007; revised on June 11, 2007; accepted on June 25, 2007
Advance Access publication August 24, 2007
Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren
Feature selection techniques have become an apparent need in
many bioinformatics applications. In addition to the large pool of
techniques that have already been developed in the machine
learning and data mining fields, specific applications in bioinformatics have led to a wealth of newly proposed techniques.
In this article, we make the interested reader aware of the
possibilities of feature selection, providing a basic taxonomy of
feature selection techniques, and discussing their use, variety and
potential in a number of both common as well as upcoming
bioinformatics applications.
Contact: 
Supplementary
information:
 
supplementary_data/yvsae/fsreview
INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, the motivation for applying feature
selection (FS) techniques in bioinformatics has shifted from
being an illustrative example to becoming a real prerequisite for
model building. In particular, the high dimensional nature of
many modelling tasks in bioinformatics, going from sequence
analysis over microarray analysis to spectral analyses and
literature mining has given rise to a wealth of feature selection
techniques being presented in the field.
In this review, we focus on the application of feature
selection techniques. In contrast to other dimensionality
techniques
projection
(e.g. principal component analysis) or compression (e.g. using
information theory), feature selection techniques do not alter
the original representation of the variables, but merely select a
subset of them. Thus, they preserve the original semantics of
the variables, hence, offering the advantage of interpretability
by a domain expert.
While feature selection can be applied to both supervised and
unsupervised learning, we focus here on the problem of
supervised learning (classification), where the class labels are
known beforehand. The interesting topic of feature selection for
unsupervised learning (clustering) is a more complex issue,
and research into this field is recently getting more attention
in several communities . The objectives of feature
selection are manifold, the most important ones being: (a) to
avoid overfitting and improve model performance, i.e. prediction performance in the case of supervised classification and
better cluster detection in the case of clustering, (b) to provide
faster and more cost-effective models and (c) to gain a deeper
insight into the underlying processes that generated the data.
However, the advantages of feature selection techniques come
at a certain price, as the search for a subset of relevant features
introduces an additional layer of complexity in the modelling
task. Instead of just optimizing the parameters of the model
for the full feature subset, we now need to find the optimal
model parameters for the optimal feature subset, as there is
no guarantee that the optimal parameters for the full feature
 . As a result, the search in the model
hypothesis space is augmented by another dimension: the one
of finding the optimal subset of relevant features. Feature
selection techniques differ from each other in the way they
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
 The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
incorporate this search in the added space of feature subsets in
the model selection.
In the context of classification, feature selection techniques
can be organized into three categories, depending on how they
combine the feature selection search with the construction of
the classification model: filter methods, wrapper methods and
embedded methods. Table 1 provides a common taxonomy of
feature selection methods, showing for each technique the most
prominent advantages and disadvantages, as well as some
examples of the most influential techniques.
Filter techniques assess the relevance of features by looking
only at the intrinsic properties of the data. In most cases a
feature relevance score is calculated, and low-scoring features
are removed. Afterwards, this subset of features is presented as
input to the classification algorithm. Advantages of filter
techniques are that they easily scale to very high-dimensional
datasets, they are computationally simple and fast, and they are
independent of the classification algorithm. As a result, feature
selection needs to be performed only once, and then different
classifiers can be evaluated.
Table 1. A taxonomy of feature selection techniques. For each feature selection type, we highlight a set of characteristics which can guide the choice
for a technique suited to the goals and resources of practitioners in the field
Model search
Advantages
Disadvantages
Classifier
Univariate
Ignores feature dependencies
Independent of the classifier
Ignores interaction with
the classifier
Euclidean distance
Information gain,
Gain ratio 
Multivariate
Models feature dependencies
Independent of the classifier
Better computational complexity
than wrapper methods
Slower than univariate techniques
Less scalable than univariate
techniques
Ignores interaction
with the classifier
Correlation-based feature
selection (CFS) 
Markov blanket filter (MBF)
 
Fast correlation-based
feature selection (FCBF)
 
Hypothesis space
Classifier
Deterministic
Interacts with the classifier
Models feature dependencies
Less computationally
intensive than randomized methods
Risk of over fitting
More prone than randomized
algorithms to getting stuck in a
local optimum (greedy search)
Classifier dependent selection
Sequential forward selection
(SFS) 
Sequential backward elimination
(SBE) 
Plus q take-away r
 
Beam search 
Randomized
Less prone to local optima
Computationally intensive
Simulated annealing
Interacts with the classifier
Models feature dependencies
Classifier dependent selection
Higher risk of overfitting
than deterministic algorithms
Randomized hill climbing
 
Genetic algorithms
 
Estimation of distribution
algorithms 
FS U hypothesis space
Classifier
Interacts with the classifier
Classifier dependent selection
Decision trees
Better computational
complexity than wrapper methods
Models feature dependencies
Weighted naive Bayes
 
Feature selection using
the weight vector of SVM
 
Y.Saeys et al.
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
A common disadvantage of filter methods is that they ignore
the interaction with the classifier (the search in the feature
subset space is separated from the search in the hypothesis
space), and that most proposed techniques are univariate.
This means that each feature is considered separately, thereby
ignoring feature dependencies, which may lead to worse
classification performance when compared to other types of
feature selection techniques. In order to overcome the problem
of ignoring feature dependencies, a number of multivariate
filter techniques were introduced, aiming at the incorporation
of feature dependencies to some degree.
Whereas filter techniques treat the problem of finding a good
feature subset independently of the model selection step,
wrapper methods embed the model hypothesis search within
the feature subset search. In this setup, a search procedure in
the space of possible feature subsets is defined, and various
subsets of features are generated and evaluated. The evaluation
of a specific subset of features is obtained by training and
testing a specific classification model, rendering this approach
tailored to a specific classification algorithm. To search the
space of all feature subsets, a search algorithm is then
‘wrapped’ around the classification model. However, as the
space of feature subsets grows exponentially with the number of
features, heuristic search methods are used to guide the search
for an optimal subset. These search methods can be divided in
two classes: deterministic and randomized search algorithms.
Advantages of wrapper approaches include the interaction
between feature subset search and model selection, and the
ability to take into account feature dependencies. A common
drawback of these techniques is that they have a higher risk of
overfitting than filter techniques and are very computationally
intensive, especially if building the classifier has a high
computational cost.
In a third class of feature selection techniques, termed
embedded techniques, the search for an optimal subset of
features is built into the classifier construction, and can be seen
as a search in the combined space of feature subsets and
hypotheses.
approaches,
approaches are thus specific to a given learning algorithm.
Embedded methods have the advantage that they include the
interaction with the classification model, while at the same time
being far less computationally intensive than wrapper methods.
APPLICATIONS IN BIOINFORMATICS
Feature selection for sequence analysis
Sequence analysis has a long-standing tradition in bioinformatics. In the context of feature selection, two types of problems
can be distinguished: content and signal analysis. Content
analysis focuses on the broad characteristics of a sequence, such
as tendency to code for proteins or fulfillment of a certain
biological function. Signal analysis on the other hand focuses
on the identification of important motifs in the sequence, such
as gene structural elements or regulatory elements.
Apart from the basic features that just represent the
nucleotide or amino acid at each position in a sequence,
many other features, such as higher order combinations of
these building blocks (e.g. k-mer patterns) can be derived, their
number growing exponentially with the pattern length k.
As many of them will be irrelevant or redundant, feature
selection techniques are then applied to focus on the subset of
relevant variables.
Content analysis
The prediction of subsequences that
code for proteins (coding potential prediction) has been a focus
of interest since the early days of bioinformatics. Because many
dependencies occur between adjacent positions, many variations of Markov models were developed. To deal with the high
amount of possible features, and the often limited amount of
samples, introduced the interpolated
Markov model (IMM), which used interpolation between
different orders of the Markov model to deal with small
sample sizes, and a filter method (2) to select only relevant
features. In further work, extended the
IMM framework to also deal with non-adjacent feature
dependencies, resulting in the interpolated context model
(ICM), which crosses a Bayesian decision tree with a filter
method (2) to assess feature relevance. Recently, the avenue of
FS techniques for coding potential prediction was further
pursued by , who combined different
measures of coding potential prediction, and then used the
Markov blanket multivariate filter approach (MBF) to retain
only the relevant ones.
A second class of techniques focuses on the prediction of
protein function from sequence. The early work of Chuzhanova
et al. , who combined a genetic algorithm in combination
with the Gamma test to score feature subsets for classification
of large subunits of rRNA, inspired researchers to use FS
techniques to focus on important subsets of amino acids that
relate to the protein’s functional class .
An interesting technique is described in Zavaljevsky et al.
 , using selective kernel scaling for support vector
machines (SVM) as a way to asses feature weights, and
subsequently remove features with low weights.
The use of FS techniques in the domain of sequence analysis
is also emerging in a number of more recent applications, such
as the recognition of promoter regions , and the prediction of microRNA targets .
In Sinha , a classification approach is chosen to
discriminative
Ben-Dor et al. who use the threshold number of
misclassification
microarray analysis) to score genes for relevance to tissue
classification. From the TNoM score, a P-value is calculated
that represents the significance of each motif. Motifs are then
sorted according to their P-value.
A review of feature selection techniques
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
Another line of research is performed in the context of the
gene prediction setting, where structural elements such as the
translation initiation site (TIS) and splice sites are modelled as
classification
selection for structural element recognition was pioneered in
Degroeve et al. for the problem of splice site prediction,
combining a sequential backward method together with an
embedded SVM evaluation criterion to assess feature relevance.
In Saeys et al. , an estimation of distribution algorithm
(EDA, a generalization of genetic algorithms) was used to gain
more insight in the relevant features for splice site prediction.
Similarly, the prediction of TIS is a suitable problem to apply
feature selection techniques. In Liu et al. , the authors
demonstrate the advantages of using feature selection for this
problem, using the feature-class entropy as a filter measure to
remove irrelevant features.
In future research, FS techniques can be expected to be useful
challenging
prediction
identifying relevant features related to alternative splice sites
and alternative TIS.
Feature selection for microarray analysis
During the last decade, the advent of microarray datasets
stimulated a new line of research in bioinformatics. Microarray
data pose a great challenge for computational techniques,
because of their large dimensionality (up to several tens of
thousands of genes) and their small sample sizes . Furthermore, additional experimental complications
like noise and variability render the analysis of microarray data
an exciting domain.
In order to deal with these particular characteristics of
microarray data, the obvious need for dimension reduction
techniques was realized , and soon their application
became a de facto standard in the field. Whereas in 2001, the
field of microarray analysis was still claimed to be in its infancy
 , a considerable and valuable effort has since
been done to contribute new and adapt known FS methodologies . A general overview of the most
influential techniques, organized according to the general FS
taxonomy of Section 2, is shown in Table 2.
The univariate filter paradigm: simple yet efficient
Because of the high dimensionality of most microarray
analyses, fast and efficient FS techniques such as univariate
filter methods have attracted most attention. The prevalence
of these univariate techniques has dominated the field, and up
to now comparative evaluations of different classification and
FS techniques over DNA microarray datasets only focused on
the univariate case . This domination of
the univariate approach can be explained by a number
of reasons:
 the output provided by univariate feature rankings is
intuitive and easy to understand;
Table 2. Key references for each type of feature selection technique in the microarray domain
Filter methods
Univariate
Multivariate
Wrapper methods
Embedded methods
Parametric
Model-free
t-test 
Wilcoxon rank sum
 
 
Sequential search
 
Random forest
 
ANOVA 
 
CFS 
Genetic algorithms
 
Weight vector of
SVM 
Bayesian 
Rank products
 
MRMR 
Estimation of distribution algorithms
 
Weights of logistic
regression 
Regression 
Random permutations
 
USC 
Markov blanket 
Gamma 
 
Y.Saeys et al.
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
 the gene ranking output could fulfill the objectives and
expectations that bio-domain experts have when wanting
to subsequently validate the result by laboratory techniques or in order to explore literature searches. The experts
could not feel the need for selection techniques that take
into account gene interactions;
 the possible unawareness of subgroups of gene expression
domain experts about the existence of data analysis
techniques to select genes in a multivariate way;
 the extra computation time needed by multivariate gene
selection techniques.
Some of the simplest heuristics for the identification of
differentially expressed genes include setting a threshold on the
observed fold-change differences in gene expression between
the states under study, and the detection of the threshold
point in each gene that minimizes the number of training
sample misclassification ). However, a wide range of
new or adapted univariate feature ranking techniques has
since then been developed. These techniques can be divided
into two classes: parametric and model-free methods (see
Parametric methods assume a given distribution from which
the samples (observations) have been generated. The two sample
t-test and ANOVA are among the most widely used techniques
in microarray studies, although the usage of their basic form,
possibly without justification of their main assumptions, is not
advisable . Modifications of the
standard t-test to better deal with the small sample size and
inherent noise of gene expression datasets include a number of
t- or t-test like statistics (differing primarily in the way the
variance is estimated) and a number of Bayesian frameworks
 . Although
Gaussian assumptions have dominated the field, other types of
parametrical approaches can also be found in the literature,
such as regression modelling approaches 
and Gamma distribution models .
Due to the uncertainty about the true underlying distribution
of many gene expression scenarios, and the difficulties to
validate distributional assumptions because of small sample
sizes, non-parametric or model-free methods have been widely
proposed as an attractive alternative to make less stringent
distributional assumptions . Many
model-free metrics, frequently borrowed from the statistics
demonstrated
usefulness
expression studies, including the Wilcoxon rank-sum test
 , the between-within classes sum of
squares (BSS/WSS) and the rank products
method .
A specific class of model-free methods estimates the reference
distribution of the statistic using random permutations of the
data, allowing the computation of a model-free version of the
associated parametric tests. These techniques have emerged as a
alternative
specificities
microarray data, and do not depend on strong parametric
assumptions . Their permutation principle partly
alleviates the problem of small sample sizes in microarray
studies, enhancing the robustness against outliers.
We also mention promising types of non-parametric metrics
which, instead of trying to identify differentially expressed
genes at the whole population level (e.g. comparison of sample
means), are able to capture genes which are significantly
disregulated in only a subset of samples . These types of methods offer
a more patient specific approach for the identification of
markers, and can select genes exhibiting complex patterns that
are missed by metrics that work under the classical comparison
of two prelabelled phenotypic groups. In addition, we also
point out the importance of procedures for controlling the
different types of errors that arise in this complex multiple
testing scenario of thousands of genes ,
with a special focus on contributions for controlling the false
discovery rate (FDR).
multivariate
techniques
Univariate selection methods have certain restrictions and may
lead to less accurate classifiers by, e.g. not taking into account
gene–gene interactions. Thus, researchers have proposed techniques that try to capture these correlations between genes.
The application of multivariate filter methods ranges from
simple bivariate interactions towards
more advanced solutions exploring higher order interactions,
such as correlation-based feature selection (CFS) and several variants of the Markov
blanket filter method . The Minimum Redundancy-Maximum
Relevance (MRMR) and Uncorrelated
Shrunken Centroid (USC) 
algorithms are two other solid multivariate filter procedures,
highlighting the advantage of using multivariate methods over
univariate procedures in the gene expression domain.
Feature selection using wrapper or embedded methods offers
an alternative way to perform a multivariate gene subset
selection, incorporating the classifier’s bias into the search and
thus offering an opportunity to construct more accurate
classifiers. In the context of microarray analysis, most wrapper
methods use population-based, randomized search heuristics
 , although also a few examples use
sequential search techniques , crossing a univariately preordered gene ranking with an incrementally augmenting
wrapper method.
Another characteristic of any wrapper procedure concerns
the scoring function used to evaluate each gene subset found.
As the 0–1 accuracy measure allows for comparison with
previous works, the vast majority of papers uses this measure.
However, recent proposals advocate the use of methods for the
approximation of the area under the ROC curve , or the optimization of the LASSO (Least
Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator) model . ROC curves certainly provide an interesting
A review of feature selection techniques
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
evaluation measure, especially suited to the demand for
biomedical
scenarios.
The embedded capacity of several classifiers to discard input
features and thus propose a subset of discriminative genes, has
been exploited by several authors. Examples include the use of
random forests (a classifier that combines many single decision
trees) in an embedded way to calculate the importance of each
gene . Another line of embedded FS techniques uses the
weights of each feature in linear classifiers, such as SVMs
 and logistic regression . These weights are used to reflect the relevance of each
gene in a multivariate way, and thus allow for the removal of
genes with very small weights.
Partially due to the higher computational complexity of
wrapper and to a lesser degree embedded approaches, these
techniques have not received as much interest as filter
proposals. However, an advisable practice is to pre-reduce the
search space using a univariate filter method, and only then
wrapper or embedded methods,
hence fitting the
computation time to the available resources.
Mass spectra analysis
Mass spectrometry technology (MS) is emerging as a new and
attractive framework for disease diagnosis and protein-based
biomarker profiling . A mass
spectrum sample is characterized by thousands of different
mass/charge (m / z) ratios on the x-axis, each with their
corresponding signal intensity value on the y-axis. A typical
MALDI-TOF low-resolution proteomic profile can contain up
to 15 500 data points in the spectrum between 500 and 20 000
m / z, and the number of points even grows using higher
resolution instruments.
For data mining and bioinformatics purposes, it can initially
be assumed that each m / z ratio represents a distinct variable
whose value is the intensity. As Somorjai et al. explain,
constrained
high-dimensional input spaces and their inherent sparseness,
just as it is the case with gene expression datasets. Although the
amount of publications on mass spectrometry based data
mining is not comparable to the level of maturity reached in the
microarray
interesting
collection
methods has been presented in the last 4–5 years since the
pioneering work of Petricoin et al. .
Starting from the raw data, and after an initial step to reduce
noise and normalize the spectra from different samples
 , the following crucial step is to extract
the variables that will constitute the initial pool of candidate
discriminative features. Some studies employ the simplest
approach of considering every measured value as a predictive
feature, thus applying FS techniques over initial huge pools of
about 15 000 variables , up
to around 100 000 variables . On the other
hand, a great deal of the current studies performs aggressive
feature extraction procedures using elaborated peak detection
and alignment techniques . These procedures tend to seed the dimensionality from which supervised FS techniques will start their
work in less than 500 variables . A feature extraction step is
thus advisable to set the computational costs of many FS
techniques to a feasible size in these MS scenarios. Table 3
presents an overview of FS techniques used in the domain of
mass spectrometry. Similar to the domain of microarray
analysis, univariate filter techniques seem to be the most
common techniques used, although the use of embedded
techniques is certainly emerging as an alternative. Although
the t-test maintains a high level of popularity , other parametric measures such as F-test
 , and a notable variety of non-parametric
scores have also been
used in several MS studies. Multivariate filter techniques on the
other hand, are still somewhat underrepresented .
Wrapper approaches have demonstrated their usefulness in
MS studies by a group of influential works. Different types of
population-based randomized heuristics are used as search
engines in the major part of these papers: genetic algorithms
 , particle swarm
Table 3. . Key references for each type of feature selection technique in the domain of mass spectrometry
Univariate
Multivariate
Parametric
Model-free
t-test 
F-test 
Peak Probability
Contrast 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test 
CFS 
Relief-F 
Genetic algorithms 
Nature inspired 
Random forest/decision tree 
Weight vector of SVM 
Neural network 
Y.Saeys et al.
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
optimization and ant colony procedures
 . It is worth noting that while the first two
references start the search procedure in 15 000 dimensions by
considering each m / z ratio as an initial predictive feature,
aggressive peak detection and alignment processes reduce the
initial dimension to about 300 variables in the last two
references .
An increasing number of papers uses the embedded capacity
of several classifiers to discard input features. Variations of the
popular method originally proposed for gene expression
domains by Guyon et al. , using the weights of the
variables in the SVM-formulation to discard features with small
weights, have been broadly and successfully applied in the MS
domain . Based on a similar framework, the weights of the input
masses in a neural network classifier have been used to rank the
features’ importance in Ball et al. . The embedded
capacity of random forests and other types of
decision tree-based algorithms constitutes
an alternative embedded FS strategy.
DEALING WITH SMALL SAMPLE DOMAINS
Small sample sizes, and their inherent risk of imprecision and
overfitting, pose a great challenge for many modelling problems
in bioinformatics . In the context of
feature selection, two initiatives have emerged in response to
this novel experimental situation: the use of adequate evaluation criteria, and the use of stable and robust feature selection
Adequate evaluation criteria
Several papers have warned about the substantial number of
applications
performing
independent
validation of the reported accuracy percentages . In such cases, authors often select a discriminative subset
of features using the whole dataset. The accuracy of the final
classification model is estimated using this subset, thus testing
the discrimination rule on samples that were already used to
propose the final subset of features. We feel that the need for an
external feature selection process in training the classification
rule at each stage of the accuracy estimation procedure is
gaining space in the bioinformatics community practices.
Furthermore, novel predictive accuracy estimation methods
with promising characteristics, such as bolstered error estimation , have emerged to deal with the
specificities of small sample domains.
Ensemble feature selection approaches
Instead of choosing one particular FS method, and accepting
its outcome as the final subset, different FS methods can be
combined using ensemble FS approaches. Based on the evidence
that there is often not a single universally optimal feature
selection technique , and due to the possible
existence of more than one subset of features that discriminates
the data equally well , model combination
approaches such as boosting have been adapted to improve the
robustness and stability of final, discriminative methods
 .
Novel ensemble techniques in the microarray and mass
spectrometry domains include averaging over multiple single
feature subsets , integrating a
collection of univariate differential gene expression purpose
statistics via a distance synthesis scheme ,
using different runs of a genetic algorithm to asses relative
importancies of each feature , computing
the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test in different bootstrap samples
to assign a probability of being selected to each peak , and a number of Bayesian averaging approaches
 . Furthermore, methods
based on a collection of decision trees (e.g. random forests) can
be used in an ensemble FS way to assess the relevance of each
feature .
Although the use of ensemble approaches requires additional
computational resources, we would like to point out that they
offer an advisable framework to deal with small sample
domains, provided the extra computational resources are
affordable.
FEATURE SELECTION IN UPCOMING
Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are mutations at a
single nucleotide position that occurred during evolution and
were passed on through heredity, accounting for most of the
genetic variation among different individuals. SNPs are at the
forefront of many disease-gene association studies, their
number being estimated at about 7 million in the human
genome . Thus, selecting a
subset of SNPs that is sufficiently informative but still small
enough to reduce the genotyping overhead is an important step
towards disease-gene association. Typically, the number of
SNPs considered is not higher than tens of thousands with
sample sizes of about 100.
Several computational methods for htSNP selection (haplotype SNPs; a set of SNPs located on one chromosome) have
been proposed in the past few years. One approach is based on
the hypothesis that the human genome can be viewed as a set of
discrete blocks that only share a very small set of common
haplotypes . This approach aims to identify a
subset of SNPs that can either distinguish all the common
haplotypes , or at least explain a certain
percentage
approach is based on pairwise associations of SNPs, and tries
to select a set of htSNPs such that each of the SNPs on a
haplotype is highly associated with one of the htSNPs . A third approach considers htSNPs as a subset of
all SNPs, from which the remaining SNPs can be reconstructed
 . The idea is to select htSNPs based on how well they
predict the remaining set of the unselected SNPs.
A review of feature selection techniques
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
When the haplotype structure in the target region is
unknown, a widely used approach is to choose markers at
regular intervals , given either the number
of SNPs to choose or the desired interval. In an
ensemble approach is successfully applied to the identification
of relevant SNPs for alcoholism, while Gong et al. 
propose a robust feature selection technique based on a hybrid
between a genetic algorithm and an SVM. The Relief-F feature
selection algorithm, in conjunction with three classification
algorithms (k-NN, SVM and naive Bayes) has been proposed in
Wang et al., . Genetic algorithms have been applied to
the search of the best subset of SNPs, evaluating them with a
multivariate filter (CFS), and also in a wrapper manner, with
a decision tree as supervised classification paradigm . The multiple linear regression SNP prediction
algorithm predicts a complete
genotype based on the values of its informative SNPs (selected
with a stepwise tag selection algorithm), their positions among
all SNPS, and a sample of complete genotypes. In Sham et al.
 the tag SNP selection method allows to specify variable
tagging thresholds, based on correlations, for different SNPs.
Text and literature mining
Text and literature mining is emerging as a promising area for
data mining in biology . One important representation of text and documents is
the so-called bag-of-words (BOW) representation, where each
word in the text represents one variable, and its value consists
of the frequency of the specific word in the text. It goes without
saying that such a representation of the text may lead to very
high dimensional datasets, pointing out the need for feature
selection techniques.
Although the application of feature selection techniques is
common in the field of text classification , the application in the biomedical domain
is still in its infancy. Some examples of FS techniques in
the biomedical domain include the work of Dobrokhotov et al.
Kullback–Leibler
divergence
univariate filter method to find discriminating words in a
medical annotation task, the work of Eom and Zhang 
symmetrical
uncertainty
entropy-based
filter method) for identifying relevant features for protein
interaction discovery, and the work of Han et al. , which
Table 4. Software for feature selection
General purpose FS software
Witten and Frank 
 
Fast Correlation Based Filter Java
Yu and Liu 
 
Feature Selection Book
Liu and Motoda 
 
Kohavi et al. 
 
 
SVM and Kernel Methods
Canu et al. 
 
Matlab Toolbox
Microarray analysis FS software
Tusher et al. 
 
Trevino and Falciani 
Buturovic 
 
Li et al. 
 
Su et al. 
 
Leek et al. 
 
GEPAS-Prophet
Medina et al. 
 
DEDS (Bioconductor)
Yang et al. 
 
RankProd (Bioconductor)
Breitling et al. 
 
Limma (Bioconductor)
Smyth 
 
Multtest (Bioconductor)
Dudoit et al. 
 
Nudge (Bioconductor)
Dean and Raftery 
 
Qvalue (Bioconductor)
Storey 
 
twilight (Bioconductor)
Scheid and Spang 
 
ComparativeMarkerSelection JAVA, R
Gould et al. 
 
(GenePattern)
Mass spectra analysis FS software
Li et al. 
 
R, C, Cþþ Zhang et al. 
 
R-SVM.html
SNP analysis FS software
Lee and Kang 
 
MLR-tagging
He and Zelikovsky 
 
Sham et al. 
 
Y.Saeys et al.
Downloaded from by Universidad Politecnica De Madrid user on 14 February 2023
discusses the use of feature selection for a document classification task.
It can be expected that, for tasks such as biomedical
document clustering and classification, the large number of
feature selection techniques that were already developed in the
text mining community will be of practical use for researchers
in biomedical literature mining .
FS SOFTWARE PACKAGES
In order to provide the interested reader with some pointers to
existing software packages, Table 4 shows an overview of
existing software implementing a variety of feature selection
methods. All
software packages mentioned
are free for
academic use, and the software is organized into four sections:
general purpose FS techniques, techniques tailored to the
domain of microarray analysis, techniques specific to the
domain of mass spectra analysis and techniques to handle SNP
selection. For each software package, the main reference,
implementation language and website is shown.
In addition to these publicly available packages, we also
provide a companion website as Supplementary Matrial of this
work (see the Abstract section for the location). On this
website, the publications are indexed according to the FS
technique used, a number of keywords accompanying each
reference to understand its FS methodological contributions.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
In this article, we reviewed the main contributions of feature
selection research in a set of well-known bioinformatics
applications. Two main issues emerge as common problems
in the bioinformatics domain: the large input dimensionality,
and the small sample sizes. To deal with these problems, a
wealth of FS techniques has been designed by researchers in
bioinformatics, machine learning and data mining.
A large and fruitful effort has been performed during the last
years in the adaptation and proposal of univariate filter FS
techniques. In general, we observe that many researchers in the
field still think that filter FS approaches are only restricted to
univariate approaches. The proposal of multivariate selection
algorithms can be considered as one of the most promising
future lines of work for the bioinformatics community.
A second line of future research is the development of
especially fitted ensemble FS approaches to enhance the
robustness of the finally selected feature subsets. We feel that,
in order to alleviate the actual small sample sizes of the majority
of bioinformatics applications, the further development of such
techniques, combined with appropriate evaluation criteria,
constitutes an interesting direction for future FS research.
Other interesting opportunities for future FS research will be
the extension towards upcoming bioinformatics domains, such
as SNPs, text and literature mining, and the combination of
heterogeneous data sources. While in these domains, the FS
component is not yet as central as, e.g. in gene expression or
MS areas, we believe that its application will become essential
in dealing with the high-dimensional character of these
applications.
To conclude, we would like to note that, in order to maintain
an appropriate size of the article, we had to limit the number of
referenced studies. We therefore apologize to the authors of
papers that were not cited in this work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
constructive
significantly
quality of this review. This work was supported by BOF
grant 01P10306 from Ghent University to Y.S., and the
Government and project TIN2005-03824 of the Spanish
Ministry of Education and Science to I.I. and P.L.
Conflict of Interest: none declared.