Generative Adversarial Networks and Perceptual
Losses for Video Super-Resolution
Alice Lucas, Santiago Lopez-Tapia, Rafael Molina and Aggelos K. Katsaggelos.
Abstract—Video super-resolution (VSR) has become one of
the most critical problems in video processing. In the deep
learning literature, recent works have shown the beneﬁts of
using adversarial-based and perceptual losses to improve the
performance on various image restoration tasks; however, these
have yet to be applied for video super-resolution. In this
work, we propose a Generative Adversarial Network(GAN)-based
formulation for VSR. We introduce a new generator network
optimized for the VSR problem, named VSRResNet, along with
a new discriminator architecture to properly guide VSRResNet
during the GAN training. We further enhance our VSR GAN
formulation with two regularizers, a distance loss in featurespace and pixel-space, to obtain our ﬁnal VSRResFeatGAN
model. We show that pre-training our generator with the Mean-
Squared-Error loss only quantitatively surpasses the current
state-of-the-art VSR models. Finally, we employ the PercepDist
metric ( ) to compare state-of-the-art VSR models. We show
that this metric more accurately evaluates the perceptual quality
of SR solutions obtained from neural networks, compared with
the commonly used PSNR/SSIM metrics. Finally, we show that
our proposed model, the VSRResFeatGAN model, outperforms
current state-of-the-art SR models, both quantitatively and
qualitatively.
I. INTRODUCTION
The task of video super-resolution, which corresponds to
estimating high-resolution (HR) frames from their observed
low-resolution (LR) versions, has become one of the central
problems in image and video processing. With the growing
popularity of high-deﬁnition display devices, such as Highdeﬁnition television (HDTV), or even Ultra-high-deﬁnition
television (UHDTV) on the market, there is an avid demand
for transferring LR videos into HR videos so that they can
be displayed on high resolution TV screens, void of artifacts
and noise.
The objective posed by the Video Super-Resolution
(VSR) problem is to reconstruct a high-resolution sequence
{x1,x2,...,xT−1,xT} given a corresponding low-resolution sequence {y1,y2,...,yT−1,yT}. Algorithms which tackle the SR
problem can be divided into two broad categories: modelbased and learning-based algorithms. In model-based approaches (e.g., , , , ) the low-resolution (LR)
Preliminary results of this work were presented at the 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) . This work was
supported in part by the Sony 2016 Research Award Program Research
Project. The work of SLT and RM was supported by the the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through project DPI2016-77869-
C2-2-R and the Visiting Scholar program at the University of Granada.
SLT received ﬁnancial support through the Spanish FPU program. A.
Lucas and A.K. Katsaggelos are with the Dept. of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. S.
Lopez-Tapia and R. Molina are with the Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Department, Universidad de Granada, Spain. This work has
been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be
transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
frames are explicitly modeled as blurred, subsampled, and
noisy versions of the corresponding high-resolution (HR)
frames, i.e. yi = DHxi where xi is the i-th high-resolution
frame in the sequence, H is the blurring operator, D the
downsampling matrix, and yi the corresponding observed
low-resolution frame. With this explicit modeling, one can
invert the SR model to obtain an estimate of the reconstructed HR frame. Due to the strongly ill-posed nature
of the SR problem, careful regularization must be used
when solving for the reconstructed frame. Signal priors
must be used to enforce image-speciﬁc features into the
HR estimate. For example in the Bayesian framework,
priors controlling the smoothness or the total variation of
the reconstructed image are utilized to regularize the SR
problem (see for example , , ).
On the other hand, conventional learning-based algorithms do not explicitly make use of the analytical SR model
and instead use large training databases of HR and LR
videos to learn to solve the video super-resolution problem. Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been
proposed as another learning-based tool used for video
super-resolution. In the general case of using deep neural
networks for video SR, the goal is to ﬁnd a function f(·)
such that xt = f(Yt). In other words, f(·) learns the mapping
from the LR center frame and the corresponding past and
future frames, e.g., Yt = (yt−k,...,yt−1,yt,yt+1,...,yt+k),k ≥0,
to obtain an estimate of the reconstructed center HR frame
The traditional approach to train DNNs for video superresolution is to ﬁrst artiﬁcially synthesize a dataset with
corresponding high-resolution and low-resolution frames.
The Mean-Squared-Error (MSE) cost function between the
estimated high-resolution frame xt and the ground truth
frame is then used as the cost function during the training
of the neural network. Numerous works in the literature
(e.g., ) have shown that while the MSE-based approach
provides reasonable SR solutions, its fairly conservative
nature does not fully exploit the potential of deep neural
networks and instead produces blurry images. As an alternative to the MSE cost function, literature for NN-based
super-resolution has proposed the use of feature spaces
learned by pre-trained discriminative networks to compute
the l2 distance between an estimated and ground truth HR
frame during training. Using such feature-based losses in
addition to the MSE loss has been proven to be effective
at signiﬁcantly boosting the quality of the super-resolved
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful
models which have been shown to be able to learn complex
distributions by sampling from these with the use of deep
neural network. Originally introduced in the context of
image generation ( ), GANs have since been used for a
multitude of generative tasks, such as various image-toimage translation tasks, 3D modeling, and audio synthesis.
The generative ability of these models has been exploited
to produce images of exceptionally high quality for several image reconstruction tasks (e.g., , , . While
GANs have been applied to the image super-resolution in
numerous ways (e.g., ), they have not been applied
to the problem of video super-resolution yet. Similarly,
the use of feature-based losses for video super-resolution
still lacks in today’s literature. Therefore in this paper, we
extend the use of GANs and feature-based loss functions to
the intricate problem of video super-resolutions with deep
neural networks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide
a brief review of the current literature for learning-based
VSR in Section II. In Section III-A, we introduce a residual
architecture for video super-resolution, denoted VSRResNet,
which surpasses current state-of-the-art algorithms and
removes the need to apply motion-compensation on the
input video sequence. Next, in Section III-B we re-frame the
VSRResNet architecture in an adversarial setting. In addition
to using an adversarial loss, we add feature-based losses
in the overall cost function. The training procedure and
experiments which provide the resulting VSRResFeatGAN
is explained in more detail in Section IV. In our ﬁnal
section, Section V, we evaluate the performance of VSRRes-
FeatGAN by comparing it with the current state-of-the-art
learning-based approaches for video super-resolution for
scale factors of 2, 3 and 4. Using quantitative and qualitative
results, we show that our proposed VSRResFeatGAN model
successfully sharpens the frames to a much greater extent
than current state-of-the-art deep neural networks for video
super-resolution.
II. RELATED WORK
In the past couple of years, multiple DNN-based models
for video SR have been proposed in the literature. Liao et
al. ’s approach follows a two-step procedure in which
an ensemble of SR solutions is ﬁrst obtained through the
use of an analytical approach, and then used as input
to a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Kappeler et al.
 design an end-to-end approach and instead learn a
direct mapping between the bicubically interpolated lowresolution frames, Yt and the corresponding central highresolution frame xt. Other works have experimented with
the use of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for video
super-resolution, for example in , where the authors use
a bidirectional RNN to learn from past and future frames
in the input low-resolution sequence. While RNNs have the
advantage of explicitly learning the temporal dependencies
in the input frame sequences, the challenges and difﬁculties
associated with their training has led to CNN being the
favored neural network for video super-resolution. In this
direction, Li and Wang show the beneﬁts of residual
learning with CNNs in video super-resolution by predicting
only the residuals between the high-frequency and lowfrequency frame. Caballero et al. jointly train a spatial
transformer network and a CNN to warp the videos frames
to one another and beneﬁt from sub-pixel information.
Similarly, Makansi et al. and Tao et al. found that
performing a joint upsampling and motion compensation
(MC) operation increases the SR performance of the model.
Each of these models use the MSE loss as the guiding cost
function for training their neural networks, hence resulting
in estimated HR frames which are still fairly blurry. In the
ﬁeld of image super-resolution, the use of feature-based
losses as additional cost functions, along with the use of
GAN-based frameworks for training has been shown to
result in signiﬁcantly superior HR estimates compared with
the ones obatined with traditional NN-based frameworks,
such as the ones described above. For example, Johnson
et al. found that the use of feature-based loss as a loss
function for learning the super-resolution task signiﬁcantly
increases the sharpness of the estimated HR image. Ledig
et al. were the ﬁrsts to use a GAN network and feature
losses for learning to super-resolve images, which produced
images with a previously unseen photorealistic quality.
III. ADVERSARIALLY TRAINED DEEP RESIDUAL
ARCHITECTURE FOR VIDEO SR: VSRRESFEATGAN
In this section, we ﬁrst describe a novel neural network
architecture, VSRResNet, to solve the task of video superresolution. Next, we re-frame the VSRResNet architecture
in a GAN-based setting to further increase the perceptual
quality of the super-resolved frames. Finally, we describe
the use of feature-space and pixel-space loss functions to
further improve the performance of our VSR model.
A. The VSRResNet architecture
While single image super-resolution algorithms have used
very deep neural networks to improve their model, this
approach has not been applied yet to VSR. We argue that
adding depth to the model increases the capacity of the
model, which in turn provides better learned solutions
for the VSR problem. To increase the depth of a model
and avoid the vanishing gradient problem, we choose to
design an architecture based on a chain of residual blocks,
resulting in a neural network composed of a total of 34
convolution operations. The details of the architecture are
shown in Figure 1. Our proposed architecture, VSRResNet,
is based on a series of residual blocks, each composed
of two convolution layers with learnable kernel of size
3 × 3. A Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function
follows each convolution step. As shown in Figure 1, the
VSRResNet architecture is explicitly designed in order to
extract spatial information from each input frame and then
fuse the information together. More speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst
convolution layer applies a convolution operation individually to each of the ﬁve frames in the input sequence.
We performed an experiment in which we instead stack
the input frames together (early fusion) and then apply a
convolution operation to these concatenated frames. In this
case we observed a small decrease in the PSNR performance
of our network and therefore we did not adopt such an
early fusion approach (see also for more experiments
on early and late fusion of architectures for VSR). The
second convolution operation takes a concatenation of
the extracted features across the different time steps to
fuse the information from the previous step. The following
ﬁfteen residual blocks then learn the transformation that
provides the ﬁnal HR solution. We note here that we also
experimented with smaller and larger numbers of residual
blocks to determine our ﬁnal VSRResNet architecture. More
speciﬁcally, we found out that by using 5, 10, or 20 residual
blocks instead of the proposed 15 residual blocks, the
PNSR on our test dataset decreases by 0.90 dB, 0.20 dB,
and 0.36 dB, respectively. Similarly, to determine the best
number of input frames to the VSRResNet, we modiﬁed its
architecture to acccept as input either 3 or 7 frames, instead
of the proposed 5 input frames. We found out that these
architectural changes resulted in a PSNR decrease of 0.19
dB and 0.72 dB, respectively, which suggests that using 5
input frames provide the optimal performance for our task.
As we later show in Section V the increased depth in VS-
RResNet provides the network with more capacity to learn
from the motion in the input frames and produce higher
quality frames. Therefore, unlike most state-of-the-art systems for video super-resolution which perform motioncompensation on the input video, we choose to train
the VSRResNet architecture on a non motion-compensated
dataset, to let the network extract useful information from
the motion. In addition to learning from motion, not using
motion compensation provides the additional beneﬁt of signiﬁcantly reducing the computational time of the proposed
In the next section, we include the VSRResNet architecture as part of an adversarial framework with perceptual
losses. We call our resulting model the VSRResFeatGAN
B. The proposed adversarial system
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) learn to generate samples from a speciﬁc data distribution through
an adversarial training procedure. In the traditional GAN
approach for image generation, a generator network learns
to generate an image given a latent random vector z at
its input. The learning of the generator is guided by an
auxiliary network, a discriminator, which is simultaneously
trained to distinguish between the images generated by the
generator from images from the training dataset. Given a
generator G(z), on latent variables z to be later deﬁned, the
discriminator is trained to distinguish between real and fake
images, i.e. output D(x) = 1 when x is sampled from the
training dataset of natural images and D(G(z)) = 0 when
the images are produced by the generator. On the other
hand, the generator is trained to make the discriminator
believe that its generated images G(z) are real, i.e., trained
to assign the discriminator output a probability D(G(z)) = 1.
As a result of this adversarial training, the generator eventually converges to a solution which the discriminator fails
to identify as "fake", which generally implies successful
learning of the image manifold by the generator.
Adapting the original GAN framework to the problem
of video super-resolution, we propose to use the powerful generative property of GANs by training a GAN to
super-resolve high-resolution center patches from a given
input sequence of low-resolution frames. Using a GANbased training instead of the MSE-based training enables
the model to obtain frames of much higher perceptual
quality. We modify the original GAN setting by inputting the
sequence of input low-resolution frames Y to the generator
instead of a random vector z. This is similar to the use of
GANs in still image super-resolution ( ), in which case a
single low-resolution image is provided at the input of the
generator. The generator is adversarially trained to superresolve the input LR frames such that the discriminator
cannot distinguish between the reconstructed HR frames,
ˆx = G(Y) and those obtained from the training dataset. To
this end, we use the GAN formulation ﬁrst introduced in
 and adapt it to video super-resolution by solving:
LGAN(φ,θ) = Ex[logDφ(x)]+EY[log(1−Dφ(Gθ(Y)))]
where x is the center high-resolution frame of dimensions
N × N, Y is the sequence of low-resolution input frames
around its low-resolution version y, each of dimensions N ×
N, Dφ is our discriminator with trainable parameters φ and
Gθ is the generator network with trainable parameters θ,
where here these parameters correspond to the learneable
convolutional kernels of our networks.
We ﬁx the architecture of the generator network to the
VSRResNet architecture in Figure 1. The proposed discriminator Dφ’s architecture is shown in Figure 2. It is composed
of three convolution layers followed by a fully connected
layer and sigmoid operation, which provides the probability
of a real patch. We also experimented with the use of a
very deep CNN as the one deﬁned in , but found that
the large capacity of this latter discriminator prevented
the subsequent learning of our generator. Thus, for all
the experiments in this paper, we ﬁx the discriminator
architecture to be the one in Figure 2.
C. Adding feature-space and pixel-space distance as regularizers
Using the GAN function in Eq. 1 alone usually results
in strong artifacts in the estimated super-resolution highresolution frame, Gθ(Y). Examples of what the resulting
super-resolved frames may look like are shown in Figure
3. From this ﬁgure, it is clear that the use of the adversarial
loss alone results in the generator network learning to
produce high-frequency artifacts, which resemble ringing
patterns around the edges of the frame. In order to regularize such undesired effect of the adversarial loss, it is
necessary to add regularizers to the adversarial Equation 1.
In today’s literature, commonly used regularizers for the
GAN loss correspond to distances between the estimate
ˆx = Gθ(Y) and the ground truth x available from the training
15 Residual
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Low­Resolution
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Resolution
Residual Block
Conv (3x3)
Conv (3x3)
Figure 1: The proposed VSRResNet architecture. The network consists of a series of convolution operations with 64
kernels of size 3×3, applied on each input frame. The resulting feature maps are then concatenated together to obtain
320 feature maps. This is followed by two convolution operations and 15 residual blocks. Each residual block consists of
two convolutional operations with 64 kernels of size 3×3, each followed by a ReLU layer. Following the deﬁnition of a
residual block, the inputted feature maps are added to the output feature maps to obtain the ﬁnal output of the residual
BN  LeakyReLU
Figure 2: The proposed discriminator architecture architecture. The input to the discriminator corresponds to either an
HR patch x from the ground-truth dataset, or a patch provided by the generator Gθ(Y). Its output corresponds to the
probability that the input is a real HR patch. All convolutions in the discriminator use 3×3 convolutional kernels. The
number of convolution feature maps used for each convolution step corresponds to the number shown on top of each
convolution data cube (e.g., 64, 128, or 256). Each convolution layer is followed by a Batch Normalization (BN) layer as
deﬁned in and the LeakyReLU operation deﬁned in .
dataset. The ﬁrst regularization term measures the distance
between the estimated ˆx and the ground truth x in pixelspace, whereas the second term provides the distance in a
pre-deﬁned feature space. Here, the "distance" is provided
by the Charbonnier loss, deﬁned as:
(ˆxi,j −xi,j)2 +ǫ2
where i, j denote the pixel coordinates and ǫ is a small
constant close to zero, which for our experiments we set
to ǫ = 0.001. The Charbonnnier loss may be seen as an
approximation to the l1 loss. We found that using the
Charbonnier distance instead of the traditional l2 loss in
pixel and feature-space as regularizers for the GAN training
improves the learning behavior of the GAN model. We explain our ﬁndings in more detail in the experiments section,
Section IV. The Charbonnier loss in pixel-space provides
regularization in pixel-space, to ensure that the superresolved frames does not depart by a great extent from the
content in the corresponding ground truth high-resolution
frame. The second term, the Charbonnier regularization in
feature-space, leverages the deep features learned by deep
discriminative classiﬁers to compare the the reconstructed
frame from the ground truth frame. We choose our feature
space to be the representation space obtained from extracting the feature maps from the third and fourth convolution
layer of the VGG network deﬁned in , denoted as VGG()
in this paper. We found from our experiments that these two
loss components are necessary for producing HR frames
of high perceptual quality. Thus our proposed framework
for training our VSR system becomes minθ maxφ Ltotal(φ,θ)
Ltotal(φ,θ) = α
γ(VGG(x),VGG(Gθ(Y)))
+β[Ex[logDφ(x)]+EY[log(1−Dφ(Gθ(Y)))]]
γ(x,Gθ(Y))
where x and Y are sampled from the training dataset T ,
VGG(x) and VGG(Gθ(Y)) denote the feature maps obtained
by providing x and Y as the input to the V GG network,
and the weights α > 0 and β > 0 with α+β < 1 are hyper-
parameters which control the contribution of each loss
component and are determined experimentally.
We name the resulting model the VSRResFeatGAN model.
In the next section, we provide the details of our training
procedure used for training VSRResFeatGAN.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the steps taken towards the
training of our ﬁnal model, the VSRResFeatGAN model.
A. Training Dataset
To synthesize our training dataset of HR/LR pairs, we use
the Myanmar video sequence, which was obtained from
a publicly available video database ( ). The Myanmar
video contains 59 video sequences, of which 53 were used
for training, and 6 for testing, following Kappeler et al.’s
 ’s approach. While the Myanmar videos in their raw
and uncompressed form are 4K resolution (3840 × 2160
pixels), we downsampled the frames in each scene by four
to obtain frames of resolution 960 × 540. For each frame
at time t, the high-resolution patches were obtained by
extracting 36×36 patches from the HR frame. To synthesize
the corresponding LR patches, we ﬁrst performed bicubic
downsampling on the HR frames at times t −2, t −1, t, t +1
and t+2, followed by bicubic interpolation on these frames.
We then extracted the corresponding LR patches. at times
t −2, t −1, t, t +1 and t +2. All of the downsampling and
interpolation operations use MATLAB’s imresize function.
As a result, our training dataset consists of near 1 million
HR/LR pairs, where for each ground truth 36×36 HR patch
xt in our dataset, we are provided with a sequence of
the corresponding ﬁve corresponding 36×36 low-resolution
patches Yt = {yt−2,yt−1,yt,yt+1,yt+2}.
B. Pre-training of the generator architecture
Clearly, the generator’s task of learning a super-resolution
function G that accurately super-resolves LR patches is a
much more difﬁcult task than that of the discriminator,
which is given the objective to discriminate reconstructed
patches from ground-truth high-resolution patches. If the
generator produces patches with signiﬁcant artifacts, the
discriminator’s task then becomes trivial and failure of
GAN training may follow. Therefore, it is critical to have
the generator network start at a reasonable point in the
beginning of the training, to ensure proper convergence
of the generator and discriminator’s loss functions. To this
end, prior to starting the adversarial training, we ﬁrst train
the VSRResNet neural network with the traditional MSE loss
LRMS(x,Gθ(Y)) = ∥x−Gθ(Y)∥2
We train the VSRResNet model with the loss function in
Equation 4 for 100 epochs using the ADAM optimizer
and a batch size of 64. The initial learning rate is set to
0.001 and is then divided by a factor of 10 at the 50th and
75th epoch of the training. We train the VSRResNet model
for each of the SR scale factors of 2, 3 and 4. The training
hyper-parameters are ﬁxed across scale factors.
C. Training of VSRResFeatGAN
We trained the VSRResFeatGAN model with a learning
rate of 10−4 for both the generator and the discriminator
networks. The weight decay was set to 0.001 for the discriminator and 0.0001 for the generator. Similary to the training
of VSRResNet, batches of 64 patches were used to perform
each gradient update with the ADAM optimizer. We
trained the VSRResFeatGAN for 30 epochs, which we found
was a suitable number of epochs for achieving convergence
of the GAN training.
V. RESULTS
In Section IV, we described our approach for performing
DNN-based video super-resolution with perceptual losses
in an adversarial training. In this section, we qualitatively
and quantitatively assess the performance of our VSRResNet
and VSRResFeatGAN models and compare these to the
current state-of-the-art DNNs for video super-resolution. To
quantitatively assess the perceptual quality of the frames
estimated by VSRResFeatGAN, we propose the use of an
additional metric for evaluating the perceptual quality of
our super-resolving models, denoted as the PercepDist
metric, which we describe in more detail in Section V-C.
A. Evaluation of the effect of depth in VSRResNet
We ﬁrst evaluate the performance of our proposed VS-
RResNet model, which corresponds to our deep residual
architecture train with the Mean-Squared-Error loss only.
To assess the effect of depth in our network, we compare its performance with its shallower counterpart, the
VSRNet architecture, ﬁrst introduced in . The VSRNet
architecture is similar to the VSRResNet architecture as it
ﬁrst extracts spatial information from the sequence of ﬁve
input frames and then fused together with the subsequent
convolution layers in the network. However, the number of
convolution layer in VSRNet is limited to four, whereas our
VSRResNet network contains 15 residual blocks, for a total
of 34 convolution operations. Both networks were trained
on the same training dataset. We report the computed PSNR
and SSIM values obtained when evaluating the VSRNet
and VSRResNet models on our Myanmar test frames in
table I. Similarly to the generation of the training dataset,
the Myanmar test frames were both downsampled using
bicubic interpolation as implemented in MATLAB’s imresize
function and subsequently upsampled to their original
960 × 540 spatial extent to provide an initial estimate of
the HR solution. The VSRNet results in the table are those
reported by . Note that while the VSRNet model was
trained on motion-compensated dataset, the VSRResNet
model was not.
It is clear from Table I that VSRResNet outperforms
VSRNet by a large margin across all scale factors. This
implies that a large boost in performance can be obtained
by increasing the depth of the network with residual blocks.
For qualitative comparison, we show in Figure 4 selected
regions from the Myanmar test frames super-resolved by
VSRNet and VSRResNet. By zooming in these regions, large
Figure 3: An illustration of the artifacts originating from using the adversarial loss alone for scale factor 3. (a) ground
truth; (b) adversarial loss; (c) our proposed regularized adversarial loss.
VSRNet (MC)
VSRResNet (non MC)
(PSNR/SSIM)
(PSNR/SSIM)
38.48/0.9679
40.58/0.9807
34.42/0.9247
35.95/0.9481
31.85/0.8834
32.85/0.9075
TABLE I: Comparison of VSRResNet and VSRNet in terms
of PSNR and SSIM. The evaluation metrics were computed
on the Myanmar test dataset.
differences can be observed. As expected, the solution
obtained by VSRResNet is of much sharper quality than the
one provided by VSRNet, once again proving the beneﬁts
of increasing depth in a network trained for video superresolution without having to motion compensate the input
B. Learning from motion with VSRResNet
Having shown that adding depth provides the network
with more capacity to learn accurate SR solutions, we
now analyze whether the VSRResNet network successfully
learns from the motion present in the sequence of input
frames. Unlike most current VSR DNN-based algorithms,
we chose not to perform explicit motion-compensation on
the input LR sequence. This saves a considerable amount of
processing time in real application and forces the network
to learn to extract useful temporal information from the
past and future frames and further improve the estimate of
the center HR frame. To investigate whether the VSRResNet
truly makes use of the motion present in the input, we
design an experiment in which we replicate the center
frame of the sequence across the ﬁve time steps, i.e. setting
Yt = {yt,yt,yt,yt,yt} and feed this "center only" sequence
to VSRResNet. We compute the resulting PSNR values
obtained by VSRResNet when evaluated on the Myanmar
test frames and the VidSet4 test dataset and report
these in table II.
VSRResNet-cfo
difference
∆PSNR (dB)
Myanmar-x2
Myanmar-x3
Myanmar-x4
VidSet4-x2
VidSet3-x3
VidSet4-x4
TABLE II: Comparison of VSRResNet when using as input a sequence of frames versus the center frame only
(VSRResNet-cfo). We report results for both the Myanmar
and VidSet 4 datasets. The difference column is computed
by subtracting the results of VSRResNet when using the
center frame only from the results of using the whole input
(a) 32.08/0.9068/0.0805
(b) 33.31/0.9277/0.0570
(c) 30.73/0.8669/0.1160
(d) 32.11/0.9030/0.0749
(e) 35.10/0.9503/0.0417
(f) 37.43/0.9668/0.0322
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of VSRNet (ﬁgures (a), (c), and (e)) and VSRResNet (ﬁgures (b), (d), and (f)) for scale
factor 3. The weights for the VSRNet model that produces these images were provided by the authors of . By zooming
in the selected regions large differences can be observed. In this ﬁgure and the rest of the ﬁgures in this paper, the three
numbers in the caption below each frame correspond to the PSNR/SSIM/PercepDist metrics computed for that frame.
As shown in Table II, a large drop in the PSNR value is observed for both test sequences at all scale factors, more than
3 dB for the upscale factor of 2 on the Myanmar test dataset.
This result suggests that VSRResNet successfully uses the
motion in the input LR frame sequence to predict the center
frame. We emphasize here that even though VSRResNet
was trained on the Myanmar video dataset, which contains
relatively small motion in between frames, it still efﬁciently
uses the fast motion ﬁeld present in the VidSet4 frames, as
Table II clearly indicates. In this table we also present the
results obtained from the EDSR network , which uses a
deep residual architecture similar to ours, trained for superresolving still images. We generated the super-resolved
frames by EDSR using the ofﬁcial Pytorch repository
available at 
and computed the corresponding PSNR values in MATLAB.
The results in Table II indicate that the EDSR network
outperforms the VSRResNet for still image inputs quantitatively. However, for video sequences with motion it performs worse than the VSRResNet model that takes in temporally consecutive frames as input (except for Myanmar-x4).
This experiment suggests two paths to improve our model:
either to detect motionless sequences for which to use still
image SR methods or alter its architecture to better handle
motionless sequences.
C. Comparison with state-of-the-art DNNs
While the PSNR metric is the de facto standard metric for
assessing the performance of an image restoration model,
recent super-resolution literature has shown that the PSNR
metric does not always provide an accurate assessment of
the perceptual quality of images produced by deep neural
networks. On the other hand, the family of discriminative
Convolutional Neural Networks has been shown to learn
features that seem to be positively correlated to the human’s
assessment of perceptual quality (e.g., ). This suggests
that the representations learned by CNNs may be capable of
providing us with a suitable metric for assessing the performance of an image restoration model. Recently, Zhang et al.
 have trained a convolutional neural network to predict
the perceptual similarity between a reference image and a
distorted one , where the correct labels were obtained
from large subjective studies. As a result of the training, the
CNN learns to output a distance value between the ground
truth and the distorted images. The smaller the distance
between the two images, the better the perceptual quality of
the distorted image. The authors found that the predictions
provided by these neural networks agreed with the human
judgement regarding the quality of a given image.
To accurately assess the quality of the images produced
by our VSRResFeatGAN, we choose to use this metric,
which we denote in this paper as the PercepDist metric.
To compute the PerceptDist metric, we use the github
repository provided by the authors of , which contains
the required pre-trained CNN model weights and evaluation
code that computes the "distance" between two images.
When using this metric for evaluating the performance of
VSR systems, the image pair corresponds to the ground
truth frame and the super-resolved frame outputted by our
proposed model.
Equipped with this new metric, we now compare the
performance of our VSRResFeatGAN model with multiple
state-of-the-art VSR models. These include the VSR neural
network proposed by Tao et al. , which is based on
a convolution-LSTM neural network with efﬁcient motion
compensation on the input learned jointly within the network. In the rest of this paper, we refer to their work as
SPMC-VSR. We also compare our model with two additional competing state-of-the-art VSR models: the VESPCN
network proposed by and the Temporal Adaptive Net
proposed by . The VESPCN network incorporates
temporal information into the VSR network by performing motion compensation on the past and future frames,
and uses a sub-pixel convolution to pre-process the input
frames in low-resolution space. The Temporal Adaptive Net
 consists of a network with multiple SR branches, each
responsible for super-resolving the frames at a temporal
scale. A temporal modulation branch is then responsible
for fusing the multiple VSR solutions into a single one. We
also compare our model against two powerful SR models
for still images: (1) the state-of-the-art image SR model
proposed by Kim et al. , referred as VDSR in this
paper, and the (2) SRGAN model , which uses a GANbased loss similarly to our model. The VDSR network 
corresponds to a very deep convolutional neural network
with twenty layers trained to predict residuals between
the low-resolution image and the unknown high-resolution
image. The SRGAN model is based on a deep residual
neural network which was trained in an adversarial setting.
downsampled
test the SPMC-VSR model proposed in , we use
the model weights and test code made available by
the authors at 
super-resolve
factor 3 being unavailable, we use the results reported
in the paper . The VidSet4 frames super-resolved
by VESPCN and the Temporal Adaptive Net 
were found at 
and dingliu2/videoSR/, respectively. To test the VDSR model proposed in , we use
the code available at and use their provided model weights to upscale the
VidSet4 sequence. Finally, the model weights of SRGAN
being publicly unavailable, we use a third party source
( to load the SRGAN
model and evaluate its performance on scale factors 2 and
4. Given the super-resolved frames provided by the various
models we wish to evaluate, we compute the PSNR, SSIM
and PercepDist metric for each model. The results of our
computations are shown in table III.
Multiple observations can be made from table III. First,
we ﬁnd that our VSRResNet model, without applying motion compensation on its input, surpasses the state-of-theart NN-based systems for scale factors of 2 and 3, both in
terms of PSNR and SSIM. We argue that the VSRResNet’s
performance slightly decreases for scale factor of 4 due to
the lack of helpful motion details which occurs as a result
of the large downscaling factor. In Figures 5 and 6, we
provide a comparison of the estimated frames obtained by
VSRResNet and the SPMC-VSR for scale factors of 2 and
4. These qualitative results agree with the values shown in
Table III, which together show that the VSRResNet network
is more successful at super-resolving frames for the scale
factor 2, but not as successful for scale factor 4.
Table III shows that while the VSRResNet model outperforms all other SR models in terms of PSNR for scales 2
and 3, the VSRResFeatGAN model is the favored model for
producing visually pleasing frames, as determined by the
PerceptDist measure. In fact, VSRResFeatGAN outperforms
VSRResNet, SPMC-VSR , VESPCN , and Temporal
Adaptive Net networks consistently across all scale
factors (in addition to surpassing the models trained for
still image SR). In addition, its PercepDist measure is much
higher than that of the SRGAN model, which also uses
a GAN-based training meant to increase the perceptual
quality of the resulting images.
To directly assess the qualitative effect of perceptual and
VSRResFeatGAN
Temporal Adaptive Net
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
PSNR (dB)/SSIM
31.87/0.9426
30.90/0.9241
30.92/0.9235
31.61/0.9335
29.24/0.9128
27.80/0.8571
26.53/0.8148
27.49/0.84
26.65/0.8091
27.25/0.8253
25.51/0.7530
24.50/0.7023
25.63/0.7709
25.05/0.7292
23.58/0.7050
25.35/0.7309
25.53/0.7475
VSRResFeatGAN
Temporal Adaptive Net
PercepDist 
PercepDist
PercepDist
PercepDist
PercepDist
PercepDist
PercepDist
TABLE III: Comparison with state-of-the-art for VidSet4 dataset on scale factors 2, 3, and 4. The ﬁrst table uses PSNR and
SSIM and the second table uses the Perceptual Distance as deﬁned in . Smaller Perceptual Distance metrics implies
better perceptual quality. We were unable to compute the PerceptDist metric for the SPMC-SR model for scale factor
3 as these model weights were not made available by the authors.
adversarial losses, we show in ﬁgure 7 a comparison of selected test Myanmar frames estimated by VSRResNet versus
those obtained by VSRResFeatGAN for the scale factor 4.
Interestingly, while the VSRResNet has a higher PSNR value
that VSRResFeatGAN for this scale factor (table III), the
frames of VSRResFeatGAN look much sharper. Fine details
and textures are recovered in the case of VSRResFeatGAN,
whereas these regions are left blurry by VSRResNet. With
the signiﬁcant increase in sharpness, one may note that a
subtle amount of distortion is simultaneously introduced in
the super-resolved frames of VSRResFeatGAN. This is not an
unexpected behavior of GAN models, as these models tend
to generate small artifacts, even when strongly regularized
with perceptual losses like ours. It may be the case that
these artifacts originate from the feature loss’s tendency to
generate strong grid-like patterns in the frames, which are
then further used and distorted by the GAN to provide highfrequency information to the discriminator. The question
of whether the subtle artifacts in the frame cancel out
the visually pleasing effect of the sharpening is subjective
and left to the reader’s own assessment. However, even if
undesired artifacts are introduced in the outputted frame,
the PercepDist still favors the VSRResFeatGAN solution over
the traditional MSE-based approaches. We conclude from
these qualitative and quantitative results that the use of a
combination of perceptual and adversarial losses can have a
very signiﬁcant impact on the resulting quality of the frame.
Furthermore, not only does the VSRResFeatGAN model
outperforms the VSRResNet model in terms of the PerceptDist measure, Table III shows that it also outperforms
by a large margin the state-of-the-art VSR models in ,
 , and . In Figures 8 and 9, we qualitatively compare
the results of VSRResFeatGAN with those provided by the
SPMC-VSR and the Temporal Adaptive Net in .
We focus on these two VSR models as they provide the
best PSNR and PercepDist metrics after VSRResFeatGAN
in Table III. The particularly sharp quality observed in
the VSRResFeatGAN frames is consistent with its superior
metrics seen in Table III. More speciﬁcally, the ’walk’ frame
in Figure 8 shows that the solution obtained by VSRRes-
FeatGAN is less blurry than the frame provided by SPMC-
SR and the Temporal Adaptive Net . The small
distortions introduced from the adversarial loss are most
evident in the ’city’ frame (Figure 9), in which a strong
dot-like pattern is added to the straight lines deﬁning the
building architectures. In Figures 10 and 11, we compare the
VSRResFeatGAN models with state-of-the-art still image SR
models, more particularly the VDSR and the SRGAN
 networks. The frame in Figure 10 shows the success of
our network in sharpening the text printed on the calendar.
Finally, the car and leafy trees in Figure 11 are less blurry
than in the solution proposed by the VDSR and the
SRGAN networks.
While the lower PSNR/SSIM values for VSRResFeatGAN
may imply lower performance, the qualitative comparison
described above, in addition to the ﬁgures provided in this
paper, clearly suggest that using the PSNR/SSIM metrics
may not always accurately assess the performance of a SR
model. Instead, our results show that using a learning-based
perceptual metric such as the PercepDist introduced here
may be more appropriate for comparing the various models
in a fairly manner. The signiﬁcantly low values of the PercepDist metric for the VSRResFeatGAN models imply that
it is largely successful at providing SR estimates of visually
pleasing quality, and more importantly, is consistent with
the observations made from the qualitative results shown
in the ﬁgures of this paper. Overall, our quantitative and
qualitative results show the beneﬁts of using an adversarial
approach for training DNNs for VSR along with strong
regularization with the use of feature-based losses.
D. Training Observations
To conclude this section, we describe in more detail the
effect of using the Charbonnier loss as a substitude to
the l2 loss, and using the weights from VSRResFeatGAN-u2
instead of those of the VSRResNet model for scale factor 4.
We show that these training design decisions improve the
adversarial training procedure and lead to frames of higher
perceptual quality.
1) The effect of the Charbonnier loss during training: We
introduced the use of the Charbonnier loss to measure the
distance between an estimated patch and its corresponding
ground truth in pixel and feature-space in Section III-C.
Other works have chosen to use the l2 loss ∥ˆx−Gθ(Y)∥2
(a) 31.26/0.9248/0.1058
(b) 32.26/0.9442/0.0278
(c) 25.49/0.8713/0.1276
(d) 26.85/0.9072/0.0488
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of SPMC (ﬁgures (a), (c)) vs. VSRResNet (ﬁgures (b), (d)) with zoomed-in
regions of VidSet4 for scale factor two. The three numbers in the caption underneath each frame correspond to the
PSNR/SSIM/PercepDist metrics computed for that frame.
computing this distance. We compare these two approaches
in a controlled setting by replacing the Charbonnier loss
term in equation 3 with the l2 distance. We evaluate
the effect of each by plotting the loss function of the
discriminator during adversarial training, which we show in
Figure 12. As demonstrated in Figure 12, the Charbonnier
loss provides a more stable alternative to the adversarial
training than the l2 loss. With the use of the latter loss
function, the discriminator loss converges to values near
zero. This indicates that using the l2 loss to regularize the
generator results in the network generating patterns which
are easily detected by the discriminator. On the other hand,
when using the Charbonnier loss, the discriminator loss
decreases much more steadily, which implies successful
learning between the two adversarial networks. Therefore
we conclude that the Charbonnier loss acts as an effective
regularizer for controlling the learning dynamics between
the generator and the discriminator, providing a more stable
alternative to the l2 loss. The reason for this may be due
to its particular robustness to small details, as observed
in the super-resolution literature (e.g., ). This ability to
better super-resolve small details than the l2 loss is what
makes the discriminator’s task slightly more difﬁcult, which
in return facilitates the subsequent learning of the generator
2) Transfer
VSRResFeatGAN-u2
VSRResFeatGAN-u4:
When training VSRResFeatGAN for
super-resolving HR frames downsampled by scale factor
4, we found that the quality in the frame estimated by
VSRResFeatGAN could greatly improve by initializing the
training process with weights obtained from the trained
VSRResFeatGAN for the SR task of scale factor 2. This form
of transfer learning places the VSRResFeatGAN weights
at a good position in parameter space at the beginning
of the training process, providing the generator with
more leeway to learn accurate SR functions with fewer
artifacts. We show the visual effect of setting the initial
weights of the VSRResFeatGAN trained for scale factor 2
(a) 25.87/0.7227/0.2492
(b) 25.43/0.7020/0.2535
(c) 21.68/0.6818/0.2540
(d) 21.34/0.6640/0.2432
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison of SPMC (ﬁgures (a), (c)) vs. VSRResNet (ﬁgures (b), (d)) with zoomed-in regions
of VidSet4 for scale factor four.
to that of scale factor 4 in Figure 13. The ﬁgure reveals
that much of the strong dot-like pattern originating from
the adversarial loss is attenuated when using weight
transferring from the VSRResFeatGAN training with scale
factor 2. Figure 14 shows a comparison of the discriminator
and generator loss functions during training. The larger
values of the loss function for the discriminator shows
that the network has a slightly harder time distinguishing
the generated HR patches from the ground truth ones.
This implies that the generator generates patches of higher
perceptual quality, resulting in the loss function with
smaller values, as seen in the right part of Figure 14,
which shows the generator’s loss function. In conclusion,
these experiments reveal that by appropriately trasferring
weights from a VSRResFeatGAN trained for a smaller scale
factor can greatly help the training of GAN models for
more challenging scale factors, which results in frames
with fewer high-frequency distortions than when not using
weight transferring.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown that training a deep
residual neural network with appropriate architectural and
loss function choices results in a signiﬁcant increase in
performance, whilst removing the need to perform motion
compensation and instead encourage the network to use
the motion information for providing better SR estimates.
We have applied perceptual losses to video super-resolution
by training our deep residual network with GAN losses
and Charbonnier distance in feature and pixel spaces. We
showed that these losses enabled the network to produce
high-resolution frames of signiﬁcantly higher perceptual
quality. In addition to using the PSNR and SSIM metrics
for comparing VSRResFeatGAN with current state-of-theart models, we used the Perceptual Distance metric ( ) to
provide a comparison of the solutions provided by various
super-resolution models. We found out that frames of sharp
quality that would have been qualiﬁed as blurry according
to the PSNR metric would in fact achieve a high score with
the Perceptual Distance metric.
(a) 30.61/0.8698/0.1002
(b) 28.83/0.8041/0.0814
(c) 34.07/0.9392/0.0537
(d) 32.34/0.9164/0.0302
Figure 7: Qualitative comparison of VSRResNet (ﬁgures (a), (c)) vs. VSRResFeatGAN (ﬁgures (b), (d)) for scale factor 4
with zoomed-in regions of the Myanmar frames.
While the VSRResNetGAN model is successful at providing sharpened SR estimates to a large degree, it could be
further improved by reducing the noise introduced in the
estimated frames as a result of the adversarial training. One
solution to this would be to constrain the VSRResFeatGAN
model to learn SR mappings that are consistent with the
mathematical formulation of the VSR problem at hand.
This approach may be seen as a way to combine the SR
knowledge explicitly used by analytical methods with the
powerful ability of GAN-based neural networks, to produce
solutions of pleasing visual quality.
(b) 28.83/0.8696/0.0943
(c) 28.37/0.8599/0.0888
(d) 27.39/0.8343/0.0457
Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of (a) ground truth frame, (b) SPMC-VSR vs. (c) Temporal Adaptive Net 
and (d) VSRResFeatGAN for scale factor 4, with zoomed in regions. The frame belongs to the ’walk’ sequence of the
VidSet4 dataset.
(b) 26.56/0.7303/0.1691
(c) 26.32/0.7128/0.1782
(d) 25.53/0.6652/0.1305
Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of (a) ground truth frame, (b) SPMC-VSR vs. (c) Temporal Adaptive Net 
and (d) VSRResFeatGAN for scale factor 4, with zoomed in regions. The frame belongs to the ’city’ sequence of the
VidSet4 dataset.
(b) 21.33/0.6658/0.2138
(c) 21.37/0.6547/0.1907
(d) 21.68/0.7011/0.1272
Figure 10: Qualitative comparison of the (a) ground truth frame, (b) VDSR , (c) SRGAN vs. (d) VSRResFeatGAN
for scale factor 4, with zoomed in regions. The frame belongs to the ’calendar’ sequence of the VidSet4 dataset.
(b) 24.51/0.6469/0.2611
(c) 24.34/0.6375/0.2281
(d) 23.09/0.5694/0.1259
Figure 11: Qualitative comparison of the (a) ground truth frame, (b) VDSR , (c) SRGAN vs. (d) VSRResFeatGAN
for scale factor 4, with zoomed in regions. The frame belongs to the ’foliage’ sequence of the VidSet4 dataset.
Figure 12: The effect of using the Charbonnier loss instead of the standard MSE as regularization during adversarial
training leads to a more stable training procedure. When using MSE, the discriminator quickly learns to distinguish
super-resolved patches from ground truth ones, which results in limited learning for the generator.
(a) 26.62/0.8167/0.0539
(b) 27.39/0.8354/0.0457
Figure 13: A comparison of initial VSRResFeatGAN’s weights for scale factor 4 (ﬁgure (a)) with those of the converged
VSRResFeatGAN for scale factor 2 (ﬁgure (b)), with zoomed in regions. The dot-like artifacts originating from the GAN
training are greatly attenuated when using weight transferring from scale factor 2.
Figure 14: The effect on the loss functions of the discriminator (left) and generator (right) of using the weights from
VSRResFeatGAN pre-trained on scale factor 2, vs. starting with the VSRResNet weights pre-trained on scale factor 4.