Initial validation of the general attitudes
towards Artificial Intelligence Scale
Schepman, Astrid; Rodway, Paul
Schepman, A. & Rodway, P. . Initial validation of the general
attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale. Computers in
Human Behavior Reports, 1, 100014. 
j.chbr.2020.100014
Computers in Human Behavior Reports
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Download date
26/03/2025 15:32:33
Item License
 
Link to Item
 
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Initial validation of the General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale
Astrid Schepman and Paul Rodway
Department of Psychology, University of Chester.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dr Astrid
Schepman, School of Psychology, University of Chester, Parkgate Road, Chester,
Cheshire, CH1 4BJ, United Kingdom. Email: 
Acknowledgement: We are grateful to Dr Claudine Clucas for her advice on
Exploratory Factor Analysis and Unidimensionality Assessment.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
A new General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale (GAAIS) was
developed. The scale underwent initial statistical validation via Exploratory Factor
Analysis, which identified positive and negative subscales. Both subscales captured
emotions in line with their valence. In addition, the positive subscale reflected
societal and personal utility, whereas the negative subscale reflected concerns. The
scale showed good psychometric indices and convergent and discriminant validity
against existing measures. To cross-validate general attitudes with attitudes towards
specific instances of AI applications, summaries of tasks accomplished by specific
applications of Artificial Intelligence were sourced from newspaper articles. These
were rated for comfortableness and perceived capability. Comfortableness with
specific applications was a strong predictor of general attitudes as measured by the
GAAIS, but perceived capability was a weaker predictor. Participants viewed AI
applications involving big data (e.g. astronomy, law, pharmacology) positively, but
viewed applications for tasks involving human judgement, (e.g. medical treatment,
psychological counselling) negatively. Applications with a strong ethical dimension
led to stronger discomfort than their rated capabilities would predict. The survey data
suggested that people held mixed views of AI. The initially validated two-factor
GAAIS to measure General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence is included in the
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Psychometrics, Questionnaire, Index, Attitudes,
Perception
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Highlights
• The General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale was validated
• Attitudes towards AI differ from traditional technology acceptance
• Comfortableness and capability for specific AI applications were measured
• AI for big data was rated higher than AI for complex human judgements
• Attitudes towards AI were affected by ethical judgements
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is growing at a fast pace and permeates many
aspects of people’s daily lives, both in personal and professional settings
 . People’s general attitudes towards AI are
likely to play a large role in their acceptance of AI. An important aim of our study was
to develop a tool by which general attitudes toward AI could be measured in practical
and research contexts, and to explore the conceptual aspects of such a tool. This
took the form of an initial conceptual and statistical validation of a new scale. A
further aim was to document current general attitudes and attitudes towards specific
exemplars of AI applications.
To support our aims, we inspected recent literature to look for major themes that
could inform the creation of our scale items. We first discuss qualitative studies.
Anderson, Rainie, and Luchsinger , asked 979 experts for their views on the
following question “As emerging algorithm-driven artificial intelligence (AI) continues
to spread, will people be better off than they are today?”. The respondents’ collective
views were mixed, identifying both benefits (e.g. enhanced effectiveness) and
threats (e.g. data abuse, job losses, threats to human agency). Cave, Coughlan, and
Dihan examined AI narratives produced by a representative sample of the UK
population. They quantified the incidence of “Hopes” (e.g. AI making life easier) and
“Fears” (e.g. AI taking over or replacing humans). They found a preponderance of
negative views, in which narratives featuring dystopian expectations of AI’s future
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
impact prevailed. In contrast, Fast and Horvitz analysed news reports in the
New York Times on AI over three decades, and noted increased reporting from
2009, with a general increase in optimism in the reporting, yet also with marked
increases in concerns (e.g. loss of control, ethical issues, impact on work). Together,
these works suggested contrasting positive and negative themes, which were held
by experts, the general public, and the media alike.
Recent large-scale quantitative surveys reported similar mixed views and echoed
the same broad themes. In a survey of UK attitudes towards machine learning
 , the public perceived opportunities, but also
expressed concerns regarding harm, impersonal experiences, choice restriction, and
replacement. Zhang and Dafoe’s survey of US citizens’ attitudes towards
AI, examined applications in wide use (e.g. Siri, Google), and future applications
likely to impact widely on society (e.g. use of AI in privacy protection, cyber attack
prevention, etc.). Their findings provided a mixture of support and concerns
regarding AI. Overall, more participants (42%) supported AI than opposed it
(22%), yet caution was expressed by 82%, who felt, for example, that robots
should be managed carefully. Carrasco, Mills, Whybrew, and Jura’s BCG
Digital Government Benchmarking survey obtained similar data, with people being
more accepting of AI for some applications (e.g. traffic optimisation), than for others
(e.g. parole board decisions). Interestingly, Carrasco et al suggested that AI may
have been preferred to humans in countries where trust in governments may be low.
Preferences for AI over humans has also been observed in different context, related
to expertise, in a phenomenon named “algorithm appreciation” . Issues regarding employee displacement, ethics, and non-transparent
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
decision making were among the public’s concerns. Edelman identified
similar themes, alongside concerns about AI exacerbating wealth inequalities, loss of
intelligent behaviour in humans, increase in social isolation, and the threat of abuses
of power by malevolent actors (e.g. using deepfake material to spread
misinformation). Overall, recent large surveys reported a range of positive and
negative attitudes towards AI, echoing the key themes of the qualitative studies.
Other studies in the literature explored more specific aspects of AI perceptions in
more depth. A selection is discussed here. One perceived negative aspect of AI is
potential job displacement. Frey and Osborne generated computerisability
scores for 702 occupations, with many of those being highly computerisable. Chui,
Manyika, and Miremadi carried out an analysis with a similar aim but a
different methodology, and also identified a range of jobs at risk of automation, as
did White, Lacey and Ardanaz-Badia . Naturally, this may cause negative
emotions towards AI. However, Granulo, Fuchs, and Puntoni found that,
although people had negative emotions if they imagined other people’s jobs being
replaced by robots, they would feel less negative it if their own jobs were replaced by
robots when compared to their jobs being replaced by other people. Together, these
works suggest that jobs with highly predictable tasks may indeed be automated, so
people’s concerns for their future employment might be accurate.
As noted, AI can also trigger ethical concerns, as illustrated from Fenech, Strukelj,
and Buston , who showed divided views on the use of AI in medical diagnosis
in a representative UK sample (45% for, 34% against, 21% don’t know). Similar
divisions applied to comfortableness with personal medical information being used in
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
AI (40% comfortable vs. 49% uncomfortable, 11% don’t know). A majority was
against the use of AI in tasks usually performed by medical staff, such as answering
medical questions, suggesting treatments (17% for, 63% against, 20% don’t know).
Vayena, Blasimme, and Cohen explored what could be done in response to a
majority of the UK public feeling uncomfortable with the use of AI and machine
learning in medical settings. They concluded that trust in these applications needed
to be promoted by data protection, freedom from bias in decision making,
appropriate regulation, and transparency . In all, these studies illustrated
comfortableness, emotional reactions, perceived capability, ethical considerations,
and trust as important themes. They also showed the mixed pattern of views that
emerged from the more global survey studies and qualitative studies. Altogether,
many important positive and negative views of AI were identified in prior studies, and
these have informed the generation of items used in our scale.
1.2. The present study: A scale and allied measures
Our study’s aim was to conduct initial exploratory work towards a measurement tool
with which general attitudes towards AI could be gauged in different contexts.
Although instruments have been developed that measure people’s acceptance of
technology , most of these do not
focus on AI, whose acceptance may be different in key dimensions. Technology
Acceptance is a construct that focuses primarily on the user’s
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
willingness to adopt technology through a consumer choice. However, frequently,
consumer choice is not a factor in the application of AI, because large organisations
and governments may decide to adopt AI without consulting with their end users,
who therefore have no choice but to engage with it. For this reason, traditional
technology acceptance measures might not be ideal to measure attitudes towards
A more recently developed general technology scale is the Technology Readiness
Index. It was revised several times, but we focus on a version by Lam, Chiang, and
Parasuraman . This Index contains some elements that make it better placed
to capture key aspects of AI, but it also has some elements that may be less suited.
Lam et al.’s Technology Readiness Index has four subscales; Innovativeness,
exemplified by a sample item “You keep up with the latest technological
developments in your areas of interest”, Optimism, e.g. “Technology gives people
more control over their daily lives”, Discomfort, e.g. “Sometimes you think that
technology systems are not designed for use by ordinary people”, and Insecurity,
e.g. “You do not consider it safe to do any kind of financial business online”. These
subscales provide an interesting mixture of measures that correspond mostly to the
individual user experience (Innovativeness, Discomfort), and measures that primarily
capture reactions to technology being used more widely in society (Optimism,
Insecurity). We used the Technology Readiness Index to test for convergent and
discriminant validity with our new scale, hypothesising that there would be stronger
associations of our measures with the societally-based than the individually-based
subscales of the Technology Readiness Index, because AI is outside the end user’s
own control.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Additionally, in the second part of our study, we measured participants’ views
towards specific applications of AI. An important aim of this part of the study was to
cross-validate the general attitudes using an independent contemporary objective
measure. During the formation of general attitudes, the generalisations that people
arrive at may be biased by cognitive heuristics . This can
be caused by overgeneralisations being based on too few instances. It can also be
caused by generalisations not having been informed by specific instances, but, for
example, by general media coverage. Both causes can make generalisations
inaccurate. Asking individuals to make judgements about specific exemplars can
help overcome this. Moreover, providing specific exemplars of a general technology
is likely to facilitate the person in expressing views of that technology. This is
because it may be easier to think of the implications. In addition, their views may
form in less abstract and more concrete ways. In this part of the data it was not our
aim to produce a scale, but to discover latent factors in the data to create composite
measures for cross-validation purposes. Our reasoning was that convergence
between the general and specific AI measures would strengthen confidence in the
general scale. The survey data are also of more general interest as a gauge of
current attitudes towards AI and its specific applications. Another important aim
behind the discovery of latent factor structures in specific applications was that it
would allow for important conceptual insights about any groupings in participants’
perceptions.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
2.1. Ethics
The study was approved by the Department of Psychology Ethics Committee at our
institution and complied with the British Psychological Society’s Code of
Human Research Ethics (2nd edition).
2.2. Recruitment, participants and demographic information
2.2.1. Recruitment
Data were collected in May 2019 via Prolific ( an online
participant database based in the UK. Participants were payed £1.75 shortly after
completion.
2.2.2. Participants
Data from 100 participants were collected, 50 male, 50 female, who were nonstudents, residing in the UK and aged over 18. Data from one male participant were
removed because he did not answer any of the 11 attention checks correctly (see
Section 2.3.5), suggesting that the remaining questions may not have been read
properly. We focused on workers, because they were likely to be affected by AI in
both their personal sphere and their employment setting , and therefore formed a useful dualpurpose sample. One participant had indicated employment in the Prolific sample
filtering fields, but reported being unemployed at the time of the survey, the rest were
(self)-employed.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
2.2.3. Age, education, computer expertise.
The retained sample had a mean age of 36.15 years (SD = 10.25, range 20 – 64).
Their education levels and self-rated computer expertise are documented in Table 1.
--- insert Table 1 about here ---
Table 1: Education levels and self-rated computer expertise of the sample
Computer Expertise
Frequency Level (d)
0 Hardly ever use the computer and do
not feel very competent
equivalent (a)
14 Slightly below average computer user,
infrequently using the computer, using
few applications
A-level or
equivalent (b)
30 Average computer user, using the
internet, standard applications etc.
Bachelor’s
equivalent
34 User of specialist applications but not
an IT specialist
Master’s degree
or equivalent
17 Considerable IT expertise short of full
professional qualifications
Doctoral degree
or equivalent
2 Professionally qualified computer
scientist or IT specialist
Table 1 Notes:
a) GCSE is a General High School qualification usually taken at age 16
b) A-Level is a more specialised High School qualification, pre-university entry, usually taken
c) Professional qualifications, some in addition to those listed above
d) Some people chose two options, namely one both “Considerable IT expertise short of full
professional qualifications”, and “User of specialist applications but not an IT specialist”, and
two chose both “User of specialist applications but not an IT specialist” and “Average
computer user, using the internet, standard applications etc.”, included in both frequency
categories, explaining sum of 102.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
2.2.4. Occupations
We asked for occupations via an open text box, which yielded 82 different labels and
three missing responses. A large majority of the occupations were in the service
sector, in line with the wider UK economy, where around 80% of employment and
Gross Domestic Product is the service sector . We observed occupations from a wide socio-economic range (e.g.
cleaner, caretaker, linen assistant, sales assistant, security vs. academic, director,
general practitioner, lawyer, vet), suggesting that our sample included representation
from all strata. There was substantial representation from IT-related occupations.
Table 2 shows all occupations to allow readers to gain fuller insight into the range.
--- Insert Table 2 about here ---
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Table 2: Occupations named by participants
Cyber security
specialist
Lab assistant
Revenue accountant
Account manager
Data analyst
Data entry
Linen assistant
Sales advisor
Administration and
finance officer
Design engineer
Marketing manager
Sales assistant (2)
Administrator (4)
Mechanical engineer
Armed security
Director (2)
Mortgage broker
Senior project officer
Assistant manager
Education consultant Nurse
Systems administrator
Assurance team lead Engineer
Nurse specialist
Software engineer (2)
Bank manager
Event manager (2)
Office admin assistant
Teacher (3)
Behaviour officer
Office administrator
Technical support
Finance assistant
Office manager
Technical trainer
Finance officer
Online retailer
Technician
Careers adviser
Food retail
Transport coordinator
General practitioner PA
Transport manager
Civil servant
Graphic designer
Photographer
Cleaner (2)
Investment manager Property management
Receptionist (3)
Warehouse clerk
Commercial assistant IT analyst
Residential support worker Warehouse supervisor
Compliance manager IT supervisor
Restaurant manager
Web designer
Business consultant
IT technician (2)
Retail assistant
Writer (3)
Customer service
Table 2 Note: Occupations in alphabetical order, with occupations named more than
once showing the number of occurrences.
2.3. Measures
2.3.1. Overview
In this section we describe the design of three new measures. We also briefly outline
one validated measure chosen from the literature.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
2.3.2. General attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
A variety of items reflecting manifestations of attitudes towards AI were generated,
and subsequently evaluated by the authors for coverage, fit, clarity of expression,
and suitability for a wide audience. We generated items that reflected the positive
and negative themes identified from the literature (Section 1.1), creating 16 positive
items (opportunities, benefits, positive emotions), and 16 negative items (concerns
and negative emotions). It was important that the statements captured attitudes
towards AI in general terms, abstracting away from specific applications, settings, or
narrow time windows. Example items included “There are many beneficial
applications of Artificial Intelligence” “Artificial Intelligence is exciting” (positive), “I
think artificially intelligent systems make many errors” “I shiver with discomfort when
I think about future uses of Artificial Intelligence” (negative). Trust was captured in
e.g. “Artificial Intelligence is used to spy on people”, “I would entrust my life savings
to an artificially intelligent investment system”. All items were phrased to be suitable
for responses to a five-point Likert scale with the anchors strongly/somewhat
(dis)agree and neutral.
2.3.3. Specific AI applications for comfortableness and capability ratings
To create a set of specific applications of AI for participants to rate, we gathered
news stories that reported recent developments in artificial intelligence. The stories
were sourced by searching for “Artificial Intelligence” on the websites of three quality
UK newspapers (The Guardian, The Independent, The Financial Times) in late
February 2019. Hits were classed as relevant if they described specific applications
of AI. We used our judgement to exclude stories that overlapped with others, or that
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
may be ethically problematic by being potentially distressing to participants. This
process yielded 42 news stories, 14 from each newspaper. We produced brief oneline summaries of the tasks that the artificially intelligent systems were able to
perform, and these formed items in the study. The items can be found in Appendix A,
alongside URLs linking to the source newspaper articles.
2.3.4. Technology Readiness Index
We selected a validated scale to measure attitudes towards technology, namely the
Technology Readiness Index, opting for a short version with 18 items . This scale is psychometrically strong and well-used. It has
four subscales (Innovativeness, Optimism, Discomfort, and Insecurity). The scale
has been shown to predict user interactions with technology products, with its
subscales having separate predictive power. Innovativeness and Discomfort are
more closely related to individual user experiences, and Optimism and Insecurity
more to the use of technology in society.
2.3.5. Attention checks
To assure the quality of the data, we used 11 attention checks embedded throughout
all questionnaires. In some, a particular response was requested e.g. “We would be
grateful if you could select somewhat comfortable”, with such items varying in their
phrasing and requested responses. In the scales that used agreement responses we
used factual questions by way of attention checks. Participants could agree or
disagree with these (e.g. “You believe that London is a city”; “A chair is an animal”).
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
2.4. Procedure
Participants gave their informed consent. As part of the general consent, the
following information was given: “This study investigates people’s perceptions of
Artificial Intelligence (computing-based intelligent systems). We ask you to rate your
views on artificially intelligent systems and technology more generally. At the end,
you have the option of adding brief comments. There are no right or wrong answers.
We are interested in your personal views.” Other informed consent features were
more general and complied with general British Psychological Society Ethical
Guidelines.
Participants then completed each questionnaire in turn via JISC Online Surveys
software. We used built-in data checks to ensure each question had exactly one
answer, to minimise missing data. A “prefer not to answer” option was available. We
told participants that there would be attention checks.
We issued separate instructions for each scale, and there were varying response
options. For the General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence we stated: “We are
interested in your attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence. By Artificial Intelligence we
mean devices that can perform tasks that would usually require human intelligence.
Please note that these can be computers, robots or other hardware devices, possibly
augmented with sensors or cameras, etc. Please complete the following scale,
indicating your response to each item.” Response options were left-to-right “strongly
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
disagree; somewhat disagree; neutral; somewhat agree; strongly agree”. Items were
in the same random order for each participant.
For the specific applications, we first asked “You will see a series of brief statements
of tasks that artificially intelligent systems (AI) may be able perform. Please rate how
comfortable you would feel with Artificial Intelligence performing each task.”
Response options were, left-to-right: “very uncomfortable; somewhat uncomfortable;
neutral; somewhat comfortable; very comfortable”. After all the items were rated for
comfortableness, we stated “We will show you the same items again, but this time
please rate how CAPABLE you perceive Artificial Intelligence to be compared to
humans.” Response options were, left-to-right: “AI much less capable than humans;
somewhat less; equally capable; somewhat more; AI much more capable than
humans”. Items were in the same random order for each participant, and the same
order for comfortableness and capability.
Our final scale was the Technology Readiness Index, as presented in Lam et al.
 in the same order or presentation, with the brief instruction
“on the next screen, there are some questions about your technology use in general.
Please complete the following scale, indicating your response to each item”.
Response options were, left-to-right, “strongly disagree; somewhat disagree; neutral;
somewhat agree; strongly agree”.
After that, there was an optional open comments text box, allowing for brief
comments up to 300 characters. Few respondents made use of this option, and
comments largely echoed the themes of the main questionnaires, so there is no
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
further report of these data. Finally, a debrief screen provided brief further
information about the study, the general sources of the news stories for the
application items, and sources of support in the unlikely event this was needed. The
entire procedure including ethics processes and debriefing took participants just
under 19 minutes on average.
3. Results
3.1. Data preparation and treatment of missing quantitative data
Because of the use of technical settings to minimise missing data, the only missing
data were cases in which participants had chosen “prefer not to answer”. Use of this
option was relatively rare, with overall 136 data points of 13266 or 1% missing. To
ready the data for analysis, verbal labels constituting the answer provided were
changed to numerical values 1 to 5, with leftmost options 1, rightmost options 5 in
the first instance (see Section 2.4). Missing data points were replaced with the grand
mean for the relevant block, rounded to the nearest integer, in all cases 3 (“neutral”).
Rounding to the nearest integer was chosen in preference to exact values to avoid
minor fractional discrepancies in means when some data were scored as unreversed
in some analyses, and reversed in others. In practice, means were only a fraction
removed from these rounded integers, and in light of the small proportion of missing
data this rounding had minimal impact.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.2. Overview of analyses
We present data from the General Attitudes towards AI questions first, followed by
data from the specific applications of AI, for which comfortableness and perceived
capability were measured. For each subset of the data, a series of analytic
techniques were used. Fine-grained frequency data are presented, because these
are likely of interest for those working in AI. They also calibrate our findings to those
from other surveys. We then report Exploratory Factor Analysis and allied statistics.
For the General Attitudes the Factor Analysis was used to validate the scale. For the
ratings of specific applications, the aim was not to produce a scale, but to find factors
to aid understanding, support dimension reduction, and produce composite
measures to cross-validate the GAAIS. Full data are available via the Supplementary
Materials.
3.3. General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.3.1. Descriptive statistics: Frequencies
We report frequency categories of agreement visually, at this stage in unreversed
form to aid interpretability. To ensure that the visualisations were interpretable, we
combined (dis)agreement from the “strongly” and “somewhat” levels, retained the
neutral category, and plotted the frequencies of categories in Figure 1 (positive
statements) and Figure 2 (negative statements).
--- Insert Figures 1 and 2 about here ---
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
As can be seen, participants endorsed some positive statements with high
frequency, e.g. that there would be many beneficial applications of AI, but
participants were less ready to declare AI to be better than humans at complex
decisions. In the negative items, many felt that AI might threaten job security, but few
instinctively disliked AI or found it sinister.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Figure 1: Frequencies of responses to positive statements in the General Attitudes
to Artificial Intelligence questionnaire
Figure 1 Note: Disagreement and agreement combine the “somewhat” and
“strongly” categories of (dis)agreement. Disagreement is presented in orange at the
left of the bars, neutral in white, centrally, and agreement in green as the rightmost
part of the bars. N = 99, and bars contain raw frequencies. The last word in the
truncated item starting “For routine transactions…” is “…humans”.
I would entrust my life savings to an artificially
intelligent investment system.
I love everything about Artificial Intelligence.
Some complex decisions are best left to
artificially intelligent systems.
Artificially intelligent systems can help people
feel happier.
I would like to use Artificial Intelligence in my
An artificially intelligent agent would be better
than an employee in many routine jobs.
Artificial intelligence makes me feel great about
human ingenuity.
For routine transactions, I would rather interact
with an artificially intelligent system than with…
I am interested in using artificially intelligent
systems in my daily life.
Much of society will benefit from a future full of
Artificial Intelligence.
Artificially intelligent systems can perform better
than humans.
Artificial Intelligence can provide new economic
opportunities for this country.
Artificial Intelligence is exciting.
Artificial Intelligence can have positive impacts
on people's wellbeing.
I am impressed by what Artificial Intelligence
There are many beneficial applications of
Artificial Intelligence.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Figure 2: Frequencies of responses to negative statements in the General Attitudes
to Artificial Intelligence questionnaire
Figure 2 Note: Disagreement and agreement combine the “somewhat” and “strongly”
categories of (dis)agreement. Disagreement is presented in orange at the left of the
bars, neutral in white, centrally, and agreement in green as the rightmost part of the
bars. N = 99, and bars contain raw frequencies. The last word in the truncated item
starting “Companies just…” is “…people”.
I have an instinctive dislike of Artificial
Intelligence.
I find Artificial Intelligence sinister.
Artificially intelligent systems should only be
used for unimportant matters.
People like me will suffer if Artificial Intelligence
is used more and more.
Companies just use Artificial Intelligence to
boost their profits, with no benefits to ordinary…
I think artificially intelligent systems make many
Organisations use Artificial Intelligence
unethically.
I think Artificial Intelligence is dangerous.
I shiver with discomfort when I think about future
uses of Artificial Intelligence.
Society will just let Artificial Intelligence take
Artificial Intelligence might take control of
Artificial intelligence is limited in its abilities.
Artificial Intelligence is used to spy on people.
Artificially intelligent systems should be banned
from making life or death decisions.
I am concerned about Artificial Intelligence
applications mining my personal data.
The rise of Artificial Intelligence poses a threat
to people's job security.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.3.2. Exploratory Factor Analysis and internal consistency
We used Exploratory Factor Analysis to examine factors, and to test whether
dimension reduction and the creation of composite subscales was supported. This
process suggested two subscales along our a priori factors (positive and negative).
We conducted internal consistency analyses for the two ensuing composite
measures using Cronbach’s alpha. Before the Exploratory Factor Analysis, we first
reverse-scored the negative items, because all items needed the same polarity for
this analysis. We then examined the item correlation matrix, and identified item pairs
that were in multiple very low correlations with other items and had high associated
p-values (p > .7), removing 7 items. The remaining 25 items were entered into an
Exploratory Factor Analysis on Jamovi , with Minimum Residuals as the extraction method, and promax as
the rotation method, the latter chosen due to an expectation of correlated factors.
Items with loadings of < .4 were suppressed. Based on parallel analysis, two factors
were extracted. In this initial solution, there were four items that had low factor
loadings (< .4), and one item that cross-loaded on both factors approximately evenly.
These five items were removed, leaving 20 items. A final Exploratory Factor Analysis
was run on the 20 items that were retained. Assumption checks for the final twofactor EFA model showed a significant Bartlett’s test of Sphericity χ² = 817, df = 190,
p < .001, showing a viable correlation matrix that deviated significantly from an
identity matrix. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy (KMO MSA)
overall was .86, indicating amply sufficient sampling. The final model had twelve
items that loaded onto factor 1, i.e. positive attitudes towards AI, and eight that
loaded onto factor 2, i.e. negative views of AI. Hereby, the positivity and negativity of
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
the items assumed during their creation was statistically supported, giving the factor
structure good construct validity. In this solution the first factor accounted for 25.6%
of the variance, and the second for 15.5%, cumulatively 41.6%. Model fit measures
showed a RMSEA of .0573, 90% CI [.007, .068], TLI of .94, and the model test χ² =
182, df = 151, p = .046. These are acceptable fit measures. The final loadings are
presented in Table 3.
--- insert Table 3 about here ---
Supported by the analyses reported, we created two subscales by taking the mean
of the final retained items loading onto the relevant factors, namely positive attitudes
towards AI (α = .88) and negative attitudes towards AI (α = .83). The two factors
showed a factor correlation of .59, supporting the choice of the (oblique) promax
To evaluate whether there was a general attitudinal factor comprising both the
negative and positive subscales, we used software entitled “Factor” to assess the unidimensionality of the set of 20 items retained
following EFA. We ran a pure bifactor exploratory model with Maximum Likelihood
extraction and promax rotation. Despite a different extraction method, the same
factors were re-identified. The closeness to unidimensionality for a tentative general
factor showed Unidimensional Congruence (UniCo) = 0.672, much lower than the
.95 cut-off, and Explained Common Variance (ECV) = 0.482, much lower than the
.85 cut-off, suggesting a lack of unidimensionality, and thus suggesting an overall
scale mean should not be constructed.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Table 3: Factor loadings from the Exploratory Factor Analysis of General Attitudes
towards Artificial Intelligence data
I am interested in using artificially intelligent
systems in my daily life
There are many beneficial applications of
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence is exciting
Artificial Intelligence can provide new
economic opportunities for this country
I would like to use Artificial Intelligence in my
An artificially intelligent agent would be better
than an employee in many routine jobs
I am impressed by what Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence can have positive
impacts on people's wellbeing
Artificially intelligent systems can help people
feel happier
Artificially intelligent systems can perform
better than humans
Much of society will benefit from a future full
of Artificial Intelligence
For routine transactions, I would rather
interact with an artificially intelligent system
than with a human
I think Artificial Intelligence is dangerous
Organisations use Artificial Intelligence
unethically
I find Artificial Intelligence sinister
Artificial Intelligence is used to spy on people
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
I shiver with discomfort when I think about
future uses of Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence might take control of
I think artificially intelligent systems make
many errors
People like me will suffer if Artificial
Intelligence is used more and more
Table 3 Note: Loadings for the retained 20 items, with factor loadings onto the
positive (Pos) and negative (Neg) components, uniqueness (U, i.e. 1 minus
Communality), item-rest correlation (IRC), mean, and standard deviation (SD). Note
that negative items were reverse-scored in this analysis.
3.3. Technology Readiness Index: Internal Consistency checks
We checked the internal consistency of the pre-validated Technology Readiness
Index as it applied to our sample. We first reverse-scored the appropriate items (i.e.
the Discomfort and Insecurity subscales) and observed internal consistency metrics
as follows: Innovation, α = .87, Optimism, α = .81, Discomfort, α = .74, Insecurity, α =
.77, all acceptable to good, supporting dimension reduction to the pre-validated
subscales by calculating means across relevant items.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.4. Overall subscale means
Subscale means and SDs are in Table 4. Participants showed above neutral
attitudes towards AI for the positive subscale, with the negative subscale averaging
slightly below neutral. Our sample showed a reasonable match on the Technology
Readiness Index to the values reported by Lam et al. , with
modest deviations, suggesting good anchoring of our sample to prior samples. The
more positive aspects of technology (Innovativeness and Optimism) showed clearly
positive means, the negative aspects (Discomfort, Insecurity) were also positive, but
only just above neutral.
Table 4: Means and Standard Deviations for composite measures
General Attitudes towards AI
Positive General Attitudes towards AI
Negative General Attitudes towards AI
Technology Readiness Index
Innovativeness
Discomfort
Insecurity
Table 4 Note: Based on reverse-scoring of negative scales, so the higher the score,
the more positive the attitude, regardless of the initial polarity of the items.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.5. Convergent and discriminant validity: Correlation and regression Analyses
We computed Pearson’s correlations between the subscales of the General Attitudes
towards Artificial Intelligence, and the subscales of the Technology Readiness Index.
Correlations served an exploratory descriptive purpose, with their p-values only
being provided for reference, but not for hypothesis evaluation. Correlation
coefficients and their p-values can be seen in Table 5. Our more specific aim was to
test the prediction that the Technology Readiness Index subscales that reflected
technology in wider society would be more predictive of attitudes towards AI than the
individually-based subscales of Technology Readiness Index. To do this on a more
stringent footing than by a large number of correlations, we used multiple linear
regression. Using Jamovi, we entered data from our newly created General Attitudes
towards AI subscales, positive and negative in turn, as the criterion (dependent)
variables, and the four subscales of the Technology Readiness Index were entered
as predictor (independent) variables. Each multiple regression analysis was
preceded by assumption checks, namely an autocorrelation test, collinearity check,
inspection of the Q-Q plot of residuals, and residuals plots. All assumptions were
met. Our primary interest was in discovering whether scores on our new General
Attitudes towards AI subscales were significantly and uniquely predicted by scores
on the technology readiness subscales. We report the F and p from ANOVAs testing
the unique significant contribution for each predictor in Table 5. These regression
analyses confirmed that Technology Readiness Index measures based on individual
experiences (Innovativeness, Discomfort) did not show significant unique
contributions to the subscales of the General Attitudes towards AI, while the
Technology measures corresponding more closely to the use of technology in
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
society (Optimism, Insecurity) did. Our positive General Attitudes towards AI
subscale was significantly predicted by a positive subscale of the Technology
Readiness Index (Optimism) only, and the negative attitudes towards AI additionally
by a negative subscale (Insecurity). This supports our prediction, and underlines the
need for our new measure that captures the aspects of AI that older measures of
technology acceptance do not capture precisely. The pattern in these data provide
evidence of convergent validity as well as discriminant validity of our new scale and
subscales.
Table 5: Associations between the Technology Readiness Index and General
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale
Innovativeness
Discomfort
Insecurity
Positive General Attitudes towards AI
Negative General Attitudes towards AI
Table 5 Note: Correlations (r, p), and ANOVA tests (F, p).Technology Readiness
Index subscales are listed on the top row, and our newly constructed subscales for
General Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale are listed in the leftmost
column, N = 99. The p-values for the correlations are based on two-tailed tests with
alpha at .05. F and p are from the multiple regression’s ANOVA for the factors,
calculated with type 3 Sums of Squares, with dfs 1, 94. Please be reminded that all
negative items on both scales were reverse-scored, so the higher a score the more
positive the attitude.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.6. Specific Applications of AI: Comfortableness and perceived capability
3.6.1. Descriptive Statistics: Frequencies
We again combined the “strongly” and “somewhat” categories to aid visual
interpretation, and present frequency data for comfortableness in Figures 3A and 3B
and perceived capability of AI compared to humans in Figures 4A and 4B.
Participants were least comfortable with applications that may involve expert and
complex social understanding (e.g. psychological counselling, acting as a doctor in
general practice), while they were more comfortable with AI performing more
scientific, less personal tasks (helping detect life on other planets, using smells in
human breath to detect illness). The application with which people felt least
comfortable was one that listened in on people’s conversations to predict relationship
breakdowns. This is likely to have been thought to be a serious intrusion into
people’s privacy, likely at odds with commonly accepted moral and ethical standards.
With regard to perceived capability, the applications for which AI was most frequently
rated as more capable than humans all involved tasks that humans may find
challenging due to a variety of limitations. These include cognitive and computational
limitations (help detect life on other planets; detecting anomalies in data to aid
cybersecurity; checking large volumes of documents for legal evidence), limitations
in sensory capacities (detecting illness via smells in human breath), and knowledge
limitations (translating speech in real time). AI applications that were most frequently
rated as less capable than humans mostly involved elements of human compassion,
judgement and social skills (e.g. psychological counselling, doctor in general
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
practice, bank branch employee, selector of staff), or artistry, finesse and skill in
performance (actor, news anchor, fiction writer, painter, football player).
--- Insert Figures 3A, 3B, 4A and 4B about here ---
Figures 3A and 3B: Comfortableness ratings given to specific Artificial Intelligence
Applications
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Acting as a censor of material uploaded to
social media
Providing hair care advice using data from
intelligent hair brushes
Helping investment bankers make decisions
modelling different scenarios
Generating coherent text on specific subjects
Summarising texts to distil the essence of the
information
Reviewing and analysing risks in legal contracts
Composing music
Spotting art forgeries
Making arrangements by phone
Providing cybersecurity by detecting anomalies
in user data patterns
Analysing patient data to develop new
medications
Reducing fraud related to exams or
assessments
Checking large volumes of documents for
relevant legal evidence
Discovering new chemical molecules for
pharmaceutical or industrial applications
Helping farmers remove weeds and collect the
Using smells in human breath to detect illness
Forecasting storm damage in forestry
plantations
Working in car manufacturing plants
Helping detect life on other planets
Teaching people sign language
Translating speech into different languages in
Uncomfortable
Comfortable
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Figures 3A and 3B Note: Figure 3A lists the applications rated as highest in
comfortableness, Figure 3B the lowest. Data are collapsed over “somewhat” and
“strongly”, while retaining neutral. N = 99 and raw frequencies are presented. The
“uncomfortable” category is presented in orange on the left of the bars, neutral in
white, centrally, and “comfortable” in green as the rightmost part of the bars.
Predicting relationship breakdowns by listening
into homes via virtual assistants
Providing psychological counselling
Acting as a doctor in a GP practice
Selecting staff for employment
Playing a team football match
Providing psychotherapy for patients with
Being a news anchor
Performing surgical procedures on patients
Being an actor in a film
Being a bank branch employee
Driving a car
Deciding how to prioritise aid during
humanitarian crises
Using facial recognition to fine jaywalkers by
text message
Identifying depression via social media posts
Writing new fairy tales in the style of the Grimm
Managing patient needs and movements in a
large hospital
Acting as a call centre worker
Providing social interaction for patients in care
Painting an artwork that can be sold at auction
Selecting teams and devising game tactics in
Helping a police force predict the risk of
reoffending in bail decisions
Uncomfortable
Comfortable
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Figures 4A and 4B: Perceived capability of specific AI applications in comparisons to
Teaching people sign language
Helping a police force predict the risk of
reoffending in bail decisions
Acting as a censor of material uploaded to
social media
Providing hair care advice using data from
intelligent hair brushes
Generating coherent text on specific subjects
Summarising texts to distil the essence of the
information
Spotting art forgeries
Reviewing and analysing risks in legal contracts
Helping investment bankers make decisions
modelling different scenarios
Helping farmers remove weeds and collect the
Analysing patient data to develop new
medications
Using facial recognition to fine jaywalkers by
text message
Working in car manufacturing plants
Reducing fraud related to exams or
assessments
Forecasting storm damage in forestry
plantations
Discovering new chemical molecules for
pharmaceutical or industrial applications
Translating speech into different languages in
Checking large volumes of documents for
relevant legal evidence
Using smells in human breath to detect illness
Providing cybersecurity by detecting anomalies
in user data patterns
Helping detect life on other planets
AI less capable than humans
Equally capable
AI more capable than humans
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Figure 4A and 4B Note: The data are collapsed over “somewhat less / more ” and
“much less / more”, while retaining neutral. N = 99 and raw frequencies are
presented. The “AI less capable than humans” category is presented in orange on
the left of the bars, neutral in white, centrally, and “AI more capable than humans” in
green as the rightmost part of the bars. Figure 4A lists the AI applications rated as
highest in capability, Figure 4B the lowest.
Providing psychological counselling
Being an actor in a film
Providing psychotherapy for patients with
Acting as a doctor in a GP practice
Being a news anchor
Painting an artwork that can be sold at auction
Selecting staff for employment
Playing a team football match
Writing new fairy tales in the style of the Grimm
Being a bank branch employee
Providing social interaction for patients in care
Composing music
Acting as a call centre worker
Predicting relationship breakdowns by listening
into homes via virtual assistants
Identifying depression via social media posts
Performing surgical procedures on patients
Making arrangements by phone
Deciding how to prioritise aid during
humanitarian crises
Driving a car
Selecting teams and devising game tactics in
Managing patient needs and movements in a
large hospital
AI less capable than humans
Equally capable
AI more capable than humans
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.6.2. By-items correlations for comfortableness and perceived capability
Impressionistically, capability ratings showed some overlap in rankings with the
comfortableness ratings. However, there were also differences in relative rankings.
To explore the extent to which rated comfortableness could be captured as a
function of perceived capability of AI in comparison with humans, a correlation was
run on the average rating for each item on both these measures (see Supplementary
Materials for the processed data). Shapiro-Wilks tests detected no significant
deviation from a normal distribution for either measure. Therefore, a Pearson’s
correlation was run, giving r = .83, N = 42, p < .001, r2 = .69. This was a relatively
high association between the two variables, but with 31% of residual variance.
To explore which items may play a particularly strong role in the residual variance we
calculated the standardised residuals (ZRes) for each pair of data when predicting
comfortableness from perceived capability in a linear regression. We inspected the
items with values that were more than 1.96 z-score removed from zero in either
direction. At one end of the spectrum, these were “Using facial recognition to fine
jaywalkers by text message” (ZRes = -3.02), and “Predicting relationship
breakdowns by listening into homes via virtual assistants” (ZRes = -2.83) where
comfortableness was rated much lower than could be expected from the capability
rating. The reasons for this are most probably because both applications were
intrusive, yet AI may be perceived as highly capable of the tasks. At the other end of
the spectrum, people showed higher levels of comfortableness than could be
expected from their capability ratings for applications described as “Composing
music” (ZRes = 1.99) and “Teaching people sign language” (ZRes = 2.27).
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
3.6.3. Exploratory Factor Analysis: Comfortableness
We ran Exploratory Factor Analyses with the same parameters as before for
attitudes (Section 3.2.2.2), but without any reverse scoring. There were no a priori
expectations for factors. We eliminated 13 items involved in multiple very low
correlations (r < .1, a slightly more stringent cut-off than before because of larger
number of items). Initial Exploratory Factor Analysis (Minimum Residuals, promax)
on the remaining items identified two factors based on parallel analysis, in which 6
items did not load onto either factor, and these were also removed. A final
Exploratory Factor Analysis was run with the remaining 23 items. Bartlett’s Test of
Sphericity showed, χ² = 1090, df = 253, p < .001. KMO MSA overall was .86. The
final analysis identified two factors accounting for 23.8% and 18.8% of the variance,
respectively, total 42.5%. The factors were correlated with r = .64. The RMSEA was
.075, 90% CI [.045, .080], TLI .88, and the model test showed χ² = 291, df = 208, p <
.001, suggesting a reasonable fit to support dimension reduction and naming latent
factors. Factor loadings for comfortableness are presented in Table 6. Factor 1
primarily captured items with a high mean, indicating high levels of comfortableness.
In turn, many items loading on this factor appeared to feature readily automatable
tasks, often based on big data. Factor 2 primarily captured items with a low mean. In
turn, many of these items described task that required a human judgement. Two
measures were created, based on the mean across the relevant items. The first was
a factor which we named “Comfortableness with AI applications for big data and
automation” (Factor 1, α = .90). The second was “Comfortableness with AI
applications for Human judgement tasks” (Factor 2, α = .86). Unidimensionality
assessment was irrelevant and is therefore not reported.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
--- insert Table 6 about here ---
Table 6: Factor loadings from the Exploratory Factor Analysis of Comfortableness
with Specific Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Reducing fraud related to exams or
assessments
Using smells in human breath to detect illness
Discovering new chemical molecules for
pharmaceutical or industrial applications
Translating speech into different languages in
Helping farmers remove weeds and collect the
Reviewing and analysing risks in legal contracts
Forecasting storm damage in forestry
plantations
Spotting art forgeries
Working in car manufacturing plants
Providing hair care advice using data from
intelligent hair brushes
Checking large volumes of documents for
relevant legal evidence
Helping investment bankers make decisions
modelling different scenarios
Acting as a censor of material uploaded to
social media
Selecting staff for employment
Being a bank branch employee
Acting as a doctor in a GP practice
Managing patient needs and movements in a
large hospital
Acting as a call centre worker
Providing social interaction for patients in care
Driving a car
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Writing new fairy tales in the style of the Grimm
Deciding how to prioritise aid during
humanitarian crises
Selecting teams and devising game tactics in
Table 6 Note: Factor loadings onto Factor 1 (F1, Comfortableness with AI
applications for big data and automation) and Factor 2 (F2, Comfortableness with AI
applications for Human judgement tasks), with Uniqueness (U), item-rest correction
(IRC), item mean and standard deviation (SD) for the 23 items retained in the
Exploratory Factor Analysis of comfortableness ratings.
3.6.4. Exploratory Factor Analysis: Perceived capability
The same Exploratory Factor Analysis process as was run on the comfortableness
data was performed on the capability data, again without a priori structural
expectations. Multiple low correlations (r < .1) were detected in 14 items, and these
were eliminated, as were four items that showed low loadings on either of the two
factors extracted in the initial Exploratory Factor Analysis. Further iterations revealed
further low loading or cross-loading items, which were removed in turn. The final
analysis was on 21 items. Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity in this analysis was significant,
χ² = 1122, df = 210, p < .001, while KMO MSA was .87. Two factors were extracted
based on parallel analysis accounting for 24.5% and 22.9% of the variance,
respectively, total 47.4%. The correlation between the two factors was r = .57.
RMSEA was .081, 90% CI [.053, .089], TLI .88, and the model test showed χ² = 254,
df = 169, p < .001, suggesting a reasonable fit, which would support dimension
reduction and the naming of latent factors. Factor loadings for perceived capability
are presented in Table 7. Factor 1 contained many items which involve human
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
judgement or skilled finesse, and we named this “Perceived capability of AI for tasks
involving human judgement”, creating a factor mean based on the items loading onto
this factor (α =.89). Factor 2 seemed to contain items that all involve algorithmic
processing of “big data” and we named this factor “Perceived capability of AI for
tasks involving big data” (α = .90).
--- insert Table 7 about here ---
Table 7: Factor loadings from the Exploratory Factor Analysis of Perceived capability
of specific applications of Artificial Intelligence
Providing psychotherapy for patients with
Acting as a doctor in a GP practice
Selecting staff for employment
Performing surgical procedures on patients
Being a bank branch employee
Driving a car
Deciding how to prioritise aid during
humanitarian crises
Playing a team football match
Managing patient needs and movements in
a large hospital
Identifying depression via social media
Making arrangements by phone
Acting as a call centre worker
Painting an artwork that can be sold at
Helping detect life on other planets
Discovering new chemical molecules for
pharmaceutical or industrial applications
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Checking large volumes of documents for
relevant legal evidence
Reducing fraud related to exams or
assessments
Reviewing and analysing risks in legal
Spotting art forgeries
Helping investment bankers make
decisions modelling different scenarios
Summarising texts to distil the essence of
the information
Table 7 Note: Factor loadings onto Factor 1 (F1, Perceived capability of AI for tasks
involving Human Judgement) and Factor 2 (F2, Perceived capability of AI for tasks
involving Big Data), with Uniqueness (U), item-rest correction (IRC), item mean and
standard deviation (SD) for the 21 items retained in the Exploratory Factor Analysis
of perceived capability ratings.
3.7. Means and Standard Deviations for comfortableness and perceived
capability composite measures
We computed means and standard deviations for the factors of comfortableness and
perceived capability (see Table 8). Participants showed positive views of the use of
AI for tasks involving big data or automation, but negative views of AI being used in
tasks involving human judgement, rating their perceived capabilities particularly low.
--- insert Table 8 about here ---
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Table 8: Means and Standard Deviations for the composite measures of
Comfortableness and Perceived capability
Comfortableness
Comfortableness with AI for tasks involving big data /
automation
Comfortableness with AI for tasks involving human
Perceived capability
Perceived capability of AI for tasks involving big data
Perceived capability of AI for tasks involving human
Table 8 Note: Means and SDs for composite measures. For all scales, 3 was the
neutral centre. Scores below that point reflect negative views, above reflect positive
views. Minimum possible score was 1, maximum possible score was 5.
3.8. Cross-validation general and specific views: Correlation and regression
To explore to what extent individuals’ attitudes towards AI in general were
associated with their comfortableness with specific applications, and their perception
of the capability of AI, we again ran correlation analyses on a descriptive exploratory
basis, with p-values reported for reference, but not to test hypotheses (see Table 9).
We double-checked the key patterns using the more stringent ANOVA factor
contributions via linear multiple regression models. We predicted the positive and
then the negative subscale of General Attitudes towards AI from the four factors
related to specific applications (four-predictor model), reporting F and p for each of
the coefficients in Table 9. The strong prediction of the General Attitudes from
comfortableness with specific applications provides cross-validation of the General
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Attitudes towards AI subscales. The four-predictor model suggested that rated
capabilities of specific applications of AI were less strongly predictive of general
attitudes, suggesting these were more independent. To explore the pattern in more
detail, we checked whether the capability ratings predicted the positive subscale if
the comfortableness ratings were eliminated from the model (a two-predictor model),
and their coefficients were significant (p < .001 for Big Data, p = .002 for Human
Judgement). However, perceived capability did not significantly predict negative
general attitudes in an equivalent two-predictor model (p = .09 for Big Data, p = .56
for Human Judgement). Overall, the pattern provides cross-validation between the
general and specific views.
--- insert Table 9 about here ---
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
Table 9: Correlations and multiple regression coefficients associating subscales of
General Attitudes towards Artificial and Comfortableness with and Perceived
capability of specific applications of Artificial Intelligence
Comfortableness with AI for…
Perceived capability of AI for…
big data /
automation
Positive General
Attitudes towards AI
Negative General
Attitudes towards AI
Table 9 Note: Correlations (r, p), and ANOVA tests (F, p). General Attitudes towards
Artificial Intelligence subscales are listed in the leftmost column, and cross-validation
factor composites capturing attitudes towards specific applications of Artificial
Intelligence are listed on the top row, N = 99. The p-values for the correlations are
based on two-tailed tests with alpha at .05. F and p are from the multiple
regression’s ANOVA for the factors, calculated with type 3 Sums of Squares, with dfs
1, 94. Please be reminded that all negative items on both scales were reversescored, so the higher a score the more positive the attitude.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
4. Discussion
The Discussion contains a consideration of the psychometrics and validity of the
GAAIS, followed by an evaluation of more global conceptual findings of this study,
and an evaluation of the limitations, future research that is needed to build on the
work presented here, finishing with a conclusion.
4.1. Scale psychometrics and validity
The study yielded an initially validated General Attitudes towards Artificial
Intelligence Scale (GAAIS) with positive and negative subscales, which had good
psychometric properties. A unidimensionality assessment showed that the subscales
should not be merged into an overall composite scale score. Subscales of the
Technology Readiness Index that related to societal use of technology predicted our
General Attitudes towards AI subscales as hypothesised. These regression patterns
provided convergent validity for our new subscales. The associations were not
maximal, and did not involve subscales of the Technology Readiness Index that
related to individual user experiences of technology. This provided discriminant
validity, which is evidence of the novelty and distinctiveness of our new scale. Our
rationale for our new AI scale was that older Technology Acceptance Scales such as
the TAM reflect users’ individual choices to use technology, but AI
often involves decisions by others. Our results support the need for measurement
tools that capture these key aspects of AI, and our new scale addresses this gap.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
The subscale averages provided valuable information on attitudes towards Artificial
Intelligence. Overall, participants held slightly positive views on the positive
subscale, which consisted of items expressing enthusiasm and perceived utility of AI.
The sample mean was just below neutral for the negative subscale. This balance of
both positive and negative views in the same sample concurs well with the findings
from recent surveys discussed in Section 1.1.
Cross-validation of general attitudes using specific applications was successful,
adding further validity to our new scale. It was useful that these insights emerged
“bottom-up” from a list of AI innovations, and that clustering was likewise identified
“bottom-up” via the statistical analysis, providing independent cross-validation.
However, comfortableness was a better predictor of General Attitudes towards AI
than overall perceived capability. This is probably because people may hold very
positive attitudes towards the potential benefits of AI, but may nevertheless make a
separate assessment about current limitations of specific AI applications. This would
seem a rational position to hold given the current limitations of AI, especially given
the novelty of the specific applications in our items. In contrast, people may have
rated comfortableness more hypothetically, assuming that a system was fully
capable of the task described. Furthermore, comfortableness is more closely related
psychologically to general attitudinal constructs than capability assessments are.
The latter were probably based on rational assessments, because we asked
participants to judge AI vs. humans on each task. In contrast, comfortableness is
likely to be more emotionally based. Overall, comfortableness with specific
applications formed good cross-validation for the new General Attitudes towards
Artificial Intelligence Scale.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
4.2. Conceptual insights
The study yielded important conceptual insights. One important source of insight is
an inspection of items that were retained following exploratory factor analysis, how
these items clustered, and which items had the strongest item-rest correlations. For
the general attitudes, items that loaded onto the positive factor expressed societal or
personal benefits of AI, or a preference of AI over humans in some contexts (e.g. in
routine transactions), with some items capturing emotional matters (AI being
exciting, impressive, making people happier, enhancing their wellbeing). Items
involving personal use of AI were also present (use in own job, interest in using AI).
In all, the balance in the positive items was towards utility, both in the number of
items, and in the items with the highest item-rest correlations (see Table 3). In the
negative subscale, more items were eliminated from the initial pool, and those that
were retained were dominated by emotions (sinister, dangerous, discomfort,
suffering for “people like me”), and dystopian views of the uses of AI (unethical, error
prone-ness, taking control, spying). Here, the more emotional items tended to have
higher item-rest correlations, suggesting that the retained negative items may
reflected more affective attitudes. Some negative items were not retained in factor
analysis, because they did not correlate strongly with the other item set. Two such
eliminated negative items “The rise of Artificial Intelligence poses a threat to people's
job security” and “I am concerned about Artificial Intelligence applications mining my
personal data” showed high levels of participant concern in the survey data.
However, they did not load onto the negative factor. Overall, the positive items were
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
dominated by utility, and negative items by negative emotions and dystopian
Insights could also be gained from the clustering of the data on specific applications
of AI. When asked about their comfortableness with these specific applications as
well as their perceived capability in comparison with humans, two clusters emerged
via the data analysis. In one cluster, there were applications that featured big data
or other readily automatable tasks, and participants held positive views about these,
feeling comfortable with them, and attributing high capabilities to such applications.
Underlying this may be the common feature that these applications aided humans in
their endeavours (e.g. molecule screening, aiding bankers, detecting fraud), but
where humans are not replaced by AI, and AI did not gain autonomy or control. In
the other cluster there were applications involving some aspect of human judgement,
empathy, skill, or social understanding, and participants felt negatively towards AI
performing these functions. Discomfort and low capability were, for example,
associated with AI performing staff selection, decisions on the allocation of aid, and
driving a car. This is an important finding, which suggests that people may make
clear distinctions in the classes of tasks for which they will currently accept AI.
Another important source of conceptual insights regarding specific applications
comes from the survey data, particularly via an inspection of applications that
attracted ratings near the extremes. It is interesting to note that among the lowest
rated applications of AI, both for comfortableness and capability, were applications
related to individual health interactions, e.g. acting as a doctor. This raises issues in
the context of ongoing work developing medical AI applications . Our data also showed very low ratings for applications
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
involving psychotherapy. This is despite evidence of people’s tendency to
anthropomorphise and form emotional connections with extremely basic classic
psychotherapy systems such as ELIZA . This is another
important finding, as our data suggest that there may be initial resistance to using
such applications, and their developers may need to overcome this if they want their
applications to be effective.
Further conceptual insights were gained by correlating perceived capability and
comfortableness. While these correlated strongly across applications, we argued that
an ethical dimension led to a partial decoupling between comfortableness and
perceived capability, which was pronounced in some items. For example, while
some applications may be perceived as capable (e.g. fining people for offences
based on automatic facial recognition), participants reported levels of discomfort that
were out of line with the perceived capability of such applications. This may be
related to the intrusiveness of these types of applications . Notwithstanding this, live
facial recognition has now been introduced in London ,
with the important aim of fighting crime. More recently, facial recognition has also
been deployed in Moscow for surveillance of compliance with coronavirus / Covid-19
quarantine regulations . Our findings suggest the general public
may not feel entirely comfortable with these types of applications in all contexts, at
least not in the UK. It would be interesting and useful to examine to what extent the
public may perceive the end as justifying the means in such types of applications of
AI. This is likely to vary across cultures and contexts.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
4.3. Evaluation of limitations and future research
It is important to evaluate the limitations as well as the strengths of our research.
First, our sample size was relatively small, for resource-related reasons. A reason
why a small sample could be problematic is that Exploratory Factor Analysis needs a
reasonable sample size to be valid. However, the KMO MSAs for all Exploratory
Factor Analyses showed good sampling adequacy. KMO MSA is an empirical
measure of sampling adequacy that supersedes sample-size heuristics. These
heuristics often work on a worst-case scenario, and can therefore overestimate the
sample sizes needed . Our data also showed good internal consistency indices. Thus,
we argue that our sample size was sufficient for the analyses reported. A further
potential weakness is that the population from which the sample was drawn may not
be sufficiently informed to express valid views on AI. Similarly, both the newspaper
articles and our summaries may have oversimplified the complexities of the AI
applications . However, it was our intention to survey ordinary people’s
reactions to the type of information that may reach them via general media outlets.
News channels often simplify matters, while headlines condense and simplify
matters even more. This condensed information was likely to reflect many people’s
exposure to AI developments. Finally, our scale went through initial validation using
Exploratory Factor Analysis, but would benefit from further validation via a
Confirmatory Factor Analysis with a new and larger sample. It would also be
beneficial to run studies that link the new measure to other samples, demographics,
and other social factors. This is planned as future research.
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
4.4. Conclusion
In summary and conclusion, our research produced a usable two-factor General
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence Scale (GAAIS) with good psychometric
properties, convergent and discriminant validity, and good cross-validation patterns.
It will be helpful to further validate this tool in future research with a new, larger
sample. Attitudes towards AI need to be gauged regularly, given the rapid
development in these technologies and their profound impact on society. Data on
acceptance of AI by the public can inform legislators and organisations developing AI
applications on ways in which their introduction may need to be managed if these
applications are to be accepted by the end users. Useful measurement tools are
therefore important. Our new initially validated General Attitudes towards AI Scale is
a useful tool to help accomplish these aims. We include it ready for use in Appendix
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence