This paper defines and examines three generations of distance education pedagogy. Unlike earlier
classifications of distance education based on the technology used, this analysis focuses on the
pedagogy that defines the learning experiences encapsulated in the learning design. The three
generations of cognitive-behaviourist, social constructivist, and connectivist pedagogy are
examined, using the familiar community of inquiry model 
with its focus on social, cognitive, and teaching presences. Although this typology of pedagogies
could also be usefully applied to campus-based education, the need for and practice of openness
and explicitness in distance education content and process makes the work especially relevant to
distance education designers, teachers, and developers. The article concludes that high-quality
distance education exploits all three generations as determined by the learning content, context,
and learning expectations.
Keywords: Distance education theory
Introduction
Distance education, like all other technical–social developments, is historically constituted in the
thinking and behavioural patterns of those who developed, tested, and implemented what were
once novel systems. The designs thus encapsulate a worldview that defines its epistemological roots,
development models, and technologies utilized, even as the application of this worldview evolves
in new eras. In this paper, we explore distance education systems as they have evolved through
three eras of educational, social, and psychological development. Each era developed distinct
pedagogies, technologies, learning activities, and assessment criteria, consistent with the social
worldview of the era in which they developed. We examine each of these models of distance
education using the community of inquiry (COI) model with its focus on teaching, cognitive, and social presence.
International
Research in Open
and Distance
March – 2011
Three Generations of Distance
Education Pedagogy
Terry Anderson and Jon Dron
Athabasca University, Canada
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
Given the requirement for distance education to be technologically mediated in order to span the
geographic and often temporal distance between learners, teachers, and institutions, it is common
to think of development or generations of distance education in terms of the technology used to
span these distances. Thus distance education theorists , in a
somewhat technologically deterministic bent, have described and defined distance education
based on the predominate technologies employed for delivery. The first generation of distance
education technology was by postal correspondence. This was followed by a second generation,
defined by the mass media of television, radio, and film production. Third-generation distance
education (DE) introduced interactive technologies: first audio, then text, video, and then web and
immersive conferencing. It is less clear what defines the so-called fourth- and even fifthgeneration distance technologies except for a use of intelligent data bases that
create “intelligent flexible learning” or that incorporate Web 2.0 or semantic web technologies. It
should be noted that none of these generations has been eliminated over time; rather, the
repertoire of options available to DE designers and learners has increased. Similarly, all three
models of DE pedagogy described below are very much in existence today.
Many educators pride themselves on being pedagogically (as opposed to technologically) driven
in their teaching and learning designs. However, as McLuhan first argued, technologies
also influence and define the usage, in this case the pedagogy instantiated in the learning and
instructional designs. In an attempt to define a middle ground between either technological or
pedagogical determinism, we’ve previously written about the two being
intertwined in a dance: the technology sets the beat and creates the music, while the pedagogy
defines the moves. To some extent, our pedagogical processes may themselves be viewed as
technologies , albeit of a softer nature than the machines, software,
postal systems, and so on that underpin distance education. Some technologies may embody
pedagogies, thereby hardening them, and it is at that point that they, of necessity, become far
more influential in a learning design, the leaders of the dance rather than the partners. For
example, a learning management system that sees the world in terms of courses and content will
strongly encourage pedagogies that fit that model and constrain those that lack content and do not
fit a content-driven course model. The availability of technologies to support different models of
learning strongly influences what kinds of model can be developed; if there were no means of
two-way communication, for example, it would prevent the development of a pedagogy that
exploited dialogue and conversation and encourage the development of a pedagogy that allowed
the learner and the course content to be self-contained.
In this paper, we introduce a simple typology in which distance education pedagogies are mapped
into three distinct generations. Since the three arose in different eras and in chronological order,
we’ve labeled them from first to third generation, but as in generations of technology, none of
these three pedagogical generations has disappeared, and we will argue that all three can and
should be effectively used to address the full spectrum of learning needs and aspirations of 21st
century learners.
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
The Cognitive-Behaviourist Pedagogy of Distance Education
Cognitive and behaviourist (CB) pedagogies focus on the way in which learning was
predominantly defined, practiced, and researched in the latter half of the 20th
century. Behavioural
learning theory begins with notions of learning which are generally defined as new behaviours or
changes in behaviours that are acquired as the result of an individual’s response to stimuli. Note
in this definition the focus on the individual and the necessity for measuring actual behaviours
and not attitudes or capacities. Major behaviourist learning theorists include American
psychologists Edward Watson, John Thordike, and B.F. Skinner. These theoretical ideas led
directly to instructional designs and interventions such as the Keller Plan , computer-assisted instruction, and instructional systems designs. For example, Gagne’s
 events of instruction proceed through linear and structured phases, including to
1. gain learners’ attention,
2. inform learner of objectives,
3. stimulate recall of previous information,
4. present stimulus material,
5. provide learner guidance,
6. elicit performance,
7. provide feedback,
8. assess performance,
9. enhance transfer opportunities.
Behaviourist notions have been especially attractive for use in training (as opposed to
educational) programs as the learning outcomes associated with training are usually clearly
measured and demonstrated behaviourally. From the behaviourist tradition emerged the cognitive
revolution, beginning in the late 1950s . Cognitive pedagogy arose partially in
response to a growing need to account for motivation, attitudes, and mental barriers that may only
be partially associated or demonstrated through observable behaviours. Also important, cognitive
models were based on a growing understanding of the functions and operations of the brain and
especially of the ways in which computer models were used to describe and test learning and
thinking. Much research using this model proceeded from empirical testing of multimedia effects,
cognitive overload, redundancy, chunking, short- and long-term memory, and other mental or
cognitive processes related to learning . Although learning was still conceived of as
an individual process, its study expanded from an exclusive focus on behaviour to changes in
knowledge or capacity that are stored and recalled in individual memory. The tradition continues
with the successful application of experimentally verified methods like spaced learning and applications of brain science, as well as more dubious, scientifically unsound and
unverifiable learning style theories that achieved
popularity towards the end of the twentieth century and that still hold sway in many quarters
today. The locus of control in a CB model is very much the teacher or instructional designer.
Such theories provide models of learning that are directly generative of models of teaching.
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
It is notable that such models gained a foothold in distance education at a time when there were
limited technologies available that allowed many-to-many communication. Teleconferencing was
perhaps the most successful means available but came with associated costs and complexity that
limited its usefulness. The postal service and publication or redistribution of messages was very
slow, expensive, and limited in scope for interactivity. Methods that relied on one-to-many and
one-to-one communication were really the only sensible options because of the constraints of the
surrounding technologies.
Cognitive Presence in Cognitive-Behaviourist Models
Cognitive presence is the means and context through which learners construct and confirm new
knowledge. In cognitive–behaviourist models of learning, cognitive presence is created through
structured processes in which learners’ interest is stimulated, informed by both general and
specific cases of overriding principles and then tested and reinforced for the acquisition of this
knowledge. CB models of distance education pedagogy stress the importance of using an
instructional systems design model where the learning objectives are clearly identified and stated
and exist apart from the learner and the context of study. Later developments in cognitive theory
have attempted to design learning materials in ways that maximized brain efficiency and
effectiveness by attending to the types, ordering, timing, and nature of learning stimulations.
Social Presence in Cognitive-Behaviourist Models
What most defined the cognitive-behavioural generation of distance education was an almost total
absence of social presence. Learning was thought of as an individual process, and thus it made
little difference if one was reading a book, watching a movie, or interacting with a computerassisted learning program by oneself or in the company of other learners. This focus on
individualized learning resulted in very high levels of student freedom (space and pace) and fitted
nicely with technologies of print packages, mass media (radio and television), and postalcorrespondence interaction. It is also interesting to note the backlash against distance education
that arose amongst traditional campus-based academics, partially in reaction to this individualized
affordance. This suspicion continues today , though 30 years of research has yet
to show differences in learning outcomes between learning designs with high or low levels of
social presence, that is if one confines the definition of learning to the CB notions of acquisition
of pre-specified facts and concepts.
Teaching Presence in Cognitive-Behaviourist Models
Teaching presence in CB models was also reduced or at least radically reconstructed in many
forms of CB distance education. In its earliest instantiation as correspondence education, the
teacher had only their words on printed text to convey their presence. Holmberg described
a style of writing that he called guided didactic interaction which, through personalization and a
conversational writing style, was supposed to transmit the personality and caring concern of the
teacher or author. Later technologies allowed voice (audio) and body language of the teacher
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
(video) to be transmitted through television, film, and multimedia-based educational productions.
Despite the general absence of the teacher in these CB pedagogies, one cannot discount the
teaching presence that potentially could be developed through one-to-one written correspondence,
telephone conversation, or occasional face-to-face interaction between teacher and student, as
amply demonstrated in the movie and play versions of Educating Rita. Despite this potential, the
teaching-presence role is confused in that the learning package that instantiates CB pedagogical
models is supposed to be self-contained and complete, requiring only teacher–learner interaction
for marking and evaluation. No doubt some distance education students using this model do
experience high levels of teaching presence, but for many, teaching presence is only mediated
through text and recorded sound and images. This reduction of the role and importance of the
teacher further fueled resentment by traditional educators against the CB model of distance
education and gave rise to the necessity of creating single-mode institutions which could develop
educational models free from the constraint of older models of classroom-based and teacherdominated education.
Strengths and Weaknesses of Cognitive-Behaviourist Models
To summarize, CB models defined the first generation of individualized distance education. They
maximized access and student freedom, and were capable of scaling to very large numbers at
significantly lower costs than traditional education, as demonstrated by the successful megauniversities . However, these advantages were accompanied by the very significant
reductions in teaching, social presence, and formal models of cognitive presence, reductions that
have come under serious challenge since the latter decades of the 20th
century. While appropriate
when learning objectives are very clear, CB models avoid dealing with the full richness and
complexity of humans learning to be, as opposed to learning to do . People are not
blank slates but begin with models and knowledge of the world and learn and exist in a social
context of great intricacy and depth.
Social-Constructivist Pedagogy of Distance Education
While there is a tradition of cognitive-constructivist thinking that hinges on personal construction
of knowledge, largely developed by Piaget and his followers , the roots of the
constructivist model most commonly applied today spring from the work of Vygotsky and
Dewey, generally lumped together in the broad category of social constructivism. Socialconstructivist pedagogies, perhaps not coincidently, developed in conjunction with the
development of two-way communication technologies. At this time, rather than transmitting
information, technology became widely used to create opportunities for both synchronous and
asynchronous interactions between and among students and teachers. Michael Moore’s famous
theory of transactional distance noted the capacity for flexible interaction to substitute for
structure in distance education development and delivery models. A number of researchers noted
the challenges of getting the mix of potential interactions right . Social-constructivist pedagogy acknowledges the social nature of knowledge and
of its creation in the minds of individual learners. Teachers do not merely transmit knowledge to
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
be passively consumed by learners; rather, each learner constructs means by which new
knowledge is both created and integrated with existing knowledge. Although there are many
types of social constructivism , all the models have more or less
common themes, including the importance of
new knowledge as building upon the foundation of previous learning,
context in shaping learners’ knowledge development,
learning as an active rather than passive process,
language and other social tools in constructing knowledge,
metacognition and evaluation as a means to develop learners’ capacity to assess their own
learning environment as learner-centred and stressing the importance of multiple
perspectives,
knowledge needing to be subject to social discussion, validation, and application in real
world contexts .
The need for social construction and representation, for multiple perspectives, and for awareness
that knowledge is socially validated demanded the capacity for distance education to be a social
activity as well as the development of cohort, as opposed to individual study, organizational
models of instruction. As Greenhow, Robelia, and Hughes and others have argued,
learning is located in contexts and relationships rather than merely in the minds of individuals.
The locus of control in a social-constructivist system shifts somewhat away from the teacher, who
becomes more of a guide than an instructor, but who assumes the critical role of shaping the
learning activities and designing the structure in which those activities occur. Socialconstructivist theories are theories of learning that are less easily translated into theories of
teaching than their CB forebears.
It is notable that social-constructivist models only began to gain a foothold in distance education
when the technologies of many-to-many communication became widely available, enabled first
by email and bulletin boards, and later through the World Wide Web and mobile technologies.
While such models had been waiting in the wings for distance education since Dewey or earlier,
their widespread use and adoption was dependent on the widespread availability of workable
supporting technologies.
Cognitive Presence in Social-Constructivist Pedagogy
Constructivists emphasize the importance of knowledge having individual meaning. Thus,
cognitive presence is located in as authentic a context as possible, which resonates with distance
education, much of which takes place in the workplace and other real-world contexts outside of
formal classrooms. Cognitive presence also assumes that learners are actively engaged, and
interaction with peers is perhaps the most cost-effective way to support cognitive presence (not
requiring the high costs of simulations, computer-assisted learning programming, or media
production). Cognitive presence, for constructivists, also exploits the human capacity for role
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
modeling , imitation , and dialogic inquiry .
Thus, Garrison and others could argue that constructivist-based learning with rich studentstudent and student-teacher interaction constituted a new, “post-industrialist era” of distance
education. However, this focus on human interactions placed limits on accessibility and produced
more costly models of distance education . It
remains challenging to apply
learning where it can blossom into application and thus demonstrate true understanding.
Social Presence in Social-Constructivist Pedagogy
Social interaction is a defining feature of constructivist pedagogies. At a distance, this interaction
is always mediated, but nonetheless, it is considered to be a critical component of quality distance
education . Much research has been undertaken to prove that quality interaction
and subsequent social presence can be supported in both synchronous and asynchronous models
of distance education. More recent developments in immersive technologies, such as Second Life,
allow gestures, costumes, voice intonation, and other forms of body language that may provide
enhancements to social presence beyond those experienced face-to-face . It is likely, as learners become more acclimatized and skilled in using ever-present mobile
communications and embedded technologies, that barriers associated with a lack of social
presence will be further reduced, allowing constructivist models to thrive.
Teaching Presence in Social-Constructivist Pedagogy
Kanuka and Anderson argued that in constructivist modes of distance education, “the
educator is a guide, helper, and partner where the content is secondary to the learning process; the
source of knowledge lies primarily in experiences.” Given this critical role, one can see the
importance of teaching presence within constructivist models. Teaching presence extends beyond
facilitation of learning to choosing and constructing educational interventions and to providing
direct instruction when required. The requirements for high levels of teaching presence make the
scaling of constructivist distance education models problematic , with few classes
ever expanding beyond the 30–40 student cohort. Assessment in constructivist models is much
more complicated than in behaviourist models, as David Jonassen has argued: “Evaluating
how learners go about constructing knowledge is more important from a constructivist viewpoint
than the resulting product” (p. 141). Thus, teaching presence in constructivist pedagogical models
focuses on guiding and evaluating authentic tasks performed in realistic contexts.
Strengths and Weaknesses of Constructivist Models
Constructivist distance education pedagogies moved distance learning beyond the narrow type of
knowledge transmission that could be encapsulated easily in media through to the use of
synchronous and asynchronous, human communications-based learning. Thus, Garrison and
others argue that the rich student-student and student-teacher interaction could be viewed as a
“post-industrialist era” of distance education. However, Annand views the focus on human
interaction as placing limits on accessibility and producing more costly models of distance
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
education. Ironically, constructivist models of distance education began to share many of the
affordances and liabilities of campus-based education, with potential for teacher domination,
passive lecture delivery, and restrictions on geographic and temporal access.
Connectivist Pedagogy of Distance Education
The third generation of distance-education pedagogy emerged recently and is known as
connectivism. Canadians George Siemens and Stephen Downes
 have written defining connectivist papers, arguing that learning is the process of building
networks of information, contacts, and resources that are applied to real problems. Connectivism
was developed in the information age of a networked era and assumes ubiquitous
access to networked technologies. Connectivist learning focuses on building and maintaining
networked connections that are current and flexible enough to be applied to existing and emergent
problems. Connectivism also assumes that information is plentiful and that the learner’s role is
not to memorize or even understand everything, but to have the capacity to find and apply
knowledge when and where it is needed. Connectivism assumes that much mental processing and
problem solving can and should be off-loaded to machines, leading to Siemens’ 
contentious claim that “learning may reside in non-human appliance.” Thus, connectivism places
itself within the context of actor-network theory with its identification of the indiscriminate and
overlapping boundaries between physical objects, social conventions, and hybrid instantiations of
both, as defined by their initial and evolved application in real life .
It is noteworthy that connectivist models explicitly rely on the ubiquity of networked connections
between people, digital artifacts, and content, which would have been inconceivable as forms of
distance learning were the World Wide Web not available to mediate the process. Thus, as we
have seen in the case of the earlier generations of distance learning, technology has played a
major role in determining the potential pedagogies that may be employed.
Cognitive Presence in Connectivist Pedagogy
Connectivist cognitive presence begins with the assumption that learners have access to powerful
networks and, as importantly, are literate and confident enough to exploit these networks in
completing learning tasks. Thus, the first task of connectivist education involves exposing
students to networks and providing opportunities for them to gain a sense of self-efficacy in
networked-based cognitive skills and the process of developing their own net presence.
Connectivist learning happens best in network contexts, as opposed to individual or group
contexts . In network contexts, members participate as they define real
learning needs, filter these for relevance, and contribute in order to hone their knowledge creation
and retrieval skills. In the process, they develop networks of their own and increase their
developing social capital . The artifacts of connectivist learning are
usually open, accessible, and persistent. Thus, distance education interaction moves beyond
individual consultations with faculty (CB pedagogy) and beyond the group interactions and
constraints of the learning management systems associated with constructivist distance-education
pedagogy. Cognitive presence is enriched by peripheral and emergent interactions on networks,
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
in which alumni, practicing professionals, and other teachers are able to observe, comment upon,
and contribute to connectivist learning.
Connectivist learning is based as much upon production as consumption of educational content.
Thus, tools and skills of production (or produsage, as Bruns refers to the means of
production when producers are also users of the resources). The results of this produsage are
archives, learning objects, discussion transcripts, and resources produced by learners in the
process of documenting and demonstrating their learning. These dialogic encounters become the
content that learners and teachers utilize and collaboratively create and recreate.
Connectivist
cognitive presence is enhanced by the focus on reflection and distribution of these reflections in
blogs, twitter posts, and multimedia webcasts.
Social Presence in Connectivist Pedagogy
Connectivist pedagogy stresses the development of social presence and social capital through the
creation and sustenance of networks of current and past learners and of those with knowledge
relevant to the learning goals. Unlike group learning, in which social presence is often created by
expectation and marking for participation in activities confined to institutional time frames, social
presence on networks tends to be busy as topics rise and fall in interest. The activities of learners
are reflected in their contributions to wikis, Twitter, threaded conferences, Voicethreads, and
other network tools. Further, social presence is retained and promoted through the comments,
contributions, and insights of students who have previously engaged in the course and that persist
as augmentable archives to enrich network interactions for current students. Connectivist learning
is also enhanced by the stigmergic knowledge of others and the signs that they leave as they
navigate through learning activities. The activities, choices, and artifacts left by previous users are
mined through network analytics and presented as guideposts and paths to knowledge that new
users can follow . In this way, the combination of traces of people’s actions and
activities generate an emergent collective, which may be seen as a distinctive individual in itself,
both greater and lesser than the sum of its parts: it is a socially constituted entity that is, despite
this, soulless, a reflection of the group mind that influences but does not engage in dialogue .
Teaching Presence in Connectivist Pedagogy
As in constructivist learning, teaching presence is created by the building of learning paths and by
design and support of interactions, such that learners make connections with existing and new
knowledge resources. Unlike earlier pedagogies, the teacher is not solely responsible for defining,
generating, or assigning content. Rather, learners and teacher collaborate to create the content of
study, and in the process re-create that content for future use by others. Assessment in
connectivist pedagogy combines self-reflection with teacher assessment of the contributions to
the current and future courses. These contributions may be reflections, critical comments,
learning objects and resources, and other digital artifacts of knowledge creation, dissemination,
and problem solving. Teaching presence in connectivist learning environments also focuses on
teaching by example. The teachers’ construction of learning artifacts, critical contributions to
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
class and external discussion, capacity to make connections across discipline and context
boundaries, and the sum of their net presence serve to model connectivist presence and learning.
A final stress to teaching presence is the challenge presented by rapidly changing technologies.
No one is current on all learning and communications applications, but teachers are often less
competent and have less self-efficacy; thus, connectivist learning includes learners teaching
teachers and each other, in conjunction with teachers aiding the connectivist learning of all.
Strengths and Weaknesses of Connectivist Approaches
Learning in connectivist space is, paradoxically, plagued by a lack of connection. CB models
provide a strong structure to learning that makes explicit the path to be taken to knowledge. When
done well, a cognitivist or behaviourist approach helps the learner to take a guided path towards a
specific goal. Constructivist models still place an emphasis on scaffolding, albeit in a manner that
is more conducive to meeting individual needs and contexts. What they lose in structure, they
make up for in dialogue, with social-constructivist approaches (especially the Vygotskyinfluenced variety), relying heavily on negotiation and mediation to help the learner from one
state of knowledge to the next. In connectivist space, structure is unevenly distributed and often
emergent, with that emergence seldom leading to structure that is optimally efficient for
achieving learning goals.
Connectivist approaches used in a formal course setting, where top-down structure is imposed
over the bottom-up emergent connections of the network, often rely heavily on foci that are
typically provided by charismatic and popular network leaders. For example, David Wiley’s
paradigmatic
( and the highly acclaimed
and emblematic CCK08 provided by George Siemens and Stephen Downes were
both notably run by network leaders with many followers. This is not a coincidence: Such people
occupy highly connected nodes in their networks and can encourage a sufficiently large
population to engage so that there is continued activity even when the vast majority does not
engage regularly. Even then, learners often yearn for a more controlled environment . When scaled down and superimposed over a formal teaching pattern,
connectivist approaches require a great deal of energy on the part of the central connector to
actively maintain the network, and it is a common complaint that students at least start by feeling
lost and confused in a connectivist setting . This is only
partly due to difficulties in learning multiple technologies and navigating cyberspace, although
this aspect can be an important issue . The distributed nature and
inherent fuzziness of goals, beginnings, and endings implied by a connectivist approach often fit
poorly with a context in which students are taking more formal and traditional courses that use a
constructivist and or a cognitive-behaviourist model. Furthermore, as Kop and Hill 
observe, not all learners have sufficient autonomy in a given area to be able or willing to exercise
the control needed in such an environment. Cognitive-behaviourist models are most notably
theories of teaching and social–constructivist models are more notably theories of learning, but
both still translate well into methods and processes for teaching. Connectivist models are more
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
distinctly theories of knowledge, which makes them hard to translate into ways to learn and
harder still to translate into ways to teach. Indeed, the notion of a teacher is almost foreign to the
connectivist worldview, except perhaps as a role model and fellow node (perhaps one more
heavily weighted or connected) in a network.
While a great many speculative and theoretical papers have been written on the potential of
connectivism, most reports of experience so far are equivocal and, to cater to diverse learner
needs, there is a clear need for a richer means of establishing both networked and personal
learning environments that offer control when needed in both pedagogical and organizational
terms. The crowd can be a source of wisdom but can equally be a source of
stupidity , with processes like preferential attachment that are as capable of leading to
the Matthew Principle (where the rich get richer and the poor get poorer) and rampant bandwagon
effects as to enabling effective, connected learning.
Future Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy?
We have seen how different models of teaching and learning have evolved when the
technological affordances and climate were right for them. Cognitive-behaviourist pedagogical
models arose in a technological environment that constrained communication to the pre-Web,
one-to-one, and one-to-many modes; social-constructivism flourished in a Web 1.0, many-tomany technological context; and connectivism is at least partially a product of a networked, Web
2.0 world. It is tempting to speculate what the next generation will bring. Some see Web 3.0 as
being the semantic Web, while others include mobility, augmented reality, and location
awareness in the mix . All of these are likely to be important but may not be
sufficient to bring about a paradigmatic change of the sorts we have seen in earlier generations of
networked systems because the nature and mode of communication, though more refined, will not
change much with these emerging technologies. We see a different paradigm emerging. As
concerns about privacy mount and we come to adopt a more nuanced approach to connections
and trust, our networks are bound to become more variegated and specialized. It is already
becoming clear that connectivist approaches must become more intelligent in enabling people to
connect to and discover sources of knowledge. Part of that intelligence will come from datamining and analytics, but part will come from the crowd itself.
Another notable trend is towards more object-based, contextual, or activity-based models of
learning. It is not so much a question of building and sustaining networks as of finding the
appropriate sets of things and people and activities. CloudWorks, a product of the OU-UK, is an
example of this new trend, in which objects of discourse are more important than, or at least
distinct from, the networks that enable them . When
we post a message to a public space like CloudWorks, a blog, or a microblog (e.g., Twitter),
much of the time the post is not addressed or customized to a network of known entities but to an
unknown set of people who we hope will be interested in what we have to say, typically defined
through tags, profile fields, or hashtags. The next step in this cycle would seem to be, logically, to
enable those sets to talk back to us: to find us, guide us, and influence our learning journeys. This
represents a new and different form of communication, one in which the crowd, composed of
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
multiple intelligences, behaves as an intentional single entity. Such set-driven computing is
already perhaps one of the most common ways that learning is supported online: The PageRank
algorithm behind a Google search works in exactly this way, taking multiple intelligent choices
and combining them to provide ranked search results . Wikipedia, though
partially a farmed process, includes many crowd-based or collective elements to help others guide
our learning. Amazon recommends books for us, using complex, collaborative filtering
algorithms that use the crowd as their raw materials. In each case, it is not individuals, groups, or
networks that help us to learn but a faceless intelligence that is partly made of human actions,
partly of a machine’s.
We and others have described these entities in the past as collectives . Despite the
ubiquity of such systems, what still remains unclear is how best to exploit them in learning.
However, it seems at least possible that the next generation of distance education pedagogy will
be enabled by technologies that make effective use of collectives.
Conclusion
Distance education has evolved through many technologies and at least three generations of
pedagogy, as described in this paper. No single generation has provided all the answers, and each
has built on foundations provided by its predecessors rather than replacing the earlier prototype
 . To a large extent, the generations have evolved in tandem with the technologies
that enable them: As new affordances open out, it becomes possible to explore and capitalize on
different aspects of the learning process. For each mode of engagement, different types of
knowledge, learning, and contexts must be applied and demand that distance educators and
students be skilled and informed to select the best mix(es) of both pedagogy and technology.
Although the prime actors in all three generations remain the same—teacher, student, and
content—the development of relationships among these three increases from the critical role of
student–student interaction in constructivism to the student–content interrelationship celebrated
in connectivist pedagogies, with their focus on persistent networks and user-generated content.
The popular community-of-inquiry model, with its focus on building and sustaining cognitive,
social, and teaching presence, can be a useful heuristic in selecting appropriate pedagogies. Table
1 below summarizes these features and provides an overview and examples of both similarities
and differences among them.
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron
Summary of Distance Education Pedagogies
We conclude by arguing that all three current and future generations of DE pedagogy have an
important place in a well-rounded educational experience. Connectivism is built on an
assumption of a constructivist model of learning, with the learner at the centre, connecting and
constructing knowledge in a context that includes not only external networks and groups but also
his or her own histories and predilections. At a small scale, both constructivist and connectivist
approaches almost always rely to a greater or lesser degree on the availability of the stuff of
learning, much of which (at least, that which is successful in helping people to learn) is designed
and organized on CB models. The Web sites, books, tutorial materials, videos, and so on, from
which a learner may learn, all work more or less effectively according to how well they enable
the learner to gain knowledge. Even when learning relies on entirely social interactions, the
various parties involved may communicate knowledge more or less effectively. It is clear that
whether the learner is at the centre or part of a learning community or learning network, learning
effectiveness can be greatly enhanced by applying, at a detailed level, an understanding of how
people can learn more effectively: Cognitivist, behaviourist, constructivist, and connectivist
theories each play an important role.
Generation of
Technology
activities
granularity
granularity
Evaluation Teacher
Scalability
Cognitive–
behaviourism
Mass media:
Print, TV,
radio, one-toone
communication
Individual Fine:
scripted and
Constructivism
Conferencing
(audio, video,
many-to-many
communication
scaffolded
teacherguided
Synthesize:
Discussion
Connectivism
aggregation &
recommender
object and
level, selfcreated
friend, cotraveler
Three Generations of Distance Education Pedagogy
Anderson and Dron