Quantization and Training of Neural Networks for Efﬁcient
Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference
Benoit Jacob
Skirmantas Kligys
Menglong Zhu
Matthew Tang
Andrew Howard
Hartwig Adam
Dmitry Kalenichenko
{benoitjacob,skligys,bochen,menglong,
mttang,howarda,hadam,dkalenichenko}@google.com
Google Inc.
The rising popularity of intelligent mobile devices and
the daunting computational cost of deep learning-based
models call for efﬁcient and accurate on-device inference
schemes. We propose a quantization scheme that allows
inference to be carried out using integer-only arithmetic,
which can be implemented more efﬁciently than ﬂoating
point inference on commonly available integer-only hardware. We also co-design a training procedure to preserve
end-to-end model accuracy post quantization. As a result,
the proposed quantization scheme improves the tradeoff between accuracy and on-device latency. The improvements
are signiﬁcant even on MobileNets, a model family known
for run-time efﬁciency, and are demonstrated in ImageNet
classiﬁcation and COCO detection on popular CPUs.
1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are not well suited for use on mobile devices. Since
the advent of AlexNet , modern CNNs have primarily
been appraised according to classiﬁcation / detection accuracy. Thus network architectures have evolved without regard to model complexity and computational efﬁciency. On
the other hand, successful deployment of CNNs on mobile
platforms such as smartphones, AR/VR devices (HoloLens,
Daydream), and drones require small model sizes to accommodate limited on-device memory, and low latency to maintain user engagement. This has led to a burgeoning ﬁeld of
research that focuses on reducing the model size and inference time of CNNs with minimal accuracy losses.
Approaches in this ﬁeld roughly fall into two categories. The ﬁrst category, exempliﬁed by MobileNet ,
SqueezeNet , ShufﬂeNet , and DenseNet , designs novel network architectures that exploit computation
/ memory efﬁcient operations. The second category quantizes the weights and / or activations of a CNN from 32
bit ﬂoating point into lower bit-depth representations. This
methodology, embraced by approaches such as Ternary
weight networks (TWN ), Binary Neural Networks
(BNN ), XNOR-net , and more , is the focus of our investigation. Despite their abundance, current quantization approaches are lacking in two
respects when it comes to trading off latency with accuracy.
First, prior approaches have not been evaluated on a
reasonable baseline architecture. The most common baseline architectures, AlexNet , VGG and GoogleNet
 , are all over-parameterized by design in order to extract
marginal accuracy improvements. Therefore, it is easy to
obtain sizable compression of these architectures, reducing
quantization experiments on these architectures to proofof-concepts at best. Instead, a more meaningful challenge
would be to quantize model architectures that are already ef-
ﬁcient at trading off latency with accuracy, e.g. MobileNets.
Second, many quantization approaches do not deliver
veriﬁable efﬁciency improvements on real hardware. Approaches that quantize only the weights ( ) are
primarily concerned with on-device storage and less with
computational efﬁciency. Notable exceptions are binary,
ternary and bit-shift networks .
These latter
approaches employ weights that are either 0 or powers of
2, which allow multiplication to be implemented by bit
shifts. However, while bit-shifts can be efﬁcient in custom hardware, they provide little beneﬁt on existing hardware with multiply-add instructions that, when properly
used (i.e. pipelined), are not more expensive than additions alone. Moreover, multiplications are only expensive
if the operands are wide, and the need to avoid multiplications diminishes with bit depth once both weights and activations are quantized. Notably, these approaches rarely provide on-device measurements to verify the promised timing
improvements. More runtime-friendly approaches quantize
both the weights and the activations into 1 bit representa-
(a) Integer-arithmetic-only inference
(b) Training with simulated quantization
Latency (ms)
Top 1 Accuracy
(c) ImageNet latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff
Figure 1.1: Integer-arithmetic-only quantization. a) Integer-arithmetic-only inference of a convolution layer. The input and output
are represented as 8-bit integers according to equation 1. The convolution involves 8-bit integer operands and a 32-bit integer accumulator.
The bias addition involves only 32-bit integers (section 2.4). The ReLU6 nonlinearity only involves 8-bit integer arithmetic. b) Training
with simulated quantization of the convolution layer. All variables and computations are carried out using 32-bit ﬂoating-point arithmetic.
Weight quantization (“wt quant”) and activation quantization (“act quant”) nodes are injected into the computation graph to simulate the
effects of quantization of the variables (section 3). The resultant graph approximates the integer-arithmetic-only computation graph in panel
a), while being trainable using conventional optimization algorithms for ﬂoating point models. c) Our quantization scheme beneﬁts from
the fast integer-arithmetic circuits in common CPUs to deliver an improved latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff (section 4). The ﬁgure compares
integer quantized MobileNets against ﬂoating point baselines on ImageNet using Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 LITTLE cores.
tions . With these approaches, both multiplications and additions can be implemented by efﬁcient bit-shift
and bit-count operations, which are showcased in custom
GPU kernels (BNN ). However, 1 bit quantization often leads to substantial performance degradation, and may
be overly stringent on model representation.
In this paper we address the above issues by improving
the latency-vs-accuracy tradeoffs of MobileNets on common mobile hardware. Our speciﬁc contributions are:
• We provide a quantization scheme (section 2.1) that
quantizesh both weights and activations as 8-bit integers,
and just a few parameters (bias vectors) as 32-bit integers.
• We provide a quantized inference framework that is ef-
ﬁciently implementable on integer-arithmetic-only hardware such as the Qualcomm Hexagon (sections 2.2, 2.3),
and we describe an efﬁcient, accurate implementation on
ARM NEON (Appendix B).
• We provide a quantized training framework (section 3)
co-designed with our quantized inference to minimize the
loss of accuracy from quantization on real models.
• We apply our frameworks to efﬁcient classiﬁcation and
detection systems based on MobileNets and provide
benchmark results on popular ARM CPUs (section 4)
that show signiﬁcant improvements in the latency-vsaccuracy tradeoffs for state-of-the-art MobileNet architectures, demonstrated in ImageNet classiﬁcation ,
COCO object detection , and other tasks.
Our work draws inspiration from , which leverages
low-precision ﬁxed-point arithmetic to accelerate the training speed of CNNs, and from , which uses 8-bit ﬁxedpoint arithmetic to speed up inference on x86 CPUs. Our
quantization scheme focuses instead on improving the inference speed vs accuracy tradeoff on mobile CPUs.
2. Quantized Inference
2.1. Quantization scheme
In this section, we describe our general quantization
scheme12, that is, the correspondence between the bitrepresentation of values (denoted q below, for “quantized
value”) and their interpretation as mathematical real numbers (denoted r below, for “real value”). Our quantization
scheme is implemented using integer-only arithmetic during inference and ﬂoating-point arithmetic during training,
with both implementations maintaining a high degree of
correspondence with each other. We achieve this by ﬁrst
providing a mathematically rigorous deﬁnition of our quantization scheme, and separately adopting this scheme for
both integer-arithmetic inference and ﬂoating-point training.
1The quantization scheme described here is the one adopted in Tensor-
Flow Lite and we will refer to speciﬁc parts of its code to illustrate
aspects discussed below.
2We had earlier described this quantization scheme in the documentation of gemmlowp . That page may still be useful as an alternate
treatment of some of the topics developed in this section, and for its selfcontained example code.
A basic requirement of our quantization scheme is that it
permits efﬁcient implementation of all arithmetic using only
integer arithmetic operations on the quantized values (we
eschew implementations requiring lookup tables because
these tend to perform poorly compared to pure arithmetic
on SIMD hardware). This is equivalent to requiring that the
quantization scheme be an afﬁne mapping of integers q to
real numbers r, i.e. of the form
r = S(q −Z)
for some constants S and Z. Equation (1) is our quantization scheme and the constants S and Z are our quantization
parameters. Our quantization scheme uses a single set of
quantization parameters for all values within each activations array and within each weights array; separate arrays
use separate quantization parameters.
For 8-bit quantization, q is quantized as an 8-bit integer
(for B-bit quantization, q is quantized as an B-bit integer).
Some arrays, typically bias vectors, are quantized as 32-bit
integers, see section 2.4.
The constant S (for “scale”) is an arbitrary positive real
number. It is typically represented in software as a ﬂoatingpoint quantity, like the real values r. Section 2.2 describes
methods for avoiding the representation of such ﬂoatingpoint quantities in the inference workload.
The constant Z (for “zero-point”) is of the same type
as quantized values q, and is in fact the quantized value q
corresponding to the real value 0. This allows us to automatically meet the requirement that the real value r = 0 be
exactly representable by a quantized value. The motivation
for this requirement is that efﬁcient implementation of neural network operators often requires zero-padding of arrays
around boundaries.
Our discussion so far is summarized in the following
quantized buffer data structure3, with one instance of such a
buffer existing for each activations array and weights array
in a neural network. We use C++ syntax because it allows
the unambiguous conveyance of types.
template<typename QType>
// e.g. QType=uint8
struct QuantizedBuffer {
vector<QType> q;
// the quantized values
// the scale
// the zero-point
2.2. Integer-arithmetic-only matrix multiplication
We now turn to the question of how to perform inference
using only integer arithmetic, i.e. how to use Equation (1)
to translate real-numbers computation into quantized-values
3The actual data structures in the TensorFlow Lite Converter are
QuantizationParams and Array in this header ﬁle. As we discuss
in the next subsection, this data structure, which still contains a ﬂoatingpoint quantity, does not appear in the actual quantized on-device inference
computation, and how the latter can be designed to involve
only integer arithmetic even though the scale values S are
not integers.
Consider the multiplication of two square N × N matrices of real numbers, r1 and r2, with their product represented by r3 = r1r2. We denote the entries of each of these
matrices rα (α = 1, 2 or 3) as r(i,j)
for 1 ⩽i, j ⩽N,
and the quantization parameters with which they are quantized as (Sα, Zα). We denote the quantized entries by q(i,j)
Equation (1) then becomes:
= Sα(q(i,j)
From the deﬁnition of matrix multiplication, we have
−Z1)S2(q(j,k)
which can be rewritten as
−Z1)(q(j,k)
where the multiplier M is deﬁned as
In Equation (4), the only non-integer is the multiplier M.
As a constant depending only on the quantization scales
S1, S2, S3, it can be computed ofﬂine. We empirically ﬁnd
it to always be in the interval (0, 1), and can therefore express it in the normalized form
where M0 is in the interval [0.5, 1) and n is a non-negative
integer. The normalized multiplier M0 now lends itself well
to being expressed as a ﬁxed-point multiplier (e.g. int16 or
int32 depending on hardware capability). For example, if
int32 is used, the integer representing M0 is the int32 value
nearest to 231M0. Since M0 ⩾0.5, this value is always at
least 230 and will therefore always have at least 30 bits of
relative accuracy. Multiplication by M0 can thus be implemented as a ﬁxed-point multiplication4. Meanwhile, multiplication by 2−n can be implemented with an efﬁcient bitshift, albeit one that needs to have correct round-to-nearest
behavior, an issue that we return to in Appendix B.
2.3. Efﬁcient handling of zero-points
In order to efﬁciently implement the evaluation of Equation (4) without having to perform 2N 3 subtractions and
4The computation discussed in this section is implemented in Tensor-
Flow Lite reference code for a fully-connected layer.
without having to expand the operands of the multiplication
into 16-bit integers, we ﬁrst notice that by distributing the
multiplication in Equation (4), we can rewrite it as
NZ1Z2 −Z1a(k)
1 takes only N additions to compute, so they
collectively take only 2N 2 additions. The rest of the cost of
the evaluation of (7) is almost entirely concentrated in the
core integer matrix multiplication accumulation
which takes 2N 3 arithmetic operations; indeed, everything
else involved in (7) is O(N 2) with a small constant in the O.
Thus, the expansion into the form (7) and the factored-out
computation of a(k)
enable low-overhead handling
of arbitrary zero-points for anything but the smallest values
of N, reducing the problem to the same core integer matrix
multiplication accumulation (9) as we would have to compute in any other zero-points-free quantization scheme.
2.4. Implementation of a typical fused layer
We continue the discussion of section 2.3, but now explicitly deﬁne the data types of all quantities involved, and
modify the quantized matrix multiplication (7) to merge
the bias-addition and activation function evaluation directly
into it. This fusing of whole layers into a single operation
is not only an optimization. As we must reproduce in inference code the same arithmetic that is used in training,
the granularity of fused operators in inference code (taking
an 8-bit quantized input and producing an 8-bit quantized
output) must match the placement of “fake quantization”
operators in the training graph (section 3).
For our implementation on ARM and x86 CPU architectures, we use the gemmlowp library , whose
GemmWithOutputPipeline entry point provides supports the fused operations that we now describe5.
5The discussion in this section is implemented in TensorFlow Lite 
for e.g. a Convolutional operator (reference code is self-contained, optimized code calls into gemmlowp ).
We take the q1 matrix to be the weights, and the q2 matrix
to be the activations. Both the weights and activations are
of type uint8 (we could have equivalently chosen int8, with
suitably modiﬁed zero-points). Accumulating products of
uint8 values requires a 32-bit accumulator, and we choose a
signed type for the accumulator for a reason that will soon
become clear. The sum in (9) is thus of the form:
int32 += uint8 * uint8.
In order to have the quantized bias-addition be the addition
of an int32 bias into this int32 accumulator, the bias-vector
is quantized such that: it uses int32 as its quantized data
type; it uses 0 as its quantization zero-point Zbias; and its
quantization scale Sbias is the same as that of the accumulators, which is the product of the scales of the weights and
of the input activations. In the notation of section 2.3,
Sbias = S1S2, Zbias = 0.
Although the bias-vectors are quantized as 32-bit values,
they account for only a tiny fraction of the parameters in a
neural network. Furthermore, the use of higher precision
for bias vectors meets a real need: as each bias-vector entry
is added to many output activations, any quantization error
in the bias-vector tends to act as an overall bias (i.e. an error
term with nonzero mean), which must be avoided in order
to preserve good end-to-end neural network accuracy6.
With the ﬁnal value of the int32 accumulator, there remain three things left to do: scale down to the ﬁnal scale
used by the 8-bit output activations, cast down to uint8 and
apply the activation function to yield the ﬁnal 8-bit output
activation.
The down-scaling corresponds to multiplication by the
multiplier M in equation (7). As explained in section 2.2, it
is implemented as a ﬁxed-point multiplication by a normalized multiplier M0 and a rounding bit-shift. Afterwards, we
perform a saturating cast to uint8, saturating to the range
We focus on activation functions that are mere clamps,
e.g. ReLU, ReLU6. Mathematical functions are discussed
in appendix A.1 and we do not currently fuse them into such
layers. Thus, the only thing that our fused activation functions need to do is to further clamp the uint8 value to some
sub-interval of before storing the ﬁnal uint8 output
activation. In practice, the quantized training process (section 3) tends to learn to make use of the whole output uint8
 interval so that the activation function no longer
does anything, its effect being subsumed in the clamping
to implied in the saturating cast to uint8.
6The quantization of bias-vectors discussed here is implemented here
in the TensorFlow Lite Converter.
3. Training with simulated quantization
A common approach to training quantized networks is
to train in ﬂoating point and then quantize the resulting
weights (sometimes with additional post-quantization training for ﬁne-tuning). We found that this approach works
sufﬁciently well for large models with considerable representational capacity, but leads to signiﬁcant accuracy drops
for small models. Common failure modes for simple posttraining quantization include: 1) large differences (more
than 100×) in ranges of weights for different output channels (section 2 mandates that all channels of the same layer
be quantized to the same resolution, which causes weights
in channels with smaller ranges to have much higher relative
error) and 2) outlier weight values that make all remaining
weights less precise after quantization.
We propose an approach that simulates quantization effects in the forward pass of training. Backpropagation still
happens as usual, and all weights and biases are stored in
ﬂoating point so that they can be easily nudged by small
The forward propagation pass however simulates quantized inference as it will happen in the inference
engine, by implementing in ﬂoating-point arithmetic the
rounding behavior of the quantization scheme that we introduced in section 2:
• Weights are quantized before they are convolved with
the input. If batch normalization (see ) is used for
the layer, the batch normalization parameters are “folded
into” the weights before quantization, see section 3.2.
• Activations are quantized at points where they would be
during inference, e.g. after the activation function is applied to a convolutional or fully connected layer’s output,
or after a bypass connection adds or concatenates the outputs of several layers together such as in ResNets.
For each layer, quantization is parameterized by the
number of quantization levels and clamping range, and is
performed by applying point-wise the quantization function
q deﬁned as follows:
clamp(r; a, b) := min (max(x, a), b)
s(a, b, n) := b −a
q(r; a, b, n) :=
clamp(r; a, b) −a
s(a, b, n)
s(a, b, n) + a,
where r is a real-valued number to be quantized, [a; b] is the
quantization range, n is the number of quantization levels,
and ⌊·⌉denotes rounding to the nearest integer. n is ﬁxed
for all layers in our experiments, e.g. n = 28 = 256 for 8
bit quantization.
3.1. Learning quantization ranges
Quantization ranges are treated differently for weight
quantization vs. activation quantization:
• For weights, the basic idea is simply to set a := min w,
b := max w. We apply a minor tweak to this so that
the weights, once quantized as int8 values, only range
in [−127, 127] and never take the value −128, as this enables a substantial optimization opportunity (for more details, see Appendix B).
• For activations, ranges depend on the inputs to the network. To estimate the ranges, we collect [a; b] ranges
seen on activations during training and then aggregate
them via exponential moving averages (EMA) with the
smoothing parameter being close to 1 so that observed
ranges are smoothed across thousands of training steps.
Given signiﬁcant delay in the EMA updating activation
ranges when the ranges shift rapidly, we found it useful
to completely disable activation quantization at the start
of training (say, for 50 thousand to 2 million steps). This
allows the network to enter a more stable state where activation quantization ranges do not exclude a signiﬁcant
fraction of values.
In both cases, the boundaries [a; b] are nudged so that
value 0.0 is exactly representable as an integer z(a, b, n)
after quantization. As a result, the learned quantization parameters map to the scale S and zero-point Z in equation 1:
S = s(a, b, n), Z = z(a, b, n)
Below we depict simulated quantization assuming that
the computations of a neural network are captured as a TensorFlow graph . A typical workﬂow is described in Algorithm 1. Optimization of the inference graph by fusing
Algorithm 1 Quantized graph training and inference
1: Create a training graph of the ﬂoating-point model.
2: Insert fake quantization TensorFlow operations in locations where tensors will be downcasted to fewer bits
during inference according to equation 12.
3: Train in simulated quantized mode until convergence.
4: Create and optimize the inference graph for running in
a low bit inference engine.
5: Run inference using the quantized inference graph.
and removing operations is outside the scope of this paper. Source code for graph modiﬁcations (inserting fake
quantization operations, creating and optimizing the inference graph) and a low bit inference engine has been opensourced with TensorFlow contributions in .
Figure 1.1a and b illustrate TensorFlow graphs before
and after quantization for a simple convolutional layer. Illustrations of the more complex convolution with a bypass
connection in ﬁgure C.3 can be found in ﬁgure C.4.
Note that the biases are not quantized because they are
represented as 32-bit integers in the inference process, with
a much higher range and precision compared to the 8 bit
weights and activations. Furthermore, quantization parameters used for biases are inferred from the quantization parameters of the weights and activations. See section 2.4.
Typical TensorFlow code illustrating use of follows:
from tf.contrib.quantize \
import quantize_graph as qg
g = tf.Graph()
with g.as_default():
output = ...
total_loss = ...
optimizer = ...
train_tensor = ...
if is_training:
quantized_graph = \
qg.create_training_graph(g)
quantized_graph = \
qg.create_eval_graph(g)
# Train or evaluate quantized_graph.
3.2. Batch normalization folding
For models that use batch normalization (see ), there
is additional complexity: the training graph contains batch
normalization as a separate block of operations, whereas
the inference graph has batch normalization parameters
“folded” into the convolutional or fully connected layer’s
weights and biases, for efﬁciency. To accurately simulate
quantization effects, we need to simulate this folding, and
quantize weights after they have been scaled by the batch
normalization parameters. We do so with the following:
Here γ is the batch normalization’s scale parameter,
B) is the moving average estimate of the variance
of convolution results across the batch, and ε is just a small
constant for numerical stability.
After folding, the batch-normalized convolutional layer
reduces to the simple convolutional layer depicted in ﬁgure 1.1a with the folded weights wfold and the corresponding folded biases. Therefore the same recipe in ﬁgure 1.1b
applies. See the appendix for the training graph (ﬁgure C.5)
for a batch-normalized convolutional layer, the corresponding inference graph (ﬁgure C.6), the training graph after
batch-norm folding (ﬁgure C.7) and the training graph after both folding and quantization (ﬁgure C.8).
ResNet depth
Floating-point accuracy
Integer-quantized accuracy
Table 4.1: ResNet on ImageNet: Floating-point vs quantized network accuracy for various network depths.
Weight bits
Activation bits
Table 4.2:
ResNet on ImageNet:
Accuracy under various quantization schemes, including binary weight networks (BWN ), ternary weight networks (TWN
 ), incremental network quantization (INQ ) and
ﬁne-grained quantization (FGQ )
4. Experiments
We conducted two set of experiments, one showcasing the effectiveness of quantized training (Section. 4.1),
and the other illustrating the improved latency-vs-accuracy
tradeoff of quantized models on common hardware (Section. 4.2). The most performance-critical part of the inference workload on the neural networks being benchmarked
is matrix multiplication (GEMM). The 8-bit and 32-bit
ﬂoating-point GEMM inference code uses the gemmlowp
library for 8-bit quantized inference, and the Eigen library for 32-bit ﬂoating-point inference.
4.1. Quantized training of Large Networks
We apply quantized training to ResNets and InceptionV3 on the ImageNet dataset. These popular networks are too computationally intensive to be deployed on
mobile devices, but are included for comparison purposes.
Training protocols are discussed in Appendix D.1 and D.2.
We compare ﬂoating-point vs integer-quantized ResNets
for various depths in table 4.1. Accuracies of integer-only
quantized networks are within 2% of their ﬂoating-point
counterparts.
We also list ResNet50 accuracies under different quantization schemes in table 4.2. As expected, integer-only
quantization outperforms FGQ , which uses 2 bits for
weight quantization. INQ (5-bit weight ﬂoating-point
activation) achieves a similar accuracy as ours, but we provide additional run-time improvements (see section 4.2).
Table 4.3: Inception v3 on ImageNet: Accuracy and recall
5 comparison of ﬂoating point and quantized models.
Inception v3 on ImageNet
We compare the Inception v3 model quantized into 8 and 7
bits, respectively. 7-bit quantization is obtained by setting
the number of quantization levels in equation 12 to n = 27.
We additionally probe the sensitivity of activation quantization by comparing networks with two activation nonlinearities, ReLU6 and ReLU. The training protocol is in Appendix D.2.
Table 4.3 shows that 7-bit quantized training produces
model accuracies close to that of 8-bit quantized training, and quantized models with ReLU6 have less accuracy
degradation. The latter can be explained by noticing that
ReLU6 introduces the interval as a natural range for
activations, while ReLU allows activations to take values
from a possibly larger interval, with different ranges in different channels. Values in a ﬁxed range are easier to quantize with high precision.
4.2. Quantization of MobileNets
MobileNets are a family of architectures that achieve a
state-of-the-art tradeoff between on-device latency and ImageNet classiﬁcation accuracy. In this section we demonstrate how integer-only quantization can further improve the
tradeoff on common hardware.
We benchmarked the MobileNet architecture with varying depth-multipliers (DM) and resolutions on ImageNet
on three types of Qualcomm cores, which represent three
different micro-architectures: 1) Snapdragon 835 LITTLE
core, (ﬁgure. 1.1c), a power-efﬁcient processor found in
Google Pixel 2; 2) Snapdragon 835 big core (ﬁgure. 4.1), a
high-performance core employed by Google Pixel 2; and 3)
Snapdragon 821 big core (ﬁgure. 4.2), a high-performance
core used in Google Pixel 1.
Integer-only quantized MobileNets achieve higher accuracies than ﬂoating-point MobileNets given the same run-
Latency (ms)
Top 1 Accuracy
Figure 4.1: ImageNet classiﬁer on Qualcomm Snapdragon
835 big cores: Latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff of ﬂoatingpoint and integer-only MobileNets.
Latency (ms)
Top 1 Accuracy
Figure 4.2: ImageNet classiﬁer on Qualcomm Snapdragon
821: Latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff of ﬂoating-point and
integer-only MobileNets.
time budget. The accuracy gap is quite substantial (∼10%)
for Snapdragon 835 LITTLE cores at the 33ms latency
needed for real-time (30 fps) operation. While most of the
quantization literature focuses on minimizing accuracy loss
for a given architecture, we advocate for a more comprehensive latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff as a better measure.
Note that this tradeoff depends critically on the relative
speed of ﬂoating-point vs integer-only arithmetic in hardware. Floating-point computation is better optimized in the
Snapdragon 821, for example, resulting in a less noticeable
reduction in latency for quantized models.
We evaluated quantization in the context of mobile real time
object detection, comparing the performance of quantized
8-bit and ﬂoat models of MobileNet SSD on the
COCO dataset . We replaced all the regular convolutions in the SSD prediction layers with separable convolu-
LITTLE (ms)
Table 4.4: Object detection speed and accuracy on COCO
dataset of ﬂoating point and integer-only quantized models.
Latency (ms) is measured on Qualcomm Snapdragon 835
big and LITTLE cores.
tions (depthwise followed by 1 × 1 projection). This modi-
ﬁcation is consistent with the overall design of MobileNets
and makes them more computationally efﬁcient. We utilized the Open Source TensorFlow Object Detection API
 to train and evaluate our models. The training protocol
is described in Appendix D.3. We also delayed quantization for 500 thousand steps (see section 3.1), ﬁnding that it
signiﬁcantly decreases the time to convergence.
Table 4.4 shows the latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff between ﬂoating-point and integer-quantized models. Latency
was measured on a single thread using Snapdragon 835
cores (big and LITTLE). Quantized training and inference
results in up to a 50% reduction in running time, with a
minimal loss in accuracy (−1.8% relative).
Face detection
To better examine quantized MobileNet SSD on a smaller
scale, we benchmarked face detection on the face attribute
classiﬁcation dataset (a Flickr-based dataset used in ).
We contacted the authors of to evaluate our quantized
MobileNets on detection and face attributes following the
same protocols (detailed in Appendix D.4).
As indicated by tables 4.5 and 4.6, quantization provides
close to a 2× latency reduction with a Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 big or LITTLE core at the cost of a ∼2% drop
in the average precision. Notably, quantization allows the
25% face detector to run in real-time (1K/28 ≈36 fps) on
a single big core, whereas the ﬂoating-point model remains
slower than real-time (1K/44 ≈23 fps).
We additionally examine the effect of multi-threading on
the latency of quantized models. Table 4.6 shows a 1.5 to
2.2×) speedup when using 4 cores. The speedup ratios are
comparable between the two cores, and are higher for larger
models where the overhead of multi-threading occupies a
smaller fraction of the total computation.
Face attributes
Figure 4.3 shows the latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff of face
attribute classiﬁcation on the Qualcomm Snapdragon 821.
Table 4.5: Face detection accuracy of ﬂoating point and
integer-only quantized models.
The reported precision
/ recall is averaged over different precision / recall values where an IOU of x between the groundtruth and predicted windows is considered a correct detection, for x in
{0.5, 0.55, . . ., 0.95}.
LITTLE Cores
Table 4.6: Face detection: latency of ﬂoating point and
quantized models on Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 cores.
Since quantized training results in little accuracy degradation, we see an improved tradeoff even though the Qualcomm Snapdragon 821 is highly optimized for ﬂoating
point arithmetic (see Figure 4.2 for comparison).
Latency (ms)
Average precision
Figure 4.3: Face attribute classiﬁer on Qualcomm Snapdragon 821: Latency-vs-accuracy tradeoff of ﬂoating-point
and integer-only MobileNets.
Ablation study To understand performance sensitivity
to the quantization scheme, we further evaluate quantized
Table 4.7: Face attributes: relative average category precision of integer-quantized MobileNets (varying weight and
activation bit depths) compared with ﬂoating point.
Table 4.8: Face attributes: Age precision at difference of
5 years for quantized model (varying weight and activation
bit depths) compared with ﬂoating point.
training with varying weight and activation quantization bit
depths. The degradation in average precision for binary attributes and age precision relative to the ﬂoating-point baseline are shown in Tables 4.7 and 4.8, respectively. The tables suggest that 1) weights are more sensitive to reduced
quantization bit depth than activations, 2) 8 and 7-bit quantized models perform similarly to ﬂoating point models, and
3) when the total bit-depths are equal, it is better to keep
weight and activation bit depths the same.
5. Discussion
We propose a quantization scheme that relies only on
integer arithmetic to approximate the ﬂoating-point computations in a neural network. Training that simulates the
effect of quantization helps to restore model accuracy to
near-identical levels as the original. In addition to the 4×
reduction of model size, inference efﬁciency is improved
via ARM NEON-based implementations.
The improvement advances the state-of-the-art tradeoff between latency
on common ARM CPUs and the accuracy of popular computer vision models. The synergy between our quantization scheme and efﬁcient architecture design suggests that
integer-arithmetic-only inference could be a key enabler
that propels visual recognition technologies into the realtime and low-end phone market.