Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 809–819
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for Fact Extraction and VERiﬁcation
James Thorne1, Andreas Vlachos1, Christos Christodoulopoulos2, and Arpit Mittal2
1Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld
2Amazon Research Cambridge
{j.thorne, a.vlachos}@sheffield.ac.uk
{chrchrs, mitarpit}@amazon.co.uk
In this paper we introduce a new publicly
available dataset for veriﬁcation against
textual sources, FEVER: Fact Extraction
and VERiﬁcation. It consists of 185,445
claims generated by altering sentences extracted from Wikipedia and subsequently
veriﬁed without knowledge of the sentence they were derived from.
claims are classiﬁed as SUPPORTED, RE-
FUTED or NOTENOUGHINFO by annotators achieving 0.6841 in Fleiss κ.
the ﬁrst two classes, the annotators also
recorded the sentence(s) forming the necessary evidence for their judgment.
characterize the challenge of the dataset
presented, we develop a pipeline approach
and compare it to suitably designed oracles. The best accuracy we achieve on labeling a claim accompanied by the correct
evidence is 31.87%, while if we ignore the
evidence we achieve 50.91%. Thus we believe that FEVER is a challenging testbed
that will help stimulate progress on claim
veriﬁcation against textual sources.
Introduction
The ever-increasing amounts of textual information available combined with the ease in sharing it
through the web has increased the demand for veriﬁcation, also referred to as fact checking. While
it has received a lot of attention in the context of
journalism, veriﬁcation is important for other domains, e.g. information in scientiﬁc publications,
product reviews, etc.
In this paper we focus on veriﬁcation of textual
claims against textual sources. When compared
to textual entailment (TE)/natural language inference ,
the key difference is that in these tasks the passage
to verify each claim is given, and in recent years it
typically consists a single sentence, while in veri-
ﬁcation systems it is retrieved from a large set of
documents in order to form the evidence. Another
related task is question answering (QA), for which
approaches have recently been extended to handle large-scale resources such as Wikipedia . However, questions typically provide the information needed to identify the answer,
while information missing from a claim can often be crucial in retrieving refuting evidence. For
example, a claim stating “Fiji’s largest island is
Kauai.” can be refuted by retrieving “Kauai is the
oldest Hawaiian Island.” as evidence.
Progress on the aforementioned tasks has bene-
ﬁted from the availability of large-scale datasets
 .
However, despite the rising interest in veriﬁcation
and fact checking among researchers, the datasets
currently used for this task are limited to a few
hundred claims.
Indicatively, the recently conducted Fake News Challenge with 50 participating teams used a dataset
consisting of 300 claims veriﬁed against 2,595 associated news articles which is orders of magnitude smaller than those used for TE and QA.
In this paper we present a new dataset for claim
veriﬁcation, FEVER: Fact Extraction and VERiﬁcation.
It consists of 185,445 claims manually veriﬁed against the introductory sections of
Wikipedia pages and classiﬁed as SUPPORTED,
REFUTED or NOTENOUGHINFO. For the ﬁrst two
classes, systems and annotators need to also return
the combination of sentences forming the necessary evidence supporting or refuting the claim (see
Figure 1). The claims were generated by human
annotators extracting claims from Wikipedia and
mutating them in a variety of ways, some of which
were meaning-altering. The veriﬁcation of each
claim was conducted in a separate annotation process by annotators who were aware of the page but
not the sentence from which original claim was
extracted and thus in 31.75% of the claims more
than one sentence was considered appropriate evidence. Claims require composition of evidence
from multiple sentences in 16.82% of cases. Furthermore, in 12.15% of the claims, this evidence
was taken from multiple pages.
To ensure annotation consistency, we developed
suitable guidelines and user interfaces, resulting
in inter-annotator agreement of 0.6841 in Fleiss κ
 in claim veriﬁcation classiﬁcation,
and 95.42% precision and 72.36% recall in evidence retrieval.
To characterize the challenges posed by FEVER
we develop a pipeline approach which, given a
claim, ﬁrst identiﬁes relevant documents, then selects sentences forming the evidence from the documents and ﬁnally classiﬁes the claim w.r.t. evidence.
The best performing version achieves
31.87% accuracy in veriﬁcation when requiring
correct evidence to be retrieved for claims SUP-
PORTED or REFUTED, and 50.91% if the correctness of the evidence is ignored, both indicating the
difﬁculty but also the feasibility of the task. We
also conducted oracle experiments in which components of the pipeline were replaced by the gold
standard annotations, and observed that the most
challenging part of the task is selecting the sentences containing the evidence. In addition to publishing the data via our website1, we also publish
the annotation interfaces2 and the baseline system3
to stimulate further research on veriﬁcation.
Related Works
Vlachos and Riedel constructed a dataset
for claim veriﬁcation consisting of 106 claims,
selecting data from fact-checking websites such
as PolitiFact, taking advantage of the labelled
claims available there. However, in order to develop claim veriﬁcation components we typically
require the justiﬁcation for each verdict, including the sources used. While this information is
usually available in justiﬁcations provided by the
journalists, they are not in a machine-readable
form. Thus, also considering the small number of
claims, the task deﬁned by the dataset proposed
1 
2 
3 
fever-baselines
Claim: The Rodney King riots took place in
the most populous county in the USA.
[wiki/Los Angeles Riots]
also known as the Rodney King riots
were a series of riots, lootings, arsons,
disturbances
occurred in Los Angeles County,
California in April and May 1992.
[wiki/Los Angeles County]
is the most populous county in the USA.
Verdict: Supported
Figure 1: Manually veriﬁed claim requiring evidence
from multiple Wikipedia pages.
remains too challenging for the ML/NLP methods
currently available. Wang extended this approach by including all 12.8K claims available by
Politifact via its API, however the justiﬁcation and
the evidence contained in it was ignored in the experiments as it was not machine-readable. Instead,
the claims were classiﬁed considering only the text
and the metadata related to the person making the
claim. While this rendered the task amenable to
current NLP/ML methods, it does not allow for
veriﬁcation against any sources and no evidence
needs to be returned to justify the verdicts.
The Fake News challenge modelled veriﬁcation as stance classiﬁcation: given a claim and an article, predict whether
the article supports, refutes, observes (neutrally
states the claim) or is irrelevant to the claim. It
consists of 50K labelled claim-article pairs, combining 300 claims with 2,582 articles. The claims
and the articles were curated and labeled by journalists in the context of the Emergent Project , and the dataset was ﬁrst proposed
by Ferreira and Vlachos , who only classi-
ﬁed the claim w.r.t. the article headline instead of
the whole article. Similar to recognizing textual
entailment (RTE) , the systems
were provided with the sources to verify against,
instead of having to retrieve them.
A differently motivated but closely related
dataset is the one developed by Angeli and Manning to evaluate natural logic inference
for common sense reasoning, as it evaluated sim-
ple claims such as “not all birds can ﬂy” against
textual sources — including Wikipedia — which
were processed with an Open Information Extraction system . However, the
claims were small in number (1,378) and limited
in variety as they were derived from eight binary
ConceptNet relations .
Claim veriﬁcation is also related to the multilingual Answer Validation Exercise conducted in the context of the TREC
shared tasks. Apart from the difference in dataset
size (1,000 instances per language), the key difference is that the claims being validated were answers returned to questions by QA systems. The
questions and the QA systems themselves provide additional context to the claim, while in our
task deﬁnition the claims are outside any particular context. In the same vein, Kobayashi et al.
 collected a dataset of 412 statements in
context from high-school student exams that were
validated against Wikipedia and history textbooks.
Fact extraction and veriﬁcation dataset
The dataset was constructed in two stages4 :
Claim Generation Extracting information from
Wikipedia and generating claims from it.
Claim Labeling Classifying whether a claim is
supported or refuted by Wikipedia and selecting the evidence for it, or deciding there’s not
enough information to make a decision.
Task 1 - Claim Generation
The objective of this task was to generate claims
from information extracted from Wikipedia. We
used the June 2017 Wikipedia dump, processed
it with Stanford CoreNLP ,
and sampled sentences from the introductory sections of approximately 50,000 popular pages.5
The annotators were given a sentence from the
sample chosen at random, and were asked to generate a set of claims containing a single piece of
information, focusing on the entity that its original
Wikipedia page was about. We asked the annotators to generate claims about a single fact which
could be arbitrarily complex and allowed for a variety of expressions for the entities.
4The annotation guidelines for both stages are provided in
the supplementary materials
5These consisted of 5,000 from a Wikipedia ‘most accessed pages’ list and the pages hyperlinked from them.
If only the source sentences were used to generate claims then this would result in trivially veriﬁable claims, as the new claims would in essence
be simpliﬁcations and paraphrases. At the other
extreme, if we allowed world knowledge to be
freely incorporated it would result in claims that
would be hard to verify on Wikipedia alone. We
address this issue by introducing a dictionary: a
list of terms that were (hyper-)linked in the original sentence, along with the ﬁrst sentence from
their corresponding Wikipedia pages. Using this
dictionary, we provide additional knowledge that
can be used to increase the complexity of the generated claims in a controlled manner.
The annotators were also asked to generate mutations of the claims: altered versions of the original claims, which may or may not change whether
they are supported by Wikipedia, or even if they
can be veriﬁed against it. Inspired by the operators used in Natural Logic Inference , we speciﬁed six types of mutation: paraphrasing, negation, substitution of an
entity/relation with a similar/dissimilar one, and
making the claim more general/speciﬁc.
During trials of the annotation task, we discovered that the majority of annotators had dif-
ﬁculty generating non-trivial negation mutations
(e.g. mutations beyond adding “not” to the original). Besides providing numerous examples for
each mutation, we also redesigned the annotation
interface so that all mutation types were visible
at once and highlighted mutations that contained
“not” in order to discourage trivial negations. Finally, we provided the annotators with an ontology
diagram to illustrate the different levels of entity
similarity and class membership.
This process resulted in claims (both extracted
and mutated) with a mean length of 9.4 tokens
which is comparable to the average hypothesis
length of 8.3 tokens in Bowman et al. .
Task 2 - Claim Labeling
The annotators were asked to label each individual claim generated during Task 1 as SUPPORTED,
REFUTED or NOTENOUGHINFO. For the ﬁrst two
cases, the annotators were asked to ﬁnd the evidence from any page that supports or refutes the
claim (see Figure 2 for a screenshot of the interface). In order to encourage inter-annotator consistency, we gave the following general guideline:
If I was given only the selected sentences, do I have strong reason to believe the claim is true (supported) or
stronger reason to believe the claim is
false (refuted). If I’m not certain, what
additional information (dictionary) do I
have to add to reach this conclusion.
In the annotation interface, all sentences from
the introductory section of the page for the main
entity of the claim and of every linked entity in
those sentences were provided as a default source
of evidence (left-hand side in Fig. 2). Using this
interface the annotators recorded the sentences
necessary to justify their classiﬁcation decisions.
In order to allow exploration beyond the main and
linked pages, we also allowed annotators to add
an arbitrary Wikipedia page by providing its URL
and the system would add its introductory section
as additional sentences that could be then selected
as evidence (right-hand side in Fig. 2). The title
of the page could also be used as evidence to resolve co-reference, but this decision was not explicitly recorded. We did not set a hard time limit
for the task, but the annotators were advised not to
spend more than 2-3 minutes per claim. The label
NOTENOUGHINFO was used if the claim could
not be supported or refuted by any amount of information in Wikipedia (either because it is too
general, or too speciﬁc).
Annotators
The annotation team consisted of a total of 50
members, 25 of which were involved only in the
ﬁrst task. All annotators were native US English
speakers and were trained either directly by the
authors, or by experienced annotators. The interface for both tasks was developed by the authors
in collaboration with an initial team of two annotators. Their notes and suggestions were incorporated into the annotation guidelines.
The majority of the feedback received from the
annotators was very positive: they found the task
engaging and challenging, and after the initial
stages of annotation they had developed an understanding of the needs of the task which let them
discuss solutions about edge cases as a group.
Data Validation
Given the complexity of the second task (claim
labeling), we conducted three forms of data validation: 5-way inter-annotator agreement, agreement against super-annotators (deﬁned in Section 3.4.2), and manual validation by the authors.
The validation for claim generation was done implicitly during claim labeling. As a result 1.01% of
claims were skipped, 2.11% contained typos and
6.63% of the generated claims were ﬂagged as too
vague/ambiguous and were excluded e.g. or “Sons
of Anarchy premiered.”.
5-way Agreement
We randomly selected 4% (n = 7506) of claims
which were not skipped to be annotated by 5 annotators. We calculated the Fleiss κ score to be 0.6841 which we consider encouraging given the complexity of the task. In comparison Bowman et al. reported a κ of 0.7 for a
simpler task, since the annotators were given the
premise/evidence to verify a hypothesis against
without the additional task of ﬁnding it.
Agreement against Super-Annotators
We randomly selected 1% of the data to be annotated by super-annotators: expert annotators with
no suggested time restrictions.
The purpose of
this exercise was to provide as much coverage of
evidence as possible.
We instructed the superannotators to search over the whole Wikipedia
for every possible sentence that could be used as
evidence. We compared the regular annotations
against this set of evidence and the precision/recall
was 95.42% and 72.36% respectively.
Validation by the Authors
As a ﬁnal quality control step, we chose 227 examples and annotated them for accuracy of the labels
and the evidence provided. We found that 91.2%
of the examples were annotated correctly. 3% of
the claims were mistakes in claim generation that
had not been ﬂagged during labeling. We found a
similar number of these claims which did not meet
the guidelines during a manual error analysis of
the baseline system (Section 5.8).
When compared against the super-annotators, all
except two annotators achieved > 90% precision
and all but 9 achieved recall > 70% in evidence
retrieval. The majority of the low-recall cases are
for claims such as “Akshay Kumar is an actor.”
where the super-annotator added 34 sentences as
evidence, most of them being ﬁlmography listings
“In 2000, he starred in the Priyadarshandirected comedy Hera Pheri”).
Figure 2: Screenshot of Task 2 - Claim Labeling
During the validation by the authors, we found
that most of the examples that were annotated incorrectly were cases where the label was correct,
but the evidence selected was not sufﬁcient (only
4 out of 227 examples were labeled incorrectly according to the guidelines).
We tried to resolve this issue by asking our annotators to err on the side of caution. For example,
while the claim “Shakira is Canadian” could be labeled as REFUTED by the sentence “Shakira is a
Colombian singer, songwriter, dancer, and record
producer”, we advocated that unless more explicit
evidence is provided (e.g. “She was denied Canadian citizenship”), the claim should be labeled
as NOTENOUGHINFO, since dual citizenships are
permitted, and the annotators’ world knowledge
should not be factored in.
A related issue is entity resolution. For a claim
like “David Beckham was with United.”, it might
be trivial for an annotator to accept “David Beckham made his European League debut playing
for Manchester United.” as supporting evidence.
This implicitly assumes that “United” refers to
“Manchester United”, however there are many
Uniteds in Wikipedia and not just football clubs,
e.g. United Airlines.
The annotators knew the
page of the main entity and thus it was relatively
easy to resolve ambiguous entities. While we provide this information as part of the dataset, we argue that it should only be used for system training/development.
Baseline System Description
We construct a simple pipelined system comprising three components:
document retrieval,
sentence-level evidence selection and textual entailment. Each component is evaluated in isolation
through oracle evaluations on the development set
and we report the ﬁnal accuracies on the test set.
Document Retrieval
We use the document retrieval component from the DrQA system which returns the k nearest documents for a query using cosine similarity between
binned unigram and bigram Term Frequency-
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) vectors.
Sentence Selection
Our simple sentence selection method ranks sentences by TF-IDF similarity to the claim.
We sort the most-similar sentences ﬁrst and tune a cut-off using validation accuracy on the development set. We evaluate both
DrQA and a simple unigram TF-IDF implementation to rank the sentences for selection. We further
evaluate impact of sentence selection on the RTE
module by predicting entailment given the original
documents without sentence selection.
Recognizing Textual Entailment
We compare
two models for recognizing textual entailment.
For a simple well-performing baseline, we selected Riedel et al. ’s submission from the
2017 Fake News Challenge. It is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with a single hidden layer which
uses term frequencies and TF-IDF cosine similarity between the claim and evidence as features.
Evaluating the state-of-the-art in RTE, we used
a decomposable attention (DA) model between
the claim and the evidence passage . We selected it because at the time of development this model was the highest scoring system for the Stanford Natural Language Inference
task with publicly available
code that did not require the input text to be parsed
syntactically, nor was an ensemble.
The RTE component must correctly classify a
claim as NOTENOUGHINFO when the evidence
retrieved is not relevant or informative. However,
the instances labeled as NOTENOUGHINFO have
no evidence annotated, thus cannot be used to train
RTE for this class. To overcome this issue, we
simulate training instances for the NOTENOUGH-
INFO through two methods: sampling a sentence
from the nearest page (NEARESTP) to the claim
as evidence using our document retrieval component and sampling a sentence from Wikipedia uniformly at random (RANDOMS).
Experiments
Dataset Statistics
We partitioned the annotated claims into training,
development and test sets. We ensured that each
Wikipedia page used to generate claims occurs in
exactly one set. We reserved a further 19,998 examples for use as a test set for a shared task.
Table 1: Dataset split sizes for SUPPORTED, REFUTED
and NOTENOUGHINFO (NEI) classes
Evaluation
Predicting whether a claim is SUPPORTED, RE-
FUTED or NOTENOUGHINFO is a 3-way classi-
ﬁcation task that we evaluate using accuracy. In
the case of the ﬁrst two classes, appropriate evidence must be provided, at a sentence-level, to
justify the classiﬁcation. We consider an answer
returned correct for the ﬁrst two classes only if
correct evidence is returned. Given that the development and test datasets have balanced class distributions, a random baseline will have ∼33% accuracy if one ignores the requirement for evidence
for SUPPORTED and REFUTED.
We evaluate the correctness of the evidence
retrieved by computing the F1-score of all the
predicted sentences in comparison to the humanannotated sentences for those claims requiring
evidence on our complete pipeline system (Section 5.7). As in Fig. 1, some claims require multihop inference involving sentences from more than
one document to be correctly supported as SUP-
PORTED/REFUTED. In this case all sentences must
be selected for the evidence to be marked as correct. We report this as the proportion of fully supported claims. Some claims may be equally supported by different pieces of evidence; in this case
one complete set of sentences should be predicted.
Systems that select information that the annotators did not will be penalized in terms of precision. We recognize that it is not feasible to ensure
that the evidence selection annotations are complete, nevertheless we argue that they are useful
for automatic evaluation during system development. For a more reliable evaluation we advocate
crowd-sourcing annotations of false-positive predictions at a later date in a similar manner to the
TAC KBP Slot Filler Validation .
Document Retrieval
The document retrieval component of the baseline system returns the k nearest documents to the
claim using the DrQA TF-IDF
implementation to return the k-nearest documents.
In the scenario where evidence from multiple documents is required, k must be greater than this
ﬁgure. We simulate the upper bound in accuracy
using an oracle 3-way RTE classiﬁer that predicts
SUPPORTED/REFUTED ones correctly only if the
documents containing the supporting/refuting evidence are returned by document retrieval and always predicts NOTENOUGHINFO instances correctly independently of the evidence. Results are
shown in Table 2.
Sentence Selection
Mirroring document retrieval, we extract the top lmost similar sentences from the k-most relevant
documents using TF-IDF vector similarity.
modiﬁed document retrieval component of DrQA
 to select sentences using bigram TF-IDF with binning and compared this to
a simple unigram TF-IDF implementation using
NLTK . Using the param-
Supported (%)
Accuracy (%)
Table 2: Dev. set document retrieval evaluation.
eters k = 5 documents and l = 5 sentences,
55.30% of claims (excluding NOTENOUGHINFO)
can be fully supported or refuted by the retrieved
documents before sentence selection (see Table 2).
After applying the sentence selection component,
44.22% of claims can be fully supported using the
extracted sentences with DrQA and only 34.03%
with NLTK. This would yield oracle accuracies of
62.81% and 56.02% respectively.
Recognizing Textual Entailment
The RTE component is trained on labeled claims
paired with sentence-level. Where multiple sentences are required as evidence, the strings are
concatenated.
As discussed in Section 4, such
data is not annotated for claims labeled NOTE-
NOUGHINFO, thus we compare random samplingbased and similarity-based strategies for generating it. We evaluate classiﬁcation accuracy on the
development set in an oracle evaluation, assuming
correct evidence sentences are selected (Table 3).
Additionally, for the DA model, we predict entailment given evidence, using the AllenNLP pre-trained Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) model for comparison.
Accuracy (%)
Table 3: Oracle classiﬁcation on claims in the development set using gold sentences as evidence
The random sampling (RANDOMS) approach
(where a sentence is sampled at random from
Wikipedia in place of evidence for claims labeled as NOTENOUGHINFO) yielded sentences
that were not only semantically different to the
claim, but also unrelated.
While the the accuracy of models trained with sampling approach is
higher in oracle evaluation setting, this may not
yield a better system in the pipeline setting. In
contrast, the nearest page (NEARESTP) method
samples a sentence from the highest-ranked page
returned by our document retrieval module. This
simulates ﬁnding related information that may not
be sufﬁcient to support or refute a claim. We will
evaluate both RANDOMS and NEARESTP in the
full pipeline setting, but we will not pursue the
SNLI-trained model further as it performed substantially worse.
Full Pipeline
The complete pipeline consists of the DrQA document retrieval module (Section 5.3), DrQA-based
sentence retrieval module (Section 5.4), and the
decomposable attention RTE model (Section 5.5).
The two parameters: k, describing the number
documents and l, describing the number sentences
to return were found using grid-search optimizing the RTE accuracy with the DA model. For
the pipeline, we set k = 5 and l = 5 and report the development set accuracy, both with and
without the requirement to provide correct evidence for the SUPPORTED/REFUTED predictions
(marked as ScoreEv and NoScoreEv respectively).
Accuracy (%)
Table 4: Full pipeline results on development set
The decomposable attention model trained with
NEARESTP is the most accurate when evidence is
considered. Inspection of the confusion matrices
shows that the RANDOMS strategy harms recall
for the NOTENOUGHINFO class. This is due to the
difference between the sampled pages in the training set and the ones retrieved in the development
set causing related but uninformative evidence to
be misclassiﬁed as SUPPORTED and REFUTED.
Ablation of the sentence selection module
evaluate the impact of the sentence selection module on both the RTE accuracy by removing it.
While the sentence selection module may improve
accuracy in the RTE component, it is discarding
sentences that are required as evidence to support
claims, harming performance (see Section 5.4).
We assess the accuracies in both oracle setting
(similar to Section 5.5) (see Table 5) as well as
in the full pipeline (see Table 6).
In the oracle setting, the decomposable attention models are worst affected by removal of the
sentence selection module: exhibiting an substantial decrease in accuracy. The NEARESTP training regime exhibits a 17% decrease and the RAN-
DOMS accuracy decreases by 19%, despite nearperfect recall of the NOTENOUGHINFO class.
Oracle Accuracy (%)
Table 5: Oracle accuracy on claims in the dev. set using
gold documents as evidence (c.f. Table 3).
In the pipeline setting, we run the RTE component without sentence selection using k = 5 most
similar predicted documents. The removal of the
sentence selection component decreased the accuracy (NOSCOREEV) approximately 10% for both
decomposable attention models.
Accuracy (%)
Table 6: Pipeline accuracy on the dev. set without the
sentence selection module (c.f. Table 4).
Evaluating Full Pipeline on Test Set
We evaluate our pipeline approach on the test set
based on the results observed in Section 5.6. First,
we use DrQA to select select 5 documents nearest to the claim. Then, we select 5 sentences using
our DrQA-based sentence retrieval component and
concatenate them. Finally, we predict entailment
using the Decomposable Attention model trained
with the NEARESTP strategy. The classiﬁcation
accuracy is 31.87%. Ignoring the requirement for
correct evidence (NoScoreEv) the accuracy is
50.91%, which highlights that while the systems
were predicting the correct label, the evidence selected was different to that which the human annotators chose. The recall of the document and sentence retrieval modules for claims which required
evidence on the test set was 45.89% (considering
complete groups of evidence) and the precision
10.79%. The resulting F1 score is 17.47%.
Manual Error Analysis
Using the predictions on the test set, we sampled
961 of the predictions with an incorrect label or incorrect evidence and performed a manual analysis.
Of these, 28.51% (n = 274) had the correct predicted label but did not satisfy the requirements for
evidence. The information retrieval component of
the pipeline failed to identify any correct evidence
in 58.27% (n = 560) of cases which accounted for
the large disparity between accuracy of the system when evidence was and was not considered.
Where suitable evidence was found, the RTE component incorrectly classiﬁed 13.84% (n = 133) of
The pipeline retrieved new evidence that had
not been identiﬁed by annotators in 21.85% (n =
210) of claims. This was in-line with our expectation given the measured recall rate of annotators
(see Section 3.4.2), who achieved recall of 72.36%
of evidence identiﬁed by the super-annotators.
We found that 4.05% (n = 41) of claims did
not meet our guidelines. Of these, there were 11
claims which could be checked without evidence
as these either tautologous or self-contradictory.
Some correct claims appeared ungrammatical due
to the mis-parsing of named entities (e.g. Exotic
Birds is the name of a band but could be parsed
as a type of animal). Annotator errors (where the
wrong label was applied) were present in 1.35%
(n = 13) of incorrectly classiﬁed claims.
Interestingly, our system found new evidence
that contradicted the gold evidence in 0.52% (n =
5) of cases.
This was caused either by entity
resolution errors or by inconsistent information
present in Wikipedia pages (e.g. Pakistan was described as having both the 41st and 42nd largest
GDP in two different pages).
Ablation of Training Data
To evaluate whether the size of the dataset is
suitable for training the RTE component of the
pipeline, we plot the learning curves for the DA
and MLP models (Fig. 3). For each model, we
trained 5 models with different random initializations using the NEARESTP method (see Section 5.5).
We selected the highest performing
model when evaluated on development set and report the oracle RTE accuracy on the test set. We
observe that with fewer than 6000 training instances, the accuracy of DA is unstable.
However, with more data, its accuracy increases with
respect to the log of the number of training instances and exceeds that of MLP. While both
learning curves exhibit the typical diminishing return trends, they indicate that the dataset is large
enough to demonstrate the differences of models
with different learning capabilities.
Number of Training Instances
Test Set Oracle Accuracy (%)
Figure 3: Learning curves for the RTE models.
Discussion
The pipeline presented and evaluated in the previous section is one possible approach to the task
proposed in our dataset, but we envisage different ones to be equally valid and possibly better performing. For instance, it would be interesting to test how approaches similar to natural
logic inference can
be applied, where a knowledge base/graph is constructed by reading the textual sources and then a
reasoning process over the claim is applied, possibly using recent advances in neural theorem proving . A different
approach could be to consider a combination of
question generation 
followed by a question answering model such as
BiDAF , possibly requiring modi-
ﬁcation as they are designed to select a single span
of text from a document rather than return one or
more sentences as per our scoring criteria. The
sentence-level evidence annotation in our dataset
will help develop models selecting and attending
to the relevant information from multiple documents and non-contiguous passages. Not only will
this enhance the interpretability of predictions, but
also facilitate the development of new methods for
reading comprehension.
Another use case for the FEVER dataset is
claim extraction: generating short concise textual
facts from longer encyclopedic texts. For sources
like Wikipedia or news articles, the sentences can
contain multiple individual claims, making them
not only difﬁcult to parse, but also hard to evaluate against evidence. During the construction on
the FEVER dataset, we allowed for an extension
of the task where simple claims can be extracted
from multiple complex sentences.
Finally, we would like to note that while we
chose Wikipedia as our textual source, we do not
consider it to be the only source of information
worth considering in veriﬁcation, hence not using
TRUE or FALSE in our classiﬁcation scheme. We
expect systems developed on the dataset presented
to be portable to different textual sources.
Conclusions
In this paper we have introduced FEVER, a publicly available dataset for fact extraction and veri-
ﬁcation against textual sources. We discussed the
data collection and annotation methods and shared
some of the insights obtained during the annotation process that we hope will be useful to other
large-scale annotation efforts.
In order to evaluate the challenge this dataset
presents, we developed a pipeline approach that
comprises information retrieval and textual entailment components.
We showed that the task is
challenging yet feasible, with the best performing
system achieving an accuracy of 31.87%.
We also discussed other uses for the FEVER
dataset and presented some further extensions that
we would like to work on in the future. We believe
that FEVER will provide a stimulating challenge
for claim extraction and veriﬁcation systems.
Acknowledgments
The work reported was partly conducted while James Thorne
was at Amazon Research Cambridge. Andreas Vlachos is
supported by the EU H2020 SUMMA project (grant agreement number 688139). The authors would like to thank the
team of annotators involved in preparing this dataset.