International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning c⃝
ISSN: 1492-3831
Vol. 1, No. 1 
Rethinking the Research Agenda
Hilary Perraton
Research is seen as something grounded in theory that can lead to improved practice. Without a theoretical basis it is unlikely to go beyond
data gathering. The theoretical insights leading to good research are more
likely to come from educational and social theories generally than from an
attempt to develop a theory of open and distance learning. An examination of existing research shows that it is often atheoretical and predominantly descriptive. Research on the context of open and distance learning,
considering its purposes, outcomes, and relevance to major educational
problems, has been relatively neglected as contrasted with research on
its application. Signiﬁcant research issues today include: problems posed
by globalisation, including issues of governance and consumer protection;
ways of maximising public beneﬁt from new communication technologies;
the development of strategies for AIDS education; and the continuing need
for educational expansion.
Research lies midway between the other two themes of this issue – theory and
good practice. This paper advances four propositions about the links between
them and follows them with four proposals about important areas of research.
Proposition one: research and theory
First, unless research is grounded in theory, it cannot be much more than data
gathering. The development or existence of a theory makes it possible to generate hypotheses about good practice, to frame questions that will test them,
and so to develop more soundly based guides to practice. (This assumes that
our concern with theory and research is mainly to help solve problems.
may not be. We may be interested in research on education purely in order
to widen our understanding of human behaviour. This is a defensible and interesting posture, but not the starting point for the four propositions and suggested research agenda). To illustrate: the International Research Foundation
for Open Learning (IRFOL) recently completed a research project for the European Commission on the cost-eﬀectiveness of various technologies used in open
and distance learning within European Union member countries.1 We wanted
to help solve the administrator’s problem of choosing between alternative technologies that might include, among others, print, videoconferencing and various
Rethinking the Research Agenda
computer-based approaches. We grounded our methodology in theories that
came from learning and from classical microeconomics. From learning, we took
as a starting point the theory of media equivalence, that there are no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in teaching eﬀectiveness between diﬀerent media . From classical microeconomics we took well-tried methods for
analysing the costs which allowed us to determine some of the conditions under
which we might ﬁnd economies of scale in using the technologies . This work in turn led us to
develop a number of propositions to guide practice; the research suggests, for
example, that it there is always an onus upon the course designer to justify the
use of any medium other than print, so that the costs of print can be regarded
as a default option, and that, if lecturers are to be employed at each location
and we neglect the opportunity costs of student time, then videoconferencing
is always more costly than face-to-face education . Neither
proposition is earth-shattering but they serve to illustrate the nexus between
problem, theory, research and good practice.
Proposition two: traditions of educational thinking
They take us to the second proposition, that theoretical insights are more likely
to be found from a range of educational and social theories than from attempts
to develop theories of open and distance learning. Four traditions of educational thinking illustrate the argument.
Caricaturing them only slightly, we
could label them the Jencks thesis, the Rutter argument, the learning theory
approaches, and the neo-marxist tradition. An excursion among the traditions
helps illuminate the strengths and weaknesses of research within open and distance learning.
In his examination of American education, Jencks found that, despite the American dream and mythology, education was singularly ineﬀective in promoting
equality. He concluded that, “as long as egalitarians assume that public policy
cannot contribute to economic equality directly but must proceed by ingenious
manipulations of marginal institutions like the schools, progress will remain
glacial” . This reads like a counsel of despair for egalitarian educators. But his arguments can be used to generate research questions
for those who argue that open and distance learning has particular strengths
in widening access asking, for example, ‘how if at all can distance-teaching
institutions redress the structural inequalities that mark much conventional education?’.
In their opening chapter Rutter and his colleagues refer to the apparent conﬂict
between Jencks’ conclusions and their own work on the eﬀects of secondary
education in London. Rutter and his colleagues found that:
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
schools do indeed have an important impact on children’s development and it does matter which school a child attends. Moreover,
the results provide strong indications of what are the particular features of school organisation and functioning which make for success.
 .
Using the title of another book in the same tradition, School Matters , their ﬁndings suggest that one
may seek to identify the features within the process of education that are likely
to correlate with successful or unsuccessful outcomes Within open and distance
learning there is, similarly, a vein of research that suggests changes in methodology, usually in terms of instructional design or student support, that will
improve outcomes. As we will see below, the vein is surprisingly narrow.
Learning theories, which seek to specify the conditions under which learning
is enabled or hindered, have been used as the starting point for some research
and practice in open and distance learning. In his examination of the issue,
and drawing on the work of Bruner, Gagn´e, Ausubel and B`a`ath in particular, Holmberg concluded that “distance education and thinking about
distance education are ﬁrmly based in general educational theory” (p. 160).
In a more imaginative approach, and suggesting a programme of research that
no-one, sadly, has picked up since he died, Lewis sought to set up a
theoretical framework to help solve “hard practical problems of course design”
(p. 197) that would encourage students to develop higher-order problem-solving
skills and enable them “to challenge and extend and even transform the knowledge [they are] ... given” (p. 203).
Within the neo-marxist tradition, education is seen as an activity which reinforces and helps reproduce existing social structures but contains internal
contradictions between the free examination of ideas necessary for eﬀective education and the interests of the capitalist state and, potentially at least, between
the teaching profession as an interest group and other elements within society
 . This analysis might lead us to conclude that open
universities, for example, are a powerful device for containing educational demand at modest cost and so allowing more conventional universities to continue
in their traditional role . The research questions we derive from the tradition will depend on our own political stance. If, at
one extreme, we have an instrumental view of training to meet labour-market
demands, we may want to discover how to design a distance-learning system
that satisﬁes an employer’s needs while discouraging labour mobility. At the
other, we may ask how open and distance learning can be deployed to exploit
the contradictions inherent to the educational system in the interests of seeking
a more equitable society.
We could go on, seeking to generate other important questions from standpoints
within sociology and political science among other domains as well as from ed-
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
ucation. Morgan , for example, pointed out the relevance of the work of
Rogers, Bruner and Giddens to research on open and distance learning. One
point of the excursion is to show that existing theory will help us in framing questions that matter and therefore of value in seeking answers that will improve
practice. More than that, it suggests that social literature generally is more
useful than much of the discourse within open and distance learning. There,
for example, we have much concern with deﬁnitions. Holmberg, for example,
in his epitomizing theory presentation, seems deeply concerned to diﬀerentiate distance education from other forms of education, even though he does go
on to seek refutable hypotheses that may follow from it .
Keegan argues that “a ﬁrmly based theory of distance education will be one
which provides the touchstone against which decisions ... can be taken with
conﬁdence” . But when he comes to set out his own
theoretical propositions they are in forms such as: “It is hypothesized, therefore, that distance students have a tendency to drop out in those institutions in
which structures for the reintegration of the teaching acts are not satisfactorily
achieved” . The caution in the second half of the sentence makes it look like what Lakatos derided as degenerative problem
shift and severely limits its capacity to provoke good research questions. The
excursion also serves to remind us that good research does not need to begin
with theory. Indeed, as argued below, much of it will begin with a problem. But
we need then to know what our theoretical starting point is in order to design
and justify our research approach.
Proposition three: about the existing research
The discussion so far suggests that research in open and distance learning needs
to be grounded in theory, that there are often beneﬁts in drawing theory from
outside narrow educational conﬁnes, and that research will suﬀer unless this is
done. An examination of existing research literature conﬁrms that much of it
suﬀers from an apparently atheoretical approach. In a review we did before
launching the International Research Foundation for Open Learning we found
that most research fell under ﬁve headings:
1. Description. There are many descriptive accounts of courses and institutions. Indeed the bulk of the literature on open and distance learning,
whether speciﬁcally labelled as research or not, is essentially descriptive,
discussing some combination of management, students, teaching methods
and outcomes of a course or institution.
2. Audience studies. We have many studies of the audiences for open and
distance learning .... In some cases these studies also examine the performance of students in relation to variables associated with the methods of
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
3. Cost-eﬀectiveness studies. There is a growing literature on cost-eﬀectiveness
with a fair measure of commonality in the methodology used....
4. Methodology. There are studies, again often descriptive, of the various
methods used to teach, support and counsel open and distance-learning
students....
5. Social context.
Some recent work has been concerned to examine the
social context of open and distance learning. 
If it were not so predominantly descriptive one might claim that the second
group of studies were implicitly accepting a Jencksian view of the educational
world, assuming that the important thing was to know our audience and that
the fourth were following the Rutter approach in looking at variables in process.
But in practice few studies begin even by genuﬂecting towards theory and,
in consequence, make it the more diﬃcult to draw any general conclusions.
More than that, our third proposition is that where research has gone beyond
description towards explanation, it has tended to be about the application of
open and distance learning rather than about its context. In the same report we
used the term “application” for questions of methodology and “issues about the
most appropriate ways of using open and distance learning for a given audience
and purpose” . In contrast questions about context
concern the purposes for its use, its role alongside other forms of
education and its outcomes.
The questions cluster around issues
about the legitimacy, quality, eﬀectiveness and outputs of open and
distance learning that are particularly signiﬁcant for policy makers
As a result of these biases, we are short of well-founded research ﬁndings on
many aspects of open and distance learning, while ﬁndings about its context,
critical for policy makers, are especially scarce. At the same time there are
plenty of problems. Just on applications – not the main theme of this paper
– for example, problems of choice of methodology arise because we have little
more than rules of thumb to guide us on key issues like media selection, the case
for combining media (always asserted, but barely established), and instructional
design . More speciﬁcally, and
to illustrate, we know that the methods of open and distance learning lend
themselves to rote learning. We should be able to develop research strategies
that started with the kind of hierarchy of learning proposed by Gagn´e and ask
how one would research approaches designed to achieve learning at the upper
end of the hierarchy.
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
Proposition four: research on context as well as
application
The fourth proposition is that the more important and more diﬃcult part of the
agenda is about context. It needs to be grounded in theory and grapple with the
major educational problems that confront us. At the recent World Education
Forum in Dakar the emerging new contexts for educational development and
expansion were seen as including:
• the political, social and economic shifts in Eastern and Central Europe;
• the rapid development of the Internet as a pervasive lever of change for
the organisation of life, commerce, entertainment and education;
• the emerging new economy based on intangible capital and calling for
much increased adaptability to rapid change and a new repertoire of entrepreneurial capabilities and attitudes.
• ... and in some regions ... the disastrous spread of the HIV-AIDS pandemic
 
If open and distance learning is to play more than a peripheral role in education we should therefore expect its research agenda to address issues that follow
from these changes such as the role of private and public sector institutions in
a world of neoliberal hegemony, the gap between the information-rich and the
information-poor, educational responses to HIV-AIDS and, of course, educational expansion. We look at each in turn. They are brieﬂy spelt out in order to
establish that each of them demands more attention, and a higher priority from
distance education researchers, than the audience studies and descriptive accounts, or the development of how-to-do-it guides on the application of distance
education.
Four areas worth researching
A generation back, social theory argued that market forces had no good part to
play in the social sector and that their eﬀects were likely to be malign. Titmuss
demonstrated this in his classic comparison between the safe, voluntary-based
supply of blood to hospitals in Britain and the, inferior, pay-basis supply in
the United States .
In her debunking of the Famous Writers School,
Jessica Mitford quoted counsel for the Federal Trade Commission’s Bureau of
Deceptive Practices who argued “there is a basic contradiction involved when
you have proﬁt-making organizations in the ﬁeld of education” . These views no longer represent a social consensus. At the same time,
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
the new technologies have made it easier for distance-teaching institutions to
operate internationally, even globally. Mitford’s work showed that there never
were adequate constraints on sharp practice even within frontiers. Within public
sector higher education, the community of scholars has traditionally controlled
quality but conventional structures do not operate easily at a long distance; some
universities have sought to bypass their regular systems of checks and balances
in order to operate internationally and competitively.2 One part of a broad set of
problems about the intersection of the public and private sector is easy to deﬁne:
given globalisation, how can we establish systems of governance and regulation
that will protect individuals with imperfect information who are seeking to
enrol in courses available at a distance? (It matters both to the individuals
and to bona ﬁde institutions where an educational Gresham’s law may operate,
allowing bad institutions to undercut and drive out good). We probably need
to draw from political science in order to generate the research questions about
governance needed to help answer this question, chosen to illustrate the range
of problems facing educators and the public in a changed political environment.
Globalisation sets the context for the next set of issues about the gap between
the information-rich and the information-poor. The problem was identiﬁed in
the Briggs report , which set out the proposals for what became the
Commonwealth of Learning. It argued that while “the new communications
technologies make it possible for learners to have access to the world’s knowledge
no matter where they live” there remained a danger that “there could be an
even further widening of the gap between rich countries and poor in their access
to information” . The development of the Internet
has since dramatised the diﬀerences and at the same time revealed a further
problem within the problem – of diﬀerential access to communication media
between town and country. Some of the issues here are conceptually simple –
about the allocation of resources to new and old technologies – though they may
be politically tricky: within the United States “while textbooks ran chronically
short in poor school districts, and while some 200 traditional colleges shut their
doors over the decade to 1997, politicos and corporate executives prattled on
about the need to wire up additional ‘cyberschools”’ .
Others are more complex involving curricular and economic questions about
the educational purpose of particular types of investment in technology, and
the educational outcomes that may be expected from that investment. Again
we are short of research data, especially about developing countries.3But the
issues are stark: how, through research, can we ﬁnd ways of maximising public
and international beneﬁts from the new information opportunities?
An African consultation on education for all identiﬁed the third theme:
1. The EFA 2000 Conference recognises that HIV/AIDS has the potential to
undermine much that education seeks to achieve as well as the education
system itself.
2. The conference also recognises that there is little systematic information
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda
on how the education sector can cope with the pandemic, reduce its further
spread and lessen its impact. 
The African meeting went on to recommend that HIV-AIDS should become a
major theme, along with ﬁve more speciﬁcally educational ones, for the Dakar
world conference. Existing theory and research can go some way towards developing the strategies called for by the African meeting. Demographic modelling
should make it possible to calculate the eﬀects of AIDS on teacher recruitment
and supply; work on the multistep theory of human communication suggests
ways of using the mass media for health education ; a thorough study of communication-based education in agriculture and nutrition summarises what we know about nonformal education programmes .
Together these suggest that it should be possible to set up programmes, incorporating formative evaluation and research, that integrate mass-communication
programmes of education with practical activities including the distribution of
condoms. In learning from such a programme the researcher would need to draw
both from the traditions and assumptions of action research but also insights
from sociology and social psychology on the religious and cultural obstacles in
the way of AIDS education and containment.
On educational expansion we come back to the more conventional educational
research agenda. Two speciﬁc issues look among the most important. First,
what are the most appropriate structures that will help governments expand
eﬀective university education in the south? Second, can we devise structures
for junior-secondary education that will harness open and distance learning to
meet the new demands that are following, and will follow, the earlier expansion
of primary education? In both cases, the record of experience is patchy, with
many called to nonconventional education but few chosen to succeed. We have
ample descriptive literature on open and distance learning at both levels of
education and summaries of what can be learned from it .
Perhaps to tackle the real problems that follow from the modest achievements
of the existing programmes we need to begin by asking about the nature of the
learning process and the diﬃculties faced by relatively unsophisticated learners.
Or we need to address the political issues that would be involved in mixing and
matching education on and oﬀ-campus so that all students study partly in each
mode. Or: the plea is for hard thinking, and good research questions, that will
result in ﬁndings to help better practice.
Conclusion
Education can help us to a better world. It will help us get there if we rely more
on good research and less on under-informed trial and error.
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Rethinking the Research Agenda