Probing many-body localization with neural networks
Frank Schindler,1 Nicolas Regnault,2 and Titus Neupert1
1Department of Physics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
2Laboratoire Pierre Aigrain, D´epartement de physique de l’ENS, Ecole normale sup´erieure,
PSL Research University, Universit´e Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e,
Sorbonne Universit´es, UPMC Univ. Paris 06, CNRS, 75005 Paris, France
 
We show that a simple artiﬁcial neural network trained on entanglement spectra of individual states of a manybody quantum system can be used to determine the transition between a many-body localized and a thermalizing
regime. Speciﬁcally, we study the Heisenberg spin-1/2 chain in a random external ﬁeld. We employ a multilayer
perceptron with a single hidden layer, which is trained on labeled entanglement spectra pertaining to the fully
localized and fully thermal regimes. We then apply this network to classify spectra belonging to states in
the transition region. For training, we use a cost function that contains, in addition to the usual error and
regularization parts, a term that favors a conﬁdent classiﬁcation of the transition region states. The resulting
phase diagram is in good agreement with the one obtained by more conventional methods and can be computed
for small systems. In particular, the neural network outperforms conventional methods in classifying individual
eigenstates pertaining to a single disorder realization. It allows us to map out the structure of these eigenstates
across the transition with spatial resolution. Furthermore, we analyze the network operation using the dreaming
technique to show that the neural network correctly learns by itself the power-law structure of the entanglement
spectra in the many-body localized regime.
INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial neural networks are routinely employed for data
classiﬁcation. They are useful when features distinguishing
one class of data from another are unknown or unwieldy. A
neural network can learn such features from examples, i.e.,
a set of labeled training data. In physics, the application of
neural networks, and machine learning in general, to manybody quantum mechanics is a novel and burgeoning ﬁeld
of research.1 Currently, there are three main lines of pursuit: The application of machine learning to the problem of
classifying various phases of matter2–9, accelerating material
searches and design10–13, and the quest to encode quantum
mechanical states in structures mimicking the setup of a neural network14–16. This work is concerned with the ﬁrst kind
of approach. Most previous studies have considered the identiﬁcation of phases and phase transitions by training neural
networks on a large set of prototype conﬁgurations. Here,
we instead use entanglement spectra17, which in recent years
emerged as a powerful tool to characterize a plethora of physical systems, and have been employed for a neural network
based detection of phase transitions in Ref. 8.
We apply neural network based phase classiﬁcation to a
fundamental question in quantum statistical physics, namely
the distinction between systems that obey the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis (ETH) and those violating it. According to the ETH, local observables in a typical many-body
eigenstate should take the values that pertain to the observables in a thermal ensemble, with the whole system acting
as a heat bath for its subsystems in the thermodynamic limit.
A well-studied class of systems that violate the ETH are
those exhibiting many-body localization (MBL)18–25, meaning that partial memory of initial conditions is preserved for
inﬁnite times. Due to this property, which is intimately related to the emergence of an extensive number of integrals of
motion23,26–28, MBL systems have been envisioned as particu-
FIG. 1. Phase diagram of the Heisenberg chain with Hamiltonian (5)
obtained from the neural network ansatz in Eq. (7) trained with cost
function (8) on entanglement spectra obtained from an exact diagonalization on N = 16 sites. The plot shows the average conﬁdence
for the MBL phase over 40 realizations of disorder as a function of
the absolute maximal values of the random magnetic ﬁeld ¯h, spaced
with ∆¯h = 0.125, and for eigenstates belonging to different rescaled
energies ϵ = (E −Emin)/(Emax −Emin). Compared to Ref. 18
where a similar plot was obtained with better-controlled, yet more
sophisticated methods, we have used smaller systems and fewer disorder realizations.
larly robust quantum memories.29 Here, we study the Heisenberg chain in a random ﬁeld as a simple model for MBL. At
strong disorder, the model is in the MBL regime, whereas it
satisﬁes the ETH if disorder is weak. Several measures or
quantities allow a well-controlled quantitative distinction of
thermal and localized regimes. They have been used to study
the ETH-MBL transition in ﬁnite size numerical simulations,
 
in particular for an extensive analysis of the Heisenberg model
in a random ﬁeld. These characterizing quantities include energy level statistics30–35, level statistics25,36 as well as density
of states37 analyses of the entanglement spectrum and studies
of the distribution of the entanglement entropy over a region
of energy eigenstates18,38–43. Necessarily, these methods rely
on a physical understanding of the nature of either regime or
of the transition. The neural network based method for identifying the ETH-MBL transition that we present here requires
only that the information for distinguishing the ETH from the
MBL regime is – in some form – contained in the entanglement spectrum. This is useful in particular in situations where
the physical characteristics of a phase are not fully understood, as one may certainly argue to be the case for MBL.44,45
Thus, the neural network approach also allows for the possibility of ﬁnding ways of characterizing the phase transition
beyond established methods, with the network’s architecture
providing a variational ansatz for a classiﬁcation criterion.
We use the network to classify the entanglement spectra of
all eigenstates of the Heisenberg chain, which are obtained
by exact diagonalization, in particular at ﬁnite energy density
(note that Ref. 8 has characterized the transition using ground
state properties of the disordered Heisenberg chain via a neural network-based approach of classifying entanglement spectra). For a speciﬁc disorder conﬁguration, this allows for instance to trace the evolution of individual ETH states deep in
the MBL regime.40,46–48 We achieve this by considering the
spectra from multiple real-space entanglement cuts as input
for the neural network. By averaging over disorder realizations, we obtain a phase diagram, Fig. 1, that indicates the
location of the ETH-MBL transition as a function of energy
density and disorder strength. It is in good agreement with
results obtained using conventional methods.18,36,43,49
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, which may
also be read as a short introduction to neural networks, we
introduce the general set-up of the network used here, suited
for binary classiﬁcation of data. Subsequently, in Sec. III we
review the Heisenberg spin chain in a random ﬁeld, and deﬁne
the entanglement spectrum. We then discuss the type of input
data as well as the network architecture used for classifying
entanglement spectra as MBL or ETH in Sec. IV. In Sec. V,
we present our results and compare them to existing methods.
NEURAL NETWORKS FOR BINARY
CLASSIFICATION
An artiﬁcial neural network is an alternating sequence of
afﬁne linear maps and nonlinear functions that are successively applied to input data x giving output y. Each pair of
maps in this sequence is a layer of the network. Let the target
space of the αth layer of the network have dimension nα+1,
corresponding to nα+1 neurons. In this work, we focus on binary classiﬁcation, where we want to learn a map f(x) from
the data set {x}, represented by vectors x of dimension n1,
to the discrete target set {(0, 1), (1, 0)}. This representation
of the target set is somewhat arbitrary–here, we choose onehot vectors, i.e., vectors with a single non-zero element. Their
entries are interpreted as the neurons of the output layer.
The network setup described above now implements a trial
map ˆf, which should approximate the unknown map f as
good as possible. One important difference is that while the
target space of f is discrete, that of ˆf is continuous. This allows for smooth convergence of ˆf to f. To achieve this, we
ﬁrst train the network by adjusting its parameters to gradually
improve its performance on a training set which is labeled,
i.e., for which the output of f is known to be either (0, 1) or
(1, 0) for each x. We then apply the network to a testing set to
evaluate how well it generalizes to classify data that it has not
seen before. It is essential to avoid overﬁtting: with a large
number n2 of neurons, the network will learn not only the
general rules by which the data can be identiﬁed as pertaining
to the MBL or ETH regimes. Rather, it will also pick up nonuniversal features, such as noise speciﬁc to the training data
set that was used. To improve the generalization capability
of the network at this stage, we employ cross-validation: we
ﬁrst obtain the training and testing sets by randomly subdividing a large set of labeled data into two parts of equal size, and
then average the trained network’s output (when applying it to
previously unlabeled data) over multiple such training runs.
We now describe the full action of the network on the input
data. In the ﬁrst layer, the input vectors x of dimension n1
are mapped to a space of dimension n2 via an afﬁne linear
map x 7→V (2,1) x + a(2), followed by the application of a
nonlinear activation function g2 (the nonlinearity of which is
required in order to be able to approximate arbitrary maps f),
so that the full action of the ﬁrst layer may be written as x ≡
x(1) 7→x(2) = g2(V (2,1) x + a(2)). Here, V (2,1) is a n2 × n1
matrix, and matrix-vector multiplication between V (2,1) and
x is implied here as well as below. Each entry of the resulting
vector x(2) can be interpreted as the output of an individual
neuron, of which there are n2 in total. In general, the ﬁrst
layer is followed by further layers, each of which implements
x(α) 7→x(α+1) = gα+1
V (α+1,α) x(α) + a(α+1)
The elements of the rows in the matrix V (α+1,α) are called
the weights of the respective neuron, and the corresponding
element of the vectors a(α+1) are referred to as its bias. All
layers but the last one are called hidden layers. If there are h
hidden layers, x(h+2) = y is the two-component output vector. In the networks we use, all vectors, matrices, and numbers
In the following, we will use a network with h = 1, built
from the activation functions g2 = ReLU and g3 = Softmax,
ReLUi(x) = xi θ(xi),
Softmaxi(x) =
which are applied component-wise on their vector-valued argument, and the indices i, j run over these components. The
projections of the Softmax output onto the target set vectors
sum up to 1 and can be interpreted as the conﬁdences with
which the network allocates the input data to the respective
For a schematic representation of our network, see
In order for ˆf to approximate f, we need to tune the parameters of the network, i.e., the weights and biases, to minimize the discrepancy encoded in an appropriately chosen error functional Cost( ˆf, f). The common choice suited for a
Softmax output layer is the cross entropy
Cost( ˆf, f) = −
fi(x) log ˆfi(x).
In training, we then hope to ﬁnd the global minimum of this
functional. One starts from, e.g., randomly initialized weights
and biases, which we jointly denote as X0, and then successively applies gradient descent to the weights and biases at
step n to obtain those at n + 1 as
Xn+1 = Xn−λ
The step size λ should neither be too large (otherwise minima
are overlooked), nor too small (otherwise convergence is slow
and it becomes harder to escape from local minima). A parameter such as λ, which is not changed during training, but rather
determines how we train, is called a hyperparameter. Here, we
ﬁx λ empirically by requiring optimal minimization of the error on the training data. Each such iteration Xn 7→Xn+1 of
gradient descent is called a training step. Since it is too cumbersome to evaluate the error functional for large training sets,
we employ stochastic gradient descent; for each iteration, one
randomly chooses a relatively small subset of {x} as training
data. Note that from the point of view of variational calculus,
a neural network just corresponds to a shrewd and economic
choice of ansatz for minimizing the functional (3).
MANY-BODY LOCALIZATION IN THE HEISENBERG
CHAIN AND ENTANGLEMENT SPECTRUM
As a toy model for MBL, we study the Heisenberg Hamiltonian in a random ﬁeld in z direction,
Sr · Sr+1 +
on an N-site chain of spin-1/2 degrees of freedom with open
boundary conditions. Here, S =
2σ acts on the spin on a
given site, with σ the vector of Pauli matrices, and the hr,
r = 1, · · · , N, are static random external ﬁelds taken from a
uniform distribution in the interval [−¯h, ¯h]. In the following,
we will set J = 1. The system is integrable for ¯h = 0. System
realizations with ¯h ≪1 are in a thermalizing (ETH) regime.
System realizations with ¯h ≫1 are in an MBL regime. Both
regimes are characterized by different energy level statistics:
the ETH regime exhibits level repulsion obeying the Gaussian
orthogonal ensemble (GOE) for the Heisenberg Hamiltonian
of Eq. (5). On the other hand, the energy spectrum in the MBL
regime has Poisson level statistics.
hidden layer
output layer
entanglement spectra
conﬁdence for
n2 neurons
FIG. 2. Schematic setup of the neural network used to map entanglement spectra to the conﬁdence with which they are classiﬁed as
either belonging to the ETH or MBL regime. This map, which is explicitly given by Eq. (7), can be interpreted as the action of a hidden
layer of neurons on the input data, followed by a output layer of two
neurons which correspond to the two options of classiﬁcation. Note
that our choice of a Softmax activation function for the output layer
implies that the conﬁdences for ETH and MBL sum up to 1.
In between the two limits, the behavior of a speciﬁc system
being either ETH or MBL depends on the speciﬁc disorder
realization and the eigenstate that is considered. Averaging
over disorder realizations removes these dependencies, but the
transition between ETH and MBL regimes may still depend
on the energy density at which the system is probed, which
amounts to the existence of a many-body mobility edge. We
will assume that at ¯h = 0.25 and ¯h = 12.0 almost all eigenstates belong to the ETH or MBL regime, respectively.
A characteristic that has been shown to discriminate between ETH and MBL regimes is the entanglement spectrum.
It is deﬁned as follows. Consider the reduced density matrix
ρA of a system in the pure state |Ψ⟩obtained by subdividing
the Hilbert space into two parts, A and B, and tracing out the
degrees of freedom of B,
ρA = TrB |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| ≡e−He.
The last equality deﬁnes the entanglement Hamiltonian He.
Here we are interested in a real-space cut separating regions
A and B such that all lattice sites r ≤NA, for some 0 <
NA < N, are in A, and B is the complement of A. The spectrum of He is called the entanglement spectrum, and contains
information about the nature of |Ψ⟩.
Several possibilities have been explored to determine from
the entanglement properties whether a state |Ψ⟩at ﬁnite energy density and ﬁxed disorder shares the character of the
MBL or ETH regime.
(i) The “Schmidt gap” λ1(ρA) −
λ2(ρA), where {λj(ρA); λj ≥λj+1} denotes the spectrum
of ρA. Being the difference of the two largest eigenvalues of
the density matrix, i.e., of the square of the two largest coefﬁcients in the Schmidt decomposition of the system into A and
B, it is nearly 0 for mixed ρA, typical for the ETH regime,
and approximates 1 for almost pure ρA, characteristic of the
MBL phase50. (ii) ETH states have volume-law entanglement
scaling, while MBL states have area-law entanglement scaling. To discriminate between the two in a one-dimensional
system, one computes the entanglement entropy S(NA) as
a function of NA. Extensive scaling of S(NA) with NA is
expected in the ETH regime, while S(NA) is constant over
different values of NA in the MBL regime. (iii) The standard
deviation σE of a sample of entanglement entropies calculated
from eigenstates in a range of energies [E, E + ∆E]. Within
either phase, σE is small, while near the transition, where we
ﬁnd both MBL-like and ETH-like states in the energy interval
that is probed, σE is enhanced39–41,43. (iv) The level spacings
in the entanglement spectrum follow distinct statistical distributions in the ETH and MBL regimes. A statistical analysis
of the level distributions thus allows to identify the nature of
individual eigenstates25,36.
The power of the neural-network based approach of classifying entanglement spectra as ETH or MBL that we pursue
here is that it does not require any a priori knowledge of such
criteria. Indeed, the neural network is expected to learn them
by itself from the training by examples. In Sec. V, we compare its performance with (i) and (iii), as well as with the energy level statistics.
TRAINING DATA AND NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
We train with a single-hidden-layer neural network aimed
at binary classiﬁcation of entanglement spectra for eigenstates
obtained from the exact diagonalization of Hamiltonian (5).
For a N-site chain, there are |{x}| = 2N eigenstates. Notice,
however, that the total spin-projection in z direction measured
by the operator Sz
r commutes with the Hamiltonian (5), corresponding to a global spin rotation symmetry. In
the following we focus on eigenstates in the Sz
tot = 0 sector.
tot = 0 subspace, we are thus left with |{x}| =
states, where we only use chains with even N here.
For a cut of size NA on a N-site chain, there are n1 = 2NA
levels in each entanglement spectrum. We can further make
tot,A = PNA
r to block-diagonalize the entanglement Hamiltonian. From now on, we focus on the largest
block, e.g., with Sz
tot,A = 0 if NA is even. In this subspace,
the entanglement spectrum has length n1 =
⌊NA/2⌋is the integer part of NA/2. For training, we additionally leave out the eigenstates at very low and high energies, which are known to deviate substantially from the general trend of the given phase (concretely, we remove the 10%
highest and 10% lowest energy states). After obtaining the reduced density matrix ρA we need to take the logarithm of its
eigenvalues to arrive at the entanglement spectrum according
to Eq. (6), a procedure, which is prone to numerical errors due
to ﬁnite machine precision. Hence, we use only the ﬁrst half
(a) Dependence of the critical value ¯hc on how conﬁdent
the network is required to be in classifying a given entanglement
spectrum as MBL for the average of 40 disorder realizations of the
N = 16 chain. Here, different lines denote different percentages
of MBL spectra that are required in order to classify a given ¯h as
MBL. For the transition value ¯hc, we then take the smallest ¯h that
is classiﬁed as MBL in this way. The plateaus come from the ﬁnite
¯h resolution ∆¯h = 0.125. (b) Correlation of the critical values ¯hc
obtained from individual disorder realizations with respective mean
disorder strength ⟨|h|⟩, averaged over all sites of the N = 16 chain,
for 40 individual disorder realizations. The correlation coefﬁcient in
this case is ρ = cov(¯hc, ⟨|h|⟩)/[σ(¯hc)σ(⟨|h|⟩)] ≈0.76, with cov
denoting the covariance, and σ the standard deviation, respectively.
(that is, the lower-lying half) of each entanglement spectrum
for training, since in both the MBL and ETH regimes, the second half generically consists only of ρA eigenvalues which are
smaller than 10−16 and therefore cannot contain any information. Note that the exact size of the part of the entanglement
spectrum we train with is irrelevant, we checked that if we instead choose 1/3 or 2/3 of it the resulting phase diagram does
not change.
We choose the activation functions as in Eq. (2), so that the
full action of the network is
ˆf(x) = Softmax[V (3,2) ReLU(V (2,1) x + a(2)) + a(3)],
where V (2,1) and V (3,2) are n2 × n1 and 2 × n2 weight matrices, respectively, while a(2) and a(3) are the corresponding
n2 and two-dimensional bias vectors. Here, n1 =
and n2 is a free parameter. In fact, we will take n2 to have
a relatively large value, of the order of 103. In doing so, the
network will become prone to overﬁt. To avoid overﬁtting,
we employ two strategies (in addition to cross-validation, discussed in Sec II).
(1) Dropout regularization: In each training step, we only
train with half of the hidden layer neurons, which are
randomly chosen each time, effecting the replacement
V (2,1) →PV (2,1) in Eq. (7), where P projects onto a
random subset of size n2/2 of the hidden layer units. This
prevents successive build-up of neuronal weight conﬁgurations adjusted to nonuniversal properties of the training
data, and speeds up convergence of the testing set error.
FIG. 4. Comparison of energy-resolved single-sample ETH to MBL transition indicators. (a) Standard deviation of the von Neumann entanglement entropy of a cut of length NA = 9 of the N = 18 chain over 512 consecutive eigenstates. (b) Absolute value of the ¯h derivative of
the Schmidt gap for the same system averaged over 512 consecutive eigenstates. (c) Uncertainty in the classiﬁcation of entanglement spectra
by a neural network with one hidden layer, including cross-validation over 50 trainings. States classiﬁed as MBL with a conﬁdence larger than
0.1 but smaller than 0.9 are assigned a 1, all others a 0. The continuous color range comes from averaging over 512 consecutive eigenstates.
(d) Fine structure comparison of the classiﬁcation of 100 representative eigenstates taken from the middle of the spectrum of a single sample
of the N = 16 chain (where NA = 8). The upper panel shows the value of Schmidt gap, while the lower panel shows the conﬁdence of the
neural network for classifying a given state as MBL. Note that this ﬁne-structure analysis cannot be performed with the entanglement entropy
standard deviation criterion, as this would require a coarse-graining of eigenstates.
(2) Weight decay: During training, weights that have attained
nonzero values at some point, but are no longer actively
contributing to the minimization of the error function,
should decay to zero in subsequent training steps. This
can be achieved by adding a term −µXn on the righthand side of Eq. (4), which corresponds to an augmentation of the error functional (3) by the term µ|X|2, where
| · | denotes the l2-norm of vectors and matrices. Here, we
will apply weight decay only to the hidden layer weights
V (2,1), since only this preserves a certain reparametrization symmetry of the network.51
With these regularization methods, the number of training
steps does not need to be ﬁne-tuned as long as it is large
enough. Independent of system size we ﬁnd that a network
with the described architecture classiﬁes samples of testing
data, which have no overlap with the training data, very successfully with an accuracy of η = 1, where η is the ratio
of correctly identiﬁed spectra to all spectra in the testing set.
Note that this is the case independent of whether we train and
test with entanglement spectra obtained from the same or different disorder realizations.
However, being able to distinguish between the pure ETH
and MBL regimes alone, at ¯h = 0.25 and ¯h = 12.0, respectively, is not enough to uniquely determine the classiﬁcation strategy learned by the neural network. In order to make
the predictions for the transition region reliable, we introduce
conﬁdence optimization: the network should classify entanglement spectra at intermediate ¯h-values with maximal con-
ﬁdence. Note that this does not require any prior knowledge
of the phase diagram. To implement this criterion, we add
a penalizing term to the error functional which quantiﬁes the
lack of conﬁdence at intermediate ¯h-values. Here, we simply
choose the Shannon entropy applied to the network output,
since the result of the Softmax activation function can be interpreted as a probability distribution.
The full error functional used here for training the network
to determine the spin chain phase diagram then reads
Cost( ˆf, f) = −
fi(x) ln ˆfi(x)
ˆfi(x) ln ˆfi(x) + µ|V |2,
where TD stands for training data, i.e., entanglement spectra
from ¯h = 0.25 and ¯h = 12.0, while TR stands for transition region, i.e., entanglement spectra at intermediate disorder strengths 0.25 < ¯h < 12.0. We stress once again that
the set for TR is not labeled, meaning we do not make any
assumption about the nature of the states in the TR. In the
last two terms of Eq. (8), δ and µ are further hyperparameters
controlling the importance of conﬁdence optimization and the
strength of weight decay, respectively. We choose suitable
values empirically by requiring optimal minimization of the
error on the testing data. In particular, we observe that as long
as both µ and δ are chosen to be of order 1, their exact values
do not inﬂuence the results signiﬁcantly. For the following applications, we therefore choose δ = µ = 1, unless otherwise
noted. To understand the inﬂuence of the respective terms, see
Fig. 8 in Appendix C, where the phase transition regions obtained from networks trained with all possible combinations
of δ, µ ∈{0, 1} are compared.
We refer the reader to Appendix B for further information
on the hyperparameters used in Eq. (8), and to Appendix C
for comparison of results for different system sizes. In all
cases, there is no ﬁne-tuning of the network needed. We have
checked that changing the hyperparameters slightly from the
values we used does not induce noticeable variations in the
classiﬁcation output.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH
CONVENTIONAL METHODS
Disorder-averaged phase diagram
With the single-hidden-layer neural network described
above, we were able to reproduce the phase diagram of the
model given by Eq. (5). Figure 1 shows the conﬁdence for
the MBL phase averaged over 40 disorder realizations of the
N = 16 chain as a function of the ﬁeld ¯h and the energy density. A quantitative determination of the critical value of ¯h
that corresponds to the transition between the ETH and MBL
regimes is in part a question of deﬁnition. In order to deﬁne
a critical ¯hc, there are two quantities that need to be speci-
ﬁed: the threshold for the network conﬁdence, above which
a given entanglement spectrum is classiﬁed as being in the
MBL regime, and the fraction of eigenstates that need to be
classiﬁed as MBL by lying above this threshold. We show in
Fig. 3 (a) the resulting dependence of ¯hc on these two quantities for the N = 16 chain. For example, if we consider states
above a threshold of 90% conﬁdence as being MBL, and require that half of all spectra belonging to a certain value of
¯h have to be classiﬁed as MBL by this criterion to be at the
transition, we obtain a critical value of about ¯hc = 2.8 ± 0.5.
This agrees with the literature.18,36,43
Single disorder realization
To compare the performance with conventional methods in
more detail, we consider a speciﬁc disorder realization instead
of averaging over many. Note, however, that we nevertheless average separately over multiple training runs for crossvalidation as explained in chapter II. This is also required from
the observation of slight deviations in the classiﬁcation of single eigenstates when the network is trained multiple times,
even when this is done with the same input data and training parameters. These deviations can be traced back to the
randomized weight and bias initialization we use. See Appendix C for a quantitative analysis of this (on average negligibly small) deviation.
To obtain a phase diagram as a function of ¯h for a single disorder realization {hr}, we generate {hr} for ¯h = 1, and then
rescale it as {¯hhr}. Figure 4 (a) shows the standard deviation
of the entanglement entropy over 512 consecutive eigenstates
of the N = 18 chain. The entanglement entropy is expected
to be larger in the volume-law entangled ETH regime than in
the area law entangled MBL regime. Thus, in the transition
region, where some entanglement spectra are MBL-like and
some are ETH-like, the entanglement entropy will vary most
strongly from one eigenstate to the next.39–41,43 The maximum
in the variance can thus be associated with the transition between the two regimes.
Figure 4 (c) shows the number of states classiﬁed as neither
ETH nor MBL for each individual eigenstate of the same system, averaged over 512 consecutive eigenstates. The sharply
deﬁned region where this uncertainty is maximal can be interpreted as the neural network’s estimate for the transition be-
FIG. 5. Comparison of ETH to MBL transition indicators for a single
realization of the disorder of the N = 18 chain, averaged over energy density. The arrows indicate the vertical axis each curve refers
to. The reduced density matrix is built for NA = 9. Here, the ratio
r of adjacent energy gaps is colored in black. For the GOE describing the ETH regime, we have r ≃0.530. For the Poisson level
statistics characterizing the MBL regime, we have r ≃0.386. We
compare r to the energy-average of the conﬁdence with which entanglement spectra belonging to a given value of ¯h are classiﬁed as
ETH, obtained from two neural network (NN) instances: one with the
conﬁdence-enhancing term we added to the network’s cost function,
corresponding to δ = 1 in Eq. (8), the other without it, corresponding
to δ = 0, colored in blue and red, respectively. The large deviation in
the classiﬁcation of the network trained with δ = 0 from the established criterion of energy level statistics underlines the importance of
conﬁdence optimization. Note also that the transition is sharper for
the neural network based approach with δ = 1.
tween ETH and MBL regimes. Note that to obtain this ﬁgure,
we also performed cross-validation over 50 training runs.
We compare this result to two established criteria to determine the phase transition, which are well deﬁned for a single
disorder realization (and hence also for a ﬁxed system size).
Figure 4 (a) shows the standard deviation of the von Neumann
entanglement entropy. Figure 4 (b) shows the absolute value
of the ¯h derivative of the Schmidt gap for the same system.
As the Schmidt gap is small in the ETH phase and large in
the MBL phase, its ¯h derivative is expected to attain its maximum value at the transition50. Comparing Figs. 4 (a)–(c), we
ﬁnd that the shape and location of the transition agree very
well. At the same time, the neural network pins down a much
sharper transition than the other approaches.
The power of the neural network based method is even more
evident, when the classiﬁcation of individual eigenstates is
considered. Figure 4 (d) shows that the classiﬁcation of individual states as belonging to either the ETH or the MBL
regime by the neural network is much clearer than by the
Schmidt gap criterion.
Next, we compare the neural network based transition characterization with the established method of energy level statistics (see Sec. III). To identify the energy level statistics, we
use the average ratio r of adjacent energy gaps. For an ordered spectrum {En; En ≤En+1}, the ratio of adjacent gaps
is deﬁned as
rn = min (En −En−1, En+1 −En)
max (En −En−1, En+1 −En) .
Each energy level distribution leads to a given average ratio r
of these rn. The comparison between r and the neural network
based transition is shown in Fig. 5. Here it becomes clear that
conﬁdence optimization, as represented by an additional term
in the cost function [corresponding to δ = 1 in Eq. (8)], which
is designed to favor networks which conﬁdently classify transition region states, makes physical sense and is essential to
make contact with established methods.
We note that by reﬁning and combining conventional
methods18,36,43,49 the same or better classiﬁcation success can
be achieved. However, here we want to point out that there is
no equally simple method, assuming as little prior knowledge,
that performs equally well as the machine learning based approach. This approach is very basic: we use a single hidden
layer, typical neural activation functions, and apply standard
regularization techniques. The only nontrivial input we added
to this standard setup is cost optimization, which is effected
by a non-zero δ in Eq. (8).
We observe that the location of the transition varies substantially with different disorder realizations sampled from the
same distribution characterized by some ﬁxed ¯h. The main
reason for this is that even with ﬁxed ¯h per site of the chain,
the mean strength of disorder can still ﬂuctuate. As can be
seen in Fig. 3 (b), the disorder strength averaged over all sites
r=1 |hr| is directly correlated with the inverse of
the ﬁeld corresponding to the transition, 1/¯hc. We thus identify it as a key ingredient for the dependence of the transition
on the disorder realization, even though other properties of the
disorder realization than the average absolute ﬁeld value may
also be correlated with the location of the transition.
Spatial structure of individual eigenstates
The neural network classiﬁcation of individual eigenstates
based on the entanglement spectrum further allows to analyze
the local structure of these states, by varying the location of
the entanglement cut. We compute for a ﬁxed disorder realization the entanglement spectra of each eigenstate for seven
consecutive cuts in the middle of the N = 18 chain as a function of ¯h. All of these entanglement spectra are subsequently
classiﬁed using the neural network. We do not perform crossvalidation as we will only include conﬁdently classiﬁed spectra in the subsequent analysis. Due to the variation of the
length of the entanglement spectra with the cut location, a new
training of the network is necessary for each cut.
Figure 6 (a) shows the entanglement cut-resolved classi-
ﬁcation results for 200 consecutive eigenstates as a function
of ¯h, by varying the cut for the entanglement spectrum to lie
on seven consecutive bonds. The resulting locally resolved
classiﬁcation of eigenstates displays a remarkable asymmetry between approaching the transition from the ETH or from
the MBL side; ﬁrst, we consider the few states that are MBL
classiﬁed for some entanglement cut deep in the ETH regime.
FIG. 6. Dependence of the classiﬁcation of eigenstates for a single
disorder realization of the N = 18 chain on the location of the entanglement cut. (a) Close-up of the ¯h-dependent classiﬁcation of 200
eigenstates taken from the middle of the spectrum for entanglement
cuts ranging from NA = 6 up to NA = 12. For each value of ¯h,
a subplot is shown whose horizontal axis corresponds to these seven
cuts. Blue (red) states were classiﬁed with conﬁdence > 90% as
ETH (MBL). The remaining states are marked in white. (b) Survey of
10 000 eigenstates from the middle of the spectrum which have been
classiﬁed separately for all seven cuts. The blue (red) curve is the
fraction of eigenstates that were classiﬁed with conﬁdence > 90%
as ETH (MBL) for all cuts. The black curve is the fraction of states
that are classiﬁed with conﬁdence > 90% as ETH for at least one cut
and with the same conﬁdence as MBL for at least one cut, i.e., states
which are spatially inhomogeneous in their character.
We observe that a substantial fraction of them was classiﬁed
as MBL consistently across all seven cuts. This is in sharp
contrast with the few states that are ETH classiﬁed for some
entanglement cut deep in the MBL regime. Only a tiny fraction of these states is classiﬁed as ETH across all seven cuts
simultaneously. Our results point to an asymmetry in the evolution of the local structure of eigenstates when the transition
is approached from the MBL or ETH side.
Using this capability of resolving the state character locally, we can thus conﬁrm the following hypothesis about the
evolution of the local structure of the quantum states across
the transition40,46–48: As the transition is approached from the
MBL side, ETH-like regions emerge in rare places where the
random ﬁeld variations are small. These are the ﬁrst places
where quantum ﬂuctuations will dominate over the classical
ones induced by the random ﬁeld. As the transition is approached, these regions grow in size and will eventually be
large enough to serve as a bath for the entire system. At this
point, the state becomes entirely ETH-like. We make these
observations quantitative in Fig. 6 (b), where the fraction of
pure ETH states, pure MBL states, and of states with mixed
character is plotted as a function of ¯h.
We remark that for the above analysis to be valid, it is crucial that we are considering spin chains with open boundary
conditions. Only in this case does an entanglement cut separating the chain in two subsystems reveal purely local information. In contrast, if the chain was studied with periodic boundary conditions, a bipartitioning requires two cuts
and the entanglement spectrum would convolute information
about the structure near both cuts at distant locations.
What the network has learned: dreaming
Taken collectively, the above results on the disorderaveraged phase diagram as well as about the transition for
individual disorder realizations provide strong evidence that
the neural network performs the classiﬁcation operation for
which it was designed. To gain further insights into the network operation and to rule out that any pathological behavior emerges, we analyze it with a method called creation by
reﬁnement52, which has recently gained widespread attention
under the term dreaming53 in the application to image recognition. The method is, however, more general than this, and
here we use it on entanglement spectra. For that, the trained
network is presented with randomly initialized input data x for
which it provides an output y. Subsequently, the input data is
modiﬁed until the output y equals a desired entry from the target set {(1, 0), (0, 1)}, for example (0, 1) for being classiﬁed
as MBL. When this procedure is repeated many times, the obtained collection of input data x reveals which properties of
the training data have been learned by the network as being
characteristic for an MBL entanglement spectrum.
We perform the dreaming algorithm using gradient descent
to optimize the input data for a desired network output, using the cross-entropy between the desired and the actual output as a cost function. Instead of using entirely random input
data to initialize the dreaming, we randomly choose entanglement spectra that have not been classiﬁed conﬁdently as either MBL or ETH by the network (more precisely, we choose
spectra for which the conﬁdence of ETH and MBL is between
40% and 60%). These input spectra are then optimized toward either ETH or MBL. To obtain comparable and physical
entanglement spectra, we further enforce the constraints that
(i) the eigenvalues of the reduced density matrix be nonnegative, and (ii) the absolute value of their logarithm be ordered
from smallest to largest. Enforcing these constraints is necessary, because we cannot expect that the network has ‘learned’
any of them, and not restrictive, as any physical entanglement
spectrum can be represented this way. Note that we do not
require that the eigenvalues of the reduced density matrix sum
up to 1, since this property of the training data was lost when
restricting to the ﬁrst half of the entanglement spectrum as
described at the beginning of Sec. IV.
To keep the dreaming algorithm from merely capturing
structure speciﬁc to one training instance of the network, we
average over 40 distinct training instances. For each dreaming, we use 2 × 105 steps with a gradient descent step size
of 10−4. The results are shown in Fig. 7 (b) where a comparison with true entanglement spectra from deep in the MBL
and deep in the ETH phase is made. We observe from the resemblance between Figs. 7 (a) and (b) that the neural network
has indeed learned the relative characteristic shapes of typical
ETH and MBL entanglement spectra, in particular the powerlaw nature of the entanglement spectra in the MBL phase,37
but without becoming sensitive to their exact absolute magnitudes. This can be understood by noting that it was only
trained to distinguish one phase from the other, and not to individually characterize the respective phases on their own.
FIG. 7. Dreaming of entanglement spectra for a single disorder realization of the N = 18 chain (with NA = 9). An entry on the horizontal axis denotes the index of the respective entanglement spectrum eigenvalue. (a) 140 typical entanglement spectra of the pure
ETH (blue), MBL (red), and transition (black) regime. The trained
network assigns a conﬁdence vector (1, 0) to the ETH spectra, and
(0, 1) to the MBL spectra. The transition regime entanglement spectra have been chosen such that the network yields an output lying
between (0.4, 0.6) and (0.6, 0.4) on them. (b) Result after 200 000
steps of the dreaming gradient descent, described in the main text,
when applied on 20 of the same transition region entanglement spectra. Note the difference in scale, which indicates that the neural network learns relative rather than absolute features of the training data.
The network correctly picks up the power-law structure of the entanglement spectrum in the MBL phase, as can be deduced from its
nearly linear slope in this logarithmic plot.
We trained an artiﬁcial neural network with a single hidden
layer on entanglement spectra of the disordered Heisenberg
chain to identify the ETH and MBL regimes of this model,
and subsequently applied the network to entanglement spectra
belonging to states that lie between these two regimes. Even
though the network was not trained with entanglement spectra near the phase transition, the phase diagram obtained is
in good agreement with previous studies. By adapting the
dreaming technique, we were able to show that the network
correctly learns the power-law entanglement spectrum of the
MBL phase. Our method is uncontrolled, and is therefore less
qualiﬁed to deduce a quantitative value for the critical disorder
strength, for example. However, it has the advantage of being
simpler than conventional methods, and in addition provides
the cleanest characterization of the transition in the case of
single eigenstates of a single disorder realization.
The structure and operation of the network that we presented, including features such as conﬁdence optimization and
dreaming, is broadly applicable to classify other phases of
matter based on their entanglement spectrum and likely also
other correlation functions as input data. We conclude that
artiﬁcial neural networks constitute an efﬁcient and unbiased
tool for classifying phases of matter from numerical data.
δ = 0, µ = 1
δ = 1, µ = 1
δ = 1, µ = 0
δ = 0, µ = 0
Comparison of transition regions obtained from neural networks that were trained with different cost functions, corresponding to a
different choice of the parameters δ and µ in Eq. (8), for a single sample of the N = 18 chain with NA = 9. Here we show the classiﬁcation uncertainty as deﬁned below Fig. 4 (c), i.e., including cross-validation over 50 trainings, for different cost functions. (a) The standard
classiﬁcation result with both regularization and conﬁdence-enhancing terms in the cost function. (b) Without conﬁdence optimization, the
transition region is detected at qualitatively larger values of ¯h. From this observation alone we cannot decide which of the two networks
corresponding to δ ∈{0, 1} should be preferred, since both distinguish the pure ETH and MBL regions with η = 1. However, Fig. 5 clearly
shows that only the cost function with δ = 1 faithfully recovers the transition obtained from a level statistics analysis. In addition, as discussed
in Appendix A, when training with different kinds of input data the transition region stays unchanged only when δ = 1, while for δ = 0 the
network classiﬁcation becomes inconsistent. (c) and (d) Without proper regularization, the network performance becomes pathological.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Markus M¨uller, Maksym Serbyn, Nils Eckstein,
and Ole Richter for useful discussions, as well as Rahul Nandkishore and Scott D. Geraedts for previous collaboration on
related subjects. In addition we thank Markus M¨uller for a
critical reading of the manuscript. F.S. acknowledges support
by the Swiss National Science Foundation under grant number
200021-169061.
Appendix A: Training with other kinds of input data
In the main text, we have focused on the spectrum of He,
deﬁned by Eq. (6), as input data for our neural network. In this
appendix, we report our observations when training instead
with (a) the spectrum of the reduced density matrix ρA, and
(b) the differences of the He eigenvalues. The motivation for
input data of type (a) is that diagonalizing ρA, instead of its
logarithm, requires less preprocessing, while the motivation
for (b) is that the differences of the He eigenvalues have been
shown25,36 to be statistically distributed in a unique fashion
depending on whether the regime is MBL or ETH.
In the case of (a), we again are able to train the same network as described in the main text, Eq. (7), to an accuracy
of η = 1. An analysis of the weight distribution of the hidden layer after training shows that for distinguishing between
MBL and ETH, the trained network only takes note of the
ﬁrst few input neurons, which correspond to the lowest entanglement eigenvalues. In this case, training has dynamically
rediscovered a well known criterion for distinguishing an almost perfectly mixed state (such as a typical ETH state) from
a nearly pure state (such as a typical MBL state): the “Schmidt
gap” described in Sec. III.
For input data of kind (b), we ﬁnd that the network described by Eq. (7) does not converge to η = 1 in any reasonable number of training steps. However, when increasing its
complexity by introducing a second hidden layer of neurons,
we can again easily achieve η = 1.
In both cases, (a) and (b), the phase diagram is in quantitaa)
FIG. 9. Dependence of the classiﬁcation of states on different training runs. For each plot, the entanglement spectra for a system with
N = 18 sites with a single disorder realization were trained with 50
times, each time with randomly initialized network parameters and a
random choice of training data. The resulting classiﬁcations of the
individual eigenstates for each ¯h are then compared pairwise and the
comparison is averaged over all pairings of trainings. We consider
three categories of states: (i) classiﬁed with conﬁdence > 90% as
MBL, (ii) classiﬁed with conﬁdence > 90% as ETH, (iii) others, not
conﬁdently classiﬁed. (a) Fraction of states that switch between any
of the three categories (i)–(iii) to any other between two trainings.
(b) Fraction of states that switch from category (i) to category (ii)
(i.e., from conﬁdently MBL to conﬁdently ETH) or vice versa between two trainings. Note that the value of ¯h at which these fractions
assume their maximal value provides one method to determine the
critical transition location ¯hc for this particular disorder realization.
FIG. 10. Finite-size dependence of the transition region for different single disorder realizations of the N = 12, 14, 16, 18 chains (note that
we have on purpose used a different disorder realization for N = 18 than the one used in Fig. 4 to show that the overall shape of the transition
region is sample independent). Each plot shows the transition region as deﬁned below Fig. 4 (c) for a network trained on entanglement spectra
of a cut with NA = N/2. Note that the ¯h step size for each plot differs, and is given by ∆¯h = 0.01, 0.05, 0.125, 0.125, respectively. For
each N, we have averaged the result over an increasing number of eigenstates in order to arrive at a resolution suited for the human eye in a
controllable way. Only for N = 16 and N = 18, the data are averaged over the same number of eigenstates, in order to demonstrate that the
apparent improvement of the sharpness of the transition is not merely a result of a larger number of states that have been averaged over. Note
also that each of panels (a)–(d) necessarily represent different disorder realizations and hence the value of ¯h at which the transition occurs
should not be compared between them.
tive agreement with Fig. 1, as long as both regularization and
conﬁdence optimization terms are taken into account in the
cost function (8). We note that when we drop either of these
additions to the cross entropy, the phase diagram obtained after training the respective network to distinguish MBL and
ETH with η = 1 becomes dependent on the type of input
data. This indicates that the naive choice of cost function is
not restrictive enough to uniquely determine the neural network parameters. Instead it has a manifold of minima which
yield inequivalent phase diagrams. This observation reafﬁrms
our choice of cost function, and in particular motivates the extra criterion of conﬁdence optimization we added to encourage a high-conﬁdence classiﬁcation of transition states, i.e.,
the second term in Eq. (8).
Appendix B: Hyperparameters and network details
All neural networks used in this work were implemented
in Python using Google’s TensorFlow54. In the main text, it
was noted that a network with a large number of hidden layer
units needs to be regularized appropriately in order to avoid
overﬁtting. The exact number of hidden layer units is, however, somewhat arbitrary as long as it is large enough with
respect to the number of input neurons. For all system sizes
considered, with entanglement spectra inputs at most of size
|NA=9 = 126, corresponding to a half-cut of
the N = 18 chain, we chose n2 = 1024 units for the single
hidden layer of our network.
During training, we used an empirically determined step
size of 10−4 for gradient descent on weights initialized around
0 with a standard deviation of 0.1. Furthermore, we chose the
regularization and conﬁdence optimization parameters µ = 1
and δ = 1 in Eq. (7), respectively. We show in Fig. 8 that if
either conﬁdence optimization or weight decay is ignored, the
classiﬁcation outcome is not consistent with the results from
other methods (see also Fig. 5 in the main text).
For all calculations, we removed the lowest and highest
10% of all eigenvalues for the data set corresponding to the
the pure ETH and MBL regimes, which is then subdivided
into training and testing set for cross-validation, and train with
randomly chosen batches of 100 elements in each step. We
use the same batch size for the entanglement spectra coming
from transition region states, which are required by the con-
ﬁdence optimization term we added to the cost function. We
use between 3000 and 4000 training steps.
Appendix C: Empirical observations on the network
performance
In Sec. V we noted that the neural network’s classiﬁcation
of individual eigenstates for a single disorder realization is not
necessarily consistent over multiple training and evaluation
runs, even when all hyperparameters and input data are left
unchanged. This stems mainly from the random initialization
of the weight and bias vectors, not from the randomly chosen
training and testing sets. Here we quantify this inconsistency
in classiﬁcation for the case of a single-hidden layer network,
given by Eq. (7). We trained with entanglement spectra from a
single disorder realization of the N = 18 chain in 3000 training steps for 50 times. To distinguish between deviations in
conﬁdence and deviations in classiﬁcation, we deﬁne an MBL
state as a state that is classiﬁed as MBL with a conﬁdence
of over 90%, and likewise an ETH state as a state which is
classiﬁed as MBL with a conﬁdence of less than 10% (remember that the conﬁdences for MBL and ETH have to add
up to 100% since we use a Softmax output layer). We then
train 50 times, and consider all possible pairings of the resulting 50 phase diagrams. It turns out that the fraction of states
that change their classiﬁcation from ETH in one member of
a pair to MBL in the other, or vice versa, averages to 0.008,
while the fraction of states that were classiﬁed as either MBL
or ETH in one member of a pair, but are not conﬁdently classiﬁed as either in the other, averages to 0.07. In Fig. 9 we
present an ¯h-resolved analysis.
We also compare the network performance when trained
on entanglement spectra generated from spin chains of different length, as presented in Fig. 10.
Here we observe
that the transition seems to become sharper for larger system
sizes, as expected.40 However, one has to keep in mind that
each panel of Fig. 10 uses a different disorder realization and
hence realization-speciﬁc features and those stemming from
the change in system size both appear in these plots.
1 L. Zdeborova, Nat. Phys. , 10.1038/nphys4053 .
2 P. Broecker, J. Carrasquilla, R. G. Melko,
and S. Trebst,
 
3 K. Ch’ng, J. Carrasquilla, R. G. Melko,
and E. Khatami,
 
4 Y. Zhang and E.-A. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 216401 .
5 D.-L. Deng, X. Li, and S. Das Sarma, arXiv:1609.09060.
 
7 J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko, Nat. Phys. , 10.1038/nphys4035
8 E. P. L. van Nieuwenburg, Y.-H. Liu, and S. D. Huber, Nat. Phys.
, 10.1038/nphys4037 .
9 W. Hu, R. R. P. Singh, and R. T. Scalettar, arXiv:1704.00080.
10 A. G. Kusne, T. Gao, A. Mehta, L. Ke, M. C. Nguyen, K.-M. Ho,
V. Antropov, C.-Z. Wang, M. J. Kramer, C. Long, and I. Takeuchi,
Scientiﬁc Reports 4, 6367 EP .
11 L. M. Ghiringhelli, J. Vybiral, S. V. Levchenko, C. Draxl, and
M. Schefﬂer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 105503 .
12 S. V. Kalinin, B. G. Sumpter, and R. K. Archibald, Nat. Mater.
14, 973 .
13 L. Li, T. E. Baker, S. R. White, and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. B 94,
245129 .
14 G. Torlai and R. G. Melko, Phys. Rev. B 94, 165134 .
15 G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Science 355, 602 .
16 D.-L. Deng, X. Li, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. X 7, 021021
17 H. Li and F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 010504 .
18 D. J. Luitz, N. Laﬂorencie, and F. Alet, Phys. Rev. B 91, 081103
19 P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 .
20 L. Fleishman and P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. B 21, 2366 .
21 I. V. Gornyi, A. D. Mirlin, and D. G. Polyakov, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 206603 .
22 D. Basko, I. Aleiner, and B. Altshuler, Annals of Physics 321,
1126 .
23 D. A. Huse, R. Nandkishore, and V. Oganesyan, Phys. Rev. B 90,
174202 .
24 R. Nandkishore and D. Huse, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 6, 15 .
25 S. D. Geraedts, R. Nandkishore, and N. Regnault, Phys. Rev. B
93, 174202 .
26 M. Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and D. A. Abanin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
127201 .
27 B. Swingle, arXiv:1307.0507.
28 V. Ros, M. M¨uller, and A. Scardicchio, Nuclear Physics B 891,
420 .
29 D. A. Huse, R. Nandkishore, V. Oganesyan, A. Pal, and S. L.
Sondhi, Phys. Rev. B 88, 014206 .
30 Y. Avishai, J. Richert, and R. Berkovits, Phys. Rev. B 66, 052416
31 V. Oganesyan and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155111 .
32 A. Pal and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 82, 174411 .
33 R. Modak and S. Mukerjee, New Journal of Physics 16, 093016
34 K. Agarwal, S. Gopalakrishnan, M. Knap, M. M¨uller,
E. Demler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 160401 .
35 Y. Bar Lev, G. Cohen, and D. R. Reichman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
100601 .
36 Z.-C. Yang, C. Chamon, A. Hamma, and E. R. Mucciolo, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 267206 .
37 M. Serbyn, A. A. Michailidis, D. A. Abanin, and Z. Papi´c, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 117, 160601 .
38 B. Bauer and C. Nayak, Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
and Experiment 2013, P09005 .
39 J. A. Kj¨all, J. H. Bardarson, and F. Pollmann, Phys. Rev. Lett.
113, 107204 .
40 V. Khemani, S. P. Lim, D. N. Sheng, and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev.
X 7, 021013 .
41 R. Singh, J. H. Bardarson,
and F. Pollmann, New Journal of
Physics 18, 023046 .
42 C. Monthus, Entropy 18 , 10.3390/e18040122.
43 X. Yu, D. J. Luitz, and B. K. Clark, Phys. Rev. B 94, 184202
44 W. De Roeck, F. Huveneers, M. M¨uller, and M. Schiulaz, Phys.
Rev. B 93, 014203 .
45 P. Prelovˇsek, O. S. Bariˇsi´c, and M. ˇZnidariˇc, Phys. Rev. B 94,
241104 .
46 R. Vosk, D. A. Huse, and E. Altman, Phys. Rev. X 5, 031032
47 A. C. Potter, R. Vasseur, and S. A. Parameswaran, Phys. Rev. X
5, 031033 .
48 L. Zhang, B. Zhao, T. Devakul, and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 93,
224201 .
49 M. Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and D. A. Abanin, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041047
50 J. Gray, S. Bose, and A. Bayat, arXiv:1704.00738.
51 C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics) .
52 J. P. Lewis, in IEEE 1988 International Conference on Neural
Networks, San Diego, CA, USA pp. 229–233 vol.2.
53 A. Mordvintsev, C. Olah, and M. Tyka, Google Research Blog.
Retrieved June 20, 14 .
54 M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro,
G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat,
I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´e, R. Monga,
S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner,
I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan,
F. Vi´egas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke,
Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,” , software available from
tensorﬂow.org.