VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-based Model for
Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text
C.J. Hutto Eric Gilbert
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30032
 
 
The inherent nature of social media content poses serious
challenges to practical applications of sentiment analysis.
We present VADER, a simple rule-based model for general
sentiment analysis, and compare its effectiveness to eleven
typical state-of-practice benchmarks including LIWC,
ANEW, the General Inquirer, SentiWordNet, and machine
learning oriented techniques relying on Naive Bayes, Maximum Entropy, and Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithms. Using a combination of qualitative and quantitative
methods, we first construct and empirically validate a goldstandard list of lexical features (along with their associated
sentiment intensity measures) which are specifically attuned
to sentiment in microblog-like contexts. We then combine
these lexical features with consideration for five general
rules that embody grammatical and syntactical conventions
for expressing and emphasizing sentiment intensity. Interestingly, using our parsimonious rule-based model to assess
the sentiment of tweets, we find that VADER outperforms
individual human raters (F1 Classification Accuracy = 0.96
and 0.84, respectively), and generalizes more favorably
across contexts than any of our benchmarks.
1. Introduction
Sentiment analysis is useful to a wide range of problems
that are of interest to human-computer interaction practitioners and researchers, as well as those from fields such as
sociology, marketing and advertising, psychology, economics, and political science. The inherent nature of microblog content - such as those observed on Twitter and
Facebook - poses serious challenges to practical applications of sentiment analysis. Some of these challenges stem
from the sheer rate and volume of user generated social
content, combined with the contextual sparseness resulting
from shortness of the text and a tendency to use abbreviated language conventions to express sentiments.
A comprehensive, high quality lexicon is often essential
for fast, accurate sentiment analysis on such large scales.
An example of such a lexicon that has been widely used in
the social media domain is the Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (LIWC, pronounced “Luke”) . All rights reserved.
zales, & Booth, 2007). Sociologists, psychologists, linguists, and computer scientists find LIWC appealing because it has been extensively validated. Also, its straightforward dictionary and simple word lists are easily inspected, understood, and extended if desired. Such attributes
make LIWC an attractive option to researchers looking for
a reliable lexicon to extract emotional or sentiment polarity
from text. Despite their pervasive use for gaging sentiment
in social media contexts, these lexicons are often used with
little regard for their actual suitability to the domain.
This paper describes the development, validation, and
evaluation of VADER (for Valence Aware Dictionary for
sEntiment Reasoning). We use a combination of qualitative
and quantitative methods to produce, and then empirically
validate, a gold-standard sentiment lexicon that is especially attuned to microblog-like contexts. We next combine
these lexical features with consideration for five generalizable rules that embody grammatical and syntactical conventions that humans use when expressing or emphasizing
sentiment intensity. We find that incorporating these heuristics improves the accuracy of the sentiment analysis engine across several domain contexts (social media text, NY
Times editorials, movie reviews, and product reviews).
Interestingly, the VADER lexicon performs exceptionally
well in the social media domain. The correlation coefficient shows that VADER (r = 0.881) performs as well as
individual human raters (r = 0.888) at matching ground
truth (aggregated group mean from 20 human raters for
sentiment intensity of each tweet). Surprisingly, when we
further inspect the classification accuracy, we see that
VADER (F1 = 0.96) actually even outperforms individual
human raters (F1 = 0.84) at correctly classifying the sentiment of tweets into positive, neutral, or negative classes.
VADER retains (and even improves on) the benefits of
traditional sentiment lexicons like LIWC: it is bigger, yet
just as simply inspected, understood, quickly applied
(without a need for extensive learning/training) and easily
extended. Like LIWC (but unlike some other lexicons or
machine learning models), the VADER sentiment lexicon
is gold-standard quality and has been validated by humans.
VADER distinguishes itself from LIWC in that it is more
sensitive to sentiment expressions in social media contexts
while also generalizing more favorably to other domains.
We make VADER freely available for download and use.
Proceedings of the Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
2. Background and Related Work
Sentiment analysis, or opinion mining, is an active area of
study in the field of natural language processing that analyzes people's opinions, sentiments, evaluations, attitudes,
and emotions via the computational treatment of subjectivity in text. It is not our intention to review the entire
body of literature concerning sentiment analysis. Indeed,
such an endeavor would not be possible within the limited
space available 
and Pang & Lee ). We do provide a brief overview
of canonical works and techniques relevant to our study.
2.1 Sentiment Lexicons
A substantial number of sentiment analysis approaches rely
greatly on an underlying sentiment (or opinion) lexicon. A
sentiment lexicon is a list of lexical features (e.g., words)
which are generally labeled according to their semantic
orientation as either positive or negative . Manually creating and validating such lists of opinion-bearing
features, while being among the most robust methods for
generating reliable sentiment lexicons, is also one of the
most time-consuming. For this reason, much of the applied
research leveraging sentiment analysis relies heavily on
preexisting manually constructed lexicons. Because lexicons are so useful for sentiment analysis, we briefly provide an overview of several benchmarks. We first review
three widely used lexicons (LIWC1, GI2, Hu-Liu043) in
which words are categorized into binary classes (i.e., either
positive or negative) according to their context free semantic orientation. We then describe three other lexicons
(ANEW4, SentiWordNet5, and SenticNet6) in which words
are associated with valence scores for sentiment intensity.
2.1.1 Semantic Orientation (Polarity-based) Lexicons
LIWC is text analysis software designed for studying the
various emotional, cognitive, structural, and process components present in text samples. LIWC uses a proprietary
dictionary of almost 4,500 words organized into one (or
more) of 76 categories, including 905 words in two categories especially related to sentiment analysis (see Table 1):
LIWC Category
Positive Emotion
Love, nice, good, great
Negative Emotion
Hurt, ugly, sad, bad, worse
Table 1: Example words from two of LIWC’s 76 categories.
These two categories can be leveraged to construct a semantic
orientation-based lexicon for sentiment analysis.
1 www.liwc.net
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
LIWC is well-established and has been both internally
and externally validated in a process spanning more than a
decade of work by psychologists, sociologists, and linguists .
Its pedigree and validation make LIWC an attractive option
to researchers looking for a reliable lexicon to extract emotional or sentiment polarity from social media text. For
example, LIWC’s lexicon has been used to extract indications of political sentiment from tweets , predict the onset of
depression in individuals based on text from social media
 , characterize the emotional variability of pregnant mothers from
Twitter posts ,
unobtrusively measure national happiness based on Facebook status updates , and differentiating
happy romantic couples from unhappy ones based on their
instant message communications . However, as Hutto, Yardi, & Gilbert 
point out, despite its widespread use for assessing sentiment in social media text, LIWC does not include consideration for sentiment-bearing lexical items such as acronyms, initialisms, emoticons, or slang, which are known to
be important for sentiment analysis of social text . Also, LIWC is unable to account for differences in the sentiment intensity of words.
For example, “The food here is exceptional” conveys more
positive intensity than “The food here is okay”. A sentiment analysis tool using LIWC would score them equally
(they each contain one positive term). Such distinctions are
intuitively valuable for fine-grained sentiment analysis.
The General Inquirer (GI) is a text analysis application
with one of the oldest manually constructed lexicons still
in widespread use. The GI has been in development and
refinement since 1966, and is designed as a tool for content
analysis, a technique used by social scientists, political
scientists, and psychologists for objectively identifying
specified characteristics of messages .
The lexicon contains more than 11K words classified into
one or more of 183 categories. For our purposes, we focus
on the 1,915 words labeled Positive and the 2,291 words
labeled as Negative. Like LIWC, the Harvard GI lexicon
has been widely used in several works to automatically
determine sentiment properties of text . However, as with LIWC, the GI suffers
from a lack of coverage of sentiment-relevant lexical features common to social text, and it is ignorant of intensity
differences among sentiment-bearing words.
Hu and Liu 
maintain a publicly available lexicon of nearly 6,800 words
(2,006 with positive semantic orientation, and 4,783 negative). Their opinion lexicon was initially constructed
through a bootstrapping process using
WordNet , a well-known English lexical
database in which words are clustered into groups of synonyms known as synsets. The Hu-Liu04 opinion lexicon has
evolved over the past decade, and (unlike LIWC or the GI
lexicons) is more attuned to sentiment expressions in social
text and product reviews – though it still does not capture
sentiment from emoticons or acronyms/initialisms.
2.1.2 Sentiment Intensity (Valence-based) Lexicons
Many applications would benefit from being able to determine not just the binary polarity (positive versus negative), but also the strength of the sentiment expressed in
text. Just how favorably or unfavorably do people feel
about a new product, movie, or legislation bill? Analysts
and researchers want (and need) to be able to recognize
changes in sentiment intensity over time in order to detect
when rhetoric is heating up or cooling down . It stands to reason that having a
general lexicon with strength valences would be beneficial.
The Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) lexicon provides a set of normative emotional ratings for 1,034
English words . Unlike LIWC or
GI, the words in ANEW have been ranked in terms of their
pleasure, arousal, and dominance. ANEW words have an
associated sentiment valence ranging from 1-9 (with a neutral midpoint at five), such that words with valence scores
less than five are considered unpleasant/negative, and those
with scores greater than five are considered pleasant/positive. For example, the valence for betray is 1.68,
bland is 4.01, dream is 6.73, and delight is 8.26. These
valences help researchers measure the intensity of expressed sentiment in microblogs – an important dimension beyond simple binary orientations of positive and negative. Nevertheless, as with
LIWC and GI, the ANEW lexicon is also insensitive to
common sentiment-relevant lexical features in social text.
SentiWordNet is an extension of WordNet in which 147,306 synsets are annotated with three
numerical scores relating to positivity, negativity, and objectivity (neutrality) . Each score ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, and their sum is
1.0 for each synset. The scores were calculated using a
complex mix of semi-supervised algorithms (propagation
methods and classifiers). It is thus not a gold standard resource like WordNet, LIWC, GI, or ANEW (which were
all 100% curated by humans), but it is useful for a wide
range of tasks. We interface with SentiWordNet via Python’s Natural Language Toolkit7 (NLTK), and use the
difference of each sysnset’s positive and negative scores as
its sentiment valence to distinguish differences in the sentiment intensity of words. The SentiWordNet lexicon is
7 
very noisy; a large majority of synsets have no positive or
negative polarity. It also fails to account for sentimentbearing lexical features relevant to text in microblogs.
SenticNet is a publicly available semantic and affective
resource for concept-level opinion and sentiment analysis
 . SenticNet is constructed by means of sentic computing, a paradigm that
exploits both AI and Semantic Web techniques to process
natural language opinions via an ensemble of graph-mining
and dimensionality-reduction techniques . The SenticNet lexicon consists
of 14,244 common sense concepts such as wrath, adoration, woe, and admiration with information associated with
(among other things) the concept’s sentiment polarity, a
numeric value on a continuous scale ranging from –1 to 1.
We access the SenticNet polarity score using the online
SenticNet API and a publicly available Python package8.
2.1.3 Lexicons and Context-Awareness
Whether one is using binary polarity-based lexicons or
more nuanced valence-based lexicons, it is possible to improve sentiment analysis performance by understanding
deeper lexical properties (e.g., parts-of-speech) for more
context awareness. For example, a lexicon may be further
tuned according to a process of word-sense disambiguation
(WSD) . Word-sense
disambiguation refers to the process of identifying which
sense of a word is used in a sentence when the word has
multiple meanings (i.e. its contextual meaning). For example, using WSD, we can distinguish that the word catch has
negative sentiment in “At first glance the contract looks
good, but there’s a catch”, but is neutral in “The fisherman
plans to sell his catch at the market”. We use a publicly
available Python package9 that performs sentiment classification with word-sense disambiguation.
Despite their ubiquity for evaluating sentiment in social
media contexts, there are generally three shortcomings of
lexicon-based sentiment analysis approaches: 1) they have
trouble with coverage, often ignoring important lexical
features which are especially relevant to social text in microblogs, 2) some lexicons ignore general sentiment intensity differentials for features within the lexicon, and 3)
acquiring a new set of (human validated gold standard)
lexical features – along with their associated sentiment
valence scores – can be a very time consuming and labor
intensive process. We view the current study as an opportunity not only to address this gap by constructing just such
a lexicon and providing it to the broader research community, but also a chance to compare its efficacy against other
well-established lexicons with regards to sentiment analysis of social media text and other domains.
8 senticnet 0.3.2 ( 
9 
2.2 Machine Learning Approaches
Because manually creating and validating a comprehensive
sentiment lexicon is labor and time intensive, much work
has explored automated means of identifying sentimentrelevant features in text. Typical state of the art practices
incorporate machine learning approaches to “learn” the
sentiment-relevant features of text.
The Naive Bayes (NB) classifier is a simple classifier
that relies on Bayesian probability and the naive assumption that feature probabilities are independent of one another. Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt, or ME) is a general
purpose machine learning technique belonging to the class
of exponential models using multinomial logistic regression. Unlike NB, ME makes no conditional independence
assumption between features, and thereby accounts for
information entropy (feature weightings). Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) differ from both NB and ME models in
that SVMs are non-probability classifiers which operate by
separating data points in space using one or more hyperplanes (centerlines of the gaps separating different classes).
We use the Python-based machine learning algorithms
from scikit-learn.org for the NB, ME, SVM-Classification
(SVM-C) and SVM-Regression (SVM-R) models.
Machine learning approaches are not without drawbacks. First, they require (often extensive) training data
which are, as with validated sentiment lexicons, sometimes
troublesome to acquire. Second, they depend on the training set to represent as many features as possible (which
often, they do not – especially in the case of the short,
sparse text of social media). Third, they are often more
computationally expensive in terms of CPU processing,
memory requirements, and training/classification time
(which restricts the ability to assess sentiment on streaming
data). Fourth, they often derive features “behind the
scenes” inside of a black box that is not (easily) humaninterpretable and are therefore more difficult to either generalize, modify, or extend (e.g., to other domains).
3. Methods
Our approach seeks to leverage the advantages of parsimonious rule-based modeling to construct a computational
sentiment analysis engine that 1) works well on social media style text, yet readily generalizes to multiple domains,
2) requires no training data, but is constructed from a generalizable, valence-based, human-curated gold standard
sentiment lexicon 3) is fast enough to be used online with
streaming data, and 4) does not severely suffer from a
speed-performance tradeoff.
Figure 1 provides an overview of the research process
and summarizes the methods used in this study. In essence,
this paper reports on three interrelated efforts: 1) the development and validation of a gold standard sentiment lexicon that is sensitive both the polarity and the intensity of
sentiments expressed in social media microblogs (but
which is also generally applicable to sentiment analysis in
other domains); 2) the identification and subsequent experimental evaluation of generalizable rules regarding conventional uses of grammatical and syntactical aspects of text
for assessing sentiment intensity; and 3) comparing the
performance of a parsimonious lexicon and rule-based
model against other established and/or typical sentiment
analysis baselines. In each of these three efforts, we incorporate an explicit human-centric approach. Specifically, we
combine qualitative analysis with empirical validation and
experimental investigations leveraging the wisdom-of-thecrowd .
3.1 Constructing and Validating a Valence-Aware
Sentiment Lexicon: A Human-Centered Approach
Manually creating (much less, validating) a comprehensive
sentiment lexicon is a labor intensive and sometimes error
prone process, so it is no wonder that many opinion mining
researchers and practitioners rely so heavily on existing
lexicons as primary resources. There is, of course, a great
Figure 1: Methods and process approach overview.
deal of overlap in the vocabulary covered by such lexicons;
however, there are also numerous items unique to each.
We begin by constructing a list inspired by examining
existing well-established sentiment word-banks (LIWC,
ANEW, and GI). To this, we next incorporate numerous
lexical features common to sentiment expression in microblogs, including a full list of Western-style emoticons10
(for example, “:-)” denotes a “smiley face” and generally
indicates positive sentiment), sentiment-related acronyms
and initialisms11 (e.g., LOL and WTF are both sentimentladen initialisms), and commonly used slang12 with sentiment value (e.g., “nah”, “meh” and “giggly”). This process
provided us with over 9,000 lexical feature candidates.
Next, we assessed the general applicability of each feature candidate to sentiment expressions. We used a wisdom-of-the-crowd13 (WotC) approach 
to acquire a valid point estimate for the sentiment valence
(intensity) of each context-free candidate feature. We collected intensity ratings on each of our candidate lexical
features from ten independent human raters (for a total of
90,000+ ratings). Features were rated on a scale from “[–4]
Extremely Negative” to “ Extremely Positive”, with
allowance for “ Neutral (or Neither, N/A)”. Ratings
were obtained using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), a
micro-labor website where workers perform minor tasks in
exchange for a small amount of money (see subsection
3.1.1 for details on how we were able to consistently obtain
high quality, generalizable results from AMT workers).
Figure 2 illustrates the user interface implemented for acquiring valid point estimates of sentiment intensity for each
context-free candidate feature comprising the VADER
sentiment lexicon. (A similar UI was leveraged for all of
the evaluation and validation activities described in subsections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4.) We kept every lexical feature
that had a non-zero mean rating, and whose standard deviation was less than 2.5 as determined by the aggregate of ten
independent raters. This left us with just over 7,500 lexical
features with validated valence scores that indicated both
the sentiment polarity (positive/negative), and the sentiment intensity on a scale from –4 to +4. For example, the
word “okay” has a positive valence of 0.9, “good” is 1.9,
and “great” is 3.1, whereas “horrible” is –2.5, the frowning
emoticon “:(” is –2.2, and “sucks” and “sux” are both –1.5.
This gold standard list of features, with associated valence
for each feature, comprises VADER’s sentiment lexicon,
and is available for download from our website14.
10 
11 
12 
13 Wisdom-of-the-crowd is the process of incorporating aggregated opinions
from a collection of individuals to answer a question. The process has been found
to be as good as (often better than) estimates from lone individuals, even experts.
14 
3.1.1 Screening, Training, Selecting, and Data Quality
Checking Crowd-Sourced Evaluations and Validations
Previous linguistic rating experiments using a WotC approach on AMT have shown to be reliable – sometimes
even outperforming expert raters . On the other hand, prior work has also
advised on methods to reduce the amount of noise from
AMT workers who may produce poor quality work
 . We therefore implemented four quality control
processes to help ensure we received meaningful data from
our AMT raters.
First, every rater was prescreened for English language
reading comprehension – each rater had to individually
score an 80% or higher on a standardized college-level
reading comprehension test.
Second, every prescreened rater then had to complete an
online sentiment rating training and orientation session,
and score 90% or higher for matching the known (prevalidated) mean sentiment rating of lexical items which
included individual words, emoticons, acronyms, sentences, tweets, and text snippets (e.g., sentence segments, or
phrases). The user interface employed during the sentiment
training (Figure 2) always matched the specific sentiment
rating tasks discussed in this paper. The training helped to
ensure consistency in the rating rubric used by each independent rater.
Third, every batch of 25 features contained five “golden
items” with a known (pre-validated) sentiment rating distribution. If a worker was more than one standard deviation
away from the mean of this known distribution on three or
more of the five golden items, we discarded all 25 ratings
in the batch from this worker.
Finally, we implemented a bonus program to incentivize
and reward the highest quality work. For example, we
asked workers to select the valence score that they thought
“most other people” would choose for the given lexical
feature (early/iterative pilot testing revealed that wording
the instructions in this manner garnered a much tighter
standard deviation without significantly affecting the mean
sentiment rating, allowing us to achieve higher quality
(generalized) results while being more economical).
We compensated AMT workers $0.25 for each batch of
25 items they rated, with an additional $0.25 incentive bonus for all workers who successfully matched the group
mean (within 1.5 standard deviations) on at least 20 of 25
responses in each batch. Using these four quality control
methods, we achieved remarkable value in the data obtained from our AMT workers – we paid incentive bonuses
for high quality to at least 90% of raters for most batches.
Figure 2: Example of the interface implemented for acquiring valid point estimates of sentiment valence (intensity) for each context-free
candidate feature comprising the VADER sentiment lexicon. A similar UI was used for all rating activities described in sections 3.1-3.4.
3.2 Identifying Generalizable Heuristics Humans
Use to Assess Sentiment Intensity in Text
We next analyze a purposeful sample of 400 positive and
400 negative social media text snippets (tweets). We selected this sample from a larger initial set of 10K random
tweets pulled from Twitter’s public timeline based on their
sentiment scores using the Pattern.en sentiment analysis
engine15 (they were the top 400 most positive and negative
tweets in the set). Pattern is a web mining module for Python, and the Pattern.en module is a natural language processing (NLP) toolkit that
leverages WordNet to score sentiment according to the
English adjectives used in the text.
Next, two human experts individually scrutinized all 800
tweets, and independently scored their sentiment intensity
on a scale from –4 to +4. Following a data-driven inductive
coding technique similar to the Grounded Theory approach
 , we next used qualitative analysis
techniques to identify properties and characteristics of the
text which affect the perceived sentiment intensity of the
text. This deep qualitative analysis resulted in isolating five
generalizable heuristics based on grammatical and syntactical cues to convey changes to sentiment intensity. Importantly, these heuristics go beyond what would normally
be captured in a typical bag-of-words model. They incorporate word-order sensitive relationships between terms:
1. Punctuation, namely the exclamation point (!), increases the magnitude of the intensity without modifying the
semantic orientation. For example, “The food here is
good!!!” is more intense than “The food here is good.”
2. Capitalization, specifically using ALL-CAPS to emphasize a sentiment-relevant word in the presence of other
non-capitalized words, increases the magnitude of the
sentiment intensity without affecting the semantic ori-
15 
entation. For example, “The food here is GREAT!” conveys more intensity than “The food here is great!”
3. Degree modifiers (also called intensifiers, booster
words, or degree adverbs) impact sentiment intensity
by either increasing or decreasing the intensity. For example, “The service here is extremely good” is more intense than “The service here is good”, whereas “The
service here is marginally good” reduces the intensity.
4. The contrastive conjunction “but” signals a shift in sentiment polarity, with the sentiment of the text following
the conjunction being dominant. “The food here is
great, but the service is horrible” has mixed sentiment,
with the latter half dictating the overall rating.
5. By examining the tri-gram preceding a sentiment-laden
lexical feature, we catch nearly 90% of cases where negation flips the polarity of the text. A negated sentence
would be “The food here isn’t really all that great”.
3.3 Controlled Experiments to Evaluate Impact of
Grammatical and Syntactical Heuristics
Using the general heuristics we just identified, we next
selected 30 baseline tweets and manufactured six to ten
variations of the exact same text, controlling the specific
grammatical or syntactical feature that is presented as an
independent variable in a small experiment. With all of the
variations, we end up with 200 contrived tweets, which we
then randomly insert into a new set of 800 tweets similar to
those used during our qualitative analysis. We next asked
30 independent AMT workers to rate the sentiment intensity of all 1000 tweets to assess the impact of these features
on perceived sentiment intensity. (AMT workers were all
screened, trained, and data quality checked as described in
subsection 3.1.1). Table 2 illustrates some examples of
contrived variations on a given baseline:
Test Condition
Example Text
Baseline Yay. Another good phone interview.
Punctuation1 Yay! Another good phone interview!
Punctuation1 +
Degree Mod. Yay! Another extremely good phone interview!
Punctuation2 Yay!! Another good phone interview!!
Capitalization YAY. Another GOOD phone interview.
Punct1 + Cap. YAY! Another GOOD phone interview!
Punct2 + Cap. YAY!! Another GOOD phone interview!!
Punct3 + Cap. YAY!!! Another GOOD phone interview!!!
Punct3 + Cap. +
Degree Mod.
YAY!!! Another EXTREMELY GOOD phone interview!!!
Table 2: Example of baseline text with eight test conditions comprised of grammatical and syntactical variations.
Table 3 shows the t-test statistic, p-value, mean of differences for rank ordered data points between each distribution, and 95% confidence intervals:
Test Condition
Punctuation (. vs !)
19.02 < 2.2e-16 0.291 0.261 - 0.322
Punctuation (! vs !!)
0.215 0.188 - 0.241
Punctuation (!! vs !!!) 14.07
0.208 0.178 - 0.239
All CAPS (w/o vs w)
28.95 < 2.2e-16 0.733 0.682 - 0.784
Deg. Mod. (w/o vs w)
0.293 0.227 - 0.360
Table 3: Statistics associated with grammatical and syntactical
cues for expressing sentiment intensity. Differences in means
were all statistically significant beyond the 0.001 level.
We incorporated the mean differences between each distribution into VADER’s rule-based model. For example,
from Table 3, we see that for 95% of the data, using an
exclamation point (relative to a period or no punctuation at
all) increased the intensity by 0.261 to 0.322, with a mean
difference of 0.291 on a rating scale from 1 to 4 (we use
absolute value scale here for simplicity, because it did not
matter whether the text was positive or negative, using an
exclamation made it equally more extreme in either case).
We incorporated consideration for rule 4 by splitting the
text into segments around the contrastive conjunction
“but”, and diminished the total sentiment intensity of the
text preceding the conjunction by 50% while increasing the
sentiment intensity of the post-conjunction text by 50%.
3.4 Ground Truth in Multiple Domain Contexts
We next obtained gold standard (human-validated) ground
truth regarding sentiment intensity on corpora representing
four distinct domain contexts. For this purpose, we recruited 20 independent human raters from AMT (raters were all
screened, trained, and data quality checked consistent with
the process described in subsection 3.1.1 and Figure 2). All
four sentiment-intensity annotated corpora are available for
download from our website14:
1. Social media text: includes 4,000 tweets pulled from
Twitter’s public timeline (with varied times and days of
posting), plus 200 contrived tweets that specifically test
syntactical and grammatical conventions of conveying
differences in sentiment intensity.
2. Movie reviews: includes 10,605 sentence-level snippets
from rotten.tomatoes.com. The snippets were derived
from an original set of 2000 movie reviews (1000 positive and 1000 negative) in Pang & Lee ; we used
the NLTK tokenizer to segment the reviews into sentence phrases, and added sentiment intensity ratings.
3. Technical product reviews: includes 3,708 sentencelevel snippets from 309 customer reviews on 5 different
products. The reviews were originally used in Hu & Liu
 ; we added sentiment intensity ratings.
4. Opinion news articles: includes 5,190 sentence-level
snippets from 500 New York Times opinion editorials.
4. Results
In order to evaluate our results directly against the broader
body of literature, we assess both a) the correlation of
computed raw sentiment intensity rating to gold standard
ground truth, i.e., the mean sentiment rating from 20 prescreened and appropriately trained human raters, as well as
b) the multiclass (positive, negative, neutral) classification
metrics of precision, recall, and F1 score. In statistical
analysis of classifier performance, precision is the number
of true classifications (i.e. the number of items labeled as a
particular class that match the known gold standard classification) divided by the total number of elements labeled as
that class (including both correct and incorrect classifications). Recall is the number of true classifications divided
by the total number of elements that are known to belong
to the class; low recall is an indication that known elements
of a class were missed. The F1 score is the harmonic mean
of precision and recall, and represents the overall accuracy.
We compared the VADER sentiment lexicon to seven
other well-established sentiment analysis lexicons: Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (LIWC), General Inquirer
(GI), Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW), SentiWordNet (SWN), SenticNet (SCN), Word-Sense Disambiguation (WSD) using WordNet, and the Hu-Liu04 opinion lexicon. For fairness to each lexicon, all comparisons
utilized VADER’s rule-based model for processing syntactical and grammatical cues – the only difference were the
features represented within the actual lexicons themselves.
As Figure 3 and Table 4 both show, the VADER lexicon
performs exceptionally well in the social media domain,
and generalizes favorably. The Pearson Product Moment
Correlation Coefficient shows that VADER (r = 0.881)
performs as well as individual human raters (r = 0.888) at
matching ground truth (aggregated group mean from 20
human raters for sentiment intensity of each tweet). Surprisingly, when we further inspect the classification
Figure 3: Sentiment scores from VADER and 11 other highly regarded sentiment analysis tools/techniques on a corpus of over 4K tweets.
Although this figure specifically portrays correlation, it also helps to visually depict (and contrast) VADER’s classification precision, recall, and F1 accuracy within this domain (see Table 4). Each subplot can be roughly considered as having four quadrants: true negatives
(lower left), true positives (upper right), false negatives (upper left), and false positives (lower right).
Table 4: VADER 3-class classification performance as compared to individual human raters and 7 established lexicon baselines across
four distinct domain contexts (clockwise from upper left: tweets, movie reviews, product reviews, opinion news articles).
accuracy (with classification thresholds set at –0.05 and
+0.05 for all normalized sentiment scores between -1 and
1), we can see that VADER (F1 = 0.96) actually outperforms even individual human raters (F1 = 0.84) at correctly
classifying the sentiment of tweets. Notice how the LIWC,
GI, ANEW, and Hu-liu04 results in Figure 3 show a concentration of tweets incorrectly classified as neutral. Presumably, this is due to lack of coverage for the sentimentoriented language of social media text, which is often expressed using emoticons, slang, or abbreviated text such as
acronyms and initialisms.
The lexicons for the machine learning algorithms were
all constructed by training those models on half the data
(again, incorporating all rules), with the other half being
held out for testing. While some algorithms performed
decently on test data from the specific domain for which it
was expressly trained, they do not significantly outstrip the
simple model we use. Indeed, in three out of four cases,
VADER performs as well or better across domains than
the machine learning approaches do in the same domain
for which they were trained. Table 5 explicitly shows this,
and also highlights another advantage of VADER – its
simplicity makes it computationally efficient, unlike some
SVM models, which were unable to fully process the data
from the larger corpora (movie reviews and NYT editorials) even on a multicore system with large RAM:
Table 5: Three-class accuracy (F1 scores) for each machine
trained model (and the corpus it was trained on) as tested against
every other domain context (SVM models for the movie and NYT
data were too intensive for our multicore CPUs with 94GB RAM)
As discussed in subsections 3.2 and 3.3, we identified
and quantified the impact of several generalizable heuristics that humans use when distinguishing between degrees
of sentiment intensity. By incorporating these heuristics
into VADER’s rule-based model, we drastically improved
both the correlation to ground truth as well as the classification accuracy of the sentiment analysis engine. Importantly, these improvements are realized independent of
the lexicon or ML model that was used. That is, when we
fairly apply the rules to all lexicons and ML algorithms, we
achieve better correlation coefficients (mean r increase of
5.2%) and better accuracies (mean F1 increase of 2.1%).
Consistent with prior work , we find
that grammatical features (conventions of use for punctuation and capitalization) and consideration for degree modifiers like “very” or “extremely” prove to be useful cues for
distinguishing differences in sentiment intensity. Other
syntactical considerations identified via qualitative analysis
(negation, degree modifiers, and contrastive conjunctions)
also help make VADER successful, and is consistent with
prior work .
5. Discussion
Recent work by Socher et. al does an excellent job
of summarizing (and pushing) the current state of the art
for fine-grained sentence-level sentiment analysis by supervised machine learning models. As part of their excellent work using recursive deep models for assessing semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree bank, they
report that the state-of-the-art regarding accuracy for simple binary (positive/negative) classification on single sentences is around 80%, and that for the more difficult multiclass case that includes a third (neutral) class, accuracies
tend to hover in the 60% range for social media text ; Wang et. al ). We find it very
encouraging, therefore, to report that the results from
VADER’s simple rule-based approach are on par with such
sophisticated benchmarks. However, when compared to
sophisticated machine learning techniques, the simplicity
of VADER carries several advantages. First, it is both
quick and computationally economical without sacrificing
accuracy. Running directly from a standard modern laptop
computer with typical, moderate specifications (e.g., 3GHz
processor and 6GB RAM), a corpus that takes a fraction of
a second to analyze with VADER can take hours when
using more complex models like SVM (if training is required) or tens of minutes if the model has been previously
trained. Second, the lexicon and rules used by VADER are
directly accessible, not hidden within a machine-accessonly black-box. VADER is therefore easily inspected, understood, extended or modified. By exposing both the lexicon and rule-based model, VADER makes the inner workings of the sentiment analysis engine more accessible (and
thus, more interpretable) to a broader human audience beyond the computer science community. Sociologists, psychologists, marketing researchers, or linguists who are
comfortable using LIWC should also be able to use
VADER. Third, by utilizing a general (human-validated)
sentiment lexicon and general rules related to grammar and
syntax, VADER is at once both self-contained and domain
agnostic – it does not require an extensive set of training
data, yet it performs well in diverse domains. We stress
that in no way do we intend to convey that complex or
sophisticated techniques are in any wrong or bad. Instead
we show that a simple, human-centric, interpretable, computationally efficient approach can produce high quality
results – even outperforming individual human raters.
6. Conclusion
We report the systematic development and evaluation of
VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for sEntiment Reasoning). Using a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods, we construct and empirically validate a goldstandard list of lexical features (along with their associated
sentiment intensity measures) which are specifically attuned to sentiment in microblog-like contexts. We then
combine these lexical features with consideration for five
general rules that embody grammatical and syntactical
conventions for expressing and emphasizing sentiment
intensity. The results are not only encouraging – they are
indeed quite remarkable; VADER performed as well as
(and in most cases, better than) eleven other highly regarded sentiment analysis tools. Our results highlight the gains
to be made in computer science when the human is incorporated as a central part of the development process.
7. References
Agarwal, A., Xie, B., Vovsha, I., Rambow, O., & Passonneau, R.
 . Sentiment analysis of Twitter data. In Proc. WLSM-11s.
Akkaya, C., Wiebe, J., & Mihalcea, R. . Subjectivity word
sense disambiguation. In Proc. EMNLP-09.
Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. . SentiWordNet
3.0. In Proc. of LREC-10.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. . Affective norms for English
words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affective ratings.
Cambria, E., Havasi, C., & Hussain, A. . SenticNet 2. In
Proc. AAAI IFAI RSC-12.
Cambria, E., Speer, R., Havasi, C., & Hussain, A. .
SenticNet. In Proc. of AAAI SCK-10.
Davidov, D., Tsur, O., & Rappoport, A. . Enhanced Sentiment Learning Using Twitter Hashtags and Smileys. ICCL-10.
De Choudhury, M., Counts, S., & Horvitz, E. . Predicting
Postpartum Changes in Emotion and Behavior via Social Media.
In Proc. CHI-13.
De Choudhury, M., Gamon, M., Counts, S., & Horvitz, E. .
Predicting Depression via Social Media. In Proc. ICWSM-13.
De Smedt, T., & Daelemans, W. . Pattern for Python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13, 2063–2067.
Ding, X., Liu, B., & Yu, P. S. . A holistic lexicon-based
approach to opinion mining. In Proc. ICWSDM-08.
Downs, J. S., Holbrook, M. B., Sheng, S., & Cranor, L. F. .
Are your participants gaming the system?. In Proc. CHI-10.
Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. . Determining the semantic orientation of terms through gloss classification. In Proc. ICIKM-05.
Fellbaum, C. . WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hancock, J. T., Landrigan, C., & Silver, C. . Expressing
emotion in text-based communication. In Proc. CHI-07.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. . Mining and summarizing customer
reviews. In Proc. SIGKDD KDM-04.
Hutto, C. J., Yardi, S., & Gilbert, E. . A Longitudinal
Study of Follow Predictors on Twitter. In Proc. CHI-13.
Kamps, J., Mokken, R. J., Marx, M., & de Rijke, M. . Using WordNet to measure semantic orientation. In Proc. LREC-04.
Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., & Suh, B. . Crowdsourcing user
studies with Mechanical Turk. In Proc. CHI-08.
Kramer, A. . An unobtrusive behavioral model of “gross
national happiness.” In Proc. CHI-10.
Liu, B. . Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity. In N. Indurkhya & F. Damerau (Eds.), Handbook of Natural Language
Processing (2nd ed.). Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall.
Liu, B. . Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool.
Liu, B., Hu, M., & Cheng, J. . Opinion Observer: Analyzing and Comparing Opinions on the Web. In Proc. WWW-05.
Lu, Y., Castellanos, M., Dayal, U., & Zhai, C. . Automatic
construction of a context-aware sentiment lexicon: an optimization approach. In Proc. WWW-11.
Nielsen, F. A. . A new ANEW: Evaluation of a word list
for sentiment analysis in microblogs. In Proc. ESWC-11.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. . A sentimental education: sentiment
analysis using subjectivity summarization. In Proc. ACL-04.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. . Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations & Trends in Information Retrieval, 2(1), 1–135.
Pennebaker, J. W., Chung, C. K., Ireland, M., Gonzales, A., &
Booth, R. J. . The development and psychometric properties of LIWC2007. Austin, TX: LIWC net.
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M., & Booth, R. . Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC 2001. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shastri, L., Parvathy, A. G., Kumar, A., Wesley, J., & Balakrishnan, R. . Sentiment Extraction. IAAI-10.
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. Y. . Cheap
and Fast - But is it Good?. In Proc. EMNLP-08.
Socher, R., Perelygin, A., Wu, J., Chuang, J., Manning, C., Ng,
A., & Potts, C. . Recursive Deep Models for Semantic
Compositionality Over Sentiment Treebank. In Proc. EMNLP-13.
Stone, P. J., Dunphy, D. C., Smith, M. S., & Ogilvie, D. M.
 . General Inquirer. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. . Basics of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Surowiecki, J. . The Wisdom of Crowds. NY, NY: Anchor.
Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T. O., Sandner, P. G., & Welpe, I. M.
 . Predicting Elections with Twitter:. In Proc. ICWSM-10.
Turney, P. D., & Littman, M. L. . Measuring praise and
criticism. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 21(4), 315–346.
Wang, H., Can, D., Kazemzadeh, A., Bar, F., & Narayanan, S.
 . A system…real-time Twitter sentiment analysis. ACL-12.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., & Hwa, R. . Just how mad are you?
finding strong and weak opinion clauses. In Proc. NCAI-04s.