Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth of
millions of sequences per sample
J. Gregory Caporasoa, Christian L. Lauberb, William A. Waltersc, Donna Berg-Lyonsb, Catherine A. Lozuponea,
Peter J. Turnbaughd, Noah Fiererb,e, and Rob Knighta,f,1
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, bCooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, cDepartment of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, and eDepartment of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309; dHarvard FAS Center for Systems
Biology, Cambridge, MA 02138; and fHoward Hughes Medical Institute, Boulder, CO 80309
Edited by Jeffrey I. Gordon, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved April 30, 2010 
The ongoing revolution in high-throughput sequencing continues
to democratize the ability of small groups of investigators to map
the microbial component of the biosphere. In particular, the
coevolution of new sequencing platforms and new software tools
allows data acquisition and analysis on an unprecedented scale.
Here we report the next stage in this coevolutionary arms race,
using the Illumina GAIIx platform to sequence a diverse array of 25
environmental samples and three known “mock communities” at
a depth averaging 3.1 million reads per sample. We demonstrate
excellent consistency in taxonomic recovery and recapture diversity patterns that were previously reported on the basis of metaanalysis of many studies from the literature (notably, the saline/
nonsaline split in environmental samples and the split between
host-associated and free-living communities). We also demonstrate that 2,000 Illumina single-end reads are sufﬁcient to recapture the same relationships among samples that we observe with
the full dataset. The results thus open up the possibility of conducting large-scale studies analyzing thousands of samples simultaneously to survey microbial communities at an unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution.
human microbiome | microbial community analysis | microbial ecology |
next-generation sequencing
igh-throughput sequencing technologies have opened new
frontiers in microbial community analysis by providing
a cost-effective means of identifying the microbial phylotypes
that are present in samples. These studies have revolutionized
our understanding of the microbial communities in our bodies
(1, 2) and on our planet (3–5). This revolution in sequencing
technology, combined with the development of advanced computational tools that exploit metadata to relate hundreds of
samples to one another in ways that reveal clear biological patterns, has reinvigorated studies of the 16S rRNA gene (6).
Studies of 16S rRNA provide a view of which microbial taxa are
present in a given sample because it is an excellent phylogenetic
marker (7). Although alternative techniques, such as metagenomics, provide insight into all of the genes (and potentially
gene functions) present in a given community, 16S rRNA-based
surveys are extraordinarily valuable given that they can be used
to document unexplored biodiversity and the ecological characteristics of either whole communities or individual microbial
taxa. Perhaps because 16S rRNA phylogenies tend to correspond
well to trends in overall gene content (8), the ability to relate
trends at the species level to host or environmental parameters
has proven immensely powerful (9).
New technologies have led to astonishing decreases in the cost
of sequencing: at the scale of the whole human genome, the price
per megabase has decreased by approximately an order of
magnitude per year since 2001 (10). This rapid increase in sequencing capacity has led to a process almost akin to a coevolutionary “arms race” in which newer sequencing platforms
generate datasets of unprecedented scale that break existing
software tools: new software is then developed that exploits these
massive datasets to produce new biological insight, but in turn the
availability of these software tools prompts new experiments that
could not previously have been considered, which lead to the
production of the next generation of datasets, starting the process
again. However, we would argue that the situation is not precisely
that of a “Red Queen” coevolutionary process (in which one must
run faster and faster to remain in the same place), because each
advance really does provide a new level of insight into a range of
biological phenomena. The increase in number of sequences per
run from parallel pyrosequencing technologies such as the Roche
454 GS FLX (5 × 105) to Illumina GAIIx (1 × 108) is on the order
of 1,000-fold and greater than the increase in the number of
sequences per run from Sanger (1 × 103 through 1 × 104) to 454.
The transition from Sanger sequencing to 454 sequencing has
opened new horizons in microbial community analysis by making
it possible to collect hundreds of thousands of sequences spanning hundreds of samples. A transition to the Illumina platform
will similarly allow for deeper sequencing than has previously
been feasible, with the possibility of detecting even phylotypes
that are very rare (11). By using a variant of the barcoding
strategy used for 454 (12–14) with the Illumina platform (Fig. 1),
thousands of samples could be analyzed in a single run, with each
of the samples analyzed in unprecedented depth.
In this study, we address the question of whether the Illumina
technology is suitable for large-scale comparisons among microbial communities at different scales. One limitation of the Illumina platform is that it can currently only produce relatively short
reads (75–100 bp in a single read—although paired reads can
produce 150–200 bp from a single molecule). Previous work has
suggested that fragments of the 16S rRNA as small as 100 bp can
be sufﬁcient for resolving microbial community differences (15).
Whether the short and potentially error-prone reads produced by
the Illumina GAIIx are suitable for large-scale community comparisons remains unknown, although the platform has been used
to sequence 16S rRNA genes from a small number of samples
from the oral microbiota (11). In this study, we use a simple mock
community to determine whether Illumina sequencing accurately
captures information about known communities. We also address
This paper results from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
Sciences, “Microbes and Health” held November 2–3, 2009, at the Arnold and Mabel
Beckman Center of the National Academies of Sciences and Engineering in Irvine, CA.
The complete program and audio ﬁles of most presentations are available on the NAS
Web site at 
Author contributions: J.G.C., C.L.L., N.F., and R.K. designed research; J.G.C., C.L.L., W.A.W.,
and D.B.-L. performed research; J.G.C. and P.J.T. contributed new reagents/analytic tools;
J.G.C., C.A.L., P.J.T., and R.K. analyzed data; and J.G.C., N.F., and R.K. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: Data have been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under
Study Number SRA012609.1.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1000080107/-/DCSupplemental.
March 15, 2011
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1000080107
the question of whether this technology is suitable for large-scale
comparisons among microbial communities at different scales by
determining whether Illumina sequencing can recover the previous
observation of an intriguing global pattern of bacterial distribution,
with a partitioning of environmental sequences between saline and
nonsaline habitats (16), and an even deeper partitioning between
host-associated and free-living communities (17). Intriguingly, this
former observation has been replicated independently in archaea
(18). Accordingly, this study presents the results of sequencing
barcoded PCR amplicons from environmental (n = 25) and mock
community (n = 3) samples using one full plate (seven lanes plus
phiX control lane) on the Illumina GAIIx platform.
Results and Discussion
Surmounting the Bioinformatics Challenge. As has been the case
with other advances in sequencing technology, the unprecedented
sequencing depth provided by our Illumina run posed considerable challenges for microbial community analysis software: we
obtained 87,507,177 paired-end reads of exactly 100 nucleotides
in length from each end before quality ﬁltering. We therefore
developed a new protocol, facilitated by the Quantitative Insights
Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) toolkit (19), which can perform
standard microbial community analysis techniques on sequence
sets of this size, including quality ﬁltering of reads, efﬁcient operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking, taxonomy assignment,
computation of α and β diversity measures, and other analyses.
Because the Illumina platform has to date been primarily used
for genome sequencing and resequencing, there is no literature
that we are aware of discussing and comparing quality-ﬁltering
strategies for community 16S rRNA reads. A custom strategy was
therefore developed to quality ﬁlter the reads by truncating each
read at the point where it incurred two or more adjacent lowquality base calls. If a truncated read was shorter than 75 bases, it
was discarded. Reads surviving this step were discarded if they
contained ambiguous base calls (N characters) in their sequence or
barcode. After this quality ﬁlter, 36,329,392 5′ reads and
22,177,779 3′ reads were retained for subsequent analysis. Variants of this quality ﬁlter and their effects on read counts are
provided as Table S1: the approach described here is conservative.
We are making these methods available as part of the open-source
QIIME pipeline, allowing others to apply the same techniques.
The number of sequences was too great to divide the sequences
into unique OTUs at the 97% level using cd-hit (20), which is the
standard tool used for this task when handling pyrosequencing
data. We have previously shown, however, that patterns that were
observed with de novo tree-making methods could be captured
equally well using a “BLAST to reference tree” protocol (21) and
then calculating community differences with UniFrac. We thus
processed the data after quality ﬁltering by using a Trie preﬁx tree
(22), followed by BLASTing each remaining sequence against the
greengenes database ﬁltered at 99% identity (the greengenes reference collection) and choosing the best BLAST match via
a combination of percent identity, alignment length, and E-value
(the results are ﬁltered by E-value and percent identity, and then
the longest alignment matching these criteria is chosen). Representative sequences were then chosen for each OTU by choosing
the most abundant sequence from the original sequence collection. A phylogenetic tree that was computed for the greengenes
Target gene:
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGACGTACGTACGGTGTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA
CCGACTGACTGATTGCGTGCGATCTAGAGCATACGGCAGAAGACGAAC
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGG
GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA
.........................................amplicon...........................
ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCC
...CTTCCACTTAAATGAGACTT
ATACAGGTGAGCACCTTGTA...
CACGGTCGKCGGCGCCATT
.................................rc......amplicon...........................
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGG
...GAAGGTGAATTTACTCTGAA
TATGTCCACTCGTGGAACAT...
GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA
.........................................amplicon...........................
ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCC
...CTTCCACTTAAATGAGACTT
ATACAGGTGAGCACCTTGTA...
CACGGTCGKCGGCGCCATT
.................................rc......amplicon...........................
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGG
...GAAGGTGAATTTACTCTGAA
TATGTCCACTCGTGGAACAT...
Ampliﬁcation products:
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGACGTACGTACGGTGTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA .........................................amplicon....... ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCCGGGTACGTACGTAACGCACGCTAGATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGGCCCATGCATGCATTGCGTGCGATCTAGAGCATACGGCAGAAGACGAAC
.....................................rc..amplicon.......
TTACTATGCCGCTGGTGGCTCTGCATGCATGCCACACGGTCGKCGGCGCCATT
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGACGTACGTACGGTGTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA .........................................amplicon....... ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCCGGGTACGTACGTAACGCACGCTAGATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGGCCGACTGACTGATTGCGTGCGATCTAGAGCATACGGCAGAAGACGAAC
.....................................rc..amplicon.......
TTACTATGCCGCTGGTGGCTCTGCATGCATGCCACACGGTCGKCGGCGCCATT
Ampliﬁcation primers with annealing sites:
Sequencing primers with annealing sites:
ACGTACGTACGGTGTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA
TAATCTWTGGGVHCATCAGGCCCATGCATGCA
ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCCGGCTGACTGACT
For. Linker
+ strand 5’ Illumina Adapter
Forward primer
Rev. primer
Rev. Linker Rev. Pad
RC of + strand 3’
Illumina Adapter
Forward PCR primer construct
Reverse PCR primer construct
Read 1 sequencing primer
Read 2 sequencing primer
Index sequencing primer
Protocol for barcoded Illumina pyrosequencing. First, conserved regions within the target gene (in this case, 16S rRNA) are identiﬁed (blue), together
with an amplicon that clipping studies along the lines of ref. 15 indicate are especially good for community sequence analysis (green). Second, PCR ampli-
ﬁcations are performed, using primers that include a linker sequence not homologous to any 16S rRNA sequence at the corresponding positions, the barcode,
and the Illumina adaptor. Thus, the match between the primer and the template sequence ends at the end of the black region of the primer, and the linker
and adaptors (shown in color) do not match the template. This procedure yields a library of ampliﬁcation products that contain the barcode and Illumina
adaptors. Finally, three separate primers are used to yield the 5′ read, the 3′ read, and the index read (that yields the barcode sequence).
Caporaso et al.
March 15, 2011
reference collection using fasttree (23) was used for the calculation of phylogeny-based α and β diversity metrics. The advantage
of this approach of matching sequences against a known tree is
that it greatly reduced the compute time from O(N log N) to O
(N) in the number of sequences. The disadvantage is that any
novel taxa (i.e., microbial taxa not present in the reference collection) would effectively be disregarded (however, we note that
the short reads used are problematic for identifying novel lineages
in the ﬁrst place). Taxonomy was then assigned to all representative sequences using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP)
classiﬁer. All of these steps were performed using the QIIME
toolkit [via QIIME’s parallel wrappers in the case of BLAST (24)
and the RDP classiﬁer (25)].
Taxonomic and Alpha Diversity Analysis of Mock Communities
Reveals Excellent Consistency Across Replicates. We ﬁrst applied
these methods to the three mock community samples, representing genomic DNA from 67 bacterial isolates pooled at even concentrations. These samples have been recently analyzed through
454 FLX pyrosequencing (26) in order to quantify the noise introduced during PCR and sequencing and its potential contribution to the observed and estimated diversity. The three mock
community samples were analyzed separately from the 25 environmental samples because, rather than providing insight into
similarities and differences among communities, they provide information about the sequencing error rate. The sequencing of
deﬁned communities has been critical for quantifying sequencing
error proﬁles for pyrosequencing (27, 28), but each new method
requires validation through the sequencing of “control” samples in
addition to the more comprehensive analysis of simulated datasets. The 5′ and 3′ reads were analyzed independently from one
another. The analysis pipeline was identical for each of the four
datasets. A brief description of the analysis pipeline follows (see
Methods for full details).
Factors that may cause the observed taxa abundances (as
depicted in Fig. 2) to differ from the expected results include sequencing error, PCR primer bias, and incorrect taxonomic assignment. To assess the ability of the Illumina sequencer to capture
the actual members of each community, we tested whether
abundance-ﬁltered sequences (see below) represented the expected species distribution. Within-category replicates (i.e., mock5 vs.
mock5 or mock3 vs. mock3) Bray-Curtis distances were signiﬁcantly lower than between-category replicates (i.e., mock5 vs.
mock3) Bray-Curtis distances both at the order level (P < 0.0001,
two-tailed, two-sample t test) and at the genus level (P < 0.0001).
The difference in Bray-Curtis distance between the mock5 replicates and the expected species distribution, and the mock3 replicates and the expected species distribution, was not signiﬁcant at
the order level (P = 0.094, two-tailed, two-sample t test). At the
genus level, however, the mock5 data were signiﬁcantly more
similar to the expected sequence distribution than the mock3 data
(P < 0.0001). Taken together, these data illustrate that taxonomy
assignment was highly accurate and reproducible across replicates
at the order level and highly reproducible at the genus level, illustrating that the Illumina platform is able to correctly and reproducibly identify the actual members of a microbial community
(although, as expected, the order-level taxa are more correctly and
reproducibly assigned than the genus-level taxa by BLAST owing
to the short read lengths) (Fig. 2). All between-sample Bray-Curtis
distances are provided in Table S2.
We next tested whether the Illumina technique could correctly
quantify the within-community (α) diversity, in terms of OTU
richness. We ﬁrst compared the phylogenetic diversity (PD),
Chao1, and observed OTUs computed on the expected mock community sequences with the sequencing results at several minimum
abundance thresholds. The three mock community samples were
technical replicates designed to contain 67 OTUs (at the 97% level,
corresponding to taxonomically valid species) at even abundances
(26). We computed the expected α diversity of these samples after
following the same workﬂow as applied to the sequencing results in
terms of OTU picking and taxonomy assignment. The consistency
between replicates was excellent (Fig. 3): only in the completely
unﬁltered data do the lines diverge toward the right-hand side of
thegraph [the dashed horizontal line shows theexpected α diversity
(PD) or richness (Chao1, observed species) under each measure,
which should be the same at all sequence abundance thresholds
examined]. The α diversities of the mock 5′ and mock 3′ datasets
were greatly inﬂated when compared with the expected species
richness. Only when a minimum abundance threshold of 10,000
was applied, meaning that sequences were only considered to
Not assigned
Coriobacteriales
Lactobacillales
Erysipelotrichales
Enterobacteriales
Bacteroidales
Clostridiales
Not assigned
Mitsuokella
Rikenellaceae
Prevotellaceae
Porphyromonadaceae
Butyrivibrio
Holdemania
Coprococcus
Clostridiales FamilyXI Incertae Sedis
Anaerotruncus
Streptococcus
Enterobacter
Eubacterium
Citrobacter
Coriobacterineae
Subdoligranulum
Desulfitobacterium
Unclassified Erysipelotrichaceae
Catenibacterium
Ruminococcus
Providencia
Bifidobacteriaceae
Clostridium
Bacteroidaceae
Relative abundance (% of 16S rRNA gene sequences)
Relative abundance (% of 16S rRNA gene sequences)
Firmicutes
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteria
Bacteroidetes
Bifidobacteriales
Reproducibility of taxon assignment at the order level and the genus level. Reproducibility of taxon assignment at the order level (A) is excellent;
reproducibility at the genus level (B) is extremely consistent within a region, although the 5′ and 3′ regions lead to somewhat different assignments.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1000080107
Caporaso et al.
represent real organisms if observed at least 10,000 times (i.e., as at
least 0.01% of the total number of sequences in the run) did all
three α diversity metrics closely match the true diversity/richness of
the mock community (Fig. 3, dashed line).
Taken together, these results suggest that the Illumina platform holds promise for community sequencing but that erroneous reads or imperfect OTUs may currently make it difﬁcult to
identify rare taxa in a sample. An understanding of the types of
errors that are likely to arise, and improvement of quality-
ﬁltering strategies similar to those developed for 454 sequences
(27, 28), will be important next steps in the development of the
Illumina Genome Analyzer as a platform for microbial community sequencing. Quality ﬁltering and denoising will be particularly important for studies related to rare taxa.
Beta Diversity Analysis of Environmental Samples Conﬁrms That Host-
Associated Samples Are Especially Diverse, and the Deep Partitioning
of Diversity Among Saline and Nonsaline Environmental Samples.
Unlike α diversity estimates such as species richness, β diversity is
a measure of the degree of similarity (e.g., phylogenetic relatedness) between pairs of communities. Thus phylogenetic β
diversity metrics are useful for documenting shifts in the membership and/or structure of communities that may occur between
sample categories or across environmental gradients (29). Previous work has shown that β diversity metrics tend to be far less
sensitive to effects such as sequencing errors and chimeras (30)
than are α diversity metrics. We therefore compared the environmental samples with one another using jackknifed UPGMA
(unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean) clustering
based on the unweighted UniFrac distances between samples
(29). For both the 5′ and 3′ sequences (Fig. 4 A and B, respectively), the results support prior observations regarding the
global patterns in bacterial distributions that were derived from
metaanalysis of published data collected using different sequencing methodologies. Samples differed in membership primarily on the basis of whether they are derived from feces or
nonfeces (also aerobic vs. anaerobic, in this case). Among the
nonfeces samples, there was a separation between samples derived from human body habitats and those from other habitats. In
Estimated species (Chao1)
Phylogenetic diversity
Sequence abundance threshold
Observed species
Sequence abundance threshold
Sequence abundance threshold
Comparison of α diversity measures in the mock community. (A) PD, or phylogenetic diversity, a measure showing the branch length on a phylogenetic tree that is covered by a given sample. (B) Number of observed species-level OTUs (at the 97% level) in each community. (C) Number of estimated
species using the Chao1 estimator of species richness. The three replicates are shown in red, blue, and green; the true value for the mock community is shown
as a dashed black line (note that the expected line shown in C is the true number of species, not the Chao1 estimate of this number, because Chao1 has no
meaning when applied to a community that consists solely of singletons). Note the log scales on both axes. As with other sequencing platforms, aggressive
quality ﬁltering is required to correctly interpret diversity results from the Illumina platform.
TwinFecal1
TwinFecal2
TwinFecal2
TwinFecal1
Freshwater
Freshwater
UPGMA UniFrac clustering of the 5′ and 3′ reads
from each environmental sample show that samples
from a given environment type cluster together well.
Samples are feces (blue), freshwater creek (bright
green), freshwater lake (red), ocean (cyan), sediment
(pink), skin (yellow), soil (dark green), and tongue (dark
red). Jackknife-supported clusters showing >80% support are shown on the tree.
Caporaso et al.
March 15, 2011
the human body–derived samples, the results match prior observations, with a split separating distal tongue and skin samples
(1, 17). The clustering of the environmental samples differs
slightly when comparing the 5′ and 3′ results. In the 3′ results,
there is a split based on salinity conﬁrming previous observations
(16), whereas in the 5′ samples there is not a clear delineation
between saline and nonsaline environments. The environmental
delineation is clearer in the principal coordinates analysis (PCoA)
plots than in the UPGMA clustering.
One key limitation to metaanalyses of 16S rRNA sequences in
the public databases is that procedures for depositing representative OTUs, along with information on the relative abundances
of those OTUs, are typically not represented in machine-readable
form (16). High-throughput sequencing of many communities
simultaneously avoids this limitation, because the Sequence Read
Archive requires that all reads be deposited, allowing abundances
to be calculated. When we incorporate abundance weighting into
the results using the weighted UniFrac algorithm (31), we see that
the clustering by sample type remains essentially the same, although somewhat more of the variance is explained. These results
suggest that changes in community structure and community
membership are both important in producing large-scale patterns
of microbial diversity.
Conclusion
A valid concern regarding the use of the Illumina platform for
environmental sequencing is that although there are many more
reads, the single-end Illumina reads are less than half the length
of 454 reads. The Illumina reads are between 75 and 100 bases,
compared with 454 reads of 250–400 bases. The reproduction of
results previously obtained using much longer Sanger reads suggest that, although the Illumina reads are considerably shorter
than 454 reads, similar between-sample (β) diversity conclusions
can be reached using the Illumina platform. This directly conﬁrms
the results of prior computational work on the necessary read
length for accurate community comparisons (15).
Despite the success of this analysis, there are computational
challenges speciﬁc to the Illumina platform that still need to be
addressed to facilitate microbial community analyses on datasets
of this size and larger. One speciﬁc obstacle to overcome is how to
effectively take advantage of the paired-end reads in downstream
analyses. Although the sequencing run presented herein used
paired-end reads, the data analysis treated the 5′ and 3′ reads
independently. Because the expected amplicons were longer than
the 150 base pairs read, simply joining the reads in the correct
orientations results in a large apparent deletion in the middle of
sequence relative to the actual 16S sequence. This resulted in
poor performance for sequence searching but could likely be
addressed by using an alignment-based search tool with an alternative scoring system. However, a comparison of PCoA on
unweighted Unifrac distance matrices shows that the conclusions
reached when looking at the 5′ and 3′ reads independently are
essentially identical in both community structure and community
membership, as illustrated by Procrustes analysis on the ﬁrst three
principal coordinates (M2 = 0.023, P < 0.001 for unweighted
UniFrac; M2 = 0.021, P < 0.001 for weighted UniFrac; Fig. 5).
This suggests that if sequencing a well-chosen region of the 16S
gene, 75–100 bases may sufﬁce for drawing reliable conclusions
from the data, circumventing the need for paired-end reads. Although this conclusion might seem surprising, the success of early
phylogenetic studies using the 5S rRNA, which is typically less
than 150 nucleotides, suggests a precedent (32).
The Illumina platform returns on the order of 100 million sequencing reads per ﬂowcell and could thus potentially support
either comparison of thousands of barcoded samples with thousands ofsequences per sample, fewerbarcoded samples withhigher
depthofcoverage,orthesimultaneousanalysisofmanymarkersfor
phylogenetic and/or functional genes. We could now, for example,
contemplate analyzing samples from comprehensive time series, to
quantify microbial community dynamics across many sites, or
producing detailed 3D maps of microbial communities in environments ranging from soils to the mammalian gut. The increased
sample analysis capacity made possible with the approach describedherewillmakeitfeasibletoaddressavastrangeofquestions
that would be impossible to address using previous generations of
sequencing technology. For example, we can now explore, in detail,
whether changes in rare or abundant species are primarily responsible for differences in microbial communities associated with
health and disease. Similarly, we can begin exploring the ecological
characteristics of even rare microbial taxa (for example, novel uncultivated phyla) by examining how changes in environmental
conditions inﬂuence the structure of microbial communities across
time and space in a wide range of environments.
Datasets. Several independently compiled sample collections were included in
this analysis.These include samples fromhuman feces(n = 3), skin (n= 3), and the
dorsal tongue surface (n = 3) (1); fecal samples from human twins (31) (n = 2); soil
(n = 3) (5, 34); freshwater and freshwater sediment (n = 5), ocean (n = 3), and
marine sediment (n = 3) samples; and “mock community” samples (n = 3) from
genomic DNA isolated from 67 bacterial strains and pooled at even abundances
(26). Counts of the number of reads associated with each sample are provided
in Table S3.
All individuals were made aware of the nature of the experiment and gave
written informed consent in accordance with the sampling protocol approved
by the University of Colorado Human Research Committee (protocol 0708.12),
except for the twin specimens, which were repurposed from a previous institutional review board–approved study at Washington University (33).
Data Analysis. The QIIME software package was applied to analyze the results
of this run. Because of the number of reads, several signiﬁcant performance
enhancements were made to QIIME and contributed back to the opensource project.
Primers. Five primers, two for PCR and three for sequencing, were developed
for this analysis (Fig. 1). The PCR primers (F515/R806) were developed against
the V4 region of the 16S rRNA, which we determined would yield optimal
community clustering with reads of this length using a procedure similar to
that of ref. 15. [For reference, this primer pair ampliﬁes the region 533–786 in
the Escherichia coli strain 83972 sequence (greengenes accession no. prokM-
SA_id:470367).] The reverse PCR primer is barcoded with a 12-base errorcorrecting Golay code to facilitate multiplexing of up to ≈1,500 samples per
3’, unweighted
5’, unweighted
5’, weighted
3’, weighted
Procrustes
PCoA of the samples using sequences from each region. Samples are
feces (blue), freshwater creek (bright green), freshwater lake (red), ocean
(cyan), sediment (pink), skin (yellow), soil (dark green), and tongue (dark red).
In the Procrustes analysis, using all reads, the samples derived from the 5′ end
and the 3′ end are linked with a bar: in every case, the distance between the 5′
and 3′ reads of the same samples is much smaller than the distance between
samples, highlighting the robustness of UniFrac analysis relative to the taxonomic analysis shown in Fig. 2. The smaller panels, using only 2,000 randomly
chosen sequences per sample, show the weighted and unweighted UniFrac
results from the 5′ and 3′ reads individually: the pattern of samples is highly
reproducible (note that the direction of each axis is arbitrary, only the relative
position of the points matters rather than whether a particular sample
appears to the left or the right of the plot). As seen in ref 17, axis 1 is host
associated/free living and axis 3 is saline/nonsaline environment.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1000080107
Caporaso et al.
lane, and both PCR primers contain sequencer adapter regions. The three
sequencing primers include two for reading in from each end of the amplicon
and a third for reading the barcode. Because of technical limitations at the
sequencing facility, only part of the barcode was sequenced, so we were
unable to exploit the error-correcting properties fully; however, even with
partial barcodes we were able to resolve the samples, demonstrating the
robustness of the approach. It is important to note that this primer collection
allows for sequencing of paired-end reads, but the downstream data analyses
are not yet capable of supporting paired-end reads. Our results illustrate interesting and correlated patterns based on analysis of the unpaired reads
(i.e., α and β diversity evaluations based on the 5′ only and 3′ only reads independently achieve similar results, suggesting that 100 bases in this region
of the 16S gene can allow for successful screening and comparison of microbial communities). The reads generated from these PCR primers are both
identiﬁed as “recommended” regions by Liu et al. (15).
Polymerase Chain Reaction. Sample preparation was performed similarly to
that described by Costello et al. (1). Brieﬂy, each sample was ampliﬁed in
triplicate, combined, and cleaned using the MO BIO 96 htp PCR clean up kit.
PCRreactionscontained13μL MO BIOPCR water,10μL 5 PrimeHotMasterMix,
0.5 μL each of the forward and reverse primers (10 μM ﬁnal concentration), and
1.0 μL genomic DNA. Reactions were held at 94°C for 3 min to denature the
DNA, with ampliﬁcation proceeding for 35 cycles at 94 °C for 45 s, 50 °C for 60 s,
and 72 °C for 90 s; a ﬁnal extension of 10 min at 72 °C was added to ensure
complete ampliﬁcation. Cleaned amplicons were quantiﬁed using Picogreen
dsDNA reagent in 10 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0). A composite sample for sequencing was created by combining equimolar ratios of amplicons from the
individual samples, followed by gel puriﬁcation and ethanol precipitation to
remove any remaining contaminants and PCR artifacts. The sample, along with
aliquots of the three sequencing primers, was sent to Illumina for sequencing.
Quality Filtering of Reads. The quality scores associated with each base call for
each read were used to determine the portion of each read that was of
acceptable quality. The 100 base reads were truncated when they achieved
two or more consecutive base calls with quality scores below 1e-5. Truncation
was applied to include the bases through the last position that achieved
a quality score of greater than 1e-5. For a read to be included in downstream
analyses, it was required to have a minimum length of 75 bases, and truncated reads were discarded if they contained an N character in their sequence
or barcode. This ﬁltering step reduced the 87,507,177 paired-end reads to
36,329,392 5′ reads and 22,177,779 3′ reads. The quality ﬁltering parameters
used here were determined empirically, and details on other parameter
settings are provided in Table S1. Development of an error model for the
Illumina platform is in order, and we expect that it would improve the
results, as has been shown for the 454 platform.
OTU Picking. To facilitate OTU picking on so many sequences, OTUs were
chosen in a two-step process. First, sequences were clustered into OTUs using
the Trie algorithm, which groups sequences that are exact preﬁxes of another
sequence. Representative sequences were then selected on the basis of these
“Trie-picked” OTUs. The second step of OTU picking was performed by
BLASTing the representative sequences against a reference database. A ﬁltered version of the greengenes database was used as the reference database, and sequences were clustered by their representative BLAST match.
Representative BLAST matches were chosen on the basis of three criteria.
First, the BLAST match must achieve an E-value less than 1e-10. Next, the
percent sequence identity of the alignment between a BLAST match and the
read must be greater than or equal to the OTU selection threshold (0.97
here, corresponding to species-like OTUs). Of the remaining BLAST matches,
the match that achieves the longest alignment to the read is chosen as the
representative BLAST match. For each resulting OTU, a representative sequence was chosen as the most abundant postquality ﬁltering read.
Taxonomy Assignment. Taxonomy for the environmental sequences was
assigned to the representative sequence of each OTU using QIIME’s parallel
wrappers for the RDP classiﬁer. The most detailed taxonomic level assigned
to an OTU’s representative sequence at conﬁdence of greater than or equal
to 0.80 was taken as the taxon of the OTU.
Taxonomy assignments for the mock community alone were generated by
BLASTing the mock5 and mock3 representative sequences against the known
full-length 16S sequences from the mock community to assign taxonomy to
each representative sequence. Each representative sequence was assigned
the taxonomy of the best BLAST hit with an E-value less than 0.001, and the
relative abundances of each taxon were then computed for each mock
community sample at each taxonomic level.
Comparisons of taxonomic assignments between the mock5, mock3, and
known full-length 16S sequences data were performed by computing
quantitative Bray-Curtis distances within and between the different samples,
where total sequence counts were normalized to 10,000 sequences per
sample. Bray-Curtis “categories” were deﬁned by taxonomic classiﬁcation at
the order and genus levels. Distributions of Bray-Curtis distances were
compared with two-tailed, two-sample t tests.
Alpha Rarefaction and Beta Diversity. Alpha rarefaction was performed using
the Phylogenetic Diversity, Chao1, and observed species metrics. Ten sampling repetitions were performed, without replacement, at each sampling
depth, and the error bars in Fig. 3 indicate the range of α diversity scores
achieved at a given sampling depth.
Beta diversity was estimated by computing weighted and unweighted
UniFrac distances between samples using QIIME. Samples were clustered
based on their between-samples distances using UPGMA, and jackkniﬁng was
performed by resampling 100 times with replacement at a depth of 100,000
sequences per sample.
To compare the results of the env5 and env3 datasets, principal coordinates
analysis was applied to reduce the dimensionality of the resulting distance
matrices. The patterns of β diversity arising from the env5 and env3 were
compared using Procrustes analysis. Principal coordinates were transformed
with Procrustes using PyCogent to facilitate direct comparison of trends in
community structure. Additionally, Monte Carlo simulations were performed
by shufﬂing each set of coordinates in one of the principle coordinates matrices and recomputing M2 to estimate the probability of seeing a pair of
coordinate matrices with an M2 value as high or higher than the actual M2
value achieved by Procrustes analysis. M2 and P values presented herein are
based on the ﬁrst three principal coordinates only for each sample, although
similar results were found when looking at all coordinates (Table S4).
To evaluate the ability of the GAIIx platform to recapture similar betweencommunity patterns when applied at a much lower sampling depth (e.g., when
including more barcoded samples), 2,000 sequences were randomly sampled
without replacement from each sample in the env5 and env3 datasets.
Weighted and unweighted UniFrac were applied to these datasets, followed
by PCoA, as was done for the full env5 and env3 datasets. The PD, Chao1, and
observed OTU scores are provided in Table S5, along with variants on the
expected scores computed from the expected reads only, the expected
amplicons only, and the full-length control sequences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. WethankEricRoden(UniversityofWisconsin-Madison),
Jennifer Martiny (University of California, Irvine), Trina McMahon (University of
Wisconsin-Madison), Steve Allison (University of California, Irvine), Jeffrey
I. Gordon (Washington University), and Adam Martiny (University of California,
Irvine) for graciously providing us with DNA from their environmental samples;
Craig Pierson, Jeremy Pierce, Courtney McCormick, and Christian Haudenschild at Illumina for coordinating and conducting the sequencing run described here; the Illumina Corporation for donating the run itself; and
Elizabeth Costello, Dan Knights, Justin Kuczynski, and Jesse Stombaugh for
feedback on drafts of the manuscript. This work was funded with grants from
the US Department of Agriculture and the National Science Foundation (to
N.F. and R.K.), from the National Institutes of Health, the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, and the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America (to
R.K.), and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
1. Costello EK, et al. Bacterial community variation in human body habitats across
space and time. Science 326:1694–1697.
2. Grice EA, et al.; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program Topographical
and temporal diversity of the human skin microbiome. Science 324:1190–1192.
3. Roesch LFW, et al. Pyrosequencing enumerates and contrasts soil microbial
diversity. ISME J 1:283–290.
4. Sogin ML, et al. Microbial diversity in the deep sea and the underexplored
“rare biosphere”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:12115–12120.
5. Lauber CL, Hamady M, Knight R, Fierer N Pyrosequencing-based assessment of
soil pH as a predictor of soil bacterial community structure at the continental scale.
Appl Environ Microbiol 75:5111–5120.
6. Tringe SG, Hugenholtz P A renaissance for the pioneering 16S rRNA gene. Curr
Opin Microbiol 11:442–446.
7. Pace NR A molecular view of microbial diversity and the biosphere. Science 276:
8. Konstantinidis KT, Tiedje JM Genomic insights that advance the species
deﬁnition for prokaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:2567–2572.
Caporaso et al.
March 15, 2011
9. Hamady M, Knight R Microbial community proﬁling for human microbiome
projects: Tools, techniques, and challenges. Genome Res 19:1141–1152.
10. Pushkarev D, Neff NF, Quake SR Single-molecule sequencing of an individual
human genome. Nat Biotechnol 27:847–852.
11. Lazarevic V, et al. Metagenomic study of the oral microbiota by Illumina highthroughput sequencing. J Microbiol Methods 79:266–271.
12. Binladen J, et al. The use of coded PCR primers enables high-throughput
sequencing of multiple homolog ampliﬁcation products by 454 parallel sequencing.
PLoS ONE 2:e197.
13. Hamady M, Walker JJ, Harris JK, Gold NJ, Knight R Error-correcting barcoded
primers for pyrosequencing hundreds of samples in multiplex. Nat Methods 5:235–237.
14. Huber JA, et al. Microbial population structures in the deep marine biosphere.
Science 318:97–100.
15. Liu Z, Lozupone C, Hamady M, Bushman FD, Knight R Short pyrosequencing
reads sufﬁce for accurate microbial community analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 35:e120.
16. Lozupone CA, Knight R Global patterns in bacterial diversity. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 104:11436–11440.
17. Ley RE, Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Knight R, Gordon JI Worlds within worlds:
Evolution of the vertebrate gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol 6:776–788.
18. Auguet JC, Barberan A, Casamayor EO Global ecological patterns in uncultured
Archaea. ISME J 4:182–190.
19. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community
sequencing data. Nat Methods, 10.1038/nmeth.f.303.
20. Li W, Godzik A Cd-hit: A fast program for clustering and comparing large sets
of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 22:1658–1659.
21. Hamady M, Lozupone C, Knight R Fast UniFrac: Facilitating high-throughput
phylogenetic analyses of microbial communities including analysis of pyrosequencing
and PhyloChip data. ISME J 4:17–27.
22. Fredkin E Trie memory. Commun ACM 3:490–499.
23. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP FastTree: Computing large minimum evolution
trees with proﬁles instead of a distance matrix. Mol Biol Evol 26:1641–1650.
24. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 215:403–410.
25. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR Naive Bayesian classiﬁer for rapid
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl Environ
Microbiol 73:5261–5267.
26. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. Organismal, genetic, and transcriptional variation in the
deeply sequenced gut microbiomes of identical twins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:
7503–7508.
27. Quince C, et al. Accurate determination of microbial diversity from 454
pyrosequencing data. Nat Methods 6:639–641.
28. Kunin V, Engelbrektson A, Ochman H, Hugenholtz P Wrinkles in the rare
biosphere: Pyrosequencing errors can lead to artiﬁcial inﬂation of diversity estimates.
Environ Microbiol 12:118–123.
29. Lozupone C, Knight R UniFrac: A new phylogenetic method for comparing
microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8228–8235.
30. Ley RE, et al. Evolution of mammals and their gut microbes. Science 320:
1647–1651.
31. Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Kelley ST, Knight R Quantitative and qualitative
beta diversity measures lead to different insights into factors that structure microbial
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:1576–1585.
32. Fox GE, Woese CR The architecture of 5S rRNA and its relation to function. J
Mol Evol 6:61–76.
33. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature
457:480–484.
34. Fierer N, Jackson RB The diversity and biogeography of soil bacterial
communities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:626–631.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1000080107
Caporaso et al.