Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance
1989, Vol. 15, No. 3, 419-433
Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0096-1523/89/S00.75
Guided Search: An Alternative to the Feature Integration Model
for Visual Search
Jeremy M. Wolfe, Kyle R. Cave, and Susan L. Franzel
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Subjects searched sets of items for targets defined by conjunctions of color and form, color and
orientation, or color and size. Set size was varied and reaction times (RT) were measured. For
many unpracticed subjects, the slopes of the resulting RT x Set Size functions are too shallow to
be consistent with Treisman's feature integration model, which proposes serial, self-terminating
search for conjunctions. Searches for triple conjunctions (Color x Size x Form) are easier than
searches for standard conjunctions and can be independent of set size. A guided search model
similar to Hoffman's two-stage model can account for these data. In the model, parallel
processes use information about simple features to guide attention in the search for conjunctions.
Triple conjunctions are found more efficiently than standard conjunctions because three parallel
processes can guide attention more effectively than two.
Searches for a target among a number of distractor items
are easier for some stimuli than for others. For example,
targets defined by a unique color or a unique orientation are
found easily . If we measure the
time required to determine that a target is present, we find
that the reaction time (RT) is short and nearly independent
of the number of distractor items. The target, if present,
appears to be found in "parallel" with the visual system
examining all items at once. Other searches are not so effortless. A T can be found among a field of Ls, but the time
required to find that T will increase markedly as the number
of distracting Ls increases . The slope
of the function relating RT to number of distractors gives an
estimate of the cost in search time of each additional distractor. In a T versus L task, additional items seem to be processed
at a rate of about 40-60 ms apiece , a 2:1 ratio in slopes
is predicted between RT x Set Size functions for trials with a
target present and blank trials containing only distractors. On
blank trials, the subject must examine each item in order to
confirm that no target is present. This yields a slope of 40
ms/item. On target trials, the subject must examine an average
of half of the items before finding the target, yielding a slope
of 20 ms/item. (The terms serial and parallel must be used
with caution.)1
We thank Amy Shorter, Charles Pokorny, and Art Figel for help
in data collection and analysis, and Anne Treisman, David Irwin,
James Pomerantz, Karen Yu, Nancy Kanwisher, and Jeff Schall for
useful comments on drafts of this article. This research was supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant No. EY05087, the Whitaker
Health Sciences Fund, and the Educational Foundation of America.
We thank IBM for the use of YODA graphics hardware and software.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Jeremy M. Wolfe, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, E10-
137, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139.
Treisman's feature integration model , perhaps the leading model of visual
search, seeks to explain the distinction between serial and
parallel searches with a two-stage model. A fairly limited,
"preattentive" , parallel stage of processing is
followed by a more sophisticated, serial stage. Treisman holds
that only basic features such as color, size, and orientation
can support parallel search, whereas all other stimuli require
a serial search. In particular, she has argued that serial search
is required for targets defined by conjunctions of basic features
(e.g., a red X among green Xs and red 0s). Treisman has
presented an extensive set of experiments showing fairly steep,
linear RT x Set Size functions with 2:1 ratios between slopes
for target and blank trials . Julesz's texton model shares many important
features with the feature integration model.
It is a curious feature of these models that the parallel
processes seem to have very little influence on the subsequent
serial processes. In the standard feature integration model,
the parallel processes can identify targets on the basis of a
single feature. However, if they do not find a target, none of
' The terms serial and parallel must be used with some care.
Townsend has shown that results such as those described
above do not by themselves prove that an underlying search process
is serial or parallel. For example, it may be that all searches are
parallel and that the differences between searches lie in capacity limits
on different parallel processes: a very large capacity for processes
involved in identifying color, and more limited capacity for processes
involved in more complex identifications (e.g., T vs. L). Whether the
underlying distinction is between serial and parallel processes or
between capacity limited and unlimited processes, there remains an
interesting, qualitative difference between effortless and effortful
searches. For the sake of convenience, we will use serial to refer to
searches that produce RT X Set Size functions with a substantial
positive slope, and parallel to refer to functions with little or no slope.
We recognize that these are labels and not absolute commitments to
a particular view of the nature of the underlying mechanisms.
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
the information that they have gathered is used by the serial
processes, even if that information might be useful. Consider
a search for a red X among green Xs and red 0s. The target
is defined by a conjunction; therefore, it cannot be located by
the parallel processes. Nevertheless, a parallel process for color
can differentiate between green and red items. Because no
green item can possibly be a red X, it would seem sensible for
the parallel process to inform the serial process of the locations
of all green items so that the serial process would not waste
time and effort examining those items. Indeed, there is ample
evidence that information from parallel processing of color
can be used to restrict serial searches to items of a single color
in a multicolored array .
In this article we present data from a series of visual search
experiments suggesting that serial visual search can be guided
by information from any of a number of parallel processes.
In the first series of experiments, unpracticed subjects
searched for conjunctions of color and form or color and
orientation. In general, the slopes of the RT x Set Size
functions are quite shallow. For many subjects, the slopes are
virtually flat, or at least as "flat" as published data for feature
There have been several other published reports of shallow
slopes for conjunction searches. For example, Nakayama and
Silverman found that searches for a number of conjunctions involving motion, stereoscopic depth, or both can
produce very shallow RT x Set Size slopes . It has been
possible to regard each of these previous cases as an exception
to the general feature integration rule that conjunctions require serial search. For example, Nakayama and Silverman's
data suggest that depth may behave in special ways as a
feature. However, the results presented in this article will
show that very shallow slopes can be obtained using the same
classes of conjunctions (e.g., Color x Form) used by Treisman
 in formulating the feature integration model.
This raises the question of why our results differ from
previously published results for similar conjunction searches.
The second set of experiments addresses that issue. The results
of Experiment 7 will show that the difference is largely attributable to differences in the stimuli. It is not due to learning
(Experiments 5 and 6) or to a general ability of our subjects
to do all searches in parallel (Experiment 4). Regardless of the
explanation of the differences between our data and previously
published results, it is important to realize that the simple
existence of our data requires a modification of the feature
integration model. That model holds that conjunctions (at
least of color and form) require serial search. Our data show
that in some cases this is not so.
In our modification of the feature integration model, we
propose that the parallel processes guide the "spotlight of
attention" toward likely targets. Thus, we call it "guided
search." This is not an entirely new idea. Hoffman proposed a two-stage model in which a parallel first
stage delivers likely targets to a slower, serial, second stage.
Although the basic architecture of our proposal is similar to
that of Hoffman's, his model is based on work from a somewhat different search task and does not deal explicitly with
searches for conjunctions. An advantage of the guided search
model is its ability to explain many of the previously published
problematical results as examples of, and not exceptions to,
the general feature integration rule.
The guided search model makes testable predictions. One
such prediction is that triple conjunctions should be easier to find than standard conjunctions. If the parallel processes can guide subsequent serial
search, then three parallel sources of guidance ought to be
better than two. The standard feature integration model would
predict serial search for such stimuli. In the third set of
experiments, subjects searched for a triple conjunction of
color, form, and size. These searches produce shallower slopes
than simple Color x Form conjunctions. Indeed, in one
condition, search for triple conjunctions is independent of set
To summarize, this article makes three main points:
1. In our experiments, results from naive, unpracticed subjects searching for conjunctions of Color x Form, Color x
Orientation, and Color x Size are inconsistent with serial,
self-terminating search.
2. Searches for triple conjunctions are easier than for simple conjunctions, a fact not predicted by the standard feature
integration model.
3. A modification of that model to allow the parallel processes to guide serial search can explain these and other problematical results.
Experiment 1: Conjunctions of Color and Form
Subjects. Twenty subjects were tested. They were drawn from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) undergraduate subject
pool and were paid for their participation. All wore their best optical
correction, if they required any. All were naive as to the purposes
and method of the experiment. None had been subjects in previous
visual search experiments.
Apparatus and procedure. Stimuli were presented on a standard
television monitor that was part of a modified "Sub-Roc 3-D" video
game. Displays were controlled by an IBM PC-XT with IBM-YODA
graphics. Stimuli were saturated red and green Xs and Os on a black
background. (CIE, International Commission on Color, x,y coordinates: red, .62, .36; green, .34, .57). Subjects viewed an 11.3° by 11.3°
field with a small central fixation point. Individual items fit within
an 0.85° by 0.85° square. They could be placed at any of 36 locations
in a slightly irregular 6 by 6 array. On each trial, items were presented
at 8, 16, or 32 randomly chosen loci within the array. On target trials,
one of these loci contained a target item. Set size, positions of target
and distractors, and presence or absence of a target were random
across trials. Subjects responded by pressing one of two keys: A yes
key if a target was detected and a no key if it was not. Reaction times
were measured from stimulus onset. The stimulus remained visible
until the subject responded and feedback was given on each trial.
Targets were present on 50% of trials. All experiments in this article
were variations of this visual search paradigm.
In Experiment 1, each subject was run in one session of 260 trials.
For the first 40 trials, subjects did a very simple search in order to
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
familiarize themselves with the apparatus (e.g., a search for a purple
square among green Xs). In the next 220 trials, the target was a red
O and the distractors were green Os and red Xs. Thus, the target was
defined by a conjunction of color and form. These stimuli were
similar to those in Treisman and Gelade's Experiment 1. The
first 20 trials were discarded as practice and the data from the
remaining 200 used to derive RT x Set Size functions.
Linear regressions for RT as a function of set size were
computed separately for each subject for target and blank
trials. All subjects showed quite linear results (r > 0.9, though
r values are high for almost any monotonic set of three points,
see Experiment 2). Table 1 gives the slopes for target and
blank trials for all subjects in descending rank order by the
slope for target trials. The final column gives ratio of blank
trial to target trial slopes. The slopes are shallow. Half of our
subjects have slopes of less than 6.0 ms/item on positive trials.
In contrast, Treisman and Gelade obtained average
slopes of 28.7 for positive and 67.1 for negative trials. Several
of our subjects have slopes of 2-4 ms/item. These shallow
slopes are comparable to Treisman and Gelade's slopes
for feature searches. Average ^intercepts for RT x Set Size
functions are 451 ms for target trials and 531 ms for blank
Though they are shallow, the slopes are clearly positive. For
target trials, RT increases linearly with set size, F(\, 38) =
100.1, p < .001, with a slope of 7.5 ms/item. For blank trials,
the linear increase is also highly significant, F(l, 38) = 63.8,
p < .001, and the slope is 12.6 ms/item. The slopes for target
and blank trials differ significantly from each other, as is
shown by combining both sets of trials into a single analysis
of variance (ANOVA) and testing the interaction between target
presence and the linear increase with set size, F (1,38) = 17.4,
Are the slopes in the 2:1 ratio predicted by a serial selfterminating search? The mean slope ratio is 1.8, which is not
significantly lower than 2:1, /(19) = 0.69, p < .6. Subject MM,
however, has an extremely high slope ratio (6.4), which is
almost twice the next highest value and more than three
standard deviations above the mean. When this outlier is
excluded, the mean slope ratio drops to 1.55, and the difference from 2:1 is significant, f(18) = 2.43, p < .05. If the ratio
was 2:1, then two times the target trial slope should not be
significantly different from the blank trial slope. For the 19
subjects (excluding MM), this hypothesis is rejected (paired t
test, t = 2.1, df= 18, p < .05). Thus it seems likely that our
subjects are not performing a standard serial self-terminating
The average error rates are 1.0% for set size 8, 1.7% for 16,
and 3.8% for 32. The error rate does rise significantly with
set size, F(2, 57) = 10.3, p < .001. To examine the hypothesis
that subjects having shallow slopes would make more errors,
we performed correlations of error rate with slope. These are
not significant for target trials (r2 = 0.17, p > 0.05) or blank
trials (r2 = .16, p > .05). It might be proposed that subjects
with shallow slopes made more errors only at the largest set
sizes. However, the correlations of error rate at the largest set
size with slope are not significant (target trials: r2 = .18, p >
.05; blank trials: r2 = .13, p > .05).
Discussion
Conjunctions of Color and Form: Individual Slopes for
Target and Blank Trials
Target trials
Blank trials
Five conclusions might be drawn from these data: (1) Our
results for conjunctions of color and form differ from those
of Treisman and Gelade . Our slopes are much shallower. We examined possible reasons for this difference in
subsequent experiments. Regardless of the reason for the
difference, the ability of our subjects to perform such efficient
searches for conjunctions raises a problem for the feature
integration model. (2) Given that shallow slopes are obtained
with naive subjects and minimal (20 trials) practice, learning
is not a likely explanation for our results . Experiments 4
and 5 expand on this point. (3) Though we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the slopes for blank and target trials are in a
2:1 ratio, that relationship does not appear to hold for the
subjects with shallow slopes. (4) It would be possible to
produce arbitrarily shallow slopes in any search task if the
subjects simply waited some fixed amount of time before
responding. This uninteresting outcome would result in long
RTs (high y-intercepts). In Experiment 1, the .^intercepts are
quite low (positive trials = 451 ms, negative trials = 531 ms),
which is evidence against this explanation. (5) It would be
possible to produce shallow slopes if subjects responded
quickly but inaccurately (i.e., there would be a speed-accuracy
trade-off). However, error rates are very low in this experiment. As we will show, the error rates are actually higher for
tasks that produce slower, more serial patterns of RTs.
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
Experiment 2: Conjunctions of Color and Orientation
The results from one experiment present an insufficient
case for calling for a modification of a successful model. To
bolster the case for a change in the feature integration model,
we repeated the experiment using a slightly different conjunction (color and orientation) and different ranges of set sizes.
In this case, subjects searched for a green, horizontal line among
red horizontals and green verticals. A total of 22 subjects were tested.
Some of these subjects had been in previous visual search experiments. Two of the authors served as subjects; the other 20 subjects
were drawn from the MIT undergraduate subject pool. Subjects were
divided into three groups, each of which was tested on a different
group of set sizes: Group A, 3, 6, 9, 18, and 36; Group B, 1,2, 4, 8,
16, and 32; Group C, 1,2, 6, 12, and 24. We used more than three
set sizes per subject in order to better examine the linearity of the Set
Size x RT function. Subjects received 20 practice trials and 100
experimental trials per set size. (Groups A and C received 520 trials
and Group B received 620.) In all other respects the methods were
identical to those of the previous experiment.
Figures 1A and IB show average RTs for target and blank
trials for each group of subjects. In general, the results replicate
those from Experiment 1. In all three versions of the experiment, RT shows a strong linear trend upward as set size
increased, both for target trials [Group A, F(l, 35) = 65.3;
Group B, F(l, 35) = 182.6; Group C, F(l, 20) = 62.3; p <
.001 in all cases] and for blank trials [Group A, F(l, 35) =
19.7; Group B, F(l, 35) = 99.9; Group C, F(l, 20) = 54.5;
p < .001 in all cases]. Also for all three versions, negative
slopes are steeper than positive slopes [Group A, F(\, 35) =
11.5; Group B, F(\, 35) = 40.2; Group C, F(\, 20) = 10.3;
p < .005 in all cases].
As in Experiment 1, the RT x Set Size functions are
substantially shallower than would be predicted if subjects
were undertaking a simple, serial self-terminating search in
which attention moved every 40 ms. Average slopes for the
three groups are given in Table 2.
Shallow as they are, the slopes for target trials are misleadingly high because, in this experiment, the target trial functions are not linear. In at least two of the three groups, the
target slope decreases for larger set sizes, resulting in significant quadratic trends, Group B, F(l, 35) = 20.1, p < .001;
Group C, F(l, 20) = 6.6, p < .025. The quadratic trend is
not present in Group A (F < 1), perhaps because the smaller
set sizes were not included in that version or perhaps because
the slopes for this set of subjects are so shallow that any
nonlinearity is hidden. Given the nonlinear component in
the target trial data, we did not attempt to test the hypothesis
that the blank and target trial slopes were in a 2:1 ratio.
This negative acceleration of the RT function is apparent
in Figure 1A. Table 3 shows slopes computed separately for
the three lowest set sizes and the three highest set sizes. Clearly,
slopes are steeper for smaller set sizes. For the higher set sizes,
the slopes are very shallow, averaging 3-6 ms/item.
1 A: Target Trials
T: Green horizontal
D: Red horizontal
Green vertical
1B: Blank Trials
T: Green horizontal
D: Red horizontal
Green vertical
Figure 1. Average RTs as a function of set size in a search for a
conjunction of color and orientation. (There are three groups of
subjects [A, B, and C]. Target items [T] and distractor items [D] are
identified on the figure. 1A shows target trial data only; IB shows
blank trials. Note that RT increases quite slowly with set size and
that functions for Groups B and C appear nonlinear. See Table 2 for
slopes of these functions.)
For Group A and Set Sizes 3, 6, 9, 18, and 36, error rates
are 4.8%, 4.6%, 6.2%, 7.8%, and 8.9%, respectively. For
Group B and Set Sizes 1,2, 4, 8, 16, and 32, error rates are
1.4%, 2.8%, 1.0%, 1.2%, 0.4%, and 0.8%, respectively. For
Group C and Set Sizes 1, 2, 6, 12, and 24, error rates are
5.2%, 7.5%, 7.0%, 6.5%, and 10.2%, respectively. There is
some evidence of a speed-accuracy trade-off, in that Version
B has the longest RTs, the steepest slopes, and the lowest error
rates. An ANOVA shows that effects of set size on errors are
insignificant for all three versions (all ps > . I).
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
Slopes for RTxSet Size Functions,
for Color x Orientation Task
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 replicate and extend the results
of Experiment 1. Again, subjects can find conjunctions more
efficiently than would be predicted by the standard feature
integration model. The feature integration model also fails to
predict the nonlinearity of the results. There are several possible interpretations of that nonlinearity. Subjects could be
performing a serial search for very small set sizes but not for
larger set sizes. The search (be it serial or limited-capacity,
parallel) could become increasingly efficient with time. Perhaps the most likely explanation is that the nonlinearity is a
side effect of the density of items in the display. Because the
items are placed at random within a 6 x 6 array, large set
sizes have more near neighbors than small set sizes. Near
neighbors may facilitate a search by allowing for comparison
between items and identification of isolated items. O'Connell,
Treisman, and Wolfe have found small effects of
density consistent with this hypothesis.
The common practice of using only three set sizes in visual
search experiments of this sort makes nonlinearities hard to
observe. Pashler reports a nonlinearity in his conjunction data, albeit of a different variety. In his data, slopes
are shallower over the smaller set sizes. It is unclear why our
results differ. The nonlinearities are of interest here because
the feature integration model predicts linear functions. However, the possibility that the nonlinearities may be explained
by an orthogonal factor such as item density makes them less
important than the shallow slopes.
Experiment 3: Conjunctions of Color and Size
The targets in both Experiments 1 and 2 could be considered conjunctions of color and orientation. Experiment 3
examines conjunctions of color and size.
Five subjects (drawn from the MIT undergraduate subject pool)
were tested with a small (30 minutes of arc on a side) red square as
the target and small green squares and large (50 minutes of arc on a
side) red squares as distractors. Subjects ran 20 practice trials and 300
data trials. All other aspects of the experiment were the same as in
Experiments 1 and 2.
Results and Discussion
Table 4 shows blank and target trial slopes for the five
subjects tested with a small red square as the target and small
green and large red squares as distractors. The results are
comparable to those obtained for Color x Form and Color x
Orientation searches in Experiments 1 and 2. They are also
similar to those reported by Treisman in her more recent
work . Even with a small number of subjects,
it is clear that for some subjects, RTs for size-color conjunction searches are virtually independent of set size. This is true
even when the target is the less salient small box.
Experiment 4: Searches for 7s Among Ls
Conjunctions between basic features are not the only stimuli that traditionally give rise to steep slopes in visual search
tasks. For example, searching for a letter Tamong Ls produces
results characteristic of serial search as long as the Ts and Ls
are presented in a variety of orientations . In attempting to understand the results of Experiments
1 and 2, it would be useful to know if our subjects are similarly
efficient for all searches.
The target stimulus for this experiment was a T that could be
presented in any of four rotations (0°, 90°, 180°, or 270°). The
distractors were Ls in any of the same four rotations. Two groups of
subjects from the undergraduate subject pool were used. In Group A,
9 subjects were tested on Set Sizes 8, 16, and 32. In Group B, 6
subjects were tested on Set Sizes 1, 2, 6, 12, and 24. In Group A,
subjects were given 20 practice and 200 data trials. In Group B, they
were given 20 practice and 500 data trials. In all other respects, the
conditions of this experiment were the same as those in the previous
experiments.
Slopes for RTx Set Size Functions,
for Color x Orientation Task
Target trial
Blank trial
Note. Slopes are computed separately for the upper and lower halves
of the functions.
Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows average RT x Set Size functions for both
groups. These results fit the pattern of a serial, self-terminating
search. In both groups there are strong linear trends in the
target trials [Version 1, F(l, 20) = 33.9; Version 2, F(l, 16)
= 82.1; p < .001 for both] and in the blank trials [Version 1,
F(l, 20) = 45.5; Version 2, F(l, 16) = 53.1; p < .001 for
both]. Both groups show much steeper slopes than groups
showed in the previous experiments, with target trial slopes
of 24.9 and 19.2, and blank trial slopes of 60.1 and 41.6. In
both cases, the target and blank slopes are significantly different [Version 1, F(l, 20) = 43.0; Version 2, F(l, 16) = 30.8;
p < .001 for both]. Group A shows no hint of a quadratic
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
Color x Size Conjunctions: Individual Slopes
Target trial
Blank trial
trend (F < 1), and although the trend in Group B is in the
right direction, it is far from significant, F(l, 16) = 2.0,
The mean slope ratios for the two versions are 3.2 and 2.2.
Neither is significantly different from 2:1 [Version 1, t(5) =
1.17; Version 2, f(8) = 0.96; p > .1 for both]. Without more
subjects, however, concluding that the slope ratios are 2:1
would be unwise.
For Group A and Set Sizes 8, 16, and 32, error rates are
1.7%, 3.7%, and 1.2%, respectively. For Group B and Set
Sizes 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32, error rates are 1.2%, 2.2%, 2.3%,
2.9%, 4.9%, and 11.2%, respectively. Subjects in Group B
were also run as Group B in Experiment 2. Error rates are
higher for the T versus L task than for the conjunction task.
This contradicts the hypothesis that shallow slopes in the
conjunction task are obtained by sacrificing accuracy.
Whereas the results from the conjunction experiments (1,
2, and 3) differ strikingly from the usual pattern for serial,
self-terminating search, in Experiment 4, searches for Ts
among Ls show the same steep, linear RT x Set Size functions
seen in other studies. Thus, it is the results for conjunctions
of two features that require explanation.
Search for T among Ls
T: T (in 4 rotations)
D: L (in 4 rotations)
B: Blank trials
60.9 msec/item
B Target trials
24.9 msec/item
A: Blank trials
41.6 msec/item
A: Target trials
19.2 msec/item
Figure 2. Searches for a T among L s. (Average data are given for
two groups of subjects [A and B]. The results are consistent with
serial, self-terminating search. Target items [T] and distractor items
[D] are identified on the figure.)
Experiment 5: Practice Effects in Conjunction Tasks
Some search tasks exhibit practice effects. For example,
Schneider and Eberts ran subjects for thousands of
trials and found that RT x Set Size slopes declined somewhat,
but never to less than 10 ms/item for target trials and about
twice that for blank trials. In contrast, no subject in our
Experiment 1 had more than 20 trials of practice in conjunction experiments or more than 60 trials of total practice in
the visual search paradigm. Nevertheless, 16 of these 20
unpracticed subjects in Experiment 1 had target trial slopes
under 10 ms/item. Thus, any practice effect explanation for
our results would have to invoke transfer of some form of
practice outside of our particular experimental paradigm.
Many of our subjects were drawn from the MIT subject pool
and might have had experience in other RT experiments. In
Experiments 5 and 6, we examined the effects of practice in
our paradigm.
Five naive, unpracticed undergraduate subjects were tested on a
replication of Experiment 1. The target was a red O. The distractors
were red Xs and green 0s. Set sizes were 8, 16, and 32. Each subject
was run on five blocks of 220 trials. Blocks were run on consecutive
days. The first 20 trials in each block were practice. The remaining
200 were used to obtain RT x Set Size slopes for target and blank
trial conditions. In all other respects, the experiment was identical to
Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion
Slopes for target and blank trials for the five blocks for each
subject are shown in Table 5.
Separate ANOVAS for target and blank trials reveal significant
effects of practice for blank trials, F(4, 16) = 4.7, p = .011,
but not for target trials, F(4, 16) = 1.9, p > .15. The effect is
probably not seen in the target trials because of a "floor
effect." For 4 of the 5 subjects, slopes were less than 10 ms
on the first block. As in the preceding conjunction experiments, most of our subjects start with very shallow slopes. It
is, therefore, no great surprise that they do not show much
improvement. Even the ^-intercepts of the RT x Set Size
functions do not decrease much with practice in this experiment. Subject LCY does change from what appears to be a
serial, self-terminating search to the more efficient search
performed by our other subjects during the course of this
experiment.
Experiment 6: Practice Effects on Searches for Ts
In Experiment 4, we obtained steeper slopes with a search for 7s
among Ls. There is, therefore, more room for improvement in this
task. To test for practice effects, 5 subjects repeated Group A of
Experiment 3 (Set Sizes 8, 16, and 32) five times (for a total of 1,100
trials). The stimuli were red rather than white. In all other respects
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
Practice Effects: Color x Form Conjunctions, Slopes for Target and Blank Trials
Note. Targ = target, Blnk = blank.
the experiment was identical to Group A of Experiment 4. The same
subjects were tested in Experiments 5 and 6.
Results and Discussion
Table 6 shows the results for this experiment. There is some
improvement with practice, most of it after the first block of
220 trials. After that, slopes hover around 8-15 ms/item for
target trials. Slopes for blank trials are more variable across
subjects. Separate ANOVAS for target and blank trials show
that the main effects of practice are significant for target trials,
F(4, 16) = 3.1, p < .05, but not for blank trials (F< 1).
A comparison of the results of this experiment with the
results for the same subjects in Experiment 5 (conjunction
practice) in a single ANOVA shows that the target trial slopes
are shallower in the conjunction case, F(l, 4) = 16.4, p <
.05. There is no evidence that this difference changes with
practice, F(4, 16) = 1.3, p > .3.
The results of Experiments 5 and 6 reveal modest practice
effects when floor effects do not interfere. These effects are
not adequate to explain the differences between our data and
previously published results for similar searches. Furthermore,
these results confirm that our subjects do what appears to be
a classic, serial, self-terminating search for a T among Ls, but
do something quite different for conjunctions of color and
Experiment 7: Stimulus Salience
In our experiments, we use saturated red and green stimuli
on a black background. Treisman's earlier work involved less
striking stimulus colors and a white background. She suggests
that the differences between her results and those presented
here are explainable by these differences in stimulus salience
(A. Treisman, personal communication). Indeed, she has
shown that the less salient the perceptual distinction between
target and distractors, the steeper the resulting RT X Set Size
functions . It is important to
remember, however, that even if stimulus salience explains
the difference between our results and previously published
work, our results would still raise doubts about the standard
feature integration model, because our results show that
searches for conjunctions of color and form can yield very
shallow slopes. In Experiment 7, we attempted to emulate
Treisman's stimuli in our computer display.
In this experiment, subjects searched for a red, left, oblique line
among green, left, obliques and red, right, obliques. Treisman's
original stimuli were drawn in ink on
white cards for presentation in a tachistoscope. To emulate her
situation, the red and green used here were less saturated then the
stimuli in our previous experiments (CIE x,y coordinates: red, .42,
.35; green, .32, .41; luminance, .86 and .50 cd/m2). These stimuli
were presented on a brighter white background (CIE = .34, y - .34,
luminance = 1.5 cd/m2). Oblique stimuli were used because the
difference between left and right oblique is less salient than that
between vertical and horizontal, and because Treisman used oblique lines. As a control, subjects were also
tested with the same oblique stimuli using the saturated reds and
greens on a black background that we used in Experiments 1-6.
Ten subjects from the undergraduate subject pool were tested for
330 trials each. The first 30 trials were discarded as practice. Set sizes
of 8, 16, and 32 elements were used. In all other respects the method
was identical to that of Experiment 2.
Average results for target and blank trials from the two
conditions are shown in Figure 3. The emulation of Treis-
Practice Effects: T Versus L Searches
Note. Targ = target, Blnk = blank.
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
Tachistoscope Emulation
D: red \, green /
T-scope style: blank
24.3 msec/item
High contrast: blank
13.1 msec/item
T-scope style: target
10.8 msec/item
High contrast: target
6.1 msec/item
Figure 3. Average RTs as a function of set size in a search for a conjunction of color and orientation.
(In the "high contrast" condition, saturated color stimuli are presented on a dark background. In the
"T-scope" condition, less saturated colors are presented on a bright background, emulating the ink-onpaper conditions of Treisman and Gelade . Target items [T] and distractor items [D] are identified
on the figure.)
man's conditions (labeled T-scope
style) produces steeper slopes than does the control condition
(labeled High contrast). The two conditions of this experiment
produce significantly different slopes of RT X Set Size functions, paired t test: target trial slopes, /(9) = 6.3, p < .001;
blank trial slopes, t(9) = 2.8, p < .05.
The increase in RT with set size is significant in the Tscope emulation for target and for blank trials, F(l, 18) =
20.0, p < .001; F(l, 18) = 23.3, p < .001. The increase is
significant in the control condition as well, F(l, 18) = 46.6,
p < .001; F(l, 18) = 57.7, p < .001. The .^intercepts are
similar in the two conditions (see Figure 3). For both conditions of this experiment, the interaction of set size and trial
type is significant, T-scope: F(2, 18) = 4.4, p < .05; control:
F(2, 18)= 18.2,/><.001.
Serial, self-terminating search predicts a 2:1 ratio between
the slopes for blank and target trials. Slope ratios were computed for each subject. In the T-scope emulation, the average
ratio is 2.4 with a range of 0.8-3.9. By contrast, the average
slope ratio in the control condition is higher (3.5) with a much
greater range, 0.4-13.7. Neither average ratio is significantly
different from 2.0, T-scope: t(9) = 1.5, p > .05; control: t (9)
If the individual slopes for the blank trials are plotted as
function of the slopes for the target trials, the 2:1 slope ratio
predicted by a serial, self-terminating search predicts a linear
function with a slope of 2.0. The relationship of blank trial
slopes to target trial slopes has a significant linear component
for the T-scope emulation (r2 — .71, p < .05) and the slope of
the best-fit line is 1.8 (close to 2.0). For the control condition,
the linear relationship does not hold (r2 = .27, p > .1) and
the slope of the best fit line is 1.1. The results of the T-scope
emulation are in better agreement with the predictions of the
feature integration model than the results of the control
condition.
Average error rates for the T-scope style were 4.6% for Set
Sizes 8 and 16, and 8.1% for Set Size 32. The control
condition had lower error rates at all set sizes (4.4%, 3.9%,
and 5.1%).
Discussion
The emulation of Treisman's original conditions produced results quite consistent with serial,
self-terminating search. The slopes are steeper than those in
Experiments 1-6, though not as steep as those reported in
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
Treisman and Gelade . The slopes are comparable to
those obtained by Egeth, Virzi, and Garbart in a similar
task. In Experiments 1-6, there was little evidence of a reliable
2:1 slope ratio between blank and target trials. In the T-scope
emulation, that evidence is quite strong.
The similarity to the results of Egeth et al. suggest
that one of the two stimulus dimensions was still salient. In
Experiment 8 we attempted to further reduce the salience of
both orientation and color.
Experiment 8
The target was a blue left oblique line. Distractors were red oblique,
green oblique, blue vertical, and blue horizontal lines in equal proportion. This task was made more difficult than Experiments 1-7 by
increasing the number of different colors and different orientations
from 2 to 3 and by decreasing the difference between colors and
orientations. In particular, the blue and green used were not as
strikingly different as the red and green.
Ten subjects from the undergraduate subject pool ran 330 trials
evenly divided between target and blank conditions and between set
sizes of 16, 24, and 32 items. The first 30 trials were discarded as
As shown in Figure 4, average slopes were 25.9 ms/item
for target trials and 43.3 ms/item for blank trials. RT increases
linearly with set size, target trials: F(\, 18) = 90.3, p < .001;
CONJUNCTION WITH
REDUCED STIMULUS SALIENCE
D: red \, green \,
blue |, blue —
Blank Trials
43.3 msec/item
Target Trials
25.9 msec/item
Figure 4. Average RTs as a function of set size in a search for a
conjunction of color and orientation in low salience conditions.
(Results are consistent with serial, self-terminating search. Target
items [T] and distractor items [D] are identified on the figure.)
blank trials: F(\, 18) = 77.7, p < .001, and the two slopes
differ significantly, F(\, 18) = 14.2, p < .005. The average
slope ratio is 1.8. This does not differ significantly from 2.0,
paired t test, t(9) = .88, p > A. Error rates are quite high,
averaging 7.6% for Set Size 16, 10.6% for set size 24, and
14.2% for Set Size 32.
These results essentially replicate Treisman's older results. The slopes are comparable and
appear to be in the 2:1 ratio predicted by serial, self-terminating search. The error rates are higher than in the shallow slope
conjunction search, indicating again that the shallow slopes
were not obtained by sacrificing accuracy.
It seems likely that differences in stimulus salience between
the experiments explain differences between our results and
previously published results. The fact that stimulus salience
plays an important role in determining whether the search for
conjunctions is serial or not is useful in developing a new
model. We will return to this point below.
Discussion of Experiments 1-8
Several conclusions may be drawn from the first eight
experiments:
1. In these experiments, results of visual search for conjunctions of Color x Form, Color x Orientation, and Color
x Size do not conform to the predictions of the standard
feature integration model. Indeed, many subjects, including
naive, unpracticed subjects, produce RTs that are nearly
independent of set size.
2. The differences between these results and previously
published results cannot be explained as reflecting a general
ability on the part of our subjects to do all search tasks in
parallel, because searches for 7s among Ls are serial.
3. It is unlikely that the differences are due to practice
4. Differences in stimulus salience appear to account for a
substantial portion of the differences in results.
The central fact is that the data from these conjunction
experiments violate the predictions of the standard feature
integration model. Indeed, in light of the present results, the
recent spate of shallow RT x Set Size functions in conjunction
experiments may be seen as the rule in such searches and not
merely as an accumulation of exceptions . We now turn to a modification of the
feature integration model that can explain these and other
results. Here we will present a qualitative description of our
modified model. A more formal presentation with a computer
simulation of the results of our experiments and those of other
researchers can be found elsewhere .
The Guided Search Model
As noted in the introduction, a curious characteristic of the
standard feature integration model is that the model holds
that the parallel and serial processes are autonomous. The
serial process cannot use information collected by the parallel
process. If it could, there would be no need for a complete
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
serial, self-terminating search for conjunctions. Although a
parallel feature map cannot pinpoint the location of a conjunction target, it can divide the set of all items into those
that could be the target and those that could not. To return
to the example in the introduction, if the target is a red X, a
parallel color map can divide items into red and green items.
Any one of the red items could be the target if it were also an
X, whereas none of the green items could be the target.
Similarly, a form (or orientation) map could divide the items
into As (any one of which could be the target if it were also
red) and Os (none of which could be the target).
One can easily imagine a mechanism that would allow the
serial stage to take advantage of this ability of the parallel
maps to divide items into distractors and candidate targets.
Suppose that each parallel feature map excites all of the spatial
locations of candidate targets in a map that embodies the
serial, attentional stage of processing. All of the red locations
will be excited, all of the AT locations will be excited, and the
"red X" location (if any) will be doubly excited. If the "spotlight of attention" is directed to the point of maximum
excitation, it will find the target without the necessity of
conducting a random, serial search. This is illustrated in
This model works equally well if we assume that the parallel
processes inhibit nontarget locations, discarding distractors
rather than identifying candidate targets. Indeed, these two
versions of the guided search model are very hard to distinguish from .each other. This topic will be considered in a
separate article (Cave & Wolfe, in press). Either version implies that top down instructions about the nature of the target
can reach the parallel processes or, at least, can gate the output
of those processes.
If the transmission of information from the parallel to the
serial stage were perfect, attention would be guided immediately to the target, and conjunctive searches would be independent of set size. Our data suggest that the transmission of
Standard Conjunction (color x orientation)
Target | Distractors: •• \\
Figure 5. The guided search model for standard conjunction
searches. (See text for details.)
information is imperfect. The efficiency of the search is improved over a random, serial search, but it appears that the
serial mechanism still examines some incorrect items. One
way to model this imperfect transmission is to assume that
there is noise in the signal from the parallel to the serial stage.
If the noise is substantial, the parallel stage is of no use to the
serial stage, and the search will be strictly serial. If there is
minimal noise, the serial stage should be able to locate a target
without examining any incorrect items. Considered in these
terms, the differences between subjects and, indeed, between
laboratories, can be modeled as variations of a single noise
variable. Variation of stimulus salience (Experiment 7) can
be seen as a manipulation of the signal to noise ratio in this
task. As noted in the introduction, this model is very similar
in its outlines to a model proposed by Hoffman ,
though his model was not applied to searches for conjunctions.
Visual search takes place over time. During the time that
the search is occurring, the information from the parallel
processes to the serial process can be updated. With continuously visible stimuli, there is no reason to assume that the
parallel processes analyze the stimulus, pass their findings on
to the serial process, and then shut down. The parallel processes must continue to "see" the stimuli, just as do the
i photoreceptors or the ganglion cells of the retina. The noise
in the transmission from parallel to serial stage is random;
the signal is not. Therefore, the parallel processes might
incorrectly guide the spotlight to a distractor at first. However,
with the passage of time, the signal should emerge from the
noise to guide the spotlight of attention to the target. We are
proposing that the search for conjunctions is serial, but not
random. Each time the spotlight of attention is moved, it is
directed to the most likely target location, as identified by the
parallel processes. Continuous updating of the input from the
parallel processes makes it more and more likely that those
processes will correctly identify the target location as the most
likely location. Under some conditions, this accumulation of
information could yield nonlinear slopes of the sort seen in
Experiment 2.
The same model can be applied to feature searches. In fact,
in this model, there is no qualitative difference between
searches for basic features and searches for conjunctions. In
both cases, the parallel processes provide the signal to guide
attention to the target. In a simple feature search, the presence
of a unique feature (e.g., red among green) generates a strong
signal that quickly exceeds the background noise. As stimulus
salience is reduced, the signal indicating the presence of a
unique feature is hidden by the noise. In this case, the serial
process would examine more of the distractors before the
signal from the appropriate feature map exceeded the noise
in that map and guided the serial process to the target location
 .
This strategy of using the parallel processes to help the serial
process locate likely targets will not work for all search tasks.
Consider the T versus L task (Experiment 4). In this case,
both the target T and the distracting Ls are made up of a
vertical and a horizontal line. As illustrated in Figure 6, a
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
Search for T among L's
Figure 6. The guided search model for T versus L searches. (See
text for details.)
feature map sensitive to orientation would "see" the same
features at all locations. Even over time, the feature map
would be unable to guide the attentional spotlight, and resulting searches would be serial, as they are in Experiment 4.
The guided search model makes predictions that are qualitatively different from those of the standard feature integration model. Under the guided search model, one would expect
more efficient searches if more information from the parallel
processes could be used by the serial process. In a conjunction
experiment, each distractor item has one feature that eliminates it as a candidate target (e.g., wrong color or wrong
orientation). By conjoining three features (e.g., Color x Orientation x Size), we can arrange for each distractor to possess
two features that eliminate it as a candidate target. If two
sources of information are better than one, as the guided
search model predicts, then these triple conjunctions will
produce more efficient searches than standard conjunctions.
conjunction by attention can be performed as efficiently
across three features as across two, then the standard feature
integration model would predict that the slopes for triple
conjunctions would be about the same as those for simple
conjunctions. If it takes longer to determine that an item is
vertical, white, and large than it does to determine merely
that it is vertical and white, then the standard model predicts
that slopes for triple conjunctions would be steeper than those
for simple conjunctions.
Quinlan and Humphreys did an experiment of this
sort and found that triple conjunctions produced shallower
slopes than simple conjunctions when the target shared only
one feature with each distractor. The slopes for their triple
conjunction searches were quite steep by our standards, averaging 11.6 ms/item on target trials and 28.6 ms/item on
blank trials . In our
replication of this experiment, RT is virtually independent of
In a triple conjunction where targets and distractors share
two features, there is only one piece of information that
distinguishes targets and distractors. In this case, there is no
more information in the triple conjunction than in the standard conjunction. The guided search model would predict that
search times would be similar in these two cases. Quinlan and
Humphrey's data support this hypothesis.
Eleven subjects from the undergraduate subject pool were tested
in each of four conditions. Conditions 1 and 2 were triple conjunction
tasks where the distractors shared one feature with the target. In
Condition 1, the target was big. In Condition 2, the target was small.
Condition 3 was a triple conjunction task where the distractors each
shared two features with the target. Finally, Condition 4 was a simple
conjunction task replicating Experiment 1. The stimuli for the four
conditions are described in Table 7.
Triple Conjunction
Target | Distractors:
Experiment 9: Triple Conjunctions
In this experiment, subjects searched for targets defined by
a triple conjunction of color, form, and size. The logic of this
experiment is illustrated in Figure 7. Consider a big, black,
vertical line as the target. In a triple conjunction task, distractors can share zero, one, or two features with the target. In
this example, all distractors share one feature with the target.
This yields as a distractor set, (a) big, white, horizontal, (b)
small, black, horizontal, and (c) small, white, vertical. In terms
of the guided search model, there are now three sources of
information that can be used to constrain the movements of
the spotlight of attention. In a simple conjunction, there are
only two. As noted above, this leads to the prediction that
searches for triple conjunctions should be more efficient than
searches for simple conjunctions. The standard feature integration model would not make this prediction. If the act of
Figure 7. The guided search model for triple conjunction searches.
(See text for details.)
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
Stimuli for Experiment 9: Triple Conjunctions
Small red X
Distractors
Small red X
Small green O
Big green X
Big green X
Small green O
Big green O
Small red O
Big green O
Triple conjunction
sharing 1 feature
Triple conjunction
sharing 1 feature
Triple conjunction
sharing 2 features
Simple conjunction
All distractor items were presented with equal probability. Set sizes
of 8, 16, and 32 were used. The order of conditions was random
across subjects. In each condition, the subject had 30 practice trials
followed by 300 data trials. Targets were presented on 50% of trials.
Slopes for individual subjects and averages of those slopes
are shown in Table 8 for all four conditions. Average RTs
and ^intercepts are comparable to those in Experiments 1-8
(see Figures 8-10). The main effect of set size is insignificant
in Condition 1, F(2, 20) = 2.1 (target), 2.3 (blank); p > .1 in
both cases. For this condition, RT is independent of set size.
The main effects of set size are significant for all other
conditions.
The results are best understood when compared in pairs.
When comparing slopes in the statistical analyses, we included
target trials only, and used contrasts from an ANOVA with
subject, set size, and condition as variables. When testing
overall differences between conditions, we included both target and blank trials, and used contrasts from an ANOVA with
subject, set size, condition, and target presence as variables.
Figure 8 shows average RTs for target and blank trials for
Conditions 1 and 4, comparing a one-shared-feature triple
conjunction search to a standard conjunction search for the
same target. Overall, triple conjunction responses are faster
than standard conjunction responses, F(l, 30) = 26.7, p <
.001, and practically independent of the number of distractors.
The triple conjunction slopes are very shallow; 0.4 ms/item
for target trials and 1.2 ms/item for blank trials. This is less
than the standard conjunction slope of 5.2 ms/item for the
target trials and 10.0 ms/item for the blank trials. The difference is significant, as shown by comparing linear contrasts for
the target trials, F(l, 60) = 28.1, p < .001. Note that the
standard conjunction results are shallow and appear to be
quite serial only because of the scale used in Figure 8.
Figure 9 compares the simple conjunction results of Condition 4 with the triple conjunction search in Condition 3, in
which each distractor shared two features with the target.
There is no overall difference between these two conditions
(F< 1) and there is no difference between the slopes (F< 1).
When triple conjunction distractors differ from the target in
only one feature, a search is no easier than it is in the standard
conjunction task.
A triple conjunction search is significantly faster when
distractors share only one feature with the target (Condition
1) than when they share two (Condition 3), F(l, 30) = 23.5,
p < .001. Slopes are significantly less in Condition 1 as well,
F( 1, 60) = 20.1, p < .001. Subjects do better at searches with
one-shared-feature triple conjunctions than with either standard conjunctions or two-shared-feature triple conjunctions,
even when the target is the same in each case.
Figure 10 compares two types of one-shared-feature triple
conjunction search. The target is big in Condition 1 and small
in Condition 2. When the target is small, responses are slower,
F(l, 30) = 5.0, p < .05, and positive slopes are steeper, F(l,
60) = 5.9, p < .025. When the target is big, the slope of the
average data is 0.4 ms/item for target trials and 1.2 ms/item
for blank trials. When the target is small, those slopes increase
to 2.6 and 5.5 ms/item, respectively.
Error rates for Set Sizes 8, 16, and 32 are 1.7%, 2.3%, and
0.7% in Condition 1; 2.6%, 3.2%, and 3.8% in Condition 2;
Individual Slopes for Subjects in Four Conditions of Experiment 8
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3
Condition 4
GUIDED SEARCH MODEL
2.3%, 2.9%, and 5.1% in Condition 3; and 1.7%, 2.8%, and
5.3% in Condition 4. These rates are quite low even though
the slopes in this experiment are lower than those in any of
the other experiments in this article. Indeed, the lowest slopes
(Condition 1) are accompanied by the lowest error rates in
this experiment. The effect of experimental condition is significant, F(3, 120) = 3.7, p < .05.
Discussion
In Condition 1 of the experiment, RT is independent of set
size even though the target is defined by a conjunction, here
a triple conjunction. This finding does not fit within the
feature integration model, but it is accommodated by the
guided search model proposed here. The shallowest slopes are
obtained when each distractor differs from the target on two
dimensions. In these conditions (1 and 2), more information
from the parallel processes is available to guide attention than
in the simple conjunction condition (4). When distractors
differ from targets on only one dimension (Condition 3), the
results are virtually identical to those obtained with simple
conjunctions. As noted above, this is the predicted result
under the guided search model. The two-shared-features case
is equivalent to the simple conjunction case because, in both
cases, the parallel processes have only one chance to discard
each distractor.
In summary, the spotlight of attention can be guided by
preattentive mechanisms. A parallel feature map can partition
the set of items into distractors and candidate targets. This
information, degraded by noise, can be passed to the serial
process. In the serial process, the spotlight of attention moves
from item to item until a target is found. With the aid of
information from the parallel processes, however, that movement need not be random. Instead, the spotlight can be
Triple Compared to Simple Conjunction
Triple Compared to Simple Conjunction
Simple - Blank
10.0 msec/item
Simple - Target
5.2 msec/item
Triple - Blank
1.2 msec/item
Triple - Target
0.4 msec/ltem
Figure 8. Comparison between results for triple and simple conjunction searches. (Average data for 11 subjects. In the triple conjunction, distractors share only one feature with the target. Slopes for
triple conjunction search are 0.4 ms/item for target trials and 1.2 ms/
item for blank trials. Slopes for standard conjunction average 5.2 ms/
item for target trials and 10.0 ms/item for blank trials.)
Simple - Blank
1 0.0 msec/item
Triple - Blank
7.9 msec/item
Simple - Target
5.2 msec/item
Triple - Target
4.5 msec/item
Figure 9. Comparison between results for simple conjunction and
a triple conjunction in which each distractor shares two features with
the target. (Slopes for triple conjunction are 4.5 ms/item for target
trials and 7.9 ms/item for negative trials. Slopes for standard conjunction average 5.2 ms/item for target trials and 10.0 ms/item for
blank trials.)
directed to the most likely target. If the signal from the parallel
processes is large relative to the noise, the target will be found
quickly. If the signal is small, the spotlight will examine a
number of distractor items before finding the target.
Triple conjunction searches where the target and distractors
share only one feature produce shallower RT X Set Size
functions than do standard conjunctions because there is
more information available and presumably a larger signal
sent from the parallel to the serial process. In other tasks,
such as the T versus L task, the preattentive processes can
provide no information. In the absence of a signal, the spotlight is guided only by the meaningless noise, and items are
sampled at random until the target is found.
In a sense, it is no surprise to find that the preattentive
processes guide the spotlight of attention . The spotlight does not wander at random even in the
standard feature integration model. It moves from stimulus
item to item. If there were no guidance, the spotlight could
spend time examining the blank regions in the display or it
could wander free in the far periphery, well outside of the
stimulus field. This does not happen because, at the very least,
the preattentive processes inform later stages of the locations
of stimuli. The guided search model suggests that the preattentive processes provide, in addition to mere positional information, information about the nature of individual items,
at least to the extent of categorizing them as more or less
worthy of attention.
Several questions remain to be answered. We do not know
if the information from the preattentive processes is used to
discard distractors, perhaps by inhibiting their spatial locations, or if, instead, it acts to label candidate targets, perhaps
by enhancing their locations. Nor do we know if the preattentive processes supply their information only while the stimuli
are visible or if that information can be used even if stimuli
J. WOLFE, K. CAVE, AND S. FRANZEL
Search Asymmetry in Triple Conjunctions
Small - Blank
„ «• 5.5 msec/item
Small - Target
2.6 msec/item
1 Large -Blank
1.2 msec/item
0.4 msec/item
Figure JO. Comparison between two triple conjunction searches.
(In both, each distractor shares one feature with the target. In the
more efficient search, the target is large. In the other search, it is
small. Slopes for triple conjunction search for large stimuli are 0.4
ms/item for target trials and 1.2 ms/item for blank trials. Slopes for
triple conjunction search for small stimuli are 2.6 ms/item for target
trials and 5.5 ms/item for blank trials.)
are briefly presented . However, as discussed in the
initial presentation of the model above, we assume that the
parallel processes continue to send information to the serial
process as long as the stimuli are visible. This ongoing updating allows a small signal to emerge from noise over time. A
third unsolved problem pertains to search termination. We
do not know how the subject decides when to give up a search
and say "no" on a blank trial. In the case of a serial, selfterminating search, it is clear enough that the subject should
search through each item and then quit, producing a 2:1 slope
ratio. In parallel searches or in the hybrid parallel/serial
searches that seem to characterize our conjunction experiments, it is unclear when the subject should end the search,
and our data show wide variability in slope ratios.
A specific problem for the model is raised by the experiments of Nakayama and Silverman . They used two
targets and two distractors in their conjunction tasks, whereas
we have only one type of target. For example, in a colorform conjunction task, such as that in Experiment 1 of this
article, we might have a red X as the target with green Xs and
red Os as distractors. In the Nakayama and Silverman experiments, the second target would be a green O. With red Xs
and green Os as targets, the parallel processes, it seems, would
be unable to provide guidance to the serial process. Items
could not be partitioned into distractors and candidate targets
on the basis of color or form.
This problem rests on the assumption that subjects look for
the red X and green O at the same time. If subjects perform
two sequential searches, first for the red X, then for the green
O, then the two-target case is reduced to two one-target
searches of the sort described in this article. The parallel
processes could first guide the search for the red X and then,
if necessary, guide the search for a green O. Preliminary data
from our lab and from Treisman's (A. Treisman, personal
communication) suggest that subjects are executing two sequential searches and do not search for both types of target
at the same time.
Conclusion
We believe that the serial search for conjunctions can be
guided by parallel processes that can divide the set of stimulus
items into distractors and candidate targets. This allows naive
subjects to search for conjunctions more efficiently than
would be expected if it were necessary to do a full serial, selfterminating search. The efficiency of the search is a function
of the quality of the guidance provided by the parallel processes. In the case of a triple conjunction (Experiment 9), the
extra information from analysis of a third stimulus dimension
allows for exceedingly efficient searches. A standard conjunction produces moderately efficient searches. In contrast, in a
search for a T among Ls, there is no useful information in
the parallel processes and the task reverts to a completely
serial search. Our data can be accounted for within the feature
integration model if and only if the parallel processes pass on
useful information to guide the movements of the spotlight
of attention.