Holistic classification of CT attenuation patterns for interstitial
lung diseases via deep convolutional neural networks
Mingchen Gaoa, Ulas Bagcib, Le Lua, Aaron Wua, Mario Butya, Hoo-Chang Shina, Holger
Rotha, Georgios Z. Papadakisa, Adrien Depeursingec, Ronald M. Summersa, Ziyue Xua, and
Daniel J. Molluraa
aRadiology and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda,
MD, USA bCenter for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida (UCF), Orlando,
FL, USA cInstitute of Information Systems, University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland
(HES-SO), Sierre, Switzerland
Interstitial lung diseases (ILD) involve several abnormal imaging patterns observed in computed
tomography (CT) images. Accurate classification of these patterns plays a significant role in
precise clinical decision making of the extent and nature of the diseases. Therefore, it is important
for developing automated pulmonary computer-aided detection systems. Conventionally, this task
relies on experts’ manual identification of regions of interest (ROIs) as a prerequisite to diagnose
potential diseases. This protocol is time consuming and inhibits fully automatic assessment. In this
paper, we present a new method to classify ILD imaging patterns on CT images. The main
difference is that the proposed algorithm uses the entire image as a holistic input. By
circumventing the prerequisite of manual input ROIs, our problem set-up is significantly more
difficult than previous work but can better address the clinical workflow. Qualitative and
quantitative results using a publicly available ILD database demonstrate state-of-the-art
classification accuracy under the patch-based classification and shows the potential of predicting
the ILD type using holistic image.
Interstitial lung disease; convolutional neural network; holistic medical image classification
1. Introduction
The interstitial lung diseases (ILD) cause progressive scarring of lung tissue, which would
eventually affect the patients’ ability to breathe and get enough oxygen into the bloodstream.
CONTACT Ziyue Xu .
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Ulas Bagci 
Ziyue Xu 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC
2018 April 03.
 
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. 2018 ; 6(1): 1–6. doi:
10.1080/21681163.2015.1124249.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) is the standard in-vivo radiology imaging
tool for visualising normal/abnormal imaging patterns to identify the specific type of ILD
 , and to develop appropriate therapy plans. Examples of these lung tissue
patterns are shown in Figure 1. Computer-aided detection (CAD)/classification systems are
needed for achieving higher recalls on ILD assessment . In particular, the
amounts and anatomical positions of abnormal imaging patterns (along with patient history)
can help radiologists to optimise their diagnostic decisions, with better quantitative
measurements.
There are a vast amount of relevant literature on developing CAD systems of pulmonary
diseases, but most of them focus on identifying and quantifying a single pattern such as
consolidation or nodules . For computer-aided ILD classification, all
previous studies have employed a patch-based image representation with the classification
results of moderate success . There are two major drawbacks for the image patch-based methods: (1), The
image patch sizes or scales in studies are relatively small (31 × 31
pixels) where some visual details and spatial context may not be fully captured. The holistic
computed tomography (CT) slice holds a lot of details that may be overlooked in the patchbased representation. (2), More importantly, the state-of-the-art methods assume the manual
annotation as given. Image patches are consequently sampled within these regions of interest
(ROIs). Image patch-based approaches, which depend on the manual ROI inputs, are easier
to solve, but unfortunately less clinically desirable. This human demanding process will
become infeasible for the large-scale medical image processing and analysis.
In this paper, we propose a new representation/approach to address this limitation. Our
method classifies and labels ILD tags for holistic CT slices and can possibly be used to
prescreen a large amount of radiology data. Additionally, the prescreened data can be used
as feedback to enlarge the training data-set in a loop. This would be the essential component
for a successful and practical medical image analysis tool at a truly large scale. Different
from Li et al. , Song et al. , our CNN-based method is formulated as a
holistic image recognition task that is also considered as a weakly
supervised learning problem. Obtaining image tags alone is cost effective and can be
obtained very efficiently. On the other hand, our new set-up of using holistic images makes it
significantly more challenging than the previous settings , since the manual ROIs are no longer required. Image patches as classification
instances, which are extracted from the annotated ROIs, are well spatially aligned or
invariant to their absolute intraslice CT coordinates. On the contrary, in our set-up, only
slice-level image labels or tags are needed and no precise contouring of ILD regions are
necessary. This weakly supervised learning scheme can scale well with large scale image
database. The experimental evaluation on the publicly available data-set demonstrates the
state-of-the-art results under the same image patch-based approaches and shows promising
results under this new challenging protocol.
Gao et al.
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
2. Methods
CNN has been successfully exploited in various image classification problems and achieved
the state-of-the-art performances in image classification, detection and segmentation
challenges such as MNIST, ImageNet, etc. .
The typical image classification approach consists of two steps of feature extraction and
classification. However, the most attractive characteristics of the CNN method are that it
learns the end-to-end feature extraction and classification simultaneously. CNN also shows
promise in medical image analysis applications, such as mitosis detection , lymph node detection and knee cartilage segmentation . In previous ILD classification work, hand-crafted local image descriptors (such as
LBP, HOG) are used in Depeursinge, Van de Ville et al. , Song et al. to
capture the image patch appearance.
Our proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 2. Three attenuation scales with respect to
lung abnormality patterns are captured by rescaling the original CT image in Hounsfield
Units to 2-D inputs in training and testing. For this purpose, three different ranges are
utilised: one focusing on patterns with lower attenuation, one on patterns with higher
attenuation and one for normal lung attenuation. Using three attenuation ranges offers better
visibility or visual separation among all six ILD disease categories. Another reason for using
the three ranges is to accommodate the CNN architecture that we adapt from ImageNet
 that uses RGB values of natural images. Finally, for each input 2-D
slice, 10 samples (“data augmentation”) are cropped randomly from the original images and
resized to 224 × 224 pixels via linear interpolation. This step generates more training data to
reduce the overfitting. These inputs, together with their labels, are fed to CNN for training
and classification. Each technical component is discussed in details as follows.
2.1. CNN architecture
The architecture of our CNN is similar to the convolutional neural network proposed by
Krizhevsky et al. . CNNs with shallow layers do not have enough discriminative
power, while too deep CNNs are computationally expensive to train and easy to be
overfitted. Our network contains multiple layers: first five layers are convolutional layers
followed by three fully connected (FC) layers and the final softmax classification layer,
which is changed from 1000 classes to 6 classes in our application.
It is known from the computer vision community that supervised pre-training on a large
auxiliary data-set, followed by the domain-specific fine tuning on a small data-set, is an
effective paradigm to boost the performance of CNN models . In our experiments, the training convergence speed is much
faster when using pre-trained model than using randomly initialised model. The use of three
CT attenuation ranges also accommodates the CNN architecture of three input channels. The
output of the last FC layer is formed into a six-way softmax to produce a distribution over
the six class labels (with six neurons). We start the training via stochastic gradient descent at
a learning rate of 1/10th of the initial pre-training rate expect for the
output softmax layer. The adjusted learning rate allows appropriate fine-tuning progresses
Gao et al.
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
without ruining the initialisation. The output layer still needs a large learning rate for
convergence to the new ILD classification categories.
2.2. CT attenuation rescale
To better capture the abnormal ILD patterns in CT images, we selected three ranges of
attenuation and rescaled them to for CNN input. As shown in Figure 3(A), this
process is designed to select the attenuation value between HU_low and HU_high so that the
value within the range can be highlighted to represent different visual patterns. A linear
transformation is applied to rescale the intensities. Specifically, low-attenuation range
(Figure 6(B)) is used to capture patterns with lower intensities, such as emphysema; normal
range (Figure 3(C)) to represent normal appearance of lung regions; and high attenuation
range (Figure 6(D)) for modelling patterns with higher intensities, such as consolidation and
nodules. Specific HUs we chose in our experiments are: for low attenuation, HU_ low =
−1400 and HU_ high = −950; for normal, HU_ low = −1400 and HU_ high = 200; for high
attenuation, HU_ low = −160 and HU_ high = 240.
2.3. Data augmentation
The most common and effective way to reduce overfitting on image recognition training
using CNN is to artificially enlarge or augment the original data-set by label-preserving
geometric transformations. We generate new images by randomly jittering and cropping 10
subimages per original CT slice. Although the generated images are interdependent, the
scheme would improve the training/testing performance by ~ 5% in classification accuracy.
At test time, 10 jittered images are also generated and fed into the trained CNN model for
any CT slice. Final per slice prediction is obtained by aggregating (e.g. majority voting,
maximal pooling) over the CNN six-class softmax probabilities on 10 jittered images.
3. Experiments and discussions
A publicly available ILD database has been released recently to improve the detection and classification of a wide range of lung abnormal imaging
patterns. This database contains 120 HRCT scans with 512 × 512 pixels per axial slice,
where 17 types of lung tissues are annotated on marked regions (i.e. ROIs). Most existing
classification methods evaluated on the ILD data-set
first extract many image patches from ROIs and then only classify patches into five lung
tissue classes: normal (NM), emphysema (EM), ground glass (GG), fibrosis (FB) and
micronodules (MN). Here, consolidation (CD), as a highly prevalent type of ILD, is also
included within our classification scheme. All of the six diseases are prevalent
characteristics of ILD and identifying them is critical to determine their ILD types or
The database contains 2084 ROIs labelled with specific type of ILD disease, out of 120
patients. All patients are randomly split into two subsets at the patient level for training (100
patients) and testing (20 patients). Training/testing data are separated at patient level, i.e.
different slices from the same patient will not appear in both training and testing. All images
containing the six types of diseases are selected, resulting 1689 images in total for training
Gao et al.
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
and testing. Note that previous work report
performance on patch classification only, rather than performance assessment for the whole
image slices or at patient level, which are actually more clinically relevant.
For fair comparisons with previous work, we conduct experiments under two different
settings. One is patch-based classification, that is exactly the same as in previous state-ofthe-art work . An overall accuracy of 87.9% is achieved, comparing
with 86.1% accuracy of previous patch methods. The best F-scores are
achieved in most classes as shown in Table 1. 31 × 31 patches are extracted from the ROI
regions, and then resized to the size of 224 × 224 to accomodate the CNN architecture.
Another experiment shows the holistic image classification results. The overall accuracy is
68.6%. Note that our per slice testing accuracy results are not strictly comparable to Song et
al. , Li et al. , reporting classification results only at the image patch level
(a significantly less challenging protocol).
Table 2 shows the confusion matrix of the classification results on holistic images. Majority
voting-based aggregation from jittered subimages is used. Emphysema is perfectly classified
from other diseases. One of the three CT attenuation ranges is specifically designed to
emphasise on the patterns with lower attenuation, which boosts the classification
performance on emphysema significantly. Healthy images and micronodule patterns are
difficult to be separated based on the confusion matrix result. Micronodule patterns are
indeed visually challenging to be recognised from one single static CT slice . 3D cross-slice image features may be needed. Majority voting performs slightly
better (~ 2%) than choosing the highest value from 10 subimage CNN scores per ILD class,
and assigning the CT slice into the class corresponding to the maximum of aggregated
highest scores. Table 3 shows the confusion matrix of patch-based classification.
Our model is implemented in Matlab using MatConvNet package for
the CNN implementation, running on a PC with 3.10 GHz dual processors CPU and 32-GB
memory. Training the CNN model consumes about 20–24 h (Figure 4), while classifying a
new testing image takes only a few seconds.
4. Conclusion and future work
In this paper, we present a new representation and approach for interstitial lung disease
classification. Our method with holistic images (i.e. CT slice) as input is significantly
different from previous image patch-based algorithms. It addresses a more practical and
realistic clinical problem. Our preliminary experimental results have demonstrated the
promising feasibility and advantages of the proposed approach.
There are several directions to be explored as future work. The image features learned from
the deep convolutional network can be integrated into more sophisticated classification
algorithms. There are some cases (~ 5%) with multiple disease tags on the same slice of CT
image. Detection with multiple labels at a slice level would be interesting. Understanding the
clinical meaning and value of the features learned from the network would also be a
direction that we plan to pursue.
Gao et al.
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng Imaging Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV) of UCF, Center for Infectious
Disease Imaging (CIDI), the intramural research program of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Clinical Center
(CC), Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Imaging Biomarkers and Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory and
Clinical Image Processing Service. Acknowledgment to Nvidia Corp. for donation of K40 GPUs.