A Graph-based Push Service Platform
Huifeng Guo1⋆, Ruiming Tang2, Yunming Ye1⋆⋆, Zhenguo Li2, and Xiuqiang He2
1 Department of Computer Science, Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen, China
 
2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, China
{tangruiming,Li.Zhenguo,hexiuqiang}@huawei.com
Abstract. It is well known that learning customers’ preference and
making recommendations to them from today’s information-exploded
environment is critical and non-trivial in an on-line system. There are two
different modes of recommendation systems, namely pull-mode and pushmode. The majority of the recommendation systems are pull-mode, which
recommend items to users only when and after users enter Application
Market. While push-mode works more actively to enhance or re-build
connection between Application Market and users. As one of the most
successful phone manufactures, both the number of users and apps increase
dramatically in Huawei Application Store (also named Hispace Store),
which has approximately 0.3 billion registered users and 1.2 million apps
until 2016 and whose number of users is growing with high-speed. For
the needs of real scenario, we establish a Push Service Platform (shortly,
PSP) to discover the target user group automatically from web-scale user
operation log data with an additional small set of labelled apps (usually
around 10 apps), in Hispace Store. As presented in this work, PSP includes
distributed storage layer, application layer and evaluation layer. In the
application layer, we design a practical graph-based algorithm (named
A-PARW) for user group discovery, which is an approximate version
of partially absorbing random walk. Based on I mode of A-PARW, the
effectiveness of our system is significantly improved, compared to the
predecessor to presented system, which uses Personalized Pagerank in its
application layer.
Keywords: Random walk; Recommendation; Graph mining
Introduction
With the rapid development of internet infrastructure and smart phones, the life
of human beings is more and more closely connected to online applications, such
as online shopping , online video sharing and etc. However, as a difficult yet
crucial task to each online application, learning customers’ preference and making
⋆The work is done when Huifeng Guo is an intern in Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.
⋆⋆Corresponding author
 
Huifeng Guo et al.
a recommendation to them from today’s information-exploded environment is
a big challenge. Therefore, recommendation system plays a particularly critical
role to help customers find what they need or prefer, resulting in enhancing users’
experience and increasing revenue for online applications at the same time.
There are two different modes of recommendation systems, namely pull-mode
and push-mode. The majority of the recommendation systems are pull-mode,
which recommend items to users only when and after users enter Application
Market. The pull-mode recommendation is similar to the case of costumers
shopping in a supermarket: shop assistants arrange the products in shelves in
certain patterns according to customers’ shopping habit, so as to implicitly
persuade the customers to purchase more products. Acting as salesman, the pushmode recommendation (which is discussed in this paper) pushes the recommended
items to the users actively rather than waiting for the users entering Application
Market. The difference between pull-mode and push-mode recommendation is
that the former one recommends passively while the latter one works actively,
so that the push-mode is able to enhance or re-build the connection between
products and inactive or semi-active users3.
In Figure 1, we present several push activities in Hispace Store 4, including
book listening, music and photo editor. Through the messages of notification
center (presented in Figure 1a), the inactive or semi-active users are able to know
some new apps without entering into Hispace Store and download their favorite
apps in the display pages after clicking the corresponding notification message
(presented in Figure 1b, Figure 1c and Figure 1d).
Compared to the pull-mode recommendation, the push-mode achieves two
main advantages, namely (1) reducing the loss of semi-active users and (2)
activating the inactivate user, by actively informing the newest updating or
interesting messages to the users who do not enter Application Market very often.
However, user group selection is a challenging task in push-mode recommendation,
since too many unrelated message could disturb users and degrade the user’s
experience of the phones. In the contrary, accurately targeting users for the
corresponding push messages brings huge benefits by upgrading user’s experience
and increasing the revenue of online applications and Application Market.
However, along with the performance improvement of smart phone and
various needs from our daily-life, many apps are created by different developers
and installed by different people. Then the number of users and apps increase
dramatically these yeas. For example, Hispace Store has around 0.3 billion
registered users and 1.2 million apps until 2016. As a result, user group discovery
from the web-scale users becomes even more challenging. So we need a platform
3 In the context of Application Market, "active users" refers to the users who visits the
Application Market frequently, "inactive users" are the ones left Application Market
already and "semi-active users" are the users who do not visit the Application Market
often and are leaving but not yet.
4 Hispace Store is the name of Huawei Application Market: 
com/hd. In the rest of this paper, we use Hispace Store to denote Huawei Application
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
to support the function of target user group discovery, since the manual labeling
is impossible due to missing the ground truth and the large scale of the data.
(a) Push message
(b) Book listening
(d) Photo editor
Fig. 1: Push Services
In response to this real motivation, we have established a Push Service
Platform (shortly, PSP) for push-mode recommendation, by discovering the target
user group. PSP includes three layers: distributed storage layer, application layer
and evaluation layer. In the application layer, we design a practical graph-based
algorithm (named A-PARW ) for user group discovery, which is a approximate
version of PARW .
In this paper, we present full details of Huawei PSP. We firstly overview
each layer in Huawei PSP generally. We then give a detailed analysis of different
user group discovery algorithms theoretically and empirically. We implement the
A-PARW algorithm for services with web-scale data size. Finally, we perform our
system to several real marketing tasks in Hispace Store, and carried out detailed
off-line and on-line test. The results show that, I mode of A-PARW is able to find
a target user group effectively. Based on I mode of A-PARW, the effectiveness of
our system is significantly improved, compared to PPR (short for personalized
pagerank ). PPR is applied in the predecessor to the current Huawei PSP, and
the effectiveness of PPR is demonstrated in our previous work 5.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the PSP in
general. Section 3 presents the Application Layer of PSP, analyses the differences
and similarities of two graph-based algorithms in the application layer in detail
and introduces the implementation details of A-PARW in VENUS and Power-
Graph [?]. In Section 4 we perform experiments to evaluate the two graph-based
5 xRank, proposed in , is exactly PPR and is equivalent to D mode of A-PARW.
Huifeng Guo et al.
algorithms on both public and real-life datasets. We discuss some related works
in Section 5. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6.
Platform Overview
Fig. 2: PSP Architecture
In order to provide push-mode recommendation to the users, we establish
Huawei Push Service Platform (PSP) to select a target user group, to whom send
the pre-defined messages. PSP, as presented in Figure 2, includes Distributed
Storage Layer, Application Layer and Evaluation Layer. Specifically, Storage Layer
is built for historical data storage (including the users’ download/click/payment
historical information) and on-line log caching; Application Layer mines target
user group from the graph-structural historical User-APP data in an off-line
manner and pushes the pre-defined messages to the selected users’ phones; and in
Evaluation Layer we tune the parameters, compare the performance of different
algorithms both off-line and on-line A/B test. In the rest of this section, we
introduce these three layers in more details.
Distributed Storage Layer maintains two database systems for historical data
storage and on-line caching. The HDFS (shortening of Hadoop Distributed File
System) stores historical data, including users’ download, click and payment log
data, which is the source data for User-APP bipartite graph construction. While
HBase (shortening of Hadoop Database) caches on-line data and users’ feedback,
which is critical for on-line monitoring and algorithm evaluation. Updating in an
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
incremental way, we use on-line data and users’ feedback data in HBase to update
the historical data in HDFS periodically. In addition, this layer incorporates a
Hadoop cluster to store large-scale datasets and provides parallel data processing.
Application Layer contains the major components (i.e., off-line target users
mining and on-line message pushing) of the platform. For the different demands
of real project, our Computing Engine of Application Layer supports Graph
Engine (such as VENUS and PowerGraph) and distributed computing engines
(such as MapReduce). In the off-line part of Application Layer, we first construct
User-APP bipartite graph by extracting and preprocessing on the users’ historical
data stored in HDFS, then mine target user group to send a pre-defined message,
and finally we filter the selected users by some beneficial rules. On the other
hand, the function of the on-line part is to push the recommendation messages
to the selected users by the off-line part and caches users’ feedback, that whether
he/she clicked (or even downloaded) apps recommended by the sent message,
by HBase. Moreover, we will give more details about the Application Layer in
Section 3 since it is the most challenging part of our system.
This system also includes Evaluation Layer which conducts both off-line
and on-line experiments and analyzes the results. Off-line evaluation compares
pre-defined off-line metrics of the results by different algorithms, which helps
us to tune the parameters of the algorithms. On-line evaluation monitors and
compares the performance of the algorithms which are carefully selected by offline evaluation. The details of evaluation methods and metrics will be presented
in Section 4.1.
Application Layer
To better understand our PSP, in this section, we present the full details of
Application Layer (which is the most interesting part) of our PSP. We start with
presenting the work flow of Application Layer (shown in Figure 3).
History Data
P re−processing
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Graph Construction User-APP Graph
Graph Mining
−−−−−−−−−−→Target User
User F iltering
−−−−−−−−−−→User List
On−line P ushing
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Observation
User Feedback
−−−−−→Online
Updating pediodly
−−−−−−−−−−−−→History Data.
The input of PSP is a topic push activity, which is usually a graphic message,
describing a group of on-line applications under a certain topic, such as music
fans, cook lovers, etc. As an initial step, we provide Data Preprocessing and
Graph Construction operation (presented in Section 3.1) to generate User-APP
bipartite graph from users’ download/click/payment historical data, which is
stored in HDFS. Based on this graph, we can mine target user group with the
help of Graph Mining Algorithm (presented in Section 3.2). According to some
domain knowledge and specific rules, User Filtering Pooling filters unneeded
users to obtain the final user list (presented in Section 3.3) and the on-line Push
Service (presented in Section 3.4) sends the message to the selected users. Then,
Huifeng Guo et al.
Fig. 3: Application Layer
PSP will cache the users’ feedback data and update these data to History data
periodically. Moreover, we use diverse computing engines to support a variety of
needs in this layer(presented in Section 3.5).
In the rest of this section, we introduce the details of Application Layer
according to the work flow, which has been briefly described above.
Data Preprocessing and Graph Construction
In this section, we present the details of the first step in the Application Layer,
namely data preparation operation.
Data Preprocessing In the data preprocessing stage, the system can set a
series of rules according to demands, such as removing the pre-installed Apps or
very popular Apps from raw data before graph construction, because installing
such apps are not able to reflect users’ interests.
Graph Construction Based on the data that is being preprocessed, we construct an undirected graph G = (U, A, ξ), where U denotes the set of vertices
representing users and A is the set of vertices representing apps, ξ is a set of edges.
Since we only use historical information between users and apps, without the
information within users or within apps, the constructed graph G is a bipartite
graph. For instance, in Figure 4, User vertices are on the left-hand-side and APP
vertices are on the right-hand-side. There exists an edge connecting Ui and Ai
if user Ui installs app Ai. For example, U1 installs three apps A1, A2 and A3,
while A2 is installed by all the three users.
We assign uniform IDs to vertices in A and U. More specifically, vertices in U
are assigned with IDs from 1 to |U|, and vertices in A are assigned with IDs from
|U|+1 to |U|+|A|. For simplicity, we use vi to denote vertex with ID i. In Figure 4,
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
Fig. 4: An example user-app bipartite graph
for example, we use v1, v2, v3 to denote U1, U2, U3 repectively and v4, v5, v6, v7, v8
to denote A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 respectively. We denote the adjacency matrix of
G as W, where W = [wij] ∈RN×N is a symmetric non-negative matrix of
pairwise affinities among vertices (note that N = |A| + |U| and wii = 0). Let
D = diag(d1, d2, ..., dN) with di = P
j wij as the degree of vertex i and define
the Laplacian of G as L = D −W. We define the transition matrix of a graph,
denoted by T as:
T(vi, vj) =
if (vi, vj) ̸∈ξ
if (vi, vj) ∈ξ
For instance, the transition matrix of the graph in Figure 4 is:
T = D−1 · W =
0 1/3 1/3 1/3 0
0 1/4 1/4 1/4 1/4
1/3 1/3 1/3 0
1/2 0 1/2 0
In some scenarios of push services, the graph has to be updated frequently. Online
news recommendation is such a scenario, as the hot spots can be changed at
any time. While in some other scenarios, the graph needs to be updated less
frequently, such as recommendation in application market. Because users’ interest
is not varying much from time to time. Hence, in our application scenario (i.e.,
app recommendation), we re-construct graph weekly with the most up-to-date
information, which takes a few hours.
Huifeng Guo et al.
Graph Mining Algorithms
After the user-app graph being constructed, the second step is Graph Mining,
which plays a critical role in Application Layer of PSP. In this section, we present
the details of Graph Mining Algorithms, including motivation and principle. This
essential part mines the potential related users to a pre-defined message which
contains a set of apps.
Motivation of PARW In this section, we present the motivation behind our
graph-based algorithm. A naive way in the graph-based methods of mining user
group involves two steps: firstly, label all the apps that are related to the given
topic, and then select the users who have installed the apps labelled in the first
step as the result. For example, suppose there is a mission to find a group of
music lovers based on a graph in Figure 4. Assume that, we label A1 and A3 as
the apps that are developed for music lovers, then it is straightforward to find
the users who have installed these two apps, namely, U1 and U3.
However, there are two serious problems with this naive graph-based approach,
as stated in . First of all, the approach relies heavily on manual labeling of
the apps, which is too expensive to manually label all the apps belonging to a
specific category and limited to different business demands. Secondly the naive
approach gives no ranking information which is critical for some applications.
For example, for two promotion activities with different numbers but the same
type of labelled apps, we cannot separate a subset from target user group with
respect to the similarity with labelled apps.
In our earlier work , we applied PPR for the same purpose which does
not rely on the labeling of all related apps and can generate the sorted user list
according to their similarities with the corresponding apps in the pre-defined
messages. The user-app relationship bipartite graph G introduced in Section 3.1
can be viewed as representing the similarity between users by considering the
overlapped apps they have installed (on the other hand, also representing the
similarities between apps by considering the overlapped users who have installed
these apps), therefore starting from a small set of manually-labeled seed apps6,
the other related apps and also users who are interested in these apps can be
mined from the G as well as their similarities to the seeds apps.
However, the drawback of PPR is that it tends to neglect the relevant semiactive users even though it captures the relevant active users well. Ative users
download spontaneously with high probability no matter receiving push messages
or not. But there is a significant impact on semi-active users due to the fact that
semi-active users do not enter Application Market very often. In Figure 5, we
present the detailed procedure of selecting target users by PPR, starting from
seed app A2 (namely, vertex v5 ) in Figure 4. Intuitively, U2 (namely, vertex v2)
is more revelent than U3 (namely, vertex v3) to A2, since U2 only downloaded A2
while U3 downloaded not only A2 but also A3, A4, A5. However, we can observe
from the computation procedure of PPR that the more relevant user (namely,
6 Seed apps are labeled manually and are presented explicitly in the push message.
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
U2) is disregarded because its similarity score is taken away by the higher-degree
user (namely, U3).
Therefore we need an algorithm that could mine relevant semi-active users
according to the given push message. This motivates us to take a graph-based
algorithm which is able to highlight community structure to generate the sorted
user list according to their similarities with the corresponding push massage
(namely, a few manually labelled seed apps). In the following part, we present
such an algorithm, A-PARW.
Fig. 5: An example of computation procedure of PPR algorithm
A-PARW Algorithm As stated in the previous section, we initially label a set
of apps, which are referred as seed apps and denoted by S. We aim to find target
user group for such seed apps. A-PARW is a approximate version of Partially
absorbing Random Walk Algorithm (for short, PARW in our earlier work ).
We give the formulation of PARW in Equation 2.
R⊤= I⊤· (Λ + L)−1 · Λ
where R is the rank score vector starting from S, L is the Laplacian of the
given graph, Λ = diag(λ1, λ2, ..., λN) is a diagonal matrix with λ1, λ2, ..., λN
being arbitrary non-negative numbers, I denotes a vector of I(v) over all the
vertices, I(v) is the initial value of vertex v initializing as:
such that the sum of initial scores of all vertices equals to 1.
PARW is a random walk style graph-based algorithm. In PARW, a random
walk is absorbed at state i with probability pi, and is transferred via a random
edge of state i with probability 1 −pi. We proved in that a random walk
starting from a set of low conductance vertices (referred as SP) is most likely
Huifeng Guo et al.
absorbed in SP if the Λ = α · I (where I is an identity matrix and α is a small
positive value). We denote the case of Λ = α · I as PARW-I. One property of
PARW-I is that the absorption probability varies slowly within SP, and drops
sharply outside SP. This property suggests that PARW-I is able to capture the
global community structure.
Fig. 6: An running example of PARW-I algorithm
In Figure 6, iteration 0 suggests that high degree vertex v3 and low degree
vertex v2 have the same probability to get score from the seed node v5. However,
v2 absorbs more score than v3 because the user representing by v2 only installs
A2 (namely, vertex v5), which means he is more interested in A2. Actually, v5
λ+3 score to every neighbour, while the absorbing rate of v2 is
λ+1, which is strictly greater than
λ+4 of v3.
On the other hand, we showed in that D mode of PARW (Λ = α · D) is
equivalent to PPR . Furthermore, we show that D mode of PARW is the same
as PPR . Equation 4 is the formulation of PPR.
R∗⊤= α · R⊤· T + 1 −α
where α is a decay factor.
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
We show the equivalence between D mode of PARW and PPR by transforming
the formulation of PPR to D mode of PARW.
R∗⊤= α · R⊤· T + (1 −α) · (1
= α · R⊤· D−1 · W + (1 −α) · I
= R⊤· Λ−1 · W · (Λ + D)−1 · Λ + I
′⊤· (Λ + D)−1 · Λ
∴R⊤· Λ−1 · (Λ + D) = R⊤· Λ−1 · W + I
R⊤· Λ−1 · (Λ + L) = I
′⊤· (Λ + L)−1 · Λ
where Λ = (1 −α)/α · D, L = D −W, I
2 · (1N/N + I), and R∗equals R
after enough iterations.
Algorithm 1 dry=A-PARW(s, Λ, γ)
◃approximate algorithm of parw
Input: A start seed s, the regularization parameter Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λn}, and a tolerance
threshold γ
Output: A-PARW vector dry
1: Initialize dry = 0 and run = {(s, 1)}
2: while run is not empty do
pop a queue run element (i, w)
dryi = dryi +
if w < γ · di then
for all links (i, j) ∈ξ do
if pair (j, s) ∈run then
add a new pair (j,
λi+di ) to run
15: end while
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no scalable implementation
of PARW algorithm. Therefore we propose a flow-based approximation of PARW
in Algorithm 1 motivated by and followed the iterative formula of PARW.
Our algorithm maintains a pair of vectors run and dry, starting with the trivial
approximation of dry = 0 and run = I (Line 1), and then applies a series of push
operations which transfers probabilities from run to dry while keeps no transfer
out of dry . At a vertex vi, a push operation transfers λi/(λi + di) fraction of the
vertex’s probability from run to dryi (Line 3-4), and then equally distributes the
Huifeng Guo et al.
remaining di/(λi + di) fraction of runi to vi’s neighbours (Line 8-14). To ensure
the amount of probability is moved each step and to allow us control the number
of push operations, our algorithm performs push operations only on the vertices
where runi ≥γ · di (Line 5-7).
Filtering Rule
In real-life scenario, the target user list, which is mined through Graph Mining
Algorithms, includes some users who are not suitable to sent push messages
due to various reasons. Therefore we can define some practical filtering rules to
filter them. For instance, we should not select users who disable the function of
receiving push messages, or we may not want to send message to the users who
visit Hispace Store every day, etc. This module of PSP will filter the target user
list generated by the graph-based algorithm through the pre-defined rules.
On-line Service
In the on-line part, the on-line Push Service sends the message to the selected
users and uses the user’s feedback data to help us refine the push strategy.
Firstly, if the push service is enabled on the user’s phone as well as the phone
is connected to the internet, the messages can be delivered to the user’s phone
and the title of the message will be shown as an alert on the notification center .
After that, target users will receive message in their phone as shown in Figure 1a,
and then users may neglect the message or click on it.
After clicking the message, users will enter into the specific page of Hispace
Store or even download apps contained in the message. For example, when a
music fans receiving an alert about music Apps on her smart phone’s notification
center (e.g., as the second message shown in Figure 1a), she takes a look at music
apps in the display page (e.g., as in Figure 1c), after clicking the alert message.
In the end, we utilize users’ feedback to generate market strategies and filtering
rules. For example, we are more likely to send message of a music-like activity to
a user who has clicked the music push activity before, and we are less likely to
send a push message to a user who have never clicked any push message bofore.
Computing Engine
As presented in Section 3.1-Section 3.4, there is a variety of computing tasks in
Application Layer, such as raw data extraction in graph construction and target
user grouping in graph mining. It is well known that data extraction is easy
to parallel because computation is independent among different pieces of data.
However, due to the dependencies between vertices in a graph, graph mining
is very different from ordinary calculation. Therefore we choose MapReduce
as general computing engine, and select more suitable graph engines for graph
mining. To meet different practical needs, we select VENUS and PowerGraph
as our graph engines. Specifically, VENUS is a disk-based graph engine, so it
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
can be used when the memory is limited; on the contrary, PowerGraph is a
memory-based distributed graph engine, therefore it could support more efficient
calculation when memory is large enough. We implement both versions (presented
in this section) in PSP for different situations.
Implementation of PARW We designed A-PARW based on VENUS for single
machine and PowerGraph for a distributed cluster. PowerGraph is a memorybased graph computing engine which is very efficient with sufficient memory, while
VENUS is a disk-based engine which needs only limited memory but not very
efficient compared to PowerGraph. In this section, we give the implementation of
the updatefunction on VENUS and the applyfunction on PowerGraph for each
vertex in Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3, respectively.
Algorithm 2 function update on venus
Input: vertex v, initial score [v.run,v.dry], stop threshold γ, the regularization parameter Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λn}
Output: updated value of v
1: v.dry+ =
λv+dv × v.run
2: for u ∈v.neighbour do
if u.run > γ · du then
λu+du × u.run
6: end for
7: return v.runflow,v.dryflow.
As shown in Algorithm 2, the A-PARW algorithm is implemented in the
update function of VENUS. Firstly, we initialize the run = Ii before the first
iteration. Then we transfer
λv+dv from run to dry (Line 1). For each iteration,
if the run of any neighbour u of v is larger than γ · du, we transfer
λu+du from
runu to runv (Line 2-5).
Different from update function on VENUS, A-PARW on PowerGraph (shown
in Algorithm 3) executes procedure init, apply and scatter sequentially. init
initializes run at first iteration and updates it by the summed up the map value
from last remaining scatter (Line 3-11). After that, it updates run and dry of
vertex v in procedure apply (Line 12-17) and procedure scatter pushes remaining
run value to the neighbours if the remnant is larger than γ (Line 18-24).
To end this section, we discuss how we choose the parameters of the algorithms.
As discussed in , the smaller regularization parameter α we selected, the
better of performance PARW-I achieved. However, due to the large scale of our
User-APP graph, extremely small α would bring computing error, resulted by
overflow. Therefore, we choose a relative small α = 0.01 to obtain both better
performance and computation reliability.
In A-PARW, dry is almost equivalent to PARW results when the run is less
than γ after n iterations when
n ≈γ , where ¯d is the average degree. It
Huifeng Guo et al.
can be calculated that n is a particularly large number when α and γ are both
small. Luckily, we found that in the actual push service, run doesn’t have to flow
everything to dry, only one thousandth or even less would be enough to get good
approximate result. As a result, we set γ to be 10−8 and select a limited number
of iterations (i.e., 20) as A-PARW-I’s stop condition. It is demonstrated to be
good enough in our scenario.
Algorithm 3 a-parw on powergraph
1: Data: run_map is a map and run_map[u] represents runflowu(v)
2: Data: dry_map is a map and dry_map[u] represents dryflowu(v)
3: procedure init(v)
if first iteration then
if v ∈S then
run_map[v] ←I(v)
run_map ←prev_run
11: end procedure
12: procedure apply(v)
for all key-value pair(w, t) >∈run_map do
dry_map[w] ←dry_map +
run_map[w] ←
17: end procedure
18: procedure scatter(v)
for all key-value pair(w, t) >∈run_map do
if w ≥γ then
send run_map to vertex u where(v, u) ∈ξ
24: end procedure
Comparison of PowerGraph and VENUS In this section, we prepare the
efficiency performance of A-PARW-I, implementing on PowerGraph and VENUS
respectively. When the push activity is not very urgent and the memory resource
is limited, we can choose the VENUS implementation. However, if the push
activity is urgent, and even worse we have to handle tens or hundreds of push
activities in a short period, it is better to choose the PowerGraph implementation.
In order to compare the efficiency of the two versions of implementation,
we run experiments on twitter-graph , which contains 41,652,230 vertices
and 1,468,364,884 edges. The parameters are set to be the same as in the real
push activities (as stated in the previous section). We run the experiments on
a server with two eight-core Intel Xeon E5-2650 2.60 GHz processors, 377 GB
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
RAM, and 20 TB hard disk, with Ubuntu 14.04. To compare fairly, we disable the
distribute-mode of PowerGraph. The evaluation results are presented in Table 1.
To process one push activity, PowerGraph needs only 6.79 seconds, while VENUS
needs around 40 minutes. For 10 push activities, PowerGraph uses around 13
seconds, while VENUS have to run more than 6 hours. If we need 100 push
activities, PowerGraph is able to return the results in less then 50 seconds, and we
do not test it on VENUS as it needs several days to get the precise timing. Since
VENUS runs the push activities one by one, therefore we can expect VENUS to
finish 100 push activities in two or three days.
Table 1: Running Time (in seconds) of A-PARW-I on PowerGraph and VENUS
No. of push activities
PowerGraph
2307.00 22588.90 N.A.
Experiment
In this section, we firstly describe two datasets used in our experiments as well
as evaluation metrics in Section 4.1. Next, we compare the experimental results
of A-PARW-I and PPR on the two datasets, in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3
respectively.
Data Set Description and Experiment Setting
We evaluated A-PARW algorithms on two datasets. One dataset is MovieLens
7, collected by GroupLens Research. While the other dataset is collected from
Hispace Store in mainland China 8. The difference between A-PARW-I and PPR
is verified on both datasets, while evaluation on the real-life datasets furthermore
demonstrated the effectiveness of A-PARW-I. To start with, in this subsection,
we will provide a concrete description of these two datasets, as well as that of
the experiment setting.
Public Dataset and Experiment Setting As we discussed in Section 3,
PARW-I is able to identify more semi-active users than PPR because PARW-I
considers global community structure, rather than inclining high-degree nodes as
PPR does. In other words, PPR prefers to rank high-degree nodes on the top,
compared to PARW-I.
One way to verify this property is comparing degree distributions of usernodes, sorting by the two algorithms. In order to illustrate this property, we ran
7 
8 
Huifeng Guo et al.
PPR and A-PARW-I on MovieLens dataset and compared degree trends of their
ranking lists.
Table 2: Statistics Description of MovieLens Dataset
MovieLens 100k MovieLens 1m MovieLens 10m MovieLens 20m
No. Movies
No. ratings
10,000,054
20,000,263
Different copies of the MovieLens dataset were available online. They are
collected over different periods, resulting in different sizes. MovieLens dataset
includes seven such copies and we used four of them, namely MovieLens 100K,
MovieLens 1M, MovieLens 10M and MovieLens 20M. In Table 2, the statistics
description of the copies that we used is presented.
To construct a user-movie bi-partite graph from MovieLens dataset following
the method in Section 3, we separated users and movies to two kinds of nodes and
there exists an edge (i, j) if user i rates movie j. Next we randomly selected 1 (or
10 or 100) movie-nodes as seed nodes. Starting with the selected seed nodes, we
ran PPR and A-PARW-I to get the degree distribution of the user nodes ranking
by the two algorithms, respectively. Note that each experiment we repeated 50
times to eliminate the affect of random choices of seed nodes. The result will be
presented in Section 4.2. Also note that for experiments on both public dataset
and real-life dataset, we set the number of iterations of A-PARW algorithms to
Real-Life Dataset and Experiment Setting Besides running the algorithms
on a public dataset (i.e., MovieLens), we also performed experiments on a
commercial dataset from Hispace Store in mainland China (we refer to this
dataset as APPData). According to IDC 9, Huawei was the third largest global
smartphone manufacturer in Q3 2016. The log servers of Hispace Store record
the information about users downloading apps at every and each moment. We
select the complete downloading log from 2015/03/01 to 2015/08/31. Table 3
describes statistics of the dataset. We constructed a bi-partite graph on the basis
of APPData, in a similar way as we did on the MovieLens dataset: there exits an
edge between user i and app j if user i downloaded app j during the period that
we considered.
We implemented the two A-PARW algorithms (namely A-PARW-I and PPR)
on the VENUS . We firstly conducted experiments to evaluate the effectiveness
of PARW-I, then we also perform experiments to verify the property of A-PARW-I
and PPR (as discussed in Section 3).
Our experiments on APPData include both off-line and on-line evaluation.
Firstly, we describe the off-line evaluation method. For off-line evaluation purpose,
9 
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
Table 3: Dataset from a commercial App Market
96,324,654
1,778,160,959
March.1 - August.31 2015
we collected users’ feedback of nine push activities from Hispace Store, for which
the selected user lists were generated by PPR. The topics of these push activities
are present in Table 4. We referred the users’ feedback as the ground truth to
compare the effectiveness of PPR and A-PARW-I. After receiving a push message
of apps, an interested user may click on it, or even download the recommended
apps. Therefore, we can distinguish the cases of clicking and downloading, as
follows: we refer a sample that the user clicked (downloaded, respectively) the
recommended advertisement as positive, and a sample of the opposite case as
negative. We ran PPR and A-PARW-I on APPData, and got top 1 million users
as well as their ranking scores, respectively. In the off-line experiment, we adopt
AUC (Area under ROC Curve) as the evaluation metric.
Table 4: The description of off-line topics
Name music camera instrument ticket listen book travel goodnight read internet
In the on-line evaluation, we sent push messages to the same number of top
users ranked by A-PARW-I and PPR, respectively. Making sure to receive the
feedback from the majority of the users after two days, we compared the number
of users who clicked (or downloaded) the recommended apps, across the two
sets of users picked by the two algorithms. We use CTR (click-through ratio) 
and also DTR (download-through ratio) as the online evaluation metrics. In our
scenario, CTR and DTR are defined as follows:
CTR = No. of users who ever clicked ads
No. of users who ever received ads
DTR = No. of users who ever downloaded ads
No. of users who ever received ads
Evaluation on Public Dataset
Recall that in Section 3, we stated that compared to A-PARW-I, PPR prefers to
rank nodes with high degree on the top. In this section, we verify this statement
empirically, i.e., we ran PPR and A-PARW-I on MovieLens dataset and compared
Huifeng Guo et al.
degree distribution of their ranking list. More specifically, we random selected x
movie-nodes as seed nodes (we have different cases of x = 1, x = 10, x = 100),
then we ran PPR and A-PARW-I to generate user lists by ranking the scores,
and lastly we are able to get the degree distribution of the user lists. For the ease
of presentation, we integrate the user-nodes in the ordered user lists into 2,000
equal-size buckets (the size of each bucket is ⌊Number_of_Nodes
⌋). We define the
degree of each bucket as the average degree of the users included in this bucket.
In Figure 7, we present the degree distribution of the results of PPR and
A-PARW-I on different copies of MovieLens dataset. In Figure 7a, Figure 7b and
Figure 7c, we present the evaluation result on MovieLens 100k (refer to Table 2),
and the number of seed nodes is 1, 10 and 100, respectively. From Figure 7d to
Figure 7f, from Figure 7g to Figure 7i and from Figure 7m to Figure 7o, we show
the evaluation results on MovieLens 1m, MovieLens 10m and MovieLens 20m,
respectively. The overall distribution on MovieLens 10m (i.e., from Figure 7g to
Figure 7i) and MovieLens 20m (i.e., from Figure 7m to Figure 7o) is not clear
for us to observe interesting findings. Therefore, we zoom into the tails of curves,
as shown from Figure 7j to Figure 7l and from Figure 7p to Figure 7r. Every
figure reports the corresponding result by repeating the experiment 50 times,
in order to eliminate the affect of random choices of seed nodes. In each figure,
x-axis represents the bucket identifier and y-axis the degree of the corresponding
bucket. The blue curve is the degree distribution of the users list generated by
PPR, while the red curve represents that of A-PARW-I.
It can be observed from Figure 7 that the degree distribution of users list by
PPR (the blue curve) is higher than A-PARW-I (the red curve) at beginning,
and then blue curve decreases rapidly and at last the blue curve lays below the
red one. In addition, the degree distribution of A-PARW-I (the red curve) is
more steady and stable except for a few of buckets near the tail. The reason for
this exception is that the scores of high degree irrelevant nodes could be larger
than the scores of low degree irrelevant nodes.
This observation is consistent with the discussion in Section 3. It can be
further implied that PPR prefers to higher degree user-nodes which results in
losing semi-active users (whose degree is not very high). In contrast, A-PARW-I
is suitable to capture semi-active users because it prefers community structure,
rather than high degree nodes.
Evaluation on Real-Life Dataset
To evaluate the effectiveness of A-PARW-I in a real-world recommender system,
we compare the performance between PPR and A-PARW-I, by running off-line
experiment on 9 push activities and on-line experiment on 2 push activities
through Hispace Store’s push service. Note that the effectiveness of PPR is
demonstrated by our previous work .
Off-line Evaluation In off-line experiment, we compare the performance of
A-PARW-I with PPR by comparing the ranking accuracy of their result list (we
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
(a) MovieLens 100k with 1
(b) MovieLens 100k with 10
(c) MovieLens 100k with 100
(d) MovieLens 1m with 1
(e) MovieLens 1m with 10
(f) MovieLens 1m with 100
(g) MovieLens 10m with 1
(h) MovieLens 10m with 10
(i) MovieLens 10m with 100
(j) Zoom in Figure 7g
(k) Zoom in Figure 7h
(l) Zoom in Figure 7i
(m) MovieLens 20m with 1
(n) MovieLens 20m with 10
(o) MovieLens 20m with 100
(p) Zoom in Figure 7m
(q) Zoom in Figure 7n
(r) Zoom in Figure 7o
Fig. 7: Evaluation Results on MovieLens
Huifeng Guo et al.
get top 1 million users from their result list). We use AUC as the evaluation
metrics. The ground truth is determined by user feedback (click, download, or
nothing), collected from log server of Hispace Store.
In Figure 8, we present click AUC and download AUC improvement of A-
PARW-I over PPR on the 9 push activities. In each figure, x-axis represents topic
name of the push activity while y-axis is AUC improvement.
As can be observed, the performance of A-PARW-I is better than PPR
at all the 9 push activities, on both click and download cases. Moreover, the
improvement of A-PARW-I over PPR is more significant on download case,
compared to the click case. The improvement of A-PARW-I comes from the fact
that A-PARW-I pays more attention to graph community information while PPR
over considers degree of nodes in the graph; in other words A-PARW-I could find
more semi-active user-nodes, which are of low degree but highly relevant to push
activities, compared to PPR.
Fig. 8: The AUC improvement of A-PARW-I over PPR
On-line Evaluation In this section, we perform A-PARW-I and PPR algorithms
in user selection for two different on-line push activities through Huawei’s push
service. Two lists of users are obtained by the two algorithms respectively, and
the activity messages are push to these users 10. Interested users may click the
message to see the details of the apps or perform further actions.
We calculated CTR (click-through rate) and DTR (download-through rate)
from the log data of user feedbacks. For comparison, we define CTR+ and DTR+
as the improvement of A-PARW-I over PPR. The detail improvement values are
presented in Table 5. More specifically, in Figure 9a and 9b, the CTR and DTR
of A-PARW-I and PPR of the two on-line push service are shown. As we can see,
the performance of A-PARW-I is significantly higher than PPR for both click
and download in the two online push activities.
10 Duplicated users in the two lists are only pushed the message once.
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
Table 5: Online improvement of A-PARW-I over PPR
(a) CTR comparison
(b) DTR comparison
Fig. 9: Online performance
Property of PARW In this subsection, we analyse the property of A-PARW-I
and PPR from the view point of push service. The vital distinction of the two
different A-PARW-based algorithms is that A-PARW-I pay more attention to
graph community information and PPR over considers the degree of nodes in
the graph. To verify this observation, we study the tendency of CTR/DTR and
degree of the user-nodes selected by the two algorithms, sorting by the scores.
– Tendency of CTR/DTR in sorted-steady-distribution Figure 10 shows
the tendency of CTR and DTR of two on-line push activities. More specifically, Figure 10a, Figure 10b, Figure 10c and Figure 10d represent tendency
of activity ticket’s CTR, activity music’s CTR, ticket’s DTR and music’s
DTR. In the figures, x-axis is the bucket identifier (each bucket includes
100,000 users) and y-axis as the CTR (respectively DTR) of the buckets. As
we see, both PPR and A-PARW-I curves have high CTR and DTR value at
beginning. However, PPR curve drops more dramatically than A-PARW-I
curve; moreover, PPR’s CTR and DTR sometimes increase at the tail of
the curve. Compared to PPR, A-PARW-I is more stable and steady, which
means that A-PARW-I selects the users who are more relevant to the push
activity and the ranking of the users are more reliable.
– Change of degree in sorted-steady-distribution Figure 11a and Figure 11b present the degree’s tendency of A-PARW-I and PPR in the activity
of ticket and music respectively, where x-axis is the bucket identifier (each
bucket includes 100,000 users) and y-axis is total degree of the users in the
buckets. As we can see, the tendency of both red and blue curves are similar
acorss the two figures. The PPR curve is higher than the A-PARW-I curve
at first. However, PPR curve drops rapidly and A-PARW-I curve is more
Huifeng Guo et al.
(a) CTR tendency of activity ticket(b) CTR tendency of activity music
(c) DTR tendency of activity ticket(d) DTR tendency of activity music
Fig. 10: Tendency of CTR/DTR
smooth and steady. It can be concluded from this two figures that PPR
is prefers high-degree nodes while A-PARW-I considers global community
structure.
Related Work
In pull-mode recommendation, such as , user could not receive latest updating
before he/she enters Application Market. Compared to pull-mode recommendation, push-mode recommendation pushes specific messages to users according to
its characteristics and does not require users to enter the system. The push recommendation with accurate user group selection is able to rebuild or strengthen
the connection between Application Market and users.
The crucial part of push-mode is target user group discovery, which can be
solved by rule-based , CF-based and graph-based approaches. However,
the rule-based methods can not take advantage of collaborative information among
users, because it needs a set of rules that is defined so that the accuracy rate
is low and not flexible enough. The CF-based methods tend to be ineffective in
real-world scenarios because it requires a great deal interactions of users and
tags, which is very problematic due to the sparsity of data.
In graph-based approach, PageRank is a well known link analysis algorithm used by Google to rank websites according to their importance. There
are many variants of PageRank, such as TrustRank which is able to find
A Graph-based Push Service Platform
(a) degree tendency of activity ticket
(b) degree tendency of activity music
Fig. 11: Tendency of users’ degree
non-spam pages, sensitive PageRank which mines personalized page and
WTF which is used to recommend friends in Twitter. However, PageRank
based approach is biased to high-degree vertices. The authors of propose
a unified framework of graph mining which include a new algorithm PARW-I
and personalized PageRank. PARW-I can capture the community structure to
overcome the weakness of PageRank. We design a approximate version of PARW,
namely A-PARW, in our system.
Conclusions
In this paper. we introduced Huawei Push Service Platform (shortly, PSP), a
platform which performs push-mode recommendation by selecting target user
group for a given push message, including potential users mining, online pushing,
feedback caching and evaluation. In addition, we proposed a practical approximate
version of PARW (namely A-PARW) for potential users mining. We presented a
detail analysis between different modes of A-PARW algorithm based on our User-
APP graph both theoretically and empirically. A-PARW captures community
structure from User-APP graph and is not biased to high degree vertices, when
Λ = α · I. We demonstrated that A-PARW-I is able to target the most relevant
potential users and improves the performance of push service. As a live system,
PSP supports the push-mode recommendation in Hispace Store.