DOTA: A Large-scale Dataset for Object Detection in Aerial Images∗
Gui-Song Xia1†, Xiang Bai2†, Jian Ding1, Zhen Zhu2, Serge Belongie3,
Jiebo Luo4, Mihai Datcu5, Marcello Pelillo6, Liangpei Zhang1
1Wuhan University, 2Huazhong Univ. Sci. and Tech. 3Cornell University,
4Rochester University, 5German Aerospace Center (DLR), 6University of Venice
{guisong.xia, jian.ding, zlp62}@whu.edu.cn, {xbai, zzhu}@hust.edu.cn
 , , , 
Object detection is an important and challenging problem in computer vision.
Although the past decade has
witnessed major advances in object detection in natural
scenes, such successes have been slow to aerial imagery,
not only because of the huge variation in the scale, orientation and shape of the object instances on the earth’s surface, but also due to the scarcity of well-annotated datasets
of objects in aerial scenes. To advance object detection research in Earth Vision, also known as Earth Observation
and Remote Sensing, we introduce a large-scale Dataset for
Object deTection in Aerial images (DOTA). To this end, we
collect 2806 aerial images from different sensors and platforms. Each image is of the size about 4000 × 4000 pixels and contains objects exhibiting a wide variety of scales,
orientations, and shapes. These DOTA images are then annotated by experts in aerial image interpretation using 15
common object categories. The fully annotated DOTA images contains 188, 282 instances, each of which is labeled
by an arbitrary (8 d.o.f.) quadrilateral. To build a baseline
for object detection in Earth Vision, we evaluate state-ofthe-art object detection algorithms on DOTA. Experiments
demonstrate that DOTA well represents real Earth Vision
applications and are quite challenging.
1. Introduction
Object detection in Earth Vision refers to localizing objects of interest (e.g., vehicles, airplanes) on the earth’s surface and predicting their categories. In contrast to conventional object detection datasets, where objects are generally oriented upward due to gravity, the object instances in
aerial images often appear with arbitrary orientations, as illustrated in Fig. 1, depending on the perspective of the Earth
Vision platforms.
∗DOTA website is 
†Equal contribution
roundabout
#Instances
#Instances
Figure 1: An example taken from DOTA. (a) Typical image in DOTA consisting of many instances across multiple
categories. (b) Illustration of the variety in instance orientation and size. (c),(d) Illustration of sparse instances and
crowded instances, respectively. Here we show four out of
ﬁfteen of the possible categories in DOTA. Examples shown
in (b),(c),(d) are cropped from source image (a). The histograms (e),(f) exhibit the distribution of instances with respect to size and orientation in DOTA.
Extensive studies have been devoted to object detection
in aerial images ,
drawing upon recent advances in Computer Vision and accounting for the high demands of Earth Vision applications.
Most of these methods attempt to transfer object detection algorithms developed for natural scenes to the
aerial image domain. Recently, driven by the successes of
deep learning-based algorithms for object detection, Earth
Vision researchers have pursued approaches based on ﬁnetuning networks pre-trained on large-scale image datasets
(e.g., ImageNet and MSCOCO ) for detection in the
aerial domain, see e.g. .
While such ﬁne-tuning based approaches are a reasonable avenue to explore, images such as Fig. 1 reveals that
the task of object detection in aerial images is distinguished
from the conventional object detection task:
- The scale variations of object instances in aerial images are huge. This is not only because of the spatial
resolutions of sensors, but also due to the size variations inside the same object category.
- Many small object instances are crowded in aerial images, for example, the ships in a harbor and the vehicles in a parking lot, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Moreover,
the frequencies of instances in aerial images are unbalanced, for instance, some small-size (e.g. 1k × 1k)
images contain 1900 instances, while some large-size
images (e.g. 4k × 4k) may contain only a handful of
small instances.
- Objects in aerial images often appear in arbitrary orientations. There are also some instances with an extremely large aspect ratio, such as a bridge.
Besides these difﬁculties, the studies of object detection
in Earth Vision are also challenged by the dataset bias problem , i.e. the degree of generalizability across datasets
is often low. To alleviate such biases, the dataset should be
annotated to reﬂect the demands of real world applications.
Therefore, it is not surprising that the object detectors
learned from natural images are not suitable for aerial images. However, existing annotated datasets for object detection in aerial images, such as UCAS-AOD and NWPU
VHR-10 , tend to use images in ideal conditions (clear
backgrounds and without densely distributed instances),
which cannot adequately reﬂect the problem complexity.
To advance the object detection research in Earth Vision,
this paper introduces a large-scale Dataset for Object de-
Tection in Aerial images (DOTA). We collect 2806 aerial
images from different sensors and platforms with crowdsourcing. Each image is of the size about 4k × 4k pixels and contains objects of different scales, orientations and
shapes. These DOTA images are annotated by experts in
aerial image interpretation, with respect to 15 common object categories. The fully annotated DOTA dataset contains
188,282 instances, each of which is labeled by an arbitrary
quadrilateral, instead of an axis-aligned bounding box, as is
typically used for object annotation in natural scenes. The
main contributions of this work are:
- To our knowledge, DOTA is the largest annotated object dataset with a wide variety of categories in Earth
Vision.1 It can be used to develop and evaluate object
1The DIUx xView Detection Challenge with more categories and instances opened in Feb. 2018: 
detectors in aerial images. We will continue to update
DOTA, to grow in size and scope and to reﬂect evolving real world conditions.
- We also benchmark state-of-the-art object detection algorithms on DOTA, which can be used as the baseline
for future algorithm development.
In addition to advancing object detection studies in Earth
Vision, DOTA will also pose interesting algorithmic questions to conventional object detection in computer vision.
2. Motivations
Datasets have played an important role in data-driven research in recent years . Large datasets
like MSCOCO are instrumental in promoting object
detection and image captioning research. When it comes to
the classiﬁcation task and scene recognition task, the same
is true for ImageNet and Places , respectively.
However, in aerial object detection, a dataset resembling
MSCOCO and ImageNet both in terms of image number
and detailed annotations has been missing, which becomes
one of the main obstacles to the research in Earth Vision,
especially for developing deep learning-based algorithms.
Aerial object detection is extremely helpful for remote object tracking and unmanned driving. Therefore, a largescale and challenging aerial object detection benchmark,
being as close as possible to real-world applications, is imperative for promoting research in this ﬁeld.
We argue that a good aerial image dataset should possess
four properties, namely, 1) a large number of images, 2)
many instances per categories, 3) properly oriented object
annotation, and 4) many different classes of objects, which
make it approach to real-world applications. However, existing aerial image datasets share in common several shortcomings: insufﬁcient data and classes,
lack of detailed annotations, as well as low image resolution. Moreover, their complexity is inadequate to be considered as a reﬂection of the real world.
Datasets like TAS , VEDAI , COWC 
and DLR 3K Munich Vehicle only focus on vehicles. UCAS-AOD contains vehicles and planes while
HRSC2016 only contains ships even though ﬁnegrained category information are given. All these datasets
are short in the number of classes, which restricts their
applicabilities to complicated scenes. In contrast, NWPU
VHR-10 is composed of ten different classes of objects
while its total number of instances is only around 3000. Detailed comparisons of these existing datasets are shown in
Tab. 1. Compared to these aerial datasets, as we shall see
in Section 4, DOTA is challenging for its tremendous object
instances, arbitrary but well-distributed orientations, various categories and complicated aerial scenes. Moreover,
scenes in DOTA is in coincidence with natural scenes, so
DOTA is more helpful for real-world applications.
Annotation way
#main categories
#Instances
Image width
NWPU VHR-10 
horizontal BB
SZTAKI-INRIA 
oriented BB
horizontal BB
2000∼19,000
VEDAI 
oriented BB
UCAS-AOD 
oriented BB
HRSC2016 
oriented BB
3K Vehicle Detection 
oriented BB
oriented BB
Table 1: Comparison among DOTA and object detection datasets in aerial images. BB is short for bounding box. One-dot
refers to annotations with only the center coordinates of an instance provided. Fine-grained categories are not taken into
account. For example, DOTA consists of 15 different categories but only 14 main categories, because small vehicle and large
vehicle are both sub-categories of vehicle.
When it comes to general objects datasets, ImageNet and
MSCOCO are favored due to the large number of images,
many categories and detailed annotations. ImageNet has
the largest number of images among all object detection
datasets. However, the average number of instances per image is far smaller than MSCOCO and our DOTA, plus the
limitations of its clean backgrounds and carefully selected
scenes. Images in DOTA contain an extremely large number
of object instances, some of which have more than 1,000 instances. PASCAL VOC Dataset is similar to ImageNet
in instances per image and scenes but the inadequate number of images makes it unsuitable to handle most detection
needs. Our DOTA resembles MSCOCO in terms of the instance numbers and scene types, but DOTA’s categories are
not as many as MSCOCO because objects which can be
seen clearly in aerial images are quite limited.
Besides, what makes DOTA unique among the above
mentioned large-scale general object detection benchmarks
is that the objects in DOTA are annotated with properly oriented bounding boxes (OBB for short). OBB can better
enclose the objects and differentiate crowded objects from
each other. The beneﬁts of annotating objects in aerial images with OBB are further described in Section 3. We draw
a comparison among DOTA, PASCAL VOC, ImageNet and
MSCOCO to show the differences in Tab. 2.
PASCAL VOC
 
(2017train)
Table 2: Comparison among DOTA and other general object detection datasets. BBox is short for bounding boxes,
Avg. BBox quantity indicates average bounding box quantity per image. Note that for the average number of instances per image, DOTA surpasses other datasets hugely.
3. Annotation of DOTA
3.1. Images collection
In aerial images, the resolution and variety of sensors being used are factors to produce dataset biases . To eliminate the biases, images in our dataset are collected from
multiple sensors and platforms (e.g. Google Earth) with
multiple resolutions. To increase the diversity of data, we
collect images shot in multiple cities carefully chosen by
experts in aerial image interpretation. We record the exact
geographical coordinates of the location and capture time of
each image to ensure there are no duplicate images.
3.2. Category selection
Fifteen categories are chosen and annotated in our DOTA
dataset, including plane, ship, storage tank, baseball diamond, tennis court, swimming pool, ground track ﬁeld, harbor, bridge, large vehicle, small vehicle, helicopter, roundabout, soccer ball ﬁeld and basketball court.
The categories are selected by experts in aerial image interpretation according to whether a kind of objects is common and its value for real-world applications.
10 categories are common in the existing datasets, e.g.,
 , We keep them all except that we further
split vehicle into large ones and small ones because there
is obvious difference between these two sub-categories in
aerial images. Others are added mainly from the values in
real applications. For example, we select helicopter considering that moving objects are of signiﬁcant importance
in aerial images. Roundabout is chosen because it plays an
important role in roadway analysis.
It is worth discussing whether to take “stuff” categories
into account. There are usually no clear deﬁnitions for the
”stuff” categories (e.g. harbor, airport, parking lot), as is
shown in the SUN dataset . However, the context information provided by them may be helpful for detection.
We only adopt the harbor category because its border is relatively easy to deﬁne and there are abundant harbor instances
in our image sources. Soccer ﬁeld is another new category
In Fig.2, we compare the categories of DOTA with
NWPU VHR-10 , which has the largest number of categories in previous aerial object detection datasets. Note that
DOTA surpass NWPU VHR-10 not only in category numbers, but also the number of instances per category.
storage tank
baseball diamond
tennis court
basketball court
ground track field
small vehicle
large vehicle
roundabout
swimming pool
helicopter
soccer ball field
NWPU VHR 10
Figure 2: Comparison between DOTA and NWPU VHR-10
in categories and responding quantity of instances.
3.3. Annotation method
We consider different ways of annotating. In computer
vision, many visual concepts such as region descriptions,
objects, attributes, and relationships, are annotated with
bounding boxes, as shown in . A common description
of bounding boxes is (xc, yc, w, h), where (xc, yc) is the
center location, w, h are the width and height of the bounding box, respectively.
Objects without many orientations can be adequately annotated with this method. However, bounding boxes labeled
in this way cannot accurately or compactly outline oriented
instances such as text and objects in aerial images. In an extreme but actually common condition as shown in Fig. 3 (c)
and (d), the overlap between two bounding boxes is so large
that state-of-the-art object detection methods cannot differentiate them. In order to remedy this, we need to ﬁnd an
annotation method suitable for oriented objects.
An option for annotating oriented objects is θ-based oriented bounding box which is adopted in some text detection benchmarks
 , namely (xc, yc, w, h, θ), where θ
denotes the angle from the horizontal direction of the standard bounding box. A ﬂaw of this method is the inability to compactly enclose oriented objects with large deformation among different parts. Considering the complicated
scenes and various orientations of objects in aerial images,
we need to abandon this method and choose a more ﬂexible and easy-to-understand way.
An alternative is arbitrary quadrilateral bounding boxes, which can be denoted
as {(xi, yi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}, where (xi, yi) denotes the positions of the oriented bounding boxes’ vertices in the image.
The vertices are arranged in a clockwise order. This way is
widely adopted in oriented text detection benchmarks .
We draw inspiration from these researches and use arbitrary
quadrilateral bounding boxes to annotate objects.
To make a more detailed annotation, as shown in Fig. 3,
we emphasize the importance of the ﬁrst point (x1, y1),
which normally implies the “head” of the object. For helicopter, large vehicle, small vehicle, harbor, baseball diamond, ship and plane, we carefully denote their ﬁrst point to
enrich potential usages. While for soccer-ball ﬁeld, swimming pool, bridge, ground track ﬁeld, basketball court and
tennis court, there are no visual clues to decide the ﬁrst
point, so we choose the top-left point as the starting point.
Some samples of annotated patches (not the whole original image) in our dataset are shown in Fig. 4.
It is worth noticing that, Papadopoulos et al. have
explored an alternative annotation method and verify its ef-
ﬁciency and robustness. We assume that the annotations
would be more precise and robust with more elaborately designed annotation methods, and alternative annotation protocols would facilitate more efﬁcient crowd-sourced image
annotations.
3.4. Dataset splits
In order to ensure that the training data and test data distributions approximately match, we randomly select half of
the original images as the training set, 1/6 as validation set,
and 1/3 as the testing set. We will publicly provide all the
original images with ground truth for training set and validation set, but not for the testing set. For testing, we are
currently building an evaluation server.
4. Properties of DOTA
4.1. Image size
Aerial images are usually very large in size compared to
those in natural images dataset. The original size of images
in our dataset ranges from about 800 × 800 to about 4k ×
4k while most images in regular datasets (e.g. PASCAL-
VOC and MSCOCO) are no more than 1k × 1k. We make
annotations on the original full image without partitioning
it into pieces to avoid the cases where a single instance is
partitioned into different pieces.
4.2. Various orientations of instances
As shown in Fig.1 (f), our dataset achieves a good balance in the instances of different directions, which is significantly helpful for learning a robust detector. Moreover, our
dataset is closer to real scenes because it is common to see
objects in all kinds of orientations in the real world.
Figure 3: Visualization of adopted annotation method. The yellow point represents the starting point, which refers to: (a) top
left corner of a plane, (b) the center of sector-shaped baseball diamond, (c) top left corner of a large vehicle. (d) is a failure
case of the horizontal rectangle annotation, which brings high overlap compared to (c).
Figure 4: Samples of annotated images in DOTA. We show three samples per each category, except six for large-vehicle.
Figure 5: Statistics of instances in DOTA. AR denotes the aspect ratio. (a) The AR of horizontal bounding box. (b) The AR
of oriented bounding box. (c) Histogram of number of annotated instances per image.
4.3. Spatial resolution information
We also provide the spatial resolution for each image in
our dataset, which implies the actual size of an instance and
plays a signiﬁcant role in aerial object detection. The importance of spatial resolution for detection task are two folds.
First, it allows the model to be more adaptive and robust for
varieties of objects of the same category. It’s known that objects appear smaller when seen from a distance. The same
object with different sizes will trouble the model and hurt
classiﬁcation. However, a model can pay more attention to
the shape with resolution information provided instead of
objects’ size. Second, it’s better for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation. For example, it will be simple to distinguish a small
boat from a large warship.
Spatial resolution can also be used to ﬁlter mislabeled
outliers in our dataset, as intra-class varieties of actual sizes
for most categories are limited. Outliers can be found by
selecting the objects whose size is far different from those
of the same category in a small range of spatial resolution.
4.4. Various pixel size of categories
Following the convention in , we refer to the height
of a horizontal bounding box, which we call pixel size for
short, as a measurement for instance size. We divide all the
instances in our dataset into three splits according to their
height of horizontal bounding box: small for range from
10 to 50, middle for range from 50 to 300, and large for
range above 300. Tab. 3 illustrates the percentages of three
instance splits in different datasets. It is clear that the PAS-
CAL VOC dataset, NWPU VHR-10 dataset and DLR 3K
Munich Vehicle dataset are dominated by middle instances,
middle instances and small instances, respectively. However, we achieve a good balance between small instances
and middle instances, which is more similar to real-world
scenes and thus, helpful to better capture different size of
objects in practical applications.
It’s worth noting that pixel size varies in different categories. For example, a vehicle may be as small as 30, however, a bridge can be as large as 1200, which is 40 times
larger than a vehicle. The huge differences among instances
from different categories make the detection task more challenging because models have to be ﬂexible enough to handle
extremely tiny and huge objects.
10-50 pixel
50-300 pixel
above 300 pixel
PASCAL VOC
NWPU VHR-10
DLR 3K Munich Vehicle
Table 3: Comparison of instance size distribution of some
datasets in aerial images and natural images.
4.5. Various aspect ratio of instances
Aspect ratio (AR) is an essential factor for anchor-based
models, such as Faster RCNN and YOLOv2 . We
count two kinds of AR for all the instances in our dataset to
provide a reference for better model design: 1) AR of minimally circumscribed horizontal rectangle bounding box, 2)
AR of original quadrangle bounding box. Fig. 5 illustrates
these two types of distribution of aspect ratio for instances
in our dataset. We can see that instances varies greatly in aspect ratio. Moreover, there are a large number of instances
with a large aspect ratio in our dataset.
4.6. Various instance density of images
It is common for aerial images to contain thousands of
instances, which is different from natural images. For example, images in ImageNet contain on the average 2
categories and 2 instances, while MSCOCO contains 3.5
categories and 7.7 instances, respectively. Our dataset is
much richer in instances per image, which can be up to
Fig. 5 illustrates the number of instances in our
DOTA dataset.
With so many instances in a single image, it is unavoidable to see areas densely crowded with instances.
COCO, instances are not annotated one by one because occlusion makes it difﬁcult to distinguish an instance from its
neighboring instances. In these cases, the group of instances
is marked as one segment with attribute named “crowd”.
However, this is not the case for aerial images because there
are rarely occlusion due to the perspective from the above.
Therefore, we can annotate all the instances in a dense area
one by one. Fig. 4 shows examples of densely packed instances. Detecting objects in these cases poses an enormous
challenge for the current detection methods.
5. Evaluations
We evaluate the state of the art object detection methods
on DOTA. For horizontal object detection, we carefully select Faster R-CNN2 , R-FCN3 , YOLOv24 and
SSD3 as our benchmark testing algorithms for their excellent performance on general object detection. For oriented object detection, we modify the original Faster R-
CNN algorithm such that it can predict properly oriented
bounding boxes denoted as {(xi, yi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}.
Note that, the backbone networks are ResNet-101 for
R-FCN and Faster R-CNN, InceptionV2 for SSD and
customized GoogLeNet for YOLOv2, respectively.
2 
Deformable-ConvNets
3 
master/research/object_detection
4 
5.1. Evaluation tasks
To evaluate the state-of-the-art deep learning based detection methods on DOTA, we propose two tasks, namely
detection with horizontal bounding boxes (HBB for short)
and detection with oriented bounding boxes (OBB for
short). To be more speciﬁc, we evaluate those methods on
two different kinds of ground truths, HBB or OBB, no matter how those methods were trained.
YOLOv2 
Table 4: Numerical results (AP) of baseline models evaluated with HBB ground truths. The short names for categories are deﬁned as: BD–Baseball diamond, GTF–Ground
ﬁeld track, SV–Small vehicle, LV–Large vehicle, TC–Tennis
court, BC–Basketball court, SC–Storage tank, SBF–Soccerball ﬁeld, RA–Roundabout, SP–Swimming pool, and HC–
Helicopter. FR-H means Faster R-CNN trained on
Horizontal bounding boxes.
YOLOv2 
Table 5: Numerical results (AP) of baseline models evaluated with OBB ground truths.
FR-O means Faster R-
CNN trained on Oriented bounding boxes.
5.2. Evaluation prototypes
Images in DOTA are so large that they cannot be directly
sent to CNN-based detectors. Therefore, we crop a series of
1024 × 1024 patches from the original images with a stride
set to 512. Note that some complete objects may be cut into
two parts during the cropping process. For convenience, we
denote the area of the original object as Ao, and the area of
divided parts Pi as ai, (i = 1, 2). Then we compute the
parts areas over the original object area, Ui =
Ao . Finally,
we label the part Pi with Ui < 0.7 as difﬁcult and for the
other one, we keep it the same as the original annotation.
For the vertices of the newly generated parts, we need to
ensure they can be described as an oriented bounding box
with 4 vertices in the clockwise order with a ﬁtting method.
In the testing phase, ﬁrst we send the cropped image
patches to obtain temporary results and then we combine
the results together to restore the detecting results on the
original image. Finally, we use non-maximum suppression
(NMS) on these results based on the predicted classes. We
keep the threshold of NMS as 0.3 for the HBB experiments
and 0.1 for the oriented experiments. In this way, we indirectly train and test CNN-based models on DOTA.
For evaluation metrics, we adopt the same mAP calculation as for PASCAL VOC.
5.3. Baselines with horizontal bounding boxes
Ground truths for HBB experiments are generated by
calculating the axis-aligned bounding boxes over original
annotated bounding boxes. To make it fair, we keep all the
experiments’ settings and hyper parameters the same as depicted in corresponding papers .
The results of HBB prediction are shown in Tab. 4. Note
that results of SSD is a little bit lower than other models. We
suspect it should be attributed to the random crop operation
in SSD’s data augmentation strategies, which is quite useful in general object detection while degrades in aerial object detection for tremendous small training instances. The
results further indicate the huge differences between aerial
and general objects with respect to instance sizes.
5.4. Baselines with oriented bounding boxes
Prediction of OBB is difﬁcult because the state of the
art detection methods are not designed for oriented objects.
Therefore, we choose Faster R-CNN as the base framework
for its accuracy and efﬁciency and then modify it to predict
oriented bounding boxes.
RoIs (Region of Interests) generated by RPN (Region
Proposal Network) are rectangles which can be written as
R = (xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax), for a more detailed interpretation, R = {(xi, yi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}, where x1 =
x4 = xmin, x2 = x3 = xmax, y1 = y2 = ymin, y3 =
In R-CNN procedure, each RoI is attached to a ground truth oriented bounding box written as
G = {(gxi, gyi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}. Then R-CNN’s output target T = {(txi, tyi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4} is calculated as, txi =
(gxi−xi)/w, tyi = (gyi−yi)/h, where w = xmax−xmin,
and h = ymax −ymin, similar as .
Other settings and hyper parameters are kept the same as
depicted in Faster R-CNN . The numerical results are
shown in Tab. 5. To compare with our implemented Faster
R-CNN for OBB, we evaluate YOLOv2, R-FCN, SSD and
Faster R-CNN trained on HBB with the OBB ground truth.
As shown in Tab.5, the results of those methods trained on
HBB are much lower than Faster R-CNN trained on OBB,
indicating that for oriented object detection in aerial scenes,
those methods should be adjusted accordingly.
5.5. Experimental analysis
When analyzing the results exhibited in Table. 4, performances in categories like small vehicle, large vehicle and
ship are far from satisfactory, which attributes to their small
size and densely crowded locations in aerial images. As a
contrast, large and discrete objects, like planes, swimming
pools and tennis courts, the performances are rather fair.
In Fig. 6, we compare the results between object detection experiments of HBB and OBB. For densely packed and
oriented objects shown in Fig. 6 (a) and (b), location precision of objects in HBB experiments are much lower than
OBB experiments and many results are suppressed through
post-progress operations. So OBB regression is the correct
way for oriented object detection that can be really integrated to real applications. In Fig. 6 (c), large aspect ratio
objects annotated in OBB style like (harbor, bridge) are hard
for current detectors to regress. But in HBB style, those
objects usually have normal aspect ratios and as a consequence, results seem to be fairly good as shown in Fig. 6 (d).
However in extremely dense scenes, e.g in Fig. 6 (e) and (f),
results of HBB and OBB are all not satisfying which implies
the defects of current detectors.
Figure 6: Visualization results of testing on DOTA using
well-trained Faster R-CNN. TOP and Bottom respectively
illustrate the results for HBB and OBB in cases of orientation, large aspect ratio, and density.
6. Cross-dataset validations
The cross dataset generalization is an evaluation
for the generalization ability of a dataset. We choose the
UCAS-AOD dataset to do cross-dataset generalization
for its comparatively large number of data comparing to
other aerial object detection datasets. For there are no of-
ﬁcial data splits for UCAS-AOD, we randomly select 1110
for training and 400 for testing. We choose YOLOv2 as
the testing detector for all experiments described below and
HBB-style annotations for all ground truths. Input image
size is changed to 960×544 around the original image sizes
in UCAS-AOD while other setting kept unchanged.
Results are shown in Tab. 6. The performance difference across two datasets is 35.8 for YOLOv2-A and 15.6
for YOLOv2-D models, respectively. It suggests that DOTA
hugely covers UCAS-AOD and furthermore has more patterns and properties that are not shared in UCAS-AOD. And
both models get a low results on DOTA which reﬂects that
DOTA is much more challenging.
Testing set
Small-vehicle
Table 6: Results of cross-dataset generalization. Top: Detection performance evaluated on UCAS-AOD. Bottom:
Detection performance evaluated on DOTA. YOLOv2-A
and YOLOv2-D are trained with UCAS-AOD and DOTA,
respectively.
7. Conclusion
We build a large-scale dataset for oriented objects detection in aerial images which is much larger than any existing datasets in this ﬁeld. In contrast to general object
detection benchmarks, we annotate a huge number of welldistributed oriented objects with oriented bounding boxes.
We assume this dataset is challenging but similar to natural aerial scenes, which are more appropriate for practical
applications. We also establish a benchmark for object detection in aerial images and show the feasibility to produce
oriented bounding boxes by modifying a mainstream detection algorithm.
Detecting densely packed small instances and extremely
large instances with arbitrary orientations in a large picture
would be particularly meaningful and challenging. We believe DOTA will not only promote the development of object detection algorithms in Earth Vision, but also pose interesting algorithmic questions to general object detection
in computer vision.
Acknowledgement
This research is supported by NSFC projects under the
contracts No.61771350 and No.41501462. Dr. Xiang Bai
is supported by the National Program for Support of Topnotch Young Professionals.
We thank Fan Hu, Pu Jin,
Xinyi Tong, Xuan Hu, Zhipeng Dong, Liang Wu, Jun Tang,
Linyan Cui, Duoyou Zhou, Tengteng Huang, and all the
others who involved in the annotations of DOTA.