Similarity-Preserving Knowledge Distillation
Frederick Tung1,2 and Greg Mori1,2
1Simon Fraser University
2Borealis AI
 , 
Knowledge distillation is a widely applicable technique
for training a student neural network under the guidance of
a trained teacher network. For example, in neural network
compression, a high-capacity teacher is distilled to train a
compact student; in privileged learning, a teacher trained
with privileged data is distilled to train a student without
access to that data. The distillation loss determines how
a teacher’s knowledge is captured and transferred to the
student. In this paper, we propose a new form of knowledge distillation loss that is inspired by the observation that
semantically similar inputs tend to elicit similar activation
patterns in a trained network. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation guides the training of a student network
such that input pairs that produce similar (dissimilar) activations in the teacher network produce similar (dissimilar)
activations in the student network. In contrast to previous
distillation methods, the student is not required to mimic the
representation space of the teacher, but rather to preserve
the pairwise similarities in its own representation space.
Experiments on three public datasets demonstrate the potential of our approach.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are being used to solve an increasingly wide array of computer vision problems. While the
general trend in deep learning is towards deeper, wider, and
more complex networks, deploying deep learning solutions
in the real world requires us to consider the computational
cost. A mobile robot or self-driving vehicle, for example,
has limited memory and power. Even when resources are
abundant, such as when a vision system is hosted in the
cloud, more resource-efﬁcient deep networks mean more
clients can be served at a lower cost. When performing
transfer learning in the real world, data privilege and privacy issues may restrict access to data in the source domain.
It may be necessary to transfer the knowledge of a network
trained on the source domain assuming access only to training data from the target task domain.
Activations
Mini-batch
Pairwise Similarities
Figure 1. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation guides the
training of a student network such that input pairs that produce
similar (dissimilar) activations in the pre-trained teacher network
produce similar (dissimilar) activations in the student network.
Given an input mini-batch of b images, we derive b × b pairwise
similarity matrices from the activation maps, and compute a distillation loss on the matrices produced by the student and the teacher.
Knowledge distillation is a general technique for supervising the training of “student” neural networks by capturing and transferring the knowledge of trained “teacher” networks. While originally motivated by the task of neural network compression for resource-efﬁcient deep learning ,
knowledge distillation has found wider applications in such
areas as privileged learning , adversarial defense ,
and learning with noisy data . Knowledge distillation is
conceptually simple: it guides the training of a student network with an additional distillation loss that encourages the
student to mimic some aspect of a teacher network. Intuitively, the trained teacher network provides a richer supervisory signal than the data supervision (e.g. annotated class
labels) alone.
The conceptual simplicity of knowledge distillation belies the fact that how to best capture the knowledge of the
teacher to train the student (i.e. how to deﬁne the distillation
 
loss) remains an open question. In traditional knowledge
distillation , the softened class scores of the teacher are
used as the extra supervisory signal: the distillation loss encourages the student to mimic the scores of the teacher. Fit-
Nets extend this idea by adding hints to guide the training of intermediate layers. In ﬂow-based knowledge distillation , the extra supervisory signal comes from the
inter-layer “ﬂow” – how features are transformed between
layers. The distillation loss encourages the student to mimic
the teacher’s ﬂow matrices, which are derived from the inner product between feature maps in two layers, such as the
ﬁrst and last layers in a residual block. In attention transfer , the supervisory signal for knowledge distillation
is in the form of spatial attention. Spatial attention maps
are computed by summing the squared activations along the
channel dimension. The distillation loss encourages the student to produce similar normalized spatial attention maps as
the teacher, intuitively paying attention to similar parts of
the image as the teacher.
In this paper, we present a novel form of knowledge distillation that is inspired by the observation that semantically
similar inputs tend to elicit similar activation patterns in a
trained neural network. Similarity-preserving knowledge
distillation guides the training of a student network such
that input pairs that produce similar (dissimilar) activations
in the trained teacher network produce similar (dissimilar)
activations in the student network. Figure 1 shows the overall procedure. Given an input mini-batch of b images, we
compute pairwise similarity matrices from the output activation maps. The b × b matrices encode the similarities in
the activations of the network as elicited by the images in
the mini-batch. Our distillation loss is deﬁned on the pairwise similarity matrices produced by the student and the
To support the intuition of our distillation loss, Figure 2
visualizes the average activation of each channel in the last
convolutional layer of a WideResNet-16-2 teacher network
(we adopt the standard notation WideResNet-d-k to refer to
a wide residual network with depth d and width multiplier k), on the CIFAR-10 test images. We can see that
images from the same object category tend to activate similar channels in the trained network. The similarities in activations across different images capture useful semantics
learned by the teacher network. We study whether these
similarities provide an informative supervisory signal for
knowledge distillation.
The contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce similarity-preserving knowledge distillation, a novel form of knowledge distillation that uses
the pairwise activation similarities within each input
mini-batch to supervise the training of a student network with a trained teacher network.
CIFAR-10 test images, grouped by category
Average channel activations (sampled)
Figure 2. Semantically similar inputs tend to elicit similar activation patterns in a trained neural network. This visualization shows
channel-wise average activations sampled from the last convolutional layer of a WideResNet-16-2 network on the CIFAR-10 test
images. Activation patterns are largely consistent within the same
category (e.g. columns 1 to 1000) and distinctive across different
categories .
• We experimentally validate our approach on three public datasets. Our experiments show the potential of
similarity-preserving knowledge distillation, not only
for improving the training outcomes of student networks, but also for complementing traditional methods
for knowledge distillation.
The goal of knowledge distillation is to train a student
network under the guidance of a trained teacher network,
which acts as an extra source of supervision. For example,
in neural network compression, the student network is computationally cheaper than the teacher: it may be shallower,
thinner, or composed of cheaper operations. The trained
teacher network provides additional semantic knowledge
beyond the usual data supervision (e.g. the usual one-hot
vectors for classiﬁcation). The challenge is to determine
how to encode and transfer the teacher’s knowledge such
that student performance is maximized.
In traditional knowledge distillation , knowledge is
encoded and transferred in the form of softened class scores.
The total loss for training the student is given by
L = (1 −α)LCE(y, σ(zS)) + 2αT 2LCE(σ(zS
where LCE(·, ·) denotes the cross-entropy loss, σ(·) denotes
the softmax function, y is the one-hot vector indicating the
ground truth class, zS and zT are the output logits of the
WideResNet-16-1
(0.2M params)
WideResNet-40-2
(2.2M params)
Figure 3. Activation similarity matrices G (Eq. 2) produced by trained WideResNet-16-1 and WideResNet-40-2 networks on sample
CIFAR-10 test batches. Each column shows a single batch with inputs grouped by ground truth class along each axis (batch size = 128).
Brighter colors indicate higher similarity values. The blockwise patterns indicate that the elicited activations are mostly similar for inputs
of the same class, and different for inputs across different classes. Our distillation loss (Eq. 4) encourages the student network to produce
G matrices closer to those produced by the teacher network.
student and teacher networks, respectively, T is a temperature hyperparameter, and α is a balancing hyperparameter.
The ﬁrst term in Eq.1 is the usual cross-entropy loss deﬁned
using data supervision (ground truth labels), while the second term encourages the student to mimic the softened class
scores of the teacher.
Recall from the introduction and Figure 2 that semantically similar inputs tend to elicit similar activation patterns
in a trained neural network. In Figure 2, we can observe that
activation patterns are largely consistent within the same
object category and distinctive across different categories.
Might the correlations in activations encode useful teacher
knowledge that can be transferred to the student? Our hypothesis is that, if two inputs produce highly similar activations in the teacher network, it is beneﬁcial to guide the
student network towards a conﬁguration that also results in
the two inputs producing highly similar activations in the
student. Conversely, if two inputs produce dissimilar activations in the teacher, we want these inputs to produce
dissimilar activations in the student as well.
Given an input mini-batch, denote the activation map
produced by the teacher network T at a particular layer l by
T ∈Rb×c×h×w, where b is the batch size, c is the number of output channels, and h and w are spatial dimensions.
Let the activation map produced by the student network S at
a corresponding layer l′ be given by A(l′)
∈Rb×c′×h′×w′.
Note that c does not necessarily have to equal c′, and likewise for the spatial dimensions. Similar to attention transfer , the corresponding layer l′ can be the layer at the
same depth as l if the student and teacher share the same
depth, or the layer at the end of the same block if the student and teacher have different depths. To guide the student
towards the activation correlations induced in the teacher,
we deﬁne a distillation loss that penalizes differences in the
L2-normalized outer products of A(l)
T and A(l′)
S . First, let
T [i,:] = ˜G(l)
T [i,:] / || ˜G(l)
T [i,:]||2
where Q(l)
T ∈Rb×chw is a reshaping of A(l)
T , and therefore
T is a b×b matrix. Intuitively, entry (i, j) in ˜G(l)
the similarity of the activations at this teacher layer elicited
by the ith and jth images in the mini-batch. We apply a rowwise L2 normalization to obtain G(l)
T , where the notation
[i, :] denotes the ith row in a matrix. Analogously, let
S[i,:] = ˜G(l)
S[i,:] / || ˜G(l)
where Q(l′)
∈Rb×c′h′w′ is a reshaping of A(l′)
S , and G(l′)
is a b×b matrix. We deﬁne the similarity-preserving knowledge distillation loss as:
LSP(GT , GS) = 1
where I collects the (l, l′) layer pairs (e.g. layers at the end
of the same block, as discussed above) and || · ||F is the
Frobenius norm. Eq. 4 is a summation, over all (l, l′) pairs,
of the mean element-wise squared difference between the
T and G(l′)
matrices. Finally, we deﬁne the total loss for
training the student network as:
L = LCE(y, σ(zS)) + γ LSP(GT , GS) ,
WideResNet-16-k
WideResNet-40-k
3 × 3, 16k
3 × 3, 16k
3 × 3, 16k
3 × 3, 16k
3 × 3, 32k
3 × 3, 32k
3 × 3, 32k
3 × 3, 32k
3 × 3, 64k
3 × 3, 64k
3 × 3, 64k
3 × 3, 64k
average pool, 10-d fc, softmax
Table 1. Structure of WideResNet networks used in CIFAR-10 experiments. Downsampling is performed by strided convolutions in
the ﬁrst layers of conv3 and conv4.
where γ is a balancing hyperparameter.
Figure 3 visualizes the G matrices for several batches in
the CIFAR-10 test set. The top row is produced by a trained
WideResNet-16-1 network, consisting of 0.2M parameters,
while the bottom row is produced by a trained WideResNet-
40-2 network, consisting of 2.2M parameters. In both cases,
activations are collected from the last convolution layer.
Each column represents a single batch, which is identical
for both networks. The images in each batch have been
grouped by their ground truth class for easier interpretability. The G matrices in both rows show a distinctive blockwise pattern, indicating that the activations at the last layer
of these networks are largely similar within the same class
and dissimilar across different classes (the blocks are differently sized because each batch has an unequal number of
test samples from each class). Moreover, the blockwise pattern is more distinctive for the WideResNet-40-2 network,
reﬂecting the higher capacity of this network to capture the
semantics of the dataset. Intuitively, Eq. 4 pushes the student network towards producing G matrices closer to those
produced by the teacher network.
Differences from previous approaches. The similaritypreserving knowledge distillation loss (Eq. 4) is deﬁned in
terms of activations instead of class scores as in traditional
distillation . Activations are also used to deﬁne the distillation losses in FitNets , ﬂow-based distillation ,
and attention transfer . However, a key difference is
that these previous distillation methods encourage the student to mimic different aspects of the representation space
of the teacher. Our method is a departure from this common
approach in that it aims to preserve the pairwise activation
similarities of input samples. Its behavior is unchanged by a
rotation of the teacher’s representation space, for example.
In similarity-preserving knowledge distillation, the student
is not required to be able to express the representation space
of the teacher, as long as pairwise similarities in the teacher
space are well preserved in the student space.
3. Experiments
We now turn to the experimental validation of our distillation approach on three public datasets. We start with
CIFAR-10 as it is a commonly adopted dataset for comparing distillation methods, and its relatively small size allows multiple student and teacher combinations to be evaluated. We then consider the task of transfer learning, and
show how distillation and ﬁne-tuning can be combined to
perform transfer learning on a texture dataset with limited
training data. Finally, we report results on the larger CINIC-
10 dataset.
3.1. CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10 consists of 50,000 training images and 10,000
testing images at a resolution of 32x32. The dataset covers
ten object classes, with each class having an equal number
of images. We conducted experiments using wide residual
networks (WideResNets) following . Table 1
summarizes the structure of the networks. We adopted the
standard protocol for training wide residual networks
on CIFAR-10 (SGD with Nesterov momentum; 200 epochs;
batch size of 128; and an initial learning rate of 0.1, decayed
by a factor of 0.2 at epochs 60, 120, and 160). We applied
the standard horizontal ﬂip and random crop data augmentation. We performed baseline comparisons with respect
to traditional knowledge distillation (softened class scores)
and attention transfer. For traditional knowledge distillation
 , we set α = 0.9 and T = 4 following the CIFAR-10
experiments in . Attention transfer losses were applied for each of the three residual block groups. We set
the weight of the distillation loss in attention transfer and
similarity-preserving distillation by held-out validation on
a subset of the training set (β = 1000 for attention transfer,
γ = 3000 for similarity-preserving distillation).
Table 2 shows our results experimenting with several
student-teacher network pairs. We tested cases in which the
student and teacher networks have the same width but different depth (WideResNet-16-1 student with WideResNet-
40-1 teacher; WideResNet-16-2 student with WideResNet-
40-2 teacher), the student and teacher networks have the
same depth but different width (WideResNet-16-1 student
with WideResNet-16-2 teacher; WideResNet-16-2 student
with WideResNet-16-8 teacher), and the student and teacher
have different depth and width (WideResNet-40-2 student
with WideResNet-16-8 teacher).
In all cases, transferring the knowledge of the teacher network using similaritypreserving distillation improved student training outcomes.
Compared to conventional training with data supervision
(i.e. one-hot vectors), the student network consistently obtained lower median error, from 0.5 to 1.2 absolute percentage points, or 7% to 14% relative, with no additional network parameters or operations. Similarity-preserving distillation also performed favorably with respect to the tra-
WideResNet-16-1 (0.2M)
WideResNet-40-1 (0.6M)
WideResNet-16-1 (0.2M)
WideResNet-16-2 (0.7M)
WideResNet-16-2 (0.7M)
WideResNet-40-2 (2.2M)
WideResNet-16-2 (0.7M)
WideResNet-16-8 (11.0M)
WideResNet-40-2 (2.2M)
WideResNet-16-8 (11.0M)
Table 2. Experiments on CIFAR-10 with three different knowledge distillation losses: softened class scores (traditional KD), attention
transfer (AT), and similarity preserving (SP). The median error over ﬁve runs is reported, following the protocol in . The best result
for each experiment is shown in bold. Brackets indicate model size in number of parameters.
Top-1 error
Top-1 error
Top-1 error
Figure 4. LSP vs. error for (from left to right) WideResNet-16-1 students trained with WideResNet-16-2 teachers, WideResNet-16-2
students trained with WideResNet-40-2 teachers, and WideResNet-40-2 students trained with WideResNet-16-8 teachers, on CIFAR-10.
ditional (softened class scores) and attention transfer baselines, achieving the lowest error in four of the ﬁve cases.
This validates our intuition that the activation similarities across images encode useful semantics learned by the
teacher network, and provide an effective supervisory signal for knowledge distillation.
Figure 4 plots LSP vs.
error for the WideResNet-16-
1/WideResNet-16-2, WideResNet-16-2/WideResNet-40-2,
and WideResNet-40-2/WideResNet-16-8 experiments (left
to right, respectively), using all students trained with traditional KD, AT, and SP. The plots verify that LSP and performance are correlated.
While we have presented these results from the perspective of improving the training of a student network, it is
also possible to view the results from the perspective of the
teacher network. Our results suggest the potential for using similarity-preserving distillation to compress large networks into more resource-efﬁcient ones with minimal accuracy loss. In the ﬁfth test, for example, the knowledge of a
trained WideResNet-16-8 network, which contains 11.0M
parameters, is distilled into a much smaller WideResNet-
40-2 network, which contains only 2.2M parameters. This
is a 5× compression rate with only 0.3% loss in accuracy,
using off-the-shelf PyTorch without any specialized hardware or software.
The above similarity-preserving distillation results were
produced using only the activations collected from the last
convolution layers of the student and teacher networks. We
also experimented with using the activations at the end of
each WideResNet block, but found no improvement in performance. We therefore used only the activations at the ﬁnal
convolution layers in the subsequent experiments. Activation similarities may be less informative in the earlier layers of the network because these layers encode more generic
features, which tend to be present across many images. Progressing deeper in the network, the channels encode increasingly specialized features, and the activation patterns
of semantically similar images become more distinctive.
We also experimented with using post-softmax scores to
determine similarity, but this produces worse results than
using activations. We found the same when using an oracle,
suggesting that the soft teacher signal is important.
3.2. Transfer learning combining distillation with
ﬁne-tuning
In this section, we explore a common transfer learning
scenario in computer vision. Suppose we are faced with a
novel recognition task in a specialized image domain with
limited training data. A natural strategy to adopt is to transfer the knowledge of a network pre-trained on ImageNet (or
another suitable large-scale dataset) to the new recognition
task by ﬁne-tuning. Here, we combine knowledge distillation with ﬁne-tuning: we initialize the student network with
source domain (in this case, ImageNet) pretrained weights,
and then ﬁne-tune the student to the target domain using
both distillation and cross-entropy losses (Eq. 5).
We analyzed this scenario using the describable textures
dataset , which is composed of 5,640 images covering
SP (win:loss)
MobileNet-0.25 (0.2M)
MobileNet-0.5 (0.8M)
41.30 (7:3)
MobileNet-0.25 (0.2M)
MobileNet-1.0 (3.3M)
41.76 (5:5)
MobileNet-0.5 (0.8M)
MobileNet-1.0 (3.3M)
35.45 (7:3)
MobileNetV2-0.35 (0.5M)
MobileNetV2-1.0 (2.2M)
40.29 (8:2)
MobileNetV2-0.35 (0.5M)
MobileNetV2-1.4 (4.4M)
40.43 (8:2)
MobileNetV2-1.0 (2.2M)
MobileNetV2-1.4 (4.4M)
35.61 (8:2)
Table 3. Transfer learning experiments on the describable textures dataset with attention transfer (AT) and similarity preserving (SP)
knowledge distillation. The median error over the ten standard splits is reported. The best result for each experiment is shown in bold.
The (win:loss) notation indicates the number of splits in which SP outperformed AT. The (*M) notation indicates model size in number of
parameters.
47 texture categories.
Image sizes range from 300x300
to 640x640.
We applied ImageNet-style data augmentation with horizontal ﬂipping and random resized cropping during training. At test time, images were resized to
256x256 and center cropped to 224x224 for input to the networks. For evaluation, we adopted the standard ten trainingvalidation-testing splits. To demonstrate the versatility of
our method on different network architectures, and in particular its compatibility with mobile-friendly architectures,
we experimented with variants of MobileNet and MobileNetV2 . Tables 1 and 2 in the supplementary summarize the structure of the networks.
We compared with an attention transfer baseline. Softened class score based distillation is not directly comparable
in this setting because the classes in the source and target
domains are disjoint. Similarity-preserving distillation can
be applied directly to train the student, without ﬁrst ﬁnetuning the teacher, since it aims to preserve similarities instead of mimicking the teacher’s representation space. The
teacher is run in inference mode to generate representations
in the new domain. This capacity is useful when the new
domain has limited training data, when the source domain
is not accessible to the student (e.g. in privileged learning),
or in continual learning where trained knowledge needs to
be preserved across tasks 1. We set the hyperparameters
for attention transfer and similarity-preserving distillation
by held-out validation on the ten standard splits. All networks were trained using SGD with Nesterov momentum,
a batch size of 96, and for 60 epochs with an initial learning
rate of 0.01 reduced to 0.001 after 30 epochs.
Table 3 shows that similarity-preserving distillation can
effectively transfer knowledge across different domains.
For all MobileNet and MobileNetV2 student-teacher pairs
tested, applying similarity-preserving distillation during
ﬁne-tuning resulted in lower median student error than
1In continual (or lifelong) learning, the goal is to extend a trained network to new tasks while avoiding the catastrophic forgetting of previous
tasks. One way to prevent catastrophic forgetting is to supervise the new
model (the student) with the model trained for previous tasks (the teacher)
via a knowledge distillation loss .
ﬁne-tuning without distillation.
Fine-tuning MobileNet-
0.25 with distillation reduced the error by 1.1% absolute,
and ﬁne-tuning MobileNet-0.5 with distillation reduced the
error by 1.3% absolute, compared to ﬁne-tuning without
distillation.
Fine-tuning MobileNetV2-0.35 with distillation reduced the error by 1.0% absolute, and ﬁne-tuning
MobileNetV2-1.0 with distillation reduced the error by
1.0% absolute, compared to ﬁne-tuning without distillation.
For all student-teacher pairs, similarity-preserving distillation obtained lower median error than the spatial attention transfer baseline. Table 3 incudes a breakdown of
how similarity-preserving distillation compares with spatial attention transfer on a per-split basis. On aggregate,
similarity-preserving distillation outperformed spatial attention transfer on 19 out of the 30 MobileNet splits and
24 out of the 30 MobileNetV2 splits. The results suggest
that there may be a challenging domain shift in the important image areas for the network to attend. Moreover, while
attention transfer summarizes the activation map by summing out the channel dimension, similarity-preserving distillation makes use of the full activation map in computing
the similarity-based distillation loss, which may be more
robust in the presence of a domain shift in attention.
3.3. CINIC-10
The CINIC-10 dataset is designed to be a middle option relative to CIFAR-10 and ImageNet: it is composed
of 32x32 images in the style of CIFAR-10, but at a total
of 270,000 images its scale is closer to that of ImageNet.
We adopted CINIC-10 for rapid experimentation because
several GPU-months would have been required to perform
full held-out validation and training on ImageNet for our
method and all baselines.
For the student and teacher architectures, we experimented with variants of the state-of-the-art mobile architecture ShufﬂeNetV2 . The ShufﬂeNetV2 networks are
summarized in Table 3 in the supplementary.
the standard training-validation-testing split and set the hyperparameters for similarity-preserving distillation and all
baselines by held-out validation (KD: {α = 0.6, T = 16};
Sh.NetV2-0.5 (0.4M)
Sh.NetV2-1.0 (1.3M)
Sh.NetV2-0.5 (0.4M)
Sh.NetV2-2.0 (5.3M)
Sh.NetV2-1.0 (1.3M)
Sh.NetV2-2.0 (5.3M)
M.NetV2-0.35 (0.4M)
M.NetV2-1.0 (2.2M)
Table 4. Experiments on CINIC-10 with three different knowledge distillation losses: softened class scores (traditional KD), attention
transfer (AT), and similarity preserving (SP). The best result for each experiment is shown in bold. Brackets indicate model size in number
of parameters.
AT: β = 50; SP: γ = 2000; KD+SP: {α = 0.6, T =
16, γ = 2000}; AT+SP: {β = 30, γ = 2000}). All networks were trained using SGD with Nesterov momentum,
a batch size of 96, for 140 epochs with an initial learning
rate of 0.01 decayed by a factor of 10 after the 100th and
120th epochs. We applied CIFAR-style data augmentation
with horizontal ﬂips and random crops during training.
The results are shown in Table 4 (top). Compared to
conventional training with data supervision only, similaritypreserving distillation consistently improved student training outcomes. In particular, training ShufﬂeNetV2-0.5 with
similarity-preserving distillation reduced the error by 1.5%
absolute, and training ShufﬂeNetV2-1.0 with similaritypreserving distillation reduced the error by 1.3% absolute.
On an individual basis, all three knowledge distillation approaches achieved comparable results, with a total spread of 0.12% absolute error on ShufﬂeNetV2-0.5
(for the best results with ShufﬂeNetV2-1.0 as teacher) and
a total spread of 0.06% absolute error on ShufﬂeNetV2-
1.0. However, the lowest error was achieved by combining similarity-preserving distillation with spatial attention
transfer. Training ShufﬂeNetV2-0.5 combining both distillation losses reduced the error by 1.9% absolute, and training ShufﬂeNetV2-1.0 combining both distillation losses
reduced the error by 1.4% absolute.
This result shows
that similarity-preserving distillation complements attention transfer and captures teacher knowledge that is not fully
encoded in spatial attention maps. Table 4 (bottom) summarizes additional experiments with MobileNetV2.
results are similar: SP does not outperform the individual
baselines but complements traditional KD and AT.
Sensitivity analysis. Figure 5 illustrates how the performance of similarity-preserving distillation is affected by the
choice of hyperparameter γ. We plot the top-1 errors on the
CINIC-10 test set for ShufﬂeNetV2-0.5 and ShufﬂeNetV2-
1.0 students trained with γ ranging from 10 to 64,000. We
observed robust performance over a broad range of values
for γ. In all experiments, we set γ by held-out validation.
3.4. Different student and teacher architectures
We performed additional experiments with students and
teachers from different architecture families on CIFAR-
10. Table 5 shows that, for both MobileNetV2 and Shuf-
Top-1 error
ShuffleNetV2-0.5
ShuffleNetV2-1.0
Figure 5. Sensitivity to γ on the CINIC-10 test set for Shuf-
ﬂeNetV2 students.
ﬂeNetV2, SP outperforms conventional training as well as
the traditional KD and AT baselines.
4. Related Work
We presented in this paper a novel distillation loss for
capturing and transferring knowledge from a teacher network to a student network.
Several prior alternatives
 are described in the introduction and some
key differences are highlighted in Section 2. In addition to
the knowledge capture (or loss deﬁnition) aspect of distillation studied in this paper, another important open question is the architectural design of students and teachers.
In most studies of knowledge distillation, including ours,
the student network is a thinner and/or shallower version
of the teacher network. Inspired by efﬁcient architectures
such as MobileNet and ShufﬂeNet, Crowley et al. proposed to replace regular convolutions in the teacher network
with cheaper grouped and pointwise convolutions in the student. Ashok et al. developed a reinforcement learning approach to learn the student architecture. Polino et al.
 demonstrated how a quantized student network can be
trained using a full-precision teacher network.
There is also innovative orthogonal work exploring alternatives to the usual student-teacher training paradigm.
Wang et al.
 introduced an additional discriminator
network, and trained the student, teacher, and discrimina-
ShufﬂeNetV2-0.5 (0.4M)
WideResNet-40-2 (2.2M)
MobileNetV2-0.35 (0.4M)
WideResNet-40-2 (2.2M)
Table 5. Additional experiments with students and teachers from different architecture families on CIFAR-10. The median error over ﬁve
runs is reported, following the protocol in . The best result for each experiment is shown in bold. Brackets indicate model size in
number of parameters.
tor networks together using a combination of distillation
and adversarial losses. Lan et al. proposed the onthe-ﬂy native ensemble teacher model, in which the teacher
is trained together with multiple students in a multi-branch
network architecture. The teacher prediction is a weighted
average of the branch predictions.
Knowledge distillation was ﬁrst introduced as a technique for neural network compression. Resource efﬁciency
considerations have led to a recent increase in interest in
efﬁcient neural architectures , as well
as in algorithms for compressing trained deep networks.
Weight pruning methods remove unimportant weights from the network, sparsifying
the network connectivity structure. The induced sparsity
is unstructured when individual connections are pruned, or
structured when entire channels or ﬁlters are pruned. Unstructured sparsity usually results in better accuracy but requires specialized sparse matrix multiplication libraries 
or hardware engines in practice. Quantized networks
 , such as ﬁxed-point, binary, ternary,
and arbitrary-bit networks, encode weights and/or activations using a small number of bits, or at lower precision.
Fractional or arbitrary-bit quantization encodes individual weights at different precisions, allowing multiple
precisions to be used within a single network layer. Lowrank factorization methods produce compact low-rank approximations of ﬁlter matrices. Techniques
from different categories have also been optimized jointly
or combined sequentially to achieve higher compression
rates .
State-of-the-art
compression
achieve signiﬁcant reductions in network size, in some
cases by an order of magnitude, but often require specialized software or hardware support. For example, unstructured pruning requires optimized sparse matrix multiplication routines to realize practical acceleration , platform
constraint-aware compression requires hardware simulators or empirical measurements, and arbitrarybit quantization requires specialized hardware. One
of the advantages of knowledge distillation is that it is easily
implemented in any off-the-shelf deep learning framework
without the need for extra software or hardware. Moreover,
distillation can be integrated with other network compression techniques for further gains in performance .
5. Conclusion
We proposed similarity-preserving knowledge distillation: a novel form of knowledge distillation that aims to
preserve pairwise similarities in the student’s representation space, instead of mimicking the teacher’s representation space. Our experiments demonstrate the potential of
similarity-preserving distillation in improving the training
outcomes of student networks compared to training with
only data supervision (e.g. ground truth labels). Moreover,
in a transfer learning setting, when traditional class score
based distillation is not directly applicable, we have shown
that similarity-preserving distillation provides a robust solution to the challenging domain shift problem. We have also
shown that similarity-preserving distillation complements
the state-of-the-art attention transfer method and captures
teacher knowledge that is not fully encoded in spatial attention maps. We believe that similarity-preserving distillation can provide a simple yet effective drop-in replacement
for (or complement to) traditional forms of distillation in a
variety of application areas, including model compression
 , privileged learning , adversarial defense , and
learning with noisy data .
Future directions.
As future work, we plan to explore similarity-preserving knowledge distillation in semisupervised and omni-supervised learning settings.
Since similarity-preserving distillation does not require labels, it is possible to distill further knowledge from the
teacher using auxiliary images without annotations.
example, the supervised loss (e.g. cross-entropy) can be
computed using the usual annotated training set, while the
distillation loss can be computed using an auxiliary set of
unlabelled web images. In this setting, the distillation loss
is analogous to the reconstruction or unsupervised loss in
semi-supervised learning.