comment | FOCUS
comment | FOCUS
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | October 2021 | 1122–1144 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
Reproducibility standards for machine learning in
the life sciences
To make machine-learning analyses in the life sciences more computationally reproducible, we propose standards
based on data, model and code publication, programming best practices and workflow automation. By meeting
these standards, the community of researchers applying machine-learning methods in the life sciences can ensure
that their analyses are worthy of trust.
Benjamin J. Heil, Michael M. Hoffman, Florian Markowetz, Su-In Lee,
Casey S. Greene and Stephanie C. Hicks
he field of machine learning has
grown tremendously within the
past ten years. In the life sciences,
machine-learning models are rapidly being
adopted because they are well suited to cope
with the scale and complexity of biological
data. However, there are drawbacks to using
such models. For example, machine-learning
models can be harder to interpret than
simpler models, and this opacity can obscure
learned biases. If we are going to use such
models in the life sciences, we will need to
trust them. Ultimately all science requires
trust1—no scientist can reproduce the results
from every paper they read. The question,
then, is how to ensure that machine-learning
analyses in the life sciences can be trusted.
One attempt at creating trustworthy
analyses with machine-learning models
revolves around reporting analysis details
such as hyperparameter values, model
architectures and data-splitting procedures.
Unfortunately, such reporting requirements
are insufficient to make analyses
trustworthy. Documenting implementation
details without making data, models and
code publicly available and usable by other
scientists does little to help future scientists
attempting the same analyses and less to
uncover biases. Authors can only report on
biases they already know about, and without
the data, models and code, other scientists
will be unable to discover issues post hoc.
For machine-learning models in the life
sciences to become trusted, scientists must
prioritize computational reproducibility2.
That is to say that third parties should be
able to obtain the same results as the original
authors by using their published data,
models and code. By doing so, researchers
can ensure the accuracy of reported results
and detect biases in the models.
Analyses and models that are
reproducible by third parties can be
examined in depth and, ultimately, become
worthy of trust. To that end, we believe the
life sciences community should adopt norms
and standards that underlie reproducible
machine learning research.
While many regard the computational
reproducibility of a work as a binary
property, we prefer to think of it on a sliding
scale2 that reflects the time needed to
reproduce. Published works fall somewhere
on this scale, which is bookended by
‘forever’, for a completely irreproducible
work, and ‘zero’, for a work where one can
automatically repeat the entire analysis
with a single keystroke. As in many cases
it is difficult to impose a single standard
that divides work into ‘reproducible’ and
‘irreproducible’, we instead propose a
menu of three standards with varying
degrees of rigor for computational
reproducibility (Table 1):
Bronze standard. The authors make
the data, models and code used in the
analysis publicly available. The bronze
standard is the minimal standard for
reproducibility. Without data, models
and code, it is not possible to reproduce
Silver standard. In addition to
meeting the bronze standard: (1) the
dependencies of the analysis can
be downloaded and installed in a
single command; (2) key details for
reproducing the work are documented,
including the order in which to run the
analysis scripts, the operating system
used and system resource requirements;
and (3) all random components in the
analysis are set to be deterministic.
The silver standard is a midway point
between minimal availability and full
automation. Works that meet this
standard will take much less time to
reproduce than ones only meeting the
bronze standard.
Gold standard. The work meets the
silver standard, and the authors make
the analysis reproducible with a single
command. The gold standard for
reproducibility is full automation.
When a work meets this standard, it
will take little to no effort for a scientist
to reproduce it.
While reporting has become a recent
area of focus3–5, excellent reporting can look
akin to a nutritional information panel. It
describes information about a work, but it is
insufficient for reproducing the work. In the
best case scenario, it provides a summary
of what the researchers who conducted
Table 1 | Proposed reproducibility standards
Data published and downloadable
Models published and downloadable
Source code published and downloadable
Dependencies set up in a single command
Key analysis details recorded
Analysis components set to deterministic
Entire analysis reproducible with a single command
FOCUS | comment
FOCUS | comment
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | October 2021 | 1122–1144 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
the analysis know about biases in the data,
model limitations and other elements.
However, it often does not provide enough
information for someone to fully understand
how the model came to be. For these
reasons, we believe concrete standards for
ensuring reproducibility should be preferred
over reporting requirements.
Data. Data are a fundamental component
of analyses. Without data, models cannot be
trained and analyses cannot be reproduced.
Moreover, biases and artifacts in the data
that were missed by the authors cannot
be discovered if the data are never made
available. For the data in an analysis to be
trusted, they must be published.
To that end, all datasets used in a
publication should be made publicly
available when their corresponding
manuscript is first posted as a preprint
or published by a peer-reviewed journal.
Specifically, the raw form of all data used for
the publication must be published. The way
the bronze standard should be met depends
on the data used. Authors should deposit
new data in a specialist repository designed
for that kind of data6, when possible. For
example, one may deposit gene expression
data in the Gene Expression Omnibus7
or microscopy images in the BioImage
Archive8. If no specialist repository for that
data type exists, one should instead use a
generalist repository like Zenodo (https://
zenodo.org) for datasets of up to 50 GB or
Dryad ( for datasets
larger than 50 GB. When researchers use
existing datasets, they must include the
information and code required to download
and pre-process the data.
Models. Sharing trained models
is another critical component for
reproducibility. Even if the code for an
analysis were perfectly reproducible and
required no extra scientist time to run, its
corresponding model would still need to be
made publicly available. Requiring people
who wish to use a method on their own
data to re-train a model slows the progress
of science, creates an unnecessary barrier to
entry and wastes the compute and effort of
future researchers. Being unable to examine
a model also makes trusting it difficult.
Without access to the model, it is hard to
say whether the model fails to generalize to
other datasets, fails to make fair decisions
across demographic groups such as age,
sex and nationality, or learns to make
predictions based on artifacts in the data.
Because of the importance of sharing
trained models, meeting the bronze standard
of reproducibility requires that authors
deposit trained weights for the models
used to generate their results in a public
repository. However, authors do not need to
publish the weights for additional models
from a hyperparameter sweep if one can
reproduce the results without them. When a
relevant specialist model zoo such as Kipoi9
or Sfaira10 exists, authors should deposit
the models there. Otherwise, authors can
deposit the models in a generalist repository
such as Zenodo. Making models available
solely on a non-archived website, such
as a GitHub project, does not fulfill this
requirement.
Source code. From a reproducibility
standpoint, a work’s source code is as
critical as its methods section. Source code
contains implementation details that a
future author is unlikely to replicate exactly
from methods descriptions and reporting
tables. These small deviations can lead to
different behavior between the original
work and the reproduced one. That is, of
course, ignoring the huge burden of having
to re-implement the entire analysis from
scratch. For the computational components
of a study, the code is likely to be a better
description of the work than the methods
section itself. As a result, computational
papers without published code should
meet similar skepticism to papers without
methods sections.
To meet the bronze standard, authors
must deposit code in a third-party,
archivable repository such as Zenodo.
This includes the code used in training,
tuning and testing models, creating figures,
processing data and generating the final
results. One good way of meeting the bronze
standard involves creating a GitHub project
and archiving it in Zenodo. Doing so gives
both the persistence of Zenodo required by
scholarly literature and GitHub’s resources
for further development and use, such
as the user support forum provided by
GitHub Issues.
While it is possible to reproduce an analysis
with only its data, models and code, this
task is by no means easy. Fortunately, there
are best practices from the field of software
engineering that can make reproducing
analyses easier by simplifying package
management, recording analysis details and
controlling randomness.
One roadblock that appears when
attempting to reproduce an analysis stems
from differences in behavior between
versions of packages used in the analysis.
Analyses that once worked with specific
dependency versions can stop working
altogether with later versions. Guessing
which version one must use to reproduce
an analysis—or even to get it to run at
all—can feel like playing a game of ‘package
Battleship’. Proper use of dependency
management tools such as Packrat (https://
rstudio.github.io/packrat/) and Conda
( can eliminate these
difficulties both for the authors and others
seeking to build on the work by tracking
which versions of packages are used.
Authors may also wish to consider
containerization for managing
dependencies. Container systems such
as Docker11 allow authors to specify the
system state in which to run their code more
precisely than just versions of key software
packages. Containerization provides
better guarantees of reproducing a precise
software environment, but this very fact
can also facilitate code that will not tolerate
even modest environment changes. That
brittleness can make it more difficult for
future researchers to build on the original
analysis. Therefore, we recommend that
authors using containers also ensure that
their code works on the latest version of
at least one operating system distribution.
Furthermore, containers do not fully
insulate the running environment from the
underlying hardware. Authors expecting
bit-for-bit reproducibility from their
containers may find that graphics processing
unit (GPU)-accelerated code fails to
yield identical results on other machines
due to the presence of different hardware
or drivers.
Knowing the steps to run an analysis
is a crucial part of reproducing it, yet this
knowledge is often not formally recorded.
It takes far less time for the original authors
to document factors such as the order of
analysis components or information about
the computers used than for a third-party
analyst attempting to reproduce the work to
determine that information on their own.
Accordingly, the silver standard requires
that authors record the order in which one
should run their analysis components, the
operating system version used to produce
the work and the time taken to run the code.
Authors must also list the system resources
that yielded that time, such as the model
and number of central processing units
(CPUs) and GPUs and the amount of CPU
RAM and GPU RAM required. Authors
may record the order in which one should
run components: (1) in a README file
within the code repository; (2) by adding
numbers to the beginning of each script’s
name to denote their order of execution;
or (3) by providing a script to run them
in order. Authors must include details on
the operating system, wall clock and CPU
running time, and system resources used
both within the body of the manuscript and
in the README.
comment | FOCUS
comment | FOCUS
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | October 2021 | 1122–1144 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
The last challenge of this section,
randomness, is common in machine-
learning analyses. Dataset splitting, neural
network initialization and even some
GPU-parallelized math used in model
training all include elements of randomness.
Because model outputs depend heavily on
these factors, the pseudorandom number
generators used in analyses must be seeded
to ensure consistent results. How the seeds
are set depends on the language, although
authors need to take special care when
working with deep-learning libraries.
Current implementations often do not
prioritize determinism, especially when
accelerating operations on GPUs. However,
some frameworks have options to mitigate
nondeterministic operation ( 
org/docs/1.8.1/notes/randomness), and
future versions may have fully deterministic
operation ( 
framework-determinism). For now, the best
way to account for this type of randomness
is by publishing trained models. This
non-determinism is another reason why
the minimal standard requires model
publication—reproducing the model using
data and code alone may prove impossible.
As it is difficult to evaluate the extent
to which an analysis follows best practices,
we provide three requirements that must
be met to achieve the silver standard in
reproducibility. First, future users must be
able to download and install all software
dependencies for the analysis with a single
command. Second, the order in which the
analysis scripts should be run and how to
run them should be documented. Finally,
any random elements within the analysis
should be made deterministic.
The gold standard for reproducibility
requires the entire analysis to be
reproducible with a single command.
Achieving this goal requires authors to
automate all steps of their analysis, including
downloading data, pre-processing data,
training models, producing output tables,
and generating and annotating figures. Full
automation stands in addition to tracking
dependencies and making their data and
code available. In short, by meeting the
gold standard, authors make the burden of
reproducing their work as small as possible.
Workflow management software, such as
Snakemake12 or Nextflow13, streamline the
work of meeting the gold standard. They
enable authors to create a series of rules that
run all the components in an analysis. While
a simple shell script can also accomplish
this goal, workflow management software
provides several advantages without extra
work from the authors. For example,
workflow management software can make
it easy to restart analyses after errors,
parallelize analyses and track the progress of
an analysis as it runs.
Privacy. Not all data can be publicly
released. Some data contain personally
identifiable information or are restricted
by a data use agreement. In these cases,
data should be stored in a controlled access
repository14, but the use of controlled access
should be explicitly approved by journals
to prevent it from becoming another form
of ‘data available upon request’. Training
models on private data also pose privacy
challenges. Models trained with standard
workflows can be attacked to extract
training data15. Fortunately, model-training
methods designed to preserve privacy exist:
techniques such as differential privacy16
can help make models resistant to attacks
seeking to uncover personally identifiable
information, and can be applied with open
source libraries such as Opacus (https://
opacus.ai/). Researchers working on data
with privacy constraints should employ
these techniques as a routine practice.
When data cannot be shared, models
must be shared to have any hope of
computational reproducibility. If neither
data nor models are published, the code is
nearly useless, as it does not have anything
to operate on. Future authors could perhaps
replicate the study by recollecting data
and regenerating the models, but they
will not be able to evaluate the original
analysis based on the published materials.
When working on data with privacy
restrictions, it is important for authors
to use privacy-preserving techniques for
model training so that model release is
not impeded. Studies with only models
published will not be able to be fully
reproduced, but there will at least be the
possibility of testing model behavior on
other datasets.
Compute-intensive analyses. Analyses
can take a long time to run. In some
cases, they may take so long to run that
it is almost infeasible for them to be
reproduced by a different research group.
Box 1 | Aligning reproducibility incentives
Journals. Journals can enforce
reproducibility standards as a condition
of publication. The bronze standard
should be the minimal standard, although
some journals may wish to differentiate
themselves by setting higher standards.
Such journals may require the silver or
gold standards for all manuscripts, or
for particular classes of articles such as
those focused on analysis. If journals act
as the enforcing body for reproducibility
standards, they can verify that the
standards are met by either requiring
reviewers to report which standards the
work meets or by including a special
reproducibility reviewer to evaluate
Badging. A badge system that indicates
the trustworthiness of work could
incentivize scientists to progress to
higher standards of reproducibility.
Following completion of analyses, authors
could submit their work to a badging
organization that would then verify which
standards of reproducibility their work
met and assign a badge accordingly. Such
an organization would probably operate
in a similar way to the Bioconductor18
package review process. Authors could
then include the badge with a publication
or preprint to tout the effort the
authors put in to ensure their code was
reproducible. Including these badges in
biosketches or CVs would make it simple
to demonstrate a researcher’s track record
of achieving high levels of reproducibility.
This would provide a powerful signal to
funding agencies and their reviewers that
a researcher’s strengths in reproducibility
would maximize the results of the
investment made in a project. Universities
could also promote reproducibility by
explicitly requiring a track record of
reproducible research in faculty hiring,
annual review and promotion.
Reproducibility collaborators.
Adding ‘reproducibility collaborators’
to manuscripts would also provide
another means to make analyses more
reproducible. We envision a reproducibility
collaborator as someone outside the
primary authors’ research groups who
certifies that they were able to reproduce
the results of the paper from only the
data, models, code and accompanying
documentation. Such collaborators would
currently fall under the ‘validation’ role in
the CRediT Taxonomy ( 
credit/), although it should be made clear
that the reproducibility co-author should
not also be collaborating on the design or
implementation of the analysis.
FOCUS | comment
FOCUS | comment
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | October 2021 | 1122–1144 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
In those cases, authors should store and
publish intermediate outputs. Doing so
allows other users to verify the final results
even if they cannot reproduce the entire
pipeline. Workflow management systems,
as mentioned in the ‘Gold’ section, make
this partial reproduction straightforward
by tracking intermediate outputs and
using them to reproduce the final results
automatically. Setting up a lightweight
analysis demonstration, such as a web app
on a small dataset or a Colab notebook
( 
running a pre-trained model, can also be
helpful for giving users the ability to evaluate
model behavior without using large amounts
of compute.
Reproducibility of packages, libraries
and software products. The standards
outlined in this paper focus on the
computational reproducibility of analyses
using machine learning. Standards for
software designed for reuse, such as software
packages and utilities, would have a broader
scope and encompass more topics. In
addition to our standards, such software
should make use of unit testing, follow code
style guidelines, have clear documentation17
and ensure compatibility across major
operating systems to meet the gold standard
for this type of research product.
Conclusion
If we are to make machine-learning research
in the life sciences trustworthy, we must make
it computationally reproducible. Authors
who strive to meet the bronze, silver and gold
standards will increase the reproducibility of
machine-learning analyses in the life sciences.
These standards can also accelerate research
in the field. In the status quo, there is no
explicit reward for reproducible programming
practices. As a result, authors can ostensibly
minimize their own programming effort by
using irreproducible programming practices
and leaving future authors to make up
the difference. In practice, irreproducible
programming practices tend to decrease effort
in the short term for the authors, but increase
effort in the long run on both the parts of
the original authors and future reproducing
authors. Implementing the standards in a way
that rewards reproducible science helps avoid
these long-run costs (see Box 1).
Ultimately, reproducibility in
computational research is often
comparatively easy to experimental life
sciences research. Computers are designed
to perform the same tasks repeatedly with
identical results. If we can not make purely
computational analysis reproducible,
how can we ever manage to make truly
reproducible work in wet lab research with
such variable factors as reagents, cell lines
and environmental conditions? If we want
life sciences to lead the way in trustworthy
verifiable research, then setting standards
for computational reproducibility is a good
place to start.
Benjamin J. Heil
Michael M. Hoffman
Florian Markowetz
6, Su-In Lee
Casey S. Greene8,9 ✉ and
Stephanie C. Hicks
1Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate
Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 2Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 3Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. 4Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
5Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 6Cancer
Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 7Paul G. Allen School
of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 8Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
9Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. 10Department of
Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
✉e-mail: ;
 
Published online: 30 August 2021