From Tweets to Polls: Linking Text Sentiment to Public Opinion Time Series
Brendan O’Connor†
 
Ramnath Balasubramanyan†
 
Bryan R. Routledge§
 
Noah A. Smith†
 
†School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
§Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
We connect measures of public opinion measured from
polls with sentiment measured from text. We analyze
several surveys on consumer conﬁdence and political
opinion over the 2008 to 2009 period, and ﬁnd they
correlate to sentiment word frequencies in contemporaneous Twitter messages. While our results vary across
datasets, in several cases the correlations are as high as
80%, and capture important large-scale trends. The results highlight the potential of text streams as a substitute and supplement for traditional polling.
Introduction
If we want to know, say, the extent to which the U.S. population likes or dislikes Barack Obama, an obvious thing to
do is to ask a random sample of people (i.e., poll). Survey
and polling methodology, extensively developed through the
20th century , gives
numerous tools and techniques to accomplish representative
public opinion measurement.
With the dramatic rise of text-based social media, millions of people broadcast their thoughts and opinions on a
great variety of topics. Can we analyze publicly available
data to infer population attitudes in the same manner that
public opinion pollsters query a population? If so, then mining public opinion from freely available text content could
be a faster and less expensive alternative to traditional polls.
(A standard telephone poll of one thousand respondents easily costs tens of thousands of dollars to run.) Such analysis
would also permit us to consider a greater variety of polling
questions, limited only by the scope of topics and opinions
people broadcast. Extracting the public opinion from social
media text provides a challenging and rich context to explore
computational models of natural language, motivating new
research in computational linguistics.
In this paper, we connect measures of public opinion
derived from polls with sentiment measured from analysis of text from the popular microblogging site Twitter.
We explicitly link measurement of textual sentiment in microblog messages through time, comparing to contemporaneous polling data. In this preliminary work, summary
Copyright c⃝2010, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
statistics derived from extremely simple text analysis techniques are demonstrated to correlate with polling data on
consumer conﬁdence and political opinion, and can also predict future movements in the polls. We ﬁnd that temporal
smoothing is a critically important issue to support a successful model.
We begin by discussing the data used in this study: Twitter
for the text data, and public opinion surveys from multiple
polling organizations.
Twitter Corpus
Twitter is a popular microblogging service in which users
post messages that are very short: less than 140 characters,
averaging 11 words per message. It is convenient for research because there are a very large number of messages,
many of which are publicly available, and obtaining them
is technically simple compared to scraping blogs from the
We use 1 billion Twitter messages posted over the years
2008 and 2009, collected by querying the Twitter API,1 as
well as archiving the “Gardenhose” real-time stream. This
comprises a roughly uniform sample of public messages, in
the range of 100,000 to 7 million messages per day. (The
primary source of variation is growth of Twitter itself; its
message volume increased by a factor of 50 over this twoyear time period.)
Most Twitter users appear to live in the U.S., but we made
no systematic attempt to identify user locations or even message language, though our analysis technique should largely
ignore non-English messages.
There probably exist many further issues with this text
sample; for example, the demographics and communication
habits of the Twitter user population probably changed over
this time period, which should be adjusted for given our desire to measure attitudes in the general population. There
are clear opportunities for better preprocessing and stratiﬁed
sampling to exploit these data.
1This scraping effort was conducted by Brendan Meeder.
Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
Public Opinion Polls
We consider several measures of consumer conﬁdence and
political opinion, all obtained from telephone surveys to participants selected through random-digit dialing, a standard
technique in traditional polling .
Consumer conﬁdence refers to how optimistic the public feels, collectively, about the health of the economy
and their personal ﬁnances.
It is thought that high consumer conﬁdence leads to more consumer spending; this
line of argument is often cited in the popular media and by
policymakers , and further relationships
with economic activity have been studied . Knowing the public’s consumer conﬁdence is
of great utility for economic policy making as well as business planning.
Two well-known surveys that measure U.S. consumer
conﬁdence are the Consumer Conﬁdence Index from the
Consumer Board, and the Index of Consumer Sentiment
(ICS) from the Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
Consumers.2 We use the latter, as it is more extensively studied in economics, having been conducted since the 1950s.
The ICS is derived from answers to ﬁve questions administered monthly in telephone interviews with a nationally representative sample of several hundred people; responses are
combined into the index score. Two of the questions, for
example, are:
“We are interested in how people are getting along ﬁnancially these days. Would you say that you (and your
family living there) are better off or worse off ﬁnancially than you were a year ago?”
“Now turning to business conditions in the country
as a whole—do you think that during the next twelve
months we’ll have good times ﬁnancially, or bad times,
We also use another poll, the Gallup Organization’s “Economic Conﬁdence” index,3 which is derived from answers
to two questions that ask interviewees to to rate the overall
economic health of the country. This only addresses a subset
of the issues that are incorporated into the ICS. We are interested in it because, unlike the ICS, it is administered daily
(reported as three-day rolling averages). Frequent polling
data are more convenient for our comparison purpose, since
we have ﬁne-grained, daily Twitter data, but only over a twoyear period. Both datasets are shown in Figure 1.
For political opinion, we use two sets of polls. The ﬁrst is
Gallup’s daily tracking poll for the presidential job approval
rating for Barack Obama over the course of 2009, which is
reported as 3-day rolling averages.4 These data are shown in
The second is a set of tracking polls during the 2008
U.S. presidential election cycle, asking potential voters
2Downloaded
 
3Downloaded from 
122840/gallup-daily-economic-indexes.aspx.
4Downloaded from 
113980/Gallup-Daily-Obama-Job-Approval.aspx.
Ga up Econ Conf
M ch gan ICS
Figure 1: Monthly Michigan ICS and daily Gallup consumer
conﬁdence poll.
whether they would vote for Barack Obama or John McCain.
Many different organizations administered them throughout
2008; we use a compilation provided by Pollster.com, consisting of 491 data points from 46 different polls.5 The data
are shown in Figure 3.
Text Analysis
From text, we are interested in assessing the population’s
aggregate opinion on a topic. Immediately, the task can be
broken down into two subproblems:
1. Message retrieval: identify messages relating to the topic.
2. Opinion estimation: determine whether these messages
express positive or negative opinions or news about the
If there is enough training data, this could be formulated as
a topic-sentiment model , in which the topics and sentiment of documents are jointly inferred. Our
dataset, however, is asymmetric, with millions of text messages per day (and millions of distinct vocabulary items) but
only a few hundred polling data points in each problem. It is
a challenging setting to estimate a useful model over the vocabulary and messages. The signal-to-noise ratio is typical
of information retrieval problems: we are only interested in
information contained in a small fraction of all messages.
We therefore opt to use a transparent, deterministic approach based on prior linguistic knowledge, counting instances of positive-sentiment and negative-sentiment words
in the context of a topic keyword.
5Downloaded
 
polls/us/08-us-pres-ge-mvo.php
Approve−D sapprove perc d ff
Figure 2: 2009 presidential job approval (Barack Obama).
Percent Support for Cand date
Figure 3: 2008 presidential elections, Obama vs. McCain
(blue and red). Each poll provides separate Obama and Mc-
Cain percentages (one blue and one red point); lines are 7day rolling averages.
Message Retrieval
We only use messages containing a topic keyword, manually
speciﬁed for each poll:
• For consumer conﬁdence, we use economy, job, and jobs.
• For presidential approval, we use obama.
• For elections, we use obama and mccain.
Each topic subset contained around 0.1–0.5% of all messages on a given day, though with occasional spikes, as seen
in Figure 4. These appear to be driven by news events. All
terms have a weekly cyclical structure, occurring more frequently on weekdays, especially in the middle of the week,
compared to weekends. (In the ﬁgure, this is most apparent for the term job since it has fewer spikes.) Nonetheless,
these fractions are small. In the earliest and smallest part of
our dataset, the topic samples sometimes come out just several hundred messages per day; but by late 2008, there are
thousands of messages per day for most datasets.
Figure 4: Fraction of Twitter messages containing various
topic keywords, per day.
Opinion Estimation
We derive day-to-day sentiment scores by counting positive
and negative messages. Positive and negative words are de-
ﬁned by the subjectivity lexicon from OpinionFinder, a word
list containing about 1,600 and 1,200 words marked as positive and negative, respectively .6 We do not use the lexicon’s distinctions between weak and strong words.
A message is deﬁned as positive if it contains any positive
word, and negative if it contains any negative word. (This
allows for messages to be both positive and negative.) This
gives similar results as simply counting positive and negative
words on a given day, since Twitter messages are so short
(about 11 words).
We deﬁne the sentiment score xt on day t as the ratio
of positive versus negative messages on the topic, counting
from that day’s messages:
countt(pos. word ∧topic word)
countt(neg. word ∧topic word)
p(pos. word | topic word, t)
p(neg. word | topic word, t)
where the likelihoods are estimated as relative frequencies.
We performed casual inspection of the detected messages
and found many examples of falsely detected sentiment. For
example, the lexicon has the noun will as a weak positive
word, but since we do not use a part-of-speech tagger, this
6Available at 
causes thousands of false positives when it matches the verb
sense of will.7
Furthermore, recall is certainly very low,
since the lexicon is designed for well-written standard English, but many messages on Twitter are written in an informal social media dialect of English, with different and alternately spelled words, and emoticons as potentially useful
signals. Creating a more comprehensive lexicon with distributional similarity techniques could improve the system;
Velikovich et al. ﬁnd that such a web-derived lexicon
substantially improves a lexicon-based sentiment classiﬁer.
Comparison to Related Work
The sentiment analysis literature often focuses on analyzing
individual documents, or portions thereof . Our problem is related to work on sentiment information retrieval, such as the TREC Blog Track
competitions that have challenged systems to ﬁnd and classify blog posts containing opinions on a given topic .
The sentiment feature we consider, presence or absence
of sentiment words in a message, is one of the most basic
ones used in the literature. If we view this system in the
traditional light—as subjectivity and polarity detection for
individual messages—it makes many errors, like all natural
language processing systems. However, we are only interested in aggregate sentiment. A high error rate merely implies the sentiment detector is a noisy measurement instrument. With a fairly large number of measurements, these
errors will cancel out relative to the quantity we are interested in estimating, aggregate public opinion.8 Furthermore,
as Hopkins and King demonstrate, it can actually be
inaccurate to na¨ıvely use standard text analysis techniques,
which are usually designed to optimize per-document classi-
ﬁcation accuracy, when the goal is to assess aggregate population proportions.
Several prior studies have estimated and made use of aggregated text sentiment.
The informal study by Lindsay
 focuses on lexical induction in building a sentiment
classiﬁer for a proprietary dataset of Facebook wall posts
(a web conversation/microblog medium broadly similar to
Twitter), and demonstrates correlations to several polls conducted during part of the 2008 presidential election. We are
unaware of other research validating text analysis against
traditional opinion polls, though a number of companies offer text sentiment analysis basically for this purpose (e.g.,
Nielsen Buzzmetrics). There are at least several other studies that use time series of either aggregate text sentiment or
good vs. bad news, including analyzing stock behavior based
on text from blogs , news articles 
and investor message boards . Dodds and Danforth use an
emotion word counting technique for purely exploratory
analysis of several corpora.
7We tried manually removing this and several other frequently
mismatching words, but it had little effect.
8There is an issue if errors correlate with variables relevant to
public opinion; for example, if certain demographics speak in dialects that are harder to analyze.
Sent ment Rat o
Figure 5: Moving average MAt of sentiment ratio for jobs,
under different windows k ∈{1, 7, 30}: no smoothing
(gray), past week (magenta), and past month (blue). The
unsmoothed version spikes as high as 10, omitted for space.
Moving Average Aggregate Sentiment
Day-to-day, the sentiment ratio is volatile, much more than
most polls.9 Just like in the topic volume plots (Figure 4),
the sentiment ratio rapidly rises and falls each day. In order
to derive a more consistent signal, and following the same
methodology used in public opinion polling, we smooth the
sentiment ratio with one of the simplest possible temporal
smoothing techniques, a moving average over a window of
the past k days:
k (xt−k+1 + xt−k+2 + ... + xt)
Smoothing is a critical issue. It causes the sentiment ratio
to respond more slowly to recent changes, thus forcing consistent behavior to appear over longer periods of time. Too
much smoothing, of course, makes it impossible to see ﬁnegrained changes to aggregate sentiment. See Figure 5 for
an illustration of different smoothing windows for the jobs
Correlation Analysis: Is text sentiment a
leading indicator of polls?
Figure 6 shows the jobs sentiment ratio compared to the two
different measures of consumer conﬁdence, Gallup Daily
and Michigan ICS. It is apparent that the sentiment ratio
captures the broad trends in the survey data.
With 15day smoothing, it is reasonably correlated with Gallup at
r = 73.1%.
The most glaring difference is a region of
high positive sentiment in May-June 2008. But otherwise,
the sentiment ratio seems to pick up on the downward slide
of consumer conﬁdence through 2008, and the rebound in
February/March of 2009.
9That the reported poll results are less volatile does not imply
that they are more accurate reﬂections of true population opinion
than the text.
Sent ment Rat o
k=15, lead=0
k=30, lead=50
Ga up Econom c Conf dence
M ch gan ICS
Figure 6: Sentiment ratio and consumer conﬁdence surveys.
Sentiment information captures broad trends in the survey
Text lead / poll lag
Corr aga nst Ga up
Text leads poll
Poll leads text
Text lead / poll lag
Corr aga nst ICS
Figure 7: Cross-correlation plots: sensitivity to lead and lag
for different smoothing windows. L > 0 means the text
window completely precedes the poll, and L < −k means
the poll precedes the text. (The window straddles the poll
for L < −k < 0.) The L = −k positions are marked on
each curve. The two parameter settings shown in Figure 6
are highlighted with boxes.
When consumer conﬁdence changes, can this ﬁrst be seen
in the text sentiment measure, or in polls? If text sentiment
responds faster to news events, a sentiment measure may be
useful for economic researchers and policymakers. We can
test this by looking at leading versions of text sentiment.
First note that the text-poll correlation reported above is
the goodness-of-ﬁt metric for ﬁtting slope and bias parameters a, b in a one variable linear least-squares model:
yt = b + a
for poll outcomes yt, daily sentiment ratios xj, Gaussian
noise ϵt, and a ﬁxed hyperparameter k. A poll outcome is
compared to the k-day text sentiment window that ends on
the same day as the poll.
We introduce a lag hyperparameter L into the model, so
the poll is compared against the text window ending L days
before the poll outcome.
yt+L = b + a
Graphically, this is equivalent to taking one of the text sentiment lines on Figure 6 and shifting it to the right by L days,
then examining the correlation against the consumer conﬁdence polls below.
Polls are typically administered over an interval. The ICS
is reported once per month (at the end of the month), and
Gallup is reported for 3-day windows. We always consider
the last day of the poll’s window to be the poll date, which is
the earliest possible day that the information could actually
be used. Therefore, we would expect both daily measures,
Gallup and text sentiment, to always lead ICS, since it measures phenomena occurring over the previous month.
The sensitivity of text-poll correlation to smoothing window and lag parameters (k, L) is shown in Figure 7. The regions corresponding to text preceding or following the poll
are marked. Correlation is higher for text leading the poll
and not the other way around, so text seems to be a leading
indicator. Gallup correlations fall off faster for poll-leadstext than text-leads-poll, and the ICS has similar properties.
If text and polls moved at random relative to each other,
these cross-correlation curves would stay close to 0. The
fact they have peaks at all strongly suggests that the text sentiment measure captures information related to the polls.
Also note that more smoothing increases the correlation:
for Gallup, 7-, 15-, and 30-day windows peak at r = 71.6%,
76.3%, and 79.4% respectively. The 7-day and 15-day windows have two local peaks for correlation, corresponding to
shifts that give alternate alignments of two different humps
against the Gallup data, but the better-correlating 30-day
window smooths over these entirely. Furthermore, for the
ICS, a 60-day window often achieves higher correlation than
the 30-day window. These facts imply that the text sentiment
information is volatile, and if polls are believed to be a gold
standard, then it is best used to detect long-term trends.
It is also interesting to consider ICS a gold standard and
compare correlations with Gallup and text sentiment. ICS
and Gallup are correlated (best correlation is r = 86.4%
if Gallup is given its own smoothing and alignment at k =
30, L = 20), which supports the hypothesis that they are
measuring similar things, and that Gallup is a leading indicator for ICS. Fixed to 30-day smoothing, the sentiment
ratio only achieves r = 63.5% under optimal lead L = 50.
So it is a weaker indicator than Gallup.
Finally, we also experimented with sentiment ratios for
the terms job and economy, which both correlate very poorly
with the Gallup poll: 10% and 7% respectively (with the
default k = 15, L = 0).10
This is a cautionary note on the common practice of stemming words, which in information retrieval can have mixed
effects on performance . Here, stemming would have conﬂated job and
jobs, severely degrading results.
Forecasting Analysis
As a further validation, we can evaluate the model in a
rolling forecast setting, by testing how well the text-based
model can predict future values of the poll. For a lag L,
and a target forecast date t + L, we train the model only on
historical data through day t −1, then predict using the window ending on day t. The lag parameter L is how many days
in the future the forecasts are for. We repeat this model ﬁt
and prediction procedure for most days. (We cannot forecast
early days in the data, since L + k initial days are necessary
to cover the start of the text sentiment window, plus at least
several days for training.)
Ga up Econom c Conf dence
Gallup poll
Text forecasts, lead=30
Poll self forecasts, lead=30
Figure 8: Rolling text-based forecasts (above), and the text
sentiment (MAt) coefﬁcients a for each of the text forecasting models over time (below).
Results are shown in Figure 8. Forecasts for one month in
10We inspected some of the matching messages to try to understand this result, but since the sentiment detector is very noisy at the
message level, it was difﬁcult to understand what was happening.
the future (that is, using past text from 44 through 30 days
before the target date) achieve 77.5% correlation. This is
slightly worse than a baseline to predict the poll from its
lagged self (yt+L ≈b0 + b1yt), which has r = 80.4%.
Adding the sentiment score to historical poll information as
a bivariate model (yt+L ≈b0 + b1yt + aMAt..t−k+1), yields
a very small improvement (r = 81.0%).
Inspecting the rolling forecasts and text model coefﬁcient
a is revealing. In 2008 and early 2009, text sentiment is
a poor predictor of consumer conﬁdence; for example, it
fails to reﬂect a hump in the polls in August and September 2008. The model learns a coefﬁcient near zero (even
negative), and makes predictions similar to the poll’s selfpredictions, which is possible since the poll’s most recent
values are absorbed into the bias term of the text-only model.
However, starting in mid-2009, text sentiment becomes a
much better predictor, as it captures the general rise in consumer conﬁdence starting then (see Figure 6). This suggests qualitatively different phenomena are being captured
by the text sentiment measure at different times. From the
perspective of time series modeling, future work should investigate techniques for deciding the importance of different
historical signals and time periods, such as vector autoregressions .
It is possible that the effectiveness of text changes over
this time period for reasons described earlier: Twitter itself
changed substantially over this time period. In 2008, the site
had far fewer users who were probably less representative
of the general population, and were using the site differently
than users would later.
Obama 2009 Job Approval and 2008 Elections
We analyze the sentiment ratio for obama and compared
it to two series of polls, presidential job approval in 2009,
and presidential election polls in 2008, as seen in Figure 9.
The job approval poll is the most straightforward, being a
steady decline since the start of the Obama presidency, perhaps with some stabilization in September or so. The sentiment ratio also generally declines during this period, with
r = 72.5% for k = 15.
However, in 2008 the sentiment ratio does not substantially correlate to the election polls (r = −8%); we compare
to the percent of support for Obama, averaged over a 7-day
window of tracking polls: the same information displayed
in Figure 3).
Lindsay found that his daily sentiment score was a leading indicator to one particular tracking
poll (Rasmussen) over a 100-day period from June-October
2008. Our measure also roughly correlates to the same data,
though less strongly (r = 44% vs. r = 57%) and only at
different lag parameters.
The elections setting may be structurally more complex
than presidential job approval. In many of the tracking polls,
people can choose to answer any Obama, McCain, undecided, not planning to vote, and third-party candidates. Furthermore, the name of every candidate has its own sentiment
ratio scores in the data. We might expect the sentiment for
mccain to be vary inversely with obama, but they in fact
slightly correlate. It is also unclear how they should interact
as part of a model of voter preferences.
Sent ment Rat o for "obama"
rac Message
w th "obama"
% Support Obama (E ect on
% Pres Job Approva
Figure 9: The sentiment ratio for obama (15-day window),
and fraction of all Twitter messages containing obama (dayby-day, no smoothing), compared to election polls 
and job approval polls .
We also found that the topic frequencies correlate with
polls much more than the sentiment scores. First note that
the message volume for obama, shown in Figure 9, has the
usual daily spikes like other words on Twitter shown in Figure 4. Some of these spikes are very dramatic; for example,
on November 5th, nearly 15% of all Twitter messages (in
our sample) mentioned the word obama.
Furthermore, the obama message volume substantially
correlates to the poll numbers. Even the raw volume has a
52% correlation to the polls, and the 15-day window version
is up to r = 79%. Simple attention seems to be associated
with popularity, at least for Obama. But the converse is not
true for mccain; this word’s 15-day message volume also
correlates to higher Obama ratings in the polls (r = 74%).
A simple explanation may be that frequencies of either term
mccain or obama are general indicators of elections news
and events, and most 2008 elections news and events were
favorable toward or good for Obama. Certainly, topic frequency may not have a straightforward relationship to public opinion in a more general text-driven methodology for
public opinion measurement, but given the marked effects it
has in these data, it is worthy of further exploration.
Conclusion
In the paper we ﬁnd that a relatively simple sentiment detector based on Twitter data replicates consumer conﬁdence
and presidential job approval polls. While the results do not
come without caution, it is encouraging that expensive and
time-intensive polling can be supplemented or supplanted
with the simple-to-gather text data that is generated from
online social networking. The results suggest that more advanced NLP techniques to improve opinion estimation may
be very useful.
The textual analysis could be substantially improved. Besides the clear need for a more well-suited lexicon, the
modes of communication should be considered. When messages are retweets (forwarded messages), should they be
counted? What about news headlines? Note that Twitter is
rapidly changing, and the experiments on recent data
performed best, which suggests that it is evolving in a direction compatible with our approach, which uses no Twitterspeciﬁc features at all.
In this work, we treat polls as a gold standard. Of course,
they are noisy indicators of the truth — as is evident in Figure 3 — just like extracted textual signals.
Future work
should seek to understand how these different signals reﬂect
public opinion either as a hidden variable, or as measured
from more reliable sources like face-to-face interviews.
Many techniques from traditional survey methodology
can also be used again for automatic opinion measurement.
For example, polls routinely use stratiﬁed sampling and
weighted designs to ask questions of a representative sample of the population. Given that many social media sites
include user demographic information, such a design is a
sensible next step.
Eventually, we see this research progressing to align with
the more general goal of query-driven sentiment analysis
where one can ask more varied questions of what people are
thinking based on text they are already writing. Modeling
traditional survey data is a useful application of sentiment
analysis. But it is also a stepping stone toward larger and
more sophisticated applications.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Center for Applied Research
in Technology at the Tepper School of Business, and the
Berkman Faculty Development Fund at Carnegie Mellon
University. We would like to thank the reviewers for helpful suggestions, Charles Franklin for advice in interpreting
election polling data, and Brendan Meeder for contribution
of the Twitter scrape.