This copy is for personal use only.
To order printed copies, contact 
This copy is for personal use only.
To order printed copies, contact 
REVIEWS AND COMMENTARY • REVIEW
ecent advances in machine learning offer promise in numerous industries and applications, including medical
imaging (1). Within the innovations of data science, machine learning is a class of techniques and area of research
that is enabling computers to learn like humans and to extract or classify patterns. Machines may further be able to
analyze more data sets and extract features from data that
humans may not be able to do (2). Recent research and
developments are enabling technologies that hold promise
now and in the future for diagnostic imaging (3). In this
review article, we will first define what is meant by “machine learning” at broad and granular levels, providing an
introduction into how such techniques can be developed
and applied to imaging interpretation. Second, we will
provide examples of applications of machine learning in
diagnostic radiology. Third, we will discuss the key barriers
and challenges in clinical application of machine learning
techniques. Finally, we will discuss the future direction and
natural extension of machine learning in radiology and beyond radiology in medicine.
Fundamentals of Machine Learning
Definition of Machine Learning
Machine learning is a method of data science that provides computers with the ability to learn without being
programmed with explicit rules (2). Machine learning
enables the creation of algorithms that can learn and
make predictions. In contrast to rules-based algorithms,
machine learning takes advantage of increased exposure
to large and new data sets and has the ability to improve
and learn with experience (3,4).
Machine Learning Categories
Machine learning tasks are typically classified into
three broad categories (5), depending on the type of task: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning (Fig 1).
In supervised learning, data labels are provided to the algorithm in the training phase (there is supervision in training). The expected outputs are usually labeled by human experts and serve as ground truth for the algorithm. The goal
of the algorithm is usually to learn a general rule that maps
inputs to outputs. In machine learning, ground truth refers
to the data assumed to be true. In unsupervised learning,
no data labels are given to the learning algorithm. The goal
of the machine learning task is to find the hidden structure
in the data and to separate data into clusters or groups. In
reinforcement learning, a computer program performs a certain task in a dynamic environment in which it receives feedback in terms of positive and negative reinforcement (such
as playing a game against an opponent) (6). Reinforcement
learning is learning from the consequences of interactions
with an environment without being explicitly taught. Examples of supervised and unsupervised learning techniques
are provided in Figure 2. A machine learning paradigm may
use a combination of supervised and unsupervised methods
with a reinforcement feedback loop.
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks (Fig 3) are statistical and mathematical methods that are a subset of machine learning.
These networks are inspired by the way biologic nervous
systems process information with a large number of highly
interconnected processing elements, which are called
neurons, nodes, or cells (7). An artificial neural network
is structured as one input layer of neurons, one or more
“hidden layers,” and one output layer. Each hidden layer
is made up of a set of neurons, where each neuron is fully
connected to all neurons in the previous layer. The strength
of each connection is quantified with its own weight. For
the network to yield the correct outputs (eg, correct detection and classification of findings on images), the weights
must be set to suitable values, which are estimated through
Current Applications and Future Impact of
Machine Learning in Radiology
Garry Choy, MD, MBA  •  Omid Khalilzadeh, MD, MPH 1  •  Mark Michalski, MD  •  Synho Do, PhD  •
Anthony E. Samir, MD, MPH  •  Oleg S. Pianykh, PhD  •  J. Raymond Geis, MD  •  Pari V. Pandharipande, MD, MPH  •
James A. Brink, MD  •  Keith J. Dreyer, DO, PhD
From the Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit St, Boston, Mass 02114 (G.C., O.K., M.M., S.D., A.E.S., O.S.P.,
P.V.P., J.A.B., K.J.D.); and Department of Radiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colo (J.R.G.). Received August 16, 2017; revision requested
October 3; final revision received January 2, 2018; accepted January 5. Address correspondence to G.C. (e-mail: ).
Current address:
1Department of Radiology, Mount Sinai Health System, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
Radiology 2018; 288:318–328  •    •  Content code:
Recent advances and future perspectives of machine learning techniques offer promising applications in medical imaging. Machine
learning has the potential to improve different steps of the radiology workflow including order scheduling and triage, clinical decision support systems, detection and interpretation of findings, postprocessing and dose estimation, examination quality control,
and radiology reporting. In this article, the authors review examples of current applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques in diagnostic radiology. In addition, the future impact and natural extension of these techniques in radiology
practice are discussed.
© RSNA, 2018
Choy et al
Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018  n radiology.rsna.org
Abbreviation
CNN = convolutional neural network
Machine learning has the potential to improve different steps of the radiology workflow.
Essentials
n Machine learning comprises a set of statistical tools that can allow
computers to perform tasks by learning from examples without
being explicitly programmed. Artificial neural networks are a
subset of machine learning inspired by the human brain neuronal
network. Deep learning is a subset of artificial neural network algorithms that contain more than one hidden processing layer.
n Machine learning has the potential to improve different steps of
the radiology workflow including order scheduling and patient
screening, clinical decision support systems, detection and interpretation of findings, postprocessing and dose estimation, and
radiology reporting.
n Collection of high-quality ground truth data, development of
generalizable and diagnostically accurate techniques, and workflow
integration are key challenges for the creation and adoption of machine learning models in radiology practice.
n Machine learning has the potential to personalize health care further. Availability of large electronic medical record data allows for
creation of interdisciplinary big data sets that could be used for individual outcome prediction analysis and clinical decision making.
n For the foreseeable future, widespread application of machine
learning algorithms in diagnostic radiology is not expected to
reduce the need for radiologists. Instead, these techniques are expected to improve radiology workflow, increase radiologist productivity, and enhance patient care and satisfaction.
a training process. Learning in artificial neural networks could be
supervised, partially supervised, or unsupervised.
Deep Learning and Convolutional Neural Networks
Deep learning (also known as deep structured learning, hierarchical learning, or deep machine learning) is a subset of artificial neural network algorithms that contain more than one
hidden layer (typically many more, and thus are “deep”). In
other words, deep learning algorithms are based on a set of algorithms that attempt to model high-level abstractions in data
(8). A typical application of machine learning, a use case, is
object recognition on images. An example of object recognition with deep learning and details on the analysis performed
in different layers of a neural network is available online (9).
Deep learning models can be categorized as typical (or normal) networks that take vector form (one-dimensional) inputs
(ie, nonstructured input) or convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) that takes two-dimensional or three-dimensional
shaped inputs (ie, structured input). Given the configural information among neighboring pixels or voxels on images (structured input), CNNs have gained great interest in medical image
analysis, particularly for feature extraction from images (10).
Convolution is a mathematical operation that has applications in finding patterns in signals or filtering signals. CNNs
are formed by a stack of an input, an output layer, as well as
multiple hidden layers that filter (convolve) the inputs to get the
useful information (Fig 3). The hidden layers of a CNN typically
consist of convolutional layers, pooling layers, fully connected
layers, and normalization layers.
The main actors on CNNs are the convolution layers,
which are comprised of filter elements known as kernels (11).
The pooling (or downsampling) layer is used to reduce the
spatial dimensions to gain computational performance and
also to reduce the chance of overfitting. CNNs (Fig 4) are
currently the most commonly applied machine learning technique in medical imaging (4,11).
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a machine learning approach that applies
knowledge learned from a previous task to a different but related
task. Transfer learning allows us to use the already existing labeled
data for a new but related task. For example, a CNN pretrained
on ImageNet ( for nonmedical image
classification and visual recognition has been used for feature
extraction and survival prediction of lung tumors on CT scans
(12). ImageNet is a large database of images that have been annotated by hand to indicate what objects are pictured. ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge is an annual contest in
which software programs compete to correctly detect and classify objects on images. Knowledge gained from nonmedical image analysis is transferable to medical image analysis. Transfer
learning creates a promising opportunity for rapid progress of
machine learning in different domains.
Machine Learning Data Sets
In general, machine learning techniques are developed by using
a train-test system (5). Three primary sets of data for training,
testing, and validation are ideally needed. The training data set
is used to fit the model. During training, the algorithm learns
from examples. The validation set is used to evaluate different
model fits on a separate data and to tune the model parameters.
Most training approaches tend to overfit training data, meaning
that they find relationships that fit the training data set well but
do not hold in general. Therefore, successive iterations of training and validation may be performed to optimize the algorithm
and avoid overfitting. In the testing set, after a machine learning
algorithm is initially developed, the final model fit may then be
applied to an independent testing data set to assess the performance, accuracy, and generalizability of the algorithm.
Open-Source Tools for Deep Neural Network
Machine Learning
Machine learning algorithms can be deployed with relative
simplicity given low cost of software tools and if armed with an
appropriate foundation of knowledge (3). There are numerous
open-source tools for deep learning (summarized in Table 1).
There has been an increasing trend by independent software
developers, data scientists, and corporate entities such as
Google to democratize machine learning technologies (Fig 5).
Why Now? Convergence of Computing Power
Major advances in processing units based on massive concurrent parallel processing chip architectures for graphics
Current Applications and Future Impact of Machine Learning in Radiology
radiology.rsna.org  n Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018
processing, combined with parallel computing
approaches (historically available for graphical
rendering and gaming), have rapidly accelerated
the capability of artificial neural networks by making truly deep neural networks possible. In addition, enterprises are amassing large stores of digital
data including medical images, which have already
been digital for decades. Furthermore, there has
been democratization of many free open-source
algorithms available for machine learning such as
Caffe, Torch, and TensorFlow (see Table 1). Large
amounts of training data are also available, such as
generalized ImageNet (13,14).
Why Machine Learning Is Powerful
Fundamentally, machine learning is powerful because it is not “brittle.” A rules-based approach may
break when exposed to the real world, because the
real world often offers examples that are not captured
within the rules that programmer uses to define an
algorithm. With machine learning, the system simply uses statistical approximation to respond most
appropriately based on its training set, which means
that it is flexible. Additionally, machine learning is a
powerful tool because it is generic, that is, the same
concepts are used for self-driving cars as is used for
medical imaging interpretation. Generalizability of
machine learning allows for rapid expansion in different fields, including medicine.
Machine Learning versus Artificial
Intelligence
Compared with machine learning, artificial intelligence (or machine intelligence) encompasses a
broader range of intelligent functions performed
by computers such as problem solving, planning,
knowledge representation, language processing, or
“learning.” Therefore, machine learning is one type
of artificial intelligence (15). For example, rulebased algorithms, such as computer-aided diagnosis
used for several years in mammography, represent a
type of artificial intelligence but not a type of machine learning. Computer-aided diagnosis is, however, a broader term and may incorporate machine
learning approaches. By definition, machine learning algorithms
improve automatically through experience and are not rule
based. Machine learning is becoming more popular at different
use cases, and in fact many artificial intelligence applications are
currently using machine learning approaches (15).
Applications of Machine Learning in
Diagnostic Imaging
Although most of the literature is focused on the role of machine learning in detection of radiology findings, machine learning also has the potential to improve different steps of radiology
workflow (Table 2), as described in the following sections.
Figure 1:  Image shows different categories of machine learning.
Figure 2:  Image shows summary of supervised and unsupervised learning paradigms and subcategories, with examples in each subcategory.
Order Scheduling and Patient Screening
Intelligent scheduling facilitated by machine learning techniques
can optimize patient scheduling and reduce the likelihood of
missing care as a result of not attending the medical and radiology appointments. A project led by Dr Efren Flores at Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston, Mass) is using machine
learning and predictive analytics for identification of patients
who are at high risk for missing radiology care and not attending
their appointments (16). The team is developing individualized
solutions to reduce the chance of missing care.
In addition, machine learning applications are proposed for
patient safety screening (17) or enhancement of safety reports
(18), which have the potential for applications in radiology
Choy et al
Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018  n radiology.rsna.org
created an algorithm that accurately characterizes bone age based
on inputs of hand radiographs of pediatric patients (Fig 7) (42).
Other potential use cases of machine learning include line
detection (43), prostate cancer detection at MRI (44–46), determination of coronary artery calcium score (47), or detection and
segmentation of brain lesions (48,49).
Automated Interpretation of Findings
Interpretation of the detected findings in medical imaging (either normal or abnormal) requires a high level of expert knowledge, experience, and clinical judgment based on each clinical
case scenario. A simple example is intra-abdominal free air,
which is most likely a normal finding in a postoperative patient
but a critical finding in a patient without recent surgery. For a
machine to function as an independent image interpreter, extensive acquisition of data-derived knowledge is required (50).
Interpretation-based systems have been developed to find lifethreatening abnormalities on the images (eg, intracranial hemorrhage), although this system is for prioritizing studies on a
worklist as opposed to performing a final read for the study (51).
Several studies have shown that machine learning could improve interpretation of findings as an aid to the radiologist (4).
practice (for example, MRI safety screening or administration of contrast material).
Image Acquisition
Machine learning could make imaging systems
intelligent. Machine learning–based data processing methods have the potential to decrease imaging time (19). Further, intelligent imaging systems
could reduce unnecessary imaging, improve positioning, and help improve characterization of the
findings. For example, an intelligent MR imager
may recognize a lesion and suggest modifications
in the sequence to achieve optimal characterization of the lesion (4).
Automated Detection of Findings
Automated detection of findings within medical
images in radiology is an area where machine
learning can make an impact immediately. For
instance, the extraction of incidental findings
such as pulmonary and thyroid nodules (20–
22) has been demonstrated to be possible with
machine learning techniques. Further machine
learning research has also been performed for
detection of critical findings such as pneumothorax (Fig 6), fractures, organ laceration, and
stroke (23–29).
The algorithms that fall within the categories
of computer-aided detection and computer-aided
diagnosis have been used for decades (30–32). In
mammography, computer-aided diagnosis has
shown effectiveness (33). However, there is controversy that computer-aided diagnosis is to some
extent ignored by some mammographers and may
have limited benefit clinically (34).
Breast cancer screening is one of the first areas where machine learning is expected to be incorporated into radiology
practice (35). Several studies have shown the diagnostic value
of machine learning techniques in different breast imaging
modalities including mammography (36), US (37), MRI (38),
and tomosynthesis (39).
Interest has grown in the role of machine learning in detection, classification, and management of pulmonary nodules
(40). For example, a deep learning system to classify pulmonary
nodules performs within the interobserver variability of experienced human observers (41). Machine learning algorithms have
also aided in reduction of false-positive results in detection of
pulmonary nodules (20). The recent Kaggle Data Science Bowl
saw nearly 10 000 participants compete for $1 million in prize
money; competitors achieved high levels of performance in
identifying candidates likely to be diagnosed with lung cancer
within 1 year .
A follow-up challenge has been proposed to bring these models
to the clinic ( 
Bone age analysis and automated determination of anatomic
age based on medical imaging holds considerable utility for pediatric radiology and endocrinology. Dr. Synho Do and colleagues
Figure 3:  Image shows artificial neural network, an interconnected group of
processing elements similar to network of neurons in the brain. Each processing element is called a cell (also called neuron or node). Multiple hidden layers with nodes
allow for multiple mathematical calculations to generate outputs. Deep learning is an
artificial neural network algorithm that contains more than one hidden layer. Feedforward neural network (top panel) is the simplest type of artificial neural network.
In this network, information moves in only one direction (forward) from input nodes,
through hidden nodes, and to output nodes. Convolutional neural network (bottom
panel) is a type of feedforward artificial neural network built from multiple hidden
layers including convolutional layers, pooling layers, fully connected layers, and normalization layers. Convolution layer is comprised of filter elements known as kernels.
Current Applications and Future Impact of Machine Learning in Radiology
radiology.rsna.org  n Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018
image registration and segmentation. Several studies have used
machine learning approaches for
image segmentations, such as segmentation of breast density on
mammography (56), body organs
(35), or joint and musculoskeletal
tissues at MRI (57).
Machine learning could also be
used for intermodality image synthesis. For example, estimation of
CT images from the corresponding MR images may be possible
by using a generative adversarial network (58). The generative
adversarial networks are neural networks that use two competing
neural network models: a noise generator model that produces
noise data and a discriminator model that distinguishes real data
from noise. Over the process of training, the discriminator model
learns to better distinguish noise from real data. Compared with
other neural networks, the generative adversarial networks show
superior performance in image generation tasks (59).
Image registration is often used in multimodality overlays
such as PET/CT registration and for comparison or subtraction
of images. Deep learning could play a considerable role in image
registration, in which manual contouring and registration is time
consuming and may suffer from inter- or intrarater variability
(60). An example is application of unsupervised deep learning
for deformable registration of brain MR images (61).
Machine learning could be used for quantitative assessment of three-dimensional structures in cross-sectional imaging
(62,63). Wang et al used a CNN-based algorithm to accurately
segment adipose tissue volume on CT images (62). Brain MRI
anatomic segmentation has also been performed by using deep
learning algorithms for delineation and quantitative assessment
of brain structures and lesions (63).
Image Quality Analytics
Trained human observers (eg, experienced radiologists) are considered to be the reference for task-based evaluation of medical
image quality. However, a long time is required to evaluate a
Feature extraction from breast MR images by machine learning could improve interpretation of findings for breast cancer
diagnosis (38). A machine-learning method based on radiologic
traits (semantic features such as contour, texture, and margin) of
the incidental pulmonary nodules has been shown to improve
accuracy of cancer prediction and diagnostic interpretation of
pulmonary nodules (40).
Automated Clinical Decision Support and
Examination Protocoling
Machine learning techniques could further enhance radiology decision support tools (52). It has been suggested that an
artificial intelligence simulation framework can approximate
optimal human decisions even in complex and uncertain environments (53). Intelligent clinical decision support systems
could improve quality of care and imaging efficiency and reduce the likelihood of adverse events or mistakes in examination protocoling (54).
Postprocessing: Image Segmentation, Registration,
and Quantification
As more imaging data are becoming available, with the help
of machine learning, medical imaging has made considerable
progress in postprocessing tasks such as image registration, segmentation, and quantification. An intelligent medical imaging paradigm is data driven and tends to learn clinically useful information from the medical images (55). Extraction of
clinically relevant data from medical images requires accurate
Figure 4:  Image shows proposed deep convolutional neural network (CNN) system for detection of colitis. In the first step, several thousand
automated regions are applied on each CT section with an algorithm that finds all possible places where objects can be located (region proposal).
For each region proposal, feature extraction and computation are performed by implementation of CNN with multiple hidden layers by using pretrained data sets. In the last step, classifier algorithm (eg, linear support vector machine) could be used for colitis classification.
Table 1: Open-Source Tools for Deep Neural Network Machine Learning
TensorFlow
  low.org
  fe.berkeleyvision.org
  tware/theano
Deep Learning for Java
 
Microsoft Cognitive Toolkit
  t.com/en-us/cognitive-toolkit
 
Note.—Websites were last accessed on July 26, 2017.
Choy et al
Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018  n radiology.rsna.org
large number of images. To address this
problem, machine learning numerical
observers (also known as model observers) have been developed as a surrogate
for human observers for image quality
assessment (64). A model observer can
be applied to optimize parameters and
evaluate image quality of low-dose CT
iterative reconstructions (65).
Automated image quality evaluation
using deep learning has been attempted
by researchers. For instance, work has
been performed in automated image
quality evaluation of liver MRI (66).
A recent study (67) suggested that
neural network algorithms could be applied for noise reduction from low-dose
CT images. Training with an adversarial
network improved the ability of the
CNN to generate images with a quality
similar to that of routine-dose CT (67).
Automated Radiation Dose
Estimation
Machine learning could be used for
organ-specific classification and organ
radiation dose estimation from CT
data sets. A recent study (68) revealed
accuracy of higher than 96% in organ
mapping and organ-specific radiation
dose estimation when employing a
deep CNN classifier on CT data sets.
More work on automated radiation
dose estimation has been done in the
field of radiation oncology, which has
the potential for similar applications in
diagnostic radiology (69,70). For example, a machine learning framework
for radiation therapy planning for
prostate cancer with MRI has shown
reduction in dosage to the organs at
risk and a boosted dose delivered to the
cancerous lesions (71).
Radiology Reporting and
Machine learning techniques have been
widely applied in natural language processing. Data extraction from free-text radiology reports with
natural language processing has applications for quality assurance and performance monitoring, as well as large-scale testing
of clinical decision support (72). Natural language processing
engines may extract findings and organ measurements from narrative radiology reports and categorize extracted measurements
(73). This can provide radiologic input data for other machine
learning applications that process medical data. Machine learning techniques could also be used to extract terminology from
Figure 5:  Image shows that feature extraction and object recognition, qualified by using confidence indicators, is made simple with toolkits such as TensorFlow object detection application
programming interface. (Image courtesy of Omid Khalilzadeh, MD, MPH, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass.)
Table 2: Clinical Applications of Machine Learning in Radiology
Order scheduling and patient screening
Automated clinical decision support and examination protocoling
Image acquisition
Automated detection of findings and features
Automated interpretation of findings
Image management, display and archiving (eg, picture archiving and communication
Postprocessing: image segmentation, registration, and quantification
Image quality analytics
Automated dose estimation
Radiology reporting and analytics
Automated correlation and integration of medical imaging data with other data sources
radiology reports for quality improvement and analytics (74).
Machine learning and natural language processing algorithms
could help track radiologists’ recommendation and reduce the
chance of disconnect in communication of follow-up recommendations (75).
Automated Data Integration and Analysis
In electronic medical records, a heterogeneous pool of data
from various data sources exist (called multiview data). There
Current Applications and Future Impact of Machine Learning in Radiology
radiology.rsna.org  n Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018
overfitted algorithm overreacts to minor variations from the
training data. Therefore, the algorithm performs well on the
training data and poorly with the new data. Overfitting is
a major challenge in machine learning, particularly when a
model is excessively complex (80).
is a high throughput of data from different sources including medical histories and progress notes, laboratory results,
pathology reports and images, radiology reports and images,
genomics, and safety reports into medical record systems. The
availability of these data provides unprecedented opportunities for data mining but also raises challenges for integration
of heterogeneous data sources (for example, imaging data vs
textual data) (76). Various machine learning techniques such
as kernel methods, matrix factorization models, and networkbased fusion methods could be applied for data integration
and analysis (77).
Key Barriers and Challenges
Collection of high-quality ground truth data, development
of generalizable and diagnostically accurate techniques, and
workflow integration are the key challenges facing adoption of
machine learning in radiology practice.
Machine Learning Performance: Large Data Sets
Typically Required but Not Always
Peter Norvig of Google demonstrated
that large volumes of data may overcome deficiencies in machine learning algorithms (78). Narrow-scope
machine learning algorithms may not
require large amounts of training data,
but instead may require high-quality
ground truth training data. In medical
imaging analysis, as with other kinds
of machine learning, the amount of
data that is required varies largely on
the task to perform. For example, segmentation tasks may only require a
small set data. On the other hand, performance classification tasks (eg, classifying a liver lesion as malignant vs
benign) may require many more label
examples, which may also be largely
dependent on the number of classifiers
to distinguish between (79).
Confounders in source data may
result in possible failures of machine
learning algorithms. Rare findings or
features may also be possible weaknesses due to lack of large volume of a
particular feature for neural networks,
which are therefore vulnerable to inaccuracies (43).
Variance and bias are issues that
may result in poor performance of a
machine learning algorithm. Bias is
erroneous assumptions in the algorithm that can result in missing the associations (underfitting). High variance can cause an algorithm to learn the
data too well and start fitting random noise (overfitting).
An optimal model is not only accurate in representation of
the training data, but also generalizable to unseen data. An
Figure 6:  Image shows feature extraction example in medical imaging use case. Automated detection of critical findings such as pneumothorax in medical imaging is one application of machine learning.
Heads-up display or method of highlighting relevant findings in a
picture archiving and communication system or other image viewing
system is example of how machine learning can be productized and
integrated into radiology workflow.
Figure 7:  Image shows automated bone age algorithm based on machine learning techniques. Opportunities exist to automate and help replace more manual workflows, such as use
of book-based references.
Choy et al
Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018  n radiology.rsna.org
hands of users and perform better over time. This is challenging because the FDA needs assurance that the performance will
improve consistently and will not decline. The FDA may need
different regulatory approaches for software that functions like a
“black box” does and just provide the clinical advice or software,
which allow health care professionals to review independently
the basis for the recommendations (82).
Deciphering the Black Box of Artificial Intelligence
By its very nature, machine learning develops complex and
high-dimensional functions that cannot be explained in simple
terms. This makes interpretability of machine learning one of
the main challenges for its acceptance in the areas where identifying the underlying causes and logic is important (such as
health care). Currently, there is limited visibility into deconstructing drivers of a machine’s decision when learning is unsupervised. Work such as the Explainable Artificial Intelligence
program by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is
being performed such that artificial intelligence and machine
learning–based algorithms can be better understood in how
these models reach their conclusions ( 
program/explainable-artificial-intelligence) (Fig 8).
Visual saliency is the perceptual quality that makes some
items stand out to our vision from their neighbors and immediately grab our attention. Visual saliency maps could highlight
areas within images that have grabbed the attention of human
observers to perform a classification task. The saliency maps
could provide “explicability” for the machine learning models
and improve the accuracy for detection of findings (83).
Radiologist’ Job Perspective and Medicolegal Issues
The performance of machine learning systems for clinical diagnosis and decision making need to be monitored.
Physicians take the ownership of the medical diagnoses and
treatments delivered to patients (84). In case of medical errors, the manufacturer and developers of the machine learning systems may not be accountable, given that by definition, the computers are learning and relearning based on
Ground Truth Annotation
Extensive ground truth annotation is often required for proper training of machine learning
algorithms. Multiple technology companies and
academic research projects rely on trained radiologists to annotate what is considered ground truth
on radiology reports and images (64). Extensive
labor costs, time, and resources are required for
endeavors to be properly implemented. Also, the
validation process must be highly robust, otherwise the algorithm could be subject to overfitting
to a particular subclassification of data (80).
Defining Standards
Appropriate development of artificial intelligence
tools necessitates defining standardized use cases
and annotation tools. These use cases will need to
be consistent with clinical practice, as well as regulatory, legal, and ethical issues that accompany
artificial intelligence in medical imaging. The clinical panels of
the American College of Radiology Data Science Institute, in
conjunction with other medical specialty societies, are defining these standardized use cases ( 
Informatics/Data-Science-Institute).
In addition, a standard approach could make image annotations interoperable between different information technology
systems and software applications that communicate and exchange data. The National Cancer Institute's Annotation and
Image Markup model offers a possible standard approach to annotation of images and image features (81).
Regulation and Workflow Integration
Machine learning–based algorithms are not currently well
integrated into picture archiving and communication system
workstations. Many systems incorporate and require a separate
workstation or network node for sending images for analysis.
Within the ecosystem of the radiology informatics value chain,
more work is needed to better incorporate novel machine learning technologies. Standards may need to be set for interoperability of machine learning algorithms with existing systems.
Vendors and researchers alike must aim to create platforms that
will allow for continuous learning and upgrades of machine
learning algorithms. Machine learning algorithms need to be
updated continuously based on possible changes in the model
through exposure to more data.
An important step toward integration of machine learning
in the clinical setting is approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). Before clinical use, machine learning
applications should submit specific information about the algorithm development and clinical validation to the FDA. Clinical
validation studies should show sufficient agreement with human
experts. The FDA is facing challenges in regulating this software
and is currently developing appropriate regulatory pathways
for machine learning applications. For example, human expert
validation is challenging for machine learning algorithms designed to find associations in data that have eluded the human
eye. Another example is algorithms that continue to learn in the
Figure 8:  Image compares traditional (left panel) and explainable (right panel)
artificial intelligence systems. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is developing explainable artificial intelligence systems that will have ability to explain their
rationale through explanation interface. This approach will enable human users to
more effectively manage and more confidently trust artificial intelligent systems.
Current Applications and Future Impact of Machine Learning in Radiology
radiology.rsna.org  n Radiology: Volume 288: Number 2—August 2018
Predictive Analytics
Prediction of treatment response and prognosis are areas where
machine learning may hold promise. Early phases of this work
have recently begun. For instance, brain tumor response to
therapy can be estimated accurately with machine learning
(92). Oakden-Rayner et al (93) used features within chest CTs
to predict longevity of patients through detecting features indicative of overall individual health within those CTs.
Extension to the Electronic Medical Record and
Other Nonimaging Clinical Data
In the future, imaging data will be linked more readily to nonimaging data in electronic medical records and other large data
sets. Deep learning, when applied to electronic medical record
data, can help derive patient representations that may lead to
clinical predictions and augmentation of clinical decision support systems (94). Miotto et al evaluated medical records from
over 700 000 patients with an unsupervised deep learning representation titled “deep patient.” They found broadly predictive
characteristics for various health states (95).
In conclusion, with the current fast pace in development of
machine learning techniques, and deep learning in particular,
there is prospect for a more widespread clinical adoption of machine learning in radiology practice. Machine learning and artificial intelligence are not expected to replace the radiologists in
the foreseeable future. These techniques can potentially facilitate
radiology workflow, increase radiologist productivity, improve
detection and interpretation of findings, reduce the chance of
error, and enhance patient care and satisfaction.
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: G.C. disclosed no relevant relationships.
O.K. disclosed no relevant relationships. M.M. disclosed no relevant relationships. S.D. disclosed no relevant relationships. A.E.S. disclosed no relevant relationships. O.S.P. disclosed no relevant relationships. J.R.G. Activities related to
the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships. Activities not related to the
present article: held stock/stock options in Montage Healthcare Solutions. Other
relationships: disclosed no relevant relationships. P.V.P. Activities related to the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships. Activities not related to the present
article: has grants/grants pending with Medical Imaging and Technology Alliance.
Other relationships: disclosed no relevant relationships. J.A.B. disclosed no relevant
relationships. K.J.D. disclosed no relevant relationships.