Timing of Seasonal Sales
Pascal Courty; Hao Li
The Journal of Business, Vol. 72, No. 4. , pp. 545-572.
Stable URL:
 
The Journal of Business is currently published by The University of Chicago Press.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
 JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
 
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact .
 
Fri Apr 27 04:02:45 2007
Pascal Courty
University Pompeu Fabra
University of Hong Kong
Timing of Seasonal Sales*
I. Introduction
A common phenomenon in retail pricing is sales.
In recent years, sales have become an important
pricing strategy for seasonal goods . An additional observation is that sales
have started earlier in the season in recent years.
Whereas New Year's Day traditionally marked
the beginning of sales in the winter season, sales
have recently advanced to before Christmas and
even around Thanksgiving. For example, Pashig-
ian and Bowen cite a report by the Na-
tional Retail Merchants Association on the
monthly distribution of yearly markdowns show-
ing that, for apparel, the market share of total an-
nual markdowns taken in June (in the spring-
summer season) and December (in the fall-winter
season) has been increasing since the 1970s. Pas-
higian and Bowen's own empirical work also
shows that, when average monthly prices of
women's apparel are compared across time, De-
cember prices have decreased relative to the aver-
age season price. What explains the trend toward
* We are grateful for the comments made by Peter Pashig-
ian, Steve Salant, the editor, an anonymous referee, and serni-
nar participants at Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology. Courty's work was sup-
ported by grant DGES PB96-0302 from the Spanish Ministry
of Education and by grant 1997 SGR 00138 from the Generali-
tat de Catalunya. Li's work was supported by a grant from the
Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Adrninis-
trative Region, China, Project no. HKU7148198H.
 
O 1999 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0021-93981199917204-0005$02.50
We present a model of
timing of seasonal
sales in which stores
choose several designs
before the season with-
out knowing which, if
any, is fashionable.
Stores begin by charg-
ing high prices to cap-
ture the fashion mar-
ket. As the season
approaches the end
with goods still unsold,
stores have sales to
capture the discount
market. More designs
and greater price com-
petition in the discount
market induce earlier
sales. The results are
consistent with the ob-
servation that the trend
toward earlier sales
since the mid- 1970s coincides with increasing
product varieties in
fashion goods markets
and increasing store
competition.
Journal of Business
early sales in the clothing industry? Should one expect a similar trend
in markets for other seasonal goods?
Around the same time that sales began to start earlier in the season,
the number of varieties offered became more important. In clothing
markets, for example, in addition to traditional formal and tailor-made
suits and dresses, there has been an increase in sportswear, which gives
producers more latitude to mix different colors and fabrics and create
new styles. The market share of sportswear in women's apparel in-
creased from around 42% in 1967, to 56% in 1972, 69% in 1977, and
78% in 1982 . Do increasing product varieties play a
role in the trend toward early sales in markets for seasonal goods?
Existing models of sales explain why a store may use sales to max-
imize profits in the presence of demand uncertainty. Absent from the
literature is an analysis of the timing of sales in a competitive context.'
Timing of sales is an important strategic issue for seasonal goods mar-
kets because stores face a deadline to sell the capacity they ordered at
the beginning of the season, and they suffer great losses when they are
forced to carry their goods to the next season.
We extend Lazear's model of sales to account for timing of sales,
product variety, and store competition explicitly. We begin with the
model of a single store that orders one design of its product at the
beginning of the season without knowing if it will be fashionable or
not, that is, whether it will command a market of fashionable consumers
or discount buyers. While fashionable consumers are impulsive buyers
who may or may not buy at a list price, both fashionable consumers
and discount buyers buy at a lower discount price. In deciding when
to start sales, the store faces a trade-off between selling the goods early
in the season and selling them cheap at the discount price. Sales occur
earlier if there are fewer fashionable consumers in the market as in
recessions, if the store learns faster about the market as when it attracts
more frequent customer visits, if the store faces a greater cost of de-
laying sales as when it has a premium location with high rent, or if
the fashion premium decreases as when product labeling and bar coding
reduce the cost of price adjustments and increase the net sales profits.
Sales do not necessarily occur earlier in stores with more competent
sales forces: these stores learn faster about consumer demand, which
tends to induce early sales, but at the same time they are more likely
to sell their goods at the list price, which tends to delay sales.
1. Exceptions include Feng and Gallego and Krider and Weinberg in the
marketing literature. Their models do not have the learning feature that is the driving force
in our model. Sobel studies the timing of periodic sales in a market for durable
goods in which a new cohort of consumers enters in each period. The demand structure
in his model is similar to ours.
Seasonal Sales
Stores often order multiple designs of a product at the beginning of
the season. For example, a brand name of shirts carries slightly differ-
entiated designs with different colo.rs, fabrics, or styles. There is little
substitution among the designs for fashionable consumers, but for dis-
count buyers the designs can be perfect substitutes. In our model, the
monopoly store has incentives to order several designs without know-
ing which one, if any, will be fashionable, even if doing so does not
increase the fashion premium or the size of the fashion market. The
marginal benefit of an additional variety comes from the reduction of
the risk in putting a "hot" design on sale, and, as a result, having a
greater number of designs induces the store to put one of them on sale
earlier to test the market. Thus, our model of monopoly store implies
a relation between increasing product varieties and earlier sales. When
the cost of creating designs decreases, our model predicts both increas-
ing product varieties and earlier sales.
Increasing product varieties in recent years in many markets have
also intensified competition among retail shops. Standard models of
sales based on monopoly pricing cannot account for the effects of in-
creasing competition.' Indeed, by applying his monopoly sales model,
Lazear reasons that since store competition reduces customer
traffic at each store and hence the pace of learning about the demand,
stores "will select lower initial prices and lower those prices more
slowly." This conclusion seems to contradict the above-mentioned co-
incidence of the trend toward earlier sales and increasing product vari-
eties in the apparel market. The inadequacy of Lazear's prediction is
due to the fact that he did not take into account the role of price compe-
Our model allows us to examine the relation between increasing
competition in retail businesses and the timing of sales. At the begin-
ning of the season, several stores each choose a design and do not know
which one of the designs, if any, will be fashionable. As in the case
of the monopoly store, the market consists either of fashionable con-
sumers who are willing to pay the list price for the fashionable design
only or of discount buyers who are willing to pay at most the discount
price and who buy from the store with the lowest price. This structure
of consumer demand captures the intuition that price competition is
not as important in fashion markets as it is in the discount market.
The main result here is that sales occur earlier under competition.
Stores advance the date of sales in an attempt to capture the discount
2. Pashigian presents a model of competition in the sense of free entry into the
retailing business, but he assumes that stores can commit to intertemporal price schedules.
This does not seem to capture the nature of price competition in retail business. We will
consider both the Pashigian type of ex ante competition by way of product variety and,
more important, ex post price competition among stores without assuming that they can
commit to intertemporal price schedules.
Journal of Business
market before their competitors. There is a negative externality among
the stores in the sense that they would be better off if they could coordi-
nate to delay sales. Competition reduces the stores' revenue at any mo-
ment in time and therefore reduces the gains from delaying sales. Ex-
perimenting with the list price becomes more costly under increasing
competition. Our finding is consistent with the consensus of retail in-
dustry officials that increasing store competition has played an impor-
tant role in the unraveling of the sale date in recent season^.^
Price competition for discount buyers implies that sales prices can
be quite variable. A monopoly store chooses the sales price to be the
reservation price of discount buyers. Under price competition in the
discount market, stores must vary their sales prices randomly in order
not to lose out in the competition. Although sales prices are random,
expected discounts increase as the season approaches the end. This is
consistent with the observation that discounts are greater when sales
occur later . As in the case of monopoly, an increase
in the service quality of stores has ambiguous effects on the timing of
sales because it increases the benefits from experimenting with the list
price while speeding up the learning process. However, while the effect
of increases in the service quality on the speed of learning does not
depend on the number of stores, the benefits from experimenting with
the list price decrease as store competition increases. Thus, more com-
petitive markets are more likely to exhibit a relation between earlier
sales and better services.
Product varieties in a market are closely related with the degree of
store competition. If a store can order a new design at some cost to
compete against existing designs, then new varieties will be created
until the expected revenue from sharing the fashion market equals the
cost of ordering a new design. The expected revenue from one share
of the fashion market does not depend on the discount price because
competitive stores extract no surplus from the discount buyers. In con-
trast, the marginal benefit to a monopoly store of acquiring an addi-
tional design arises from the reduction in the risk of putting the fashion-
able design on sale. The marginal benefit depends negatively on the
willingness to pay by discount buyers because the monopoly store ex-
tracts all their surplus. It follows that the equilibrium number of variet-
ies under competition is greater than the number of varieties that a
monopoly store will order.
Existing models of sales can explain some well-documented within-
season and across-season regularities in seasonal goods markets. La-
zear explains why prices fall as the season proceeds. Pashigian
3. Pashigian acknowledges this consensus as the officials' explanation of
some recent trends in seasonal price behavior, although his own explanation focuses instead
on increasing importance of fashion to consumers.
Seasonal Sales
 and Pashigian and Bowen argue that greater demand
uncertainty in the market for women's apparel explains why percentage
markups and markdowns are greater for women's apparel than for
men's apparel. Pashigian, Bowen, and Gould note that seasonal
variation in retail prices has increased in the apparel market but de-
creased in the automobile market, and they suggest that the reason lies
in the decreasing cost of innovation for apparel and increasing cost for
cars. By explicitly considering product variety and price competition,
our model complements the existing models of sales and explains also
across-season changes in the timing dimension of store sales strategies.
In clothing markets, new production technologies that reduced the cost
of innovations have made it easier both for existing stores to order
more designs and new entrants to establish their market share, prompt-
ing earlier sales in the season. In contrast, increasing international com-
petition and increasing cost of innovation in the automobile market
have opposite effects on the timing of sales, which may explain why
seasonal price data in the automobile market do not exhibit the same
pattern of earlier sales as in apparel markets.
This article is organized as follows. In the next section, we present
a stylized model of timing of seasonal sales. Section I11 uses the model
to study the determinants of timing of sales for a monopoly store, and
Section V studies competitive timing of sales. After deriving the main
analytical results in there sections, we present their respective empirical
implications in Sections IV and VI. In Section VII, we discuss how to
relax the assumption of store and product symmetry and extend the
model to address issues such as differentiated learning pace and product
turnover rate. Section VIII concludes with a brief summary and some
remarks on regulation policies. Proofs of the propositions can be found
in the appendix.
11. A Model of Seasonal Sales
The season begins with k 2 1 designs of a product in the market and
lasts for N selling periods. Stores cannot order new designs during the
season because of high ordering cost. Let P be the store's discount
factor between two adjacent selling periods. The small discount factor
can be interpreted as a high opportunity cost of keeping the designs
on the shelf. For simplicity, we assume throughout this article that, at
the end of the Nth period, the store has zero salvage value for unsold
designs. This assumption can be easily relaxed without changing the
basic results of the model.
We assume that the market is homogeneous with a fixed size normal-
ized to one. The market consists either of fashionable consumers at-
tracted to one of the designs or of discount buyers who do not care
about fashion. Fashion buyers are willing to pay v~ for the design they
Journal of Business
like and zero for any other design while discount buyers are willing
to pay v, < v, for any de~ign.~
We refer to v, the "list price,"
the "discount price," and the difference "fashion premium." At the
beginning of the season, stores do not know which one of the designs,
if any, is fashionable. They believe that each design is fashionable with
probability nlk and no design is fashionable with probability 1 - n.
Stretching the interpretation of this prior belief a bit, we say that stores
estimate that the fashion market is of size n.
Since there are only two possible consumer valuations, timing of
sales can be given a definite meaning. If consumers buy a design when
the price is below or equal to their valuation, no store will charge a
price between the maximum discount price V, and the list price VH.
Whenever a store charges a discount price (a price below v,), we say
that the store has "sales." Stores have no incentive to continuously
decrease price^.^
Throughout this article, we maintain the assumption that consumers
do not behave strategically. This assumption is commonly made in
models of sales .6 Justifi-
cations for the assumption include a limited supply of fashion goods,
high search cost, quick fashion turnover, and a short selling season.
These conditions are likely to be satisfied in markets for high-end fash-
ion clothes and accessories, Christmas cards, calendars, and souvenirs
for events such as NBA playoffs.
In each period, consumers visit all stores and decide whether or not
to purchase the designs at the prices posted. In this simple setting, stores
offer the designs at the list price v, in the first period if there is a good
chance of selling one of them. If consumers do not buy any of the
designs at the list price, stores learn immediately that the designs are
not fashionable and will charge discount prices (have sales). In reality,
stores are likely to learn more slowly. We model this by assuming that
fashionable consumers are impulse buyers who buy the design they
like only when they are in a buying mood, which occurs with probabil-
ity q < 1. For simplicity, we assume that fashionable buyers buy the
design they like with probability q for any price between v, and v, and
probability one if the price is v, or lower. Discount buyers buy the
cheapest design if the price does not exceed VL. If several designs are
4. Alternatively, there is a single consumer who either likes one of the designs and is
willing to pay v~ or does not like the designs and is willing to pay only v~ for any design.
5. Although stores have many opportunities to adjust their prices, sales typically occur
very infrequently during a season .
6. Consumer strategic behavior is considered in a theoretical literature , initiated by
Coase's analysis of durable goods monopoly. Much of the literature is concerned
with price behavior in the limit case (the Coase conjecture) and, with the exception of Gul
 , does not consider price competition by sellers.
Seasonal Sales
equally cheap, they are indifferent and choose randomly. Finally, to
simplify the derivation of the -main results, throughout this article we
maintain the assumption that
As in the existing models of sales , the driving force in our model is consumer demand
uncertainty and store learning, as opposed to most of the sales models
in the marketing literature , in which
inventory control is the driving force and learning plays no role. Our
assumption of a homogeneous market allows us to focus on the issues
of timing of sales and supply of variety while ignoring quantity choice
at the beginning of the season and inventory control during the selling
season. A novelty of our model is that store learning speed is affected
by the impulse of fashionable consumers, not just by the demand uncer-
tainty in the market as in the existing sales models. The parameter q
has the interpretation of the service quality of the stores: a store with
more competent sales force or more comfortable shopping environment
has a greater probability of selling the designs at the list price. Another
novelty is that product variety is taken into account explicitly, which
allows us to isolate the effects of demand uncertainty from other factors
(e.g., fashion premium) that may also affect the importance of fashion
to consumers. Moreover, we explicitly model timing of sales with a
simple demand structure of fashionable consumers and discount con-
sumers. The idea of discount market is also crucial for our analysis of
competitive timing of sales.
We have made a few simplifying assumptions above, chief among
which is symmetry regarding designs and stores: all designs have the
same list price even though there is no substitution among them for
fashionable consumers and all stores have the same service quality.
Symmetry regarding designs is assumed to focus our model on the
effects of product variety, while symmetry regarding stores is to high-
light the impact of store competition. In Section VII below, we discuss
the implications of relaxing these and other assumptions and show how
to enrich our model to address other issues related to seasonal sales.
111. Monopolistic Timing of Sales
Imagine a single store with k designs at the beginning of the season.
The store's pricing problem can be solved by backward induction. To
understand the basic intuition, assume for now that k = 1. Let
wf(p) be the store's expected profits when there are n periods to go
(superscript m stands for "monopoly") and the estimated fashion mar-
ket size is p. By the assumption of zero salvage value, wf(p) = 0. For
Journal of Business
n 2 1, the store chooses between having a sale (charging v,) and hold-
ing to the list price (charging.vH):
where the updated estimate of the size of the fashion market after un-
successfully charging the list price is given by
Since wf(p) = 0, in the last period the store charges v, (has sales)
if and only if its estimated size of the fashion market is smaller than
In all periods before the last one, the store is indifferent between having
sales in this period and having sales in the next period after charging
the list price in this period if the size of the fashion market p satisfies
This implies that the threshold size of the fashion market under which
the store is indifferent between having sales in this period and in the
next period is
If the estimated fashion market size is greater than t with n 2 2 periods
to go, then charging vH in the current period is optimal because, if the
design does not sell at v,, the store can always have sales in the next
period, that is, ~ ; - ~ ( p ' ) 2 V L . If the estimated fashion market size is
smaller than t, then it is optimal for the store to have sales right away:
since the updated estimate is always smaller than the current estimate
of the fashion market size, that is, p' < p, the best the store can do in
the next period after unsuccessfully charging vH in the current period
is to have sales.7
The above analysis can be extended to the case of multiple designs
(k r 2). This extension is important because it illustrates the effect
of product variety on timing of sales; it will also be compared to the
competitive model of sales to show the effect of store price competi-
tion. The monopoly store orders several designs at the beginning of
the season but does not know which one of the designs, if any, will
7. This argument holds for all n 2 3. For n = 2, the result follows from the fact that
ti < t, so that p' < p < t < t,.
Seasonal Sales
be fashionable. The new consideration in the case of multiple designs
is how many designs the monopoly store should choose to put on sale
when having sales is optimal. Since all designs are perfect substitutes
for discount buyers and since there is no substitution among the designs
for fashionable buyers, putting more than one design on sale is optimal
only if the per-design sales profit vL exceeds the per-design expected
profit from charging the list price VH. By the assumption qvH > VL, in
the last period it is not optimal to put more than one design on sale,
and a fortiori, it is never optimal to have more than one design on sale
in any period.
For the following proposition, we define
H+ V L ( ~- 1)
PROPOSITION1. In the last period of the season, sales occur if and
only if the estimated per-design size of the fashion market is smaller
than tl;. In any period except the last one, sales occur if and only if
the store estimates that its fashion market is smaller than tm per design.
The threshold fashion market size t r determining end-of-the-season
sales is not the same as the threshold tm during the season. Indeed,
sales occur for different reasons in the two cases. Sales at the end of
the season may be interpreted as "clearance sales." The store gets zero
salvage value for any unsold design while it captures the whole dis-
count market by putting one design on sale, so sales occur if the ex-
pected sales profit from a single design is greater than the expected
profit of selling it at the list price. The threshold t r does not depend
on the discount factor. During the season (n 12), the monopoly store's
choice is between putting one design on sale in the current period and
having sales in the next period. Since the store can always have sales
in the next period if necessary, as opposed to getting zero salvage value
in the last period after unsuccessfully charging the list price, the thresh-
old tm is smaller, and sales are less likely during the season than at the
end of the season. Moreover, the threshold tm during the season depends
on the discount factor. Indeed, from the expression of tm, we see that
sales do not occur during the season when it does not cost anything to
hold the good on the shelf (P = 1). Since our focus is on learning and
demand uncertainty, unless otherwise noted, by sales we mean sales
during the season.
Except for the different threshold in the last period, the threshold
fashion market size that determines the timing of sales does not depend
Journal of Business
on the number of periods left in the season. The reason for this is al-
ready clear in the case of k = l . In each period, the monopoly store
faces a choice of selling the single design early for sure and selling it
at the high list price with some probability. The threshold fashion mar-
ket size during the season is therefore determined by the indifference
condition between having sales in this period and having sales in the
next period after charging the list price in the current period. Since the
trade-off captured by this indifference condition does not depend on
the number of periods left in the season, the threshold tmis independent
According to proposition 1, price behavior during the season is sim-
ple. If the store's prior estimate of the total size of its fashion market
is greater than ktm,it starts with the list price V Hfor all its designs. As
the designs continue to stay on the shelf, the store adjusts its estimate
downward. If the designs are still unsold when, for the first time, the
updated estimate falls below the threshold fashion market size tm,the
store randomly selects a design and puts it on sale at the discount price
V L . Then either the market closes after purchases by discount consum-
ers, or, if no purchase is made at the sales price, the store learns that
consumers are fashionable and keeps the list price for the rest of the
s e a s ~ n . ~
Although the choice of design on sale is random, the timing of sales,
or the period when sales start, if at all, is deterministic in this monopoly
model. Since the threshold fashion market size tmdoes not depend on
the number of periods left, we can work out the timing of sales by
reversing the updating rule, starting from tmand t?. Let b, = tmand
define bnrecursively for each n 1 2 according to the updating rule:
Similarly, let 6, = ty, and define 6, according to the same updating
rule above. If the prior per-design estimate nlk exceeds b,, sales never
9ccur, and the store charges v, throughout the season. If b,-, < nlk <
b,, sales occur, if at all, in the last period of the season. For any i 5
N - 1, if the prior satisfies bi-, < nlk < bi, sales occur in the ith
period of the season, with probability ( 1 - 7c) + 7c(l - q)'-'.
8. Thus, after a single unsuccessful sale of a design, the inference is that consumers
are fashionable, and so observed average price goes down once in the season and then up
immediately. In a more realistic model one can assume that discount buyers do not purchase
the designs with probability one when they are on sale, or there is a possibility that consum-
ers are "window-shoppers" with zero valuation. Then stores do not learn immediately
that consumers are fashionable after unsuccessful sales, and average price stays down for
more periods.
Seasonal Sales
IV. Implications of the Monopoly Model
Store location, bar coding, and business cycles. It can be shown
directly from the expression of tm that the threshold fashion market
size is higher for stores with a lower P. That is, stores that discount
future profits heavier tend to have earlier sales in the season. Stores at
premium locations have lower p because they face a greater cost of
selling their designs late owing to higher rent or higher opportunity
cost of shelf space, and as a result they tend to have earlier sales. Stores
at premium locations are also likely to have more frequent customer
visits. This means more opportunities for the stores to learn about the
market, which also makes sales appear earlier in the sea~on.~
show that the threshold fashion market size tm increases as the discount
price VL increases, or as the list price VH decreases, because it is more
costly to delay sales and less profitable to keep the list price. Recent
innovations in product labeling and bar coding have reduced the cost
of price adjustments. By increasing the net profits from sales, these
innovations have equivalently increased the discount price v,, and, as
a result, sales tend to occur earlier in the season. Timing of sales also
depends on the business cycles. Sales occur earlier during recessions
because both the fashion premium v~ - v~ and the total size of the
fashion market .n are likely to decrease in a recession. If business down-
turns are anticipated before stores order their designs at the start of the
season, then stores will likely respond by ordering designs with smaller
fashion premiums, which will further precipitate sales in the season.
Store service quality. Service quality q can have opposite effects
on the timing of sales. On the one hand, an increase in the quality of
the service makes it more likely for the store to sell the designs to
fashionable consumers, which tends to delay the timing of sales by
increasing the benefits from waiting. This effect can be seen from the
expression tm, which decreases as q increases. On the other hand, with
better service, the store also learns faster whether its designs are fash-
ionable (updates faster), which tends to drive early sales. This effect
can be seen from the updating rule p' = p(l - q)/(l - pq): for a given
estimate of the fashion market size, the updated estimate is smaller if
q is greater. The overall effect of changing store service quality depends
on the comparison of these two effects. For example, since the updating
rule is unaffected by the fashion premium and the discount factor, and
since the small fashion premium and small discount factor magnify the
9. The comparison is made between stores at premium and nonpremium locations that
share some of the same seasonal goods. This does not exclude the possibility that stores
at different locations have different mixes of products. Examples of premium locations
include popular shopping malls and tourist sites. Premium locations are not exclusive loca-
tions where stores pay a higher rent and have few visits per unit of time because they sell
higher-priced goods to higher-income consumers.
Journal of Business
effects of q on tm, for a store that faces a market of small fashion pre-
mium or has a premium location with higher rent or higher opportunity
cost of shelf space, improved service quality is more likely to lead to
later sales in the season.
Increasing importance of fashion.
Pashigian observes that
since the 1960s fashion has become more important in clothing mar-
kets. Increasing importance of fashion may be represented by increas-
ing fashion premium: as fashion becomes more important to consum-
ers, they are willing to pay a higher premium for a fashionable design.
As the fashion premium increases, our model predicts later sales be-
cause experimenting with the list price becomes more attractive than
switching to the discount price. Thus, our model seems to suggest that,
as fashion becomes more important to consumers, sales start later.
However, the importance of fashion cannot be gauged solely from the
difference in willingness to pay. Increasing importance of fashion im-
plies not only greater demand uncertainty as represented by increased
fashion premium but also more product variety. The discussion of the
relation between timing of sales and the importance of fashion is in-
complete unless we address the effects of increasing supply of varieties.
This will be done immediately below for the monopoly case and in the
next section for the competitive case.
Product variety. The effects of product variety can be readily ex-
amined in our model. Fix the total size of the fashion market and con-
sider what happens to the timing of sales as the fashion market is seg-
mented by a greater number of designs. The threshold fashion market
size t: decreases with k, but kt: increases with k. Since the updating
is unaffected by the increase in the number of designs, sales occur
earlier when the monopoly begins with more designs on the shelf.'' In
the case with one good (k = l), the monopoly store balances the trade-
off between selling early and selling cheap. When there are more
designs, the monopoly can use one design as a "trial balloon"-if
consumers do not buy the design on sale, then they must have high
valuation for the remaining items, and the store will keep the list price
for the rest of the season. When the number of designs is greater, the
risk of putting a "hot" design on sale is reduced, and therefore the
balance between selling early and selling cheap is tilted in favor of
selling early."
10. If consumers value variety in the sense that n.or the high valuation v~ increases
with k, the effect of competition in driving the early start of sales obtained below will be
11. Throughout this article we assume costless search by consumers. However, it may
be argued that, as product variety increases, it becomes more difficult even for impulse
consumers to pick out the one they like, and as a result, q may decrease. If so, the effect
of an increase in product variety on timing of sales will be accompanied by additional
effects of a decrease in q. In the monopoly model, a decrease in q slows down store learning
but reduces expected profits from selling to fashion buyers so that the overall effects on
Seasonal Sales
Thus, a monopoly store can have incentives to order several designs,
even if doing so does not increase the fashion premium or the size of
the fashion market. The benefits of having more varieties can be calcu-
lated by comparing the expected profits with k + 1 and k designs at
the beginning of the season, with the prior estimate of the total fashion
market size fixed at n. Clearly, the benefits are nil if n is sufficiently
large so ;hat sales ?ever occur even with k + 1 designs (i.e., n exceeds
(k + l)bN where bNis calculated as above, with k + 1 designs): from
the derivation of proposition 1, since there are no sales, the expected
profit is just
independent of the number of designs. The difference in the expected
profits between k and k + 1 designs is the largest, the marginal benefits
of variety the greatest, when n is so small that sales occur in the first
period of the season even with k designs (i.e., n is smaller than ktm).12
From the expression of sales profits in the proof of proposition 1 (see
the appendix), the benefits to the monopoly store of adding an addi-
tional design to existing k designs are at most
Note that the above expression of marginal benefits of product variety
is proportional to ll[k(k + I)]. The intuition is simple. Since the store
chooses only one design on sale (and since by assumption increasing
the number of designs does not change the total size of the fashion
market), having one more design reduces the probability of putting a
hot design on sale. If the store chooses the hot design on sale, it gets
V L instead of the revenue from selling it at v~ sometime in the season.
The probability of choosing the hot design is llk, and so the marginal
benefit of an additional design is proportional to ll[k(k + I)].
timing of sales are unclear, but in the competitive model it will likely delay sales and thus
counterbalance the direct effect of precipitating sales of the increase in product variety
(see the discussion in Sec. VI).
12. From the derivation of proposition 1, the expected profit at the beginning of the
season consists of the expected profits from charging the list price for a few periods and
then the expected profits from sales. The first part of the profits does not depend on the
number of designs. Since sales occur earlier with k + 1 designs than with k designs, the
difference in the expected profits between k + 1 and k designs is at most the difference
in the sales profits s,(p) between k + 1 and k designs, where s,(p) is as defined in the
proof of proposition 1,and where n andp are, respectively, the number of periods remaining
and the per-design size of fashion market when sales occur with k + 1 designs. This gives
the expression that follows, where n is replaced by N and p is replaced by nl(k + 1) and
nlk, respectively.
Journal of Business
V. Competitive Timing of Sales
Now imagine that two stores, .A and B, each with a design at the begin-
ning of the season, compete for a unit-size market consisting of either
fashionable consumers or discount buyers. Fashionable consumers like
either store A's design or store B's design. Note that, since there is no
substitution between the two designs for fashionable consumers, price
competition is limited to the discount market in which the two designs
are perfect substitutes. Furthermore, if both stores charge the list price
v, and if consumers do not purchase either design, the updated estimate
of each store about its fashion market size is p(l - q)l(l - 2pq). Thus,
stores update at the same pace under competition and under monopoly.
The results we obtain below regarding earlier sales under competition
do not rely on any implicit assumption that learning is faster under
competition.
Consider first the equilibrium in the last period. Since the salvage
value is zero for both stores, each charging v, is a pure-strategy Nash
equilibrium if
where p < 112 denotes the common estimate of each store's fashion
market size. In this case, two stores are optimistic about their chance
at their own fashion market, even though each of them can capture the
whole discount market by having sales. If the above condition is not
satisfied, there is no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium because the esti-
mated size of the fashion market is too small to justify giving up the
discount market completely, but since the two designs are perfect sub-
stitutes in the discount market, price competition tends to drive down
the sales profits below what each store can get by sticking to the list
price. Note that neither store charges any price between vL and v, because such pricing reduces the store's profits from its fashion market
without attracting discount buyers. Moreover, price competition in the
discount market does not reduce the prices and profits to zero because
each store can always hold on to its fashion market, which provides a
lower bound on its profits and the amount of discount it is willing to
give away.
Using the standard techniques , we can show
that in the random-strategy equilibrium when p q v ~ < (1 - p)vL, there
is no probability mass point in the randomization support of each store,
except at VH. By symmetry, we can let the common randomization sup-
port be [&, vL]U {v,). The lower bound of the support & is determined
by the condition that each store is indifferent between charging this
price (and capturing the whole discount market) and charging v, to
take the chance at its own fashion market:
Seasonal Sales
which implies
The probability F(x) that each store charges a price below some x E
[x, vL] is determined by the condition that the other store is indifferent
between the price x and v,,
(1 - 2p)[l - F(x)lx + px = pqv,,
which implies
Note that F(x) is positive for all x E [x, vL] Moreover, the assumption
H> VL implies that F(vL) < 1, which shows that there is a probability
mass at v,; that is, the probability of each store having sales is strictly
less than one.13
The above model of two competing stores can be easily extended
to the case of many stores. For expositional convenience, we restrict
ourselves to the two-store model in the main text, although the result
and the proof are stated for the general case of k stores, each with one
design. For the following proposition, we define (superscript c stands
for "competitive' ')
PROPOSITION Suppose there are n periods left in the season. Then
sales occur with positive probability if and only if each store's estimate
of its fashion market size is smaller than ti.
From the derivation of proposition 2, when there are n periods re-
maining in the season, the expected profit of each store as a function
of its estimated fashion market size p is given by
13. This is where the assumption q v H > v~ simplifies the analysis in the competitive
model. Without this assumption, the equilibrium in the last period is characterized by
random sales prices with upper bound v,,, and V H is not in the randomization support. As
a result, the expected profit of a store, as a function of its estimated fashion market size,
does not take the form of the discounted sum of expected revenue from the fashion market,
and the analysis is correspondingly complicated.
Journal of Business
Thus, under competition, each store's profit is as if it just charges the
list price VH in each period. Obviously, this myopic strategy cannot be
part of an equilibrium. However, from an ex ante point of view, com-
peting stores cannot expect to do any better than by following this myo-
pic strategy. Under competition, the stores receive no rent from the
discount market. It is completely dissipated in store competition.
The random-strategy equilibrium calls for a few comments. In the
monopoly store model of Section 111, we have seen that the timing of
sales is deterministic, but the selection of design for sales is random
because the monopoly store has no clue which design is likely to be
fashionable. The random-strategy equilibrium in the competitive model
here may be understood in a similar way. Because stores do not know
whether they are carrying a fashionable design, only a random pricing
strategy can guarantee that they will not lose out in the competition.
Random strategies are not uncommon either in practice or in the litera-
ture. Existing models of sales distinguish two types of sales: the "tem-
poral" sales of Varian with random prices, and the "spatial"
sales of Salop and Stiglitz with deterministic prices. Temporal
sales can be interpreted as unadvertised sales.14 Compared to adver-
tised spatial sales, temporal sales are less vulnerable to consumer arbi-
Timing of sales can be derived from proposition 2. If stores' prior
estimate TC of the total size of the fashion market is larger than 2tk,
both stores start the season with the list price VH. As the designs con-
tinue to stay on the shelves, stores adjust their estimates downward,
and at the same time the threshold fashion market size for the start of
sales-randomization increases (ti increases as n decreases). Let i be the
first period such that each store's estimate of its fashion market size
is smaller than t;-i+, . If the designs are still unsold at the end of period
i - 1, which occurs with probability (1 - TC)+ n(l - q)'-', the stores
start to have sales in period i. From the derivation of proposition 2,
the probability that a store has sales, or charges a price below V L , is
where n = N - i + 1 is the number of periods remaining at the begin-
ning of period i.
Price behavior after sales start in period i can be easily derived from
proposition 2. If both stores have sales in period i, which occurs with
probability F;(V,), consumers buy the designs with probability one,
and the season is over. If only one store, say store A, has sales, which
14. A store's advertised sales (promotional sales) may also be interpreted as random
sales as long as competing stores cannot respond fast enough to undercut its price.
Seasonal Sales
occur with probability 2F,,(vL)[1 - Fn(vL)], then consumers buy from
store A if they are discount -buyers or if they like store A's fashion,
and they buy from store B only if they like B's fashion and they are
in a buying mood. In either case, the season ends after the purchase.
If consumers like store B's fashion but are not in a buying mood, store
B infers that consumers like its design with probability one and will
charge v~ for the rest of the season. Finally, if both stores charge vH
in period i, which occurs with probability 1 - F ~ ( v ~ ) ,
the season pro-
ceeds to period i + 1 if consumers are discount buyers or if they like
one design but are not in a shopping mood. In period i -k 1, the updated
estimate p' remains below the threshold fashion market size ti-i (be-
cause pf < p < t;++, < &), and the above description applies with
i + 1 replacing i and p' replacing p.
VI. Implications of the Competitive Model
Within-season price variability. Unlike the monopoly case, in
which the sales price is equal to the low valuation, price competition for
discount buyers implies that observed sales prices can be quite variable
because stores must randomize their sales prices in order not to lose
to their competitors. However, as the season approaches the end, ex-
pected discounts increase. To see this, note first that, after period i when
sales start, stores charge the sales price only if they charged vH in all
previous periods and either consumers are discount buyers or they are
fashionable but not in a buying mood. From the derivation of proposi-
tion 2, the lower bound of each store's randomization support x, is
As the number of periods n remaining decreases and as the store's
estimate p of its fashion market size is adjusted down, the bound x,
decreases. Similarly, once sales randomization starts, with n periods
remaining in the season, the probability that each store charges a price
lower than x in the randomization support is given by
Clearly, F,(x) increases as the number of periods remaining decreases
and as the stores lower the estimates of their fashion market size (p
decreases). This result is consistent with the observation in Pashigian
 that stores having sales earlier in the season give smaller dis-
Journal of Business
Although expected discounts increase as the season approaches the
end, observed average price (across designs) implied by the model may
not always decrease over the season. When sales start in period i, there
is a positive probability 2Fn(v,) [l - F,,(v,)] that only one store, say
store A, has sales, and with probability p(l - q) consumers do not
buy from store B. In this case, store B infers that consumers like its
design and will charge v, for the rest of the season. Thus, as in the
case of the monopoly store, the observed average price may go down
and then up instead of going down throughout the whole season, al-
though, under both monopoly and competition, the price for a given
design cannot go down and then up. This explains why sometimes
stores are observed to have sales in the beginning of the season, which
is mentioned by Pashigian as a puzzle to the standard theory
of sales. Our model is more successful in this respect because, unlike
the standard sales model, in which estimates of consumer willingness
to pay are always adjusted down as the season proceeds, we capture
the idea that it can go up after unsuccessful sales by introducing the
possibility that consumers are discount buyers.
Service quality and other determinants of timing. We concluded
in the monopoly case that increases in the service quality of the store
have ambiguous effects on the timing of sales because benefits from
experimenting with the list price are greater while learning is faster.
The same forces exist under competition as well. However, while the
effect of increases in the service quality on the speed of learning does
not change when there are competing stores, the benefits from experi-
menting with the list price decrease as store competition increases.
Thus, a competitive market is more likely to exhibit a correlation be-
tween earlier sales and better services. As in the case of the monopoly
store, other determinants of earlier sales are a small fashion premium,
the great opportunity cost of holding the good on the shelf, and the
small size of the fashion market. We also concluded in the monopoly
case that decreasing cost of adjusting prices drives earlier sales and
increases store profits by increasing sales profits from the discount mar-
ket. In contrast, under competition decreasing cost of adjusting prices
drives earlier sales but leaves profits unchanged because stores obtain
no profits from the discount market.
Store competition. The main result in this section is that competi-
tion drives early sales. A monopoly store starts sales when its estimate
of per-design fashion market size falls below the threshold size tm,
which does not depend on the number of periods left. With two compet-
ing stores, sales start with n periods to go if the stores' estimates of
their respective fashion market size falls below ti. Under the assump-
tion that the prior estimates of the total fashion market size are the
same under monopoly and under competition, updating of estimates
occurs at the same pace. Therefore, sales start earlier under competition
Seasonal Sales
with n periods to go if tz > tm.15Recall that t; decreases with n. We
have (in the case of k = 2)
It can be verified with a little algebra that t",
tm,and therefore t",
tmfor all n.
The reason that price competition in the discount market drives early
sales can be understood as follows. A monopoly store balances the
trade-off between taking the chance at the fashion market and capturing
the discount market for sure. In the competitive equilibrium, the two
stores face the same trade-off. However, while a monopoly store can
always have sales in the next period after unsuccessfully charging vH
in the current period, such a second chance is not taken for granted
under competition. Instead, each store perceives a first-mover advan-
tage in capturing the discount market. The contrast between the second
chance under monopoly and the first-mover advantage under competi-
tion can be seen by comparing the numerator in the expression of tm
to that of tz: under monopoly, the benefit of having sales in the current
period, instead of in the next period, represented by v,(l - P), is ex-
tracting the maximum surplus v, from discount buyers one period ear-
lier, whereas under competition the benefit of having sales in the cur-
rent period is VL, which is larger than under monopoly. Therefore, under
competition the trade-off is tilted in favor of capturing the discount
market, implying that sales are more likely under competition. The par-
adox, of course, is that in equilibrium the first-mover advantage does
not exist because price competition completely dissipates the rent in
the discount market.
Price competition intensifies as the number of stores in the market
increases. This can be modeled by an increase in the number of stores
while maintaining the total size of the fashion market and the assump-
tion that each store has one design. It is straightforward to show that
kt: increases with k. Thus, more competition drives earlier sales. To
understand the intuition behind this result, note that, as the number of
stores increases with the total size of the fashion market fixed, each
store commands an increasingly smaller share. Since the profit from
each store's fashion market decreases as its share shrinks, the perceived
advantage from being the first to capture the whole discount market
becomes greater. Therefore, sales occur earlier during the season as
competition intensifies.
15. Note that tci= tml;i.e., the end-of-the-season threshold is the same under monopoly
and under competition.
Journal of Business
Product variety. The competitive model can be used to consider
the implication of store competition to product variety. Suppose that
there are already k stores in the market, each carrying a design, and
consider the incentives of a new entrant. If the entrant carries a design
that gets ll(k + 1 ) share of the fashion market, then from the derivation
of proposition 2, the expected profit to the store at the beginning of
the season is
where n is the prior that consumers are fashionable. The above expres-
sion can be thought of as the average benefit of variety under competi-
tion, which arises from sharing the fashion market. Note that the maxi-
mum discount price vLdoes not enter the expression, as the stores do
not extract surplus from discount buyers. At the end of Section 111, we
derived the marginal benefit of variety under monopoly, which arises
from the reduction in the risk of putting the fashionable design on sale
and therefore depends negatively on V L . Comparing the average benefit
under competition to the marginal benefit under monopoly, we find that
the average benefit is greater, implying that competitive markets offer
more varieties.
If there is free entry into the retailing business, in that any store can
order a different design at some cost to compete against the designs
carried by existing stores, new varieties will be created until the ex-
pected profit from price competition equals the cost of ordering a new
design. If the cost of ordering a new design falls, there will be more
varieties in the market and, hence, greater store competition. As a re-
sult, sales will occur earlier in the season. Thus, as in the monopoly
model of Section 111, our competitive model also predicts a relation
between the number of varieties in the market and timing of sales.
Elements of an explanation of the empirical relation between the trend
of earlier sales and increasing product variety in seasonal goods mar-
kets may lie in both models.
VII. Extensions
The stylized model presented in previous sections allows us to focus on
the main issues of sales timing, product variety, and price competition.
However, several features of our results are at odds with commonly
observed practices in retail markets for seasonal goods. In this section,
we extend our model to address some of these inconsistencies. These
extensions are not meant to be comprehensive; rather, they are partly
chosen to illustrate how our model can be developed further to address
other issues regarding seasonal sales.
Seasonal Sales
A straightforward extension is to combine the monopoly model of
Section I11 and the competitive model of Section V by allowing com-
peting stores to have multiple designs. .Suppose that there are k stores,
each with 1 designs that share the fashion market equally. As in the
monopoly model, the assumption qvH > v, implies that stores randomly
select a single design when it is optimal to have sales. Following the
proofs of propositions 1and 2, we can show that the per-design thresh-
old fashion market size with n periods to go is given by
Thus, the competitive timing of sales depends only on the number of
designs that share the fashion market, not directly on the number of
competing stores (as long as there is more than one). An implication
is that the assumption in Section V that each competing store has just
one design is without loss of generality.
In our model, when a store with multiple designs of a product has
sales, a single design is chosen randomly because putting more than
one design on sale only sacrifices the chance of capturing the fashion
premium and because all designs are ex ante identical to the store.
However, one sometimes observes stores putting several designs on
sale at the same time, and the choice of designs for sales is sys-
tematic rather than random. This observation can be accommodated
in our model by relaxing the assumption of qvH > v,. If we main-
tain that all designs have the same list price and discount price, then
under the assumption ~
H< v,, the price behavior and sales timing
strategy in the monopoly model are similar as described in propo-
sition 1. In particular, a single item will be chosen when sales
occur for the first time, so that greater product variety has the same
effect of precipitating sales as in the case of q v ~
> VL. However,
unlike the case of qv, > VL, in which the "trial" sales turn out to be
unsuccessful and the store infers that it is facing a market of fashion
buyers, it will not charge v, until the end of the season. Instead, at
some point it will find it optimal to put all remaining designs on a
"clearance" sale. A more realistic assumption is that designs differ in
fashion premium so that qvH > v, for some designs but qvH < v, for
the others. Then, a few designs with small premium will be chosen
first when sales occur later in the season.16 The result that greater prod-
16. This result does not contradict the observation that "conventional" designs are less
likely to go on sale. Instead of a small fashion premium, conventional designs are most
likely to have salvage values close to the discount price, so stores are unlikely to put them
Journal of Business
uct varieties precipitate sales in the season should carry through to this
case as well.
Often, some stores learn faster than others about the demand for their
products because of better service quality, and stores can also differ in
their fashion market share. Asymmetry among stores in our model af-
fects both timing and pricing strategies of sales. To illustrate this point,
consider the situation in the last period in which one of the two stores,
say store A, has an edge over its competitor B in the fashion market,
either because its service quality is higher (qA > qB) or because it has
a greater share of fashion market (pA > pB). Then sales can be more
likely in store B than in store A. More precisely, suppose that pA(l pA)qA>pB(l - pB)qB. Then, if pAqAvH > (1 -pB)vL and pBqBvH
(1 - pA)vL, store A charges the list price vH and, store B has sales
(charges vL), but the opposite situation cannot occur; if pAqAvH
2 (1 pB)vL and pBqBvH
2 (1 - pA)vL, each store charges VH, and sales do
not occur in either store. Finally, ifpAqAvH < (1 -pB)vL andpBqBvH <
(1 - pA)vL, store A's edge in the fashion market is too small to justify
giving up the discount market completely, so there is no pure-strategy
equilibrium. In the last case, both stores can have sales, but only store
A has a positive probability of charging the list price while store B
concentrates on the discount market. The precise characterization of
the equilibrium and the proof are in the appendix. This analysis can
also be extended to during the season. Then, if a store has an edge in
the fashion market owing to large market share, its expected timing of
sales tends to be later in the season. As in Section 111, where we argued
that higher service quality has ambiguous effects on the timing of sales,
if a store has an edge in the fashion market because of its high service
quality, there will be two opposite forces affecting timing of sales: the
store has a good chance of selling its designs at the list price, which
tends to delay sales, but at the same time it learns faster about the
demand, which tends to induce early sales. The overall effect on timing
is therefore ambiguous.
In our model, fashion premium does not change for the whole dura-
tion of the season. That is, even at the end of season, fashionable con-
sumers are willing to pay the same list price for the design they like.
However, in a seasonal goods market with fast fashion turnover, the
fashion premium is likely to be declining toward the end of the season.
This can be modeled by an exogenous pace of declining list price as
the season proceeds. An implication is that, as fashion turnover be-
comes faster (the list price declines faster), the effective length of the
season becomes shorter, and sales start earlier. Such a model with an
exogenous pace of a declining list price is also more realistic because
store prices before the start of sales follow a gradual decline, as opposed
to a one-time drop from the list price to some discount prices in the
stylized model of the previous sections.
Seasonal Sales
Concluding Remarks
Since the 1970s, sales of seasonal designs such as apparel have started
earlier in the season while product variety has increased in these mar-
kets. This article discovers two links between these two trends: one
through a monopoly store's optimal pricing, and the other through store
competition. We consider a simple model in which retail stores start
the season without knowing which of the designs they have, if any,
will be fashionable. Stores initially charge a fashion premium in hopes
of capturing their fashion market, but as the end of the season ap-
proaches with designs still on the shelves, they adjust their expectations
downward. At some point in the season, it becomes more profitable to
have sales to capture the discount market. Having a greater number of
designs induces the store to put one of them on sale earlier to test the
market. Price competition in the discount market also induces stores
to start sales early because they perceive a first-mover advantage in
having sales before their competitors and because competition reduces
the profits from delaying sales. In a market with free entry, a fall in
the cost of product innovation results in more product varieties, greater
store competition, and sales earlier in the season.
Pashigian's work is most closely related to ours. He uses a
monopoly model to show that, as fashion becomes more important,
there is more within-season price variation. Increasing importance of
fashion is modeled by a mean-preserving spread of the distribution of
consumer valuation. In Pashigian's model, greater product variety
means more uncertainty facing the monopoly store and greater hetero-
geneity among consumers at the same time. By contrast, in our model
the increasing importance of fashion implies more uncertainty facing
competing stores only. Although increasing demand for individualism
has resulted in greater heterogeneity among consumers, a large fraction
of consumers strives to own the design that is "in." A model driven
entirely by greater uncertainty and competition such as ours captures
the essential herding aspect of the fashion phenomenon.
Our results indicate a close relation among the timing of sales, stores'
profits, and equilibrium product variety. This observation has at least
two important implications for the retailing industry. First, price com-
petition in the discount market imposes a negative externality on the
competing stores and drives early sales. Thus, there is collective incen-
tive for the stores to lobby regulators to impose restrictions on the tim-
ing of sales and on the amount of discounts. Second, industry regulators
must take into account the effect on product variety of regulation poli-
cies restricting the amount of discount or the timing of sales. When
consumers value product variety, a binding restriction on the timing
of sales, together with policies that ensure free entry in the retail busi-
ness, may result in an increase in product variety and consumer welfare.
Journal of Business
I. Proof of Proposition 1
estimated per-design size of the fashion market is smaller than ty. In any period
except the last one, sales occur if and only if the store estimates that its fashion
market is smaller than tmper design.
Suppose that there are n periods remaining in the season, with proba-
bility p consumers like a given design, and with probability 1 - kp they are
discount buyers. The optimal profit of the monopoly store w:(p)
satisfies the
following equation:
PROPOSITION In the last period of the season, sales occur if and only if the
where p' = p(1 - q)/(l - kpq) and
is the expected profits from putting one design on sale. The first term in the sales
profits sn(p), (1 - kp + p)v,, is the expected sales profits in the current period-
consumers buy if either they are discount buyers (with probability kp) or they
like the design on sale (with probability p). The second term, (k - l)pqvH, gives
the expected profits from selling one of k - 1designs not on sale (with probability
(k - 1)pq). The third term gives the profits (discounted by P) after an unsuccessful
sale (with probability (k - l)p(l - q)) when the monopoly store learns that
consumers like one of k - 1 remaining designs for sure and charges vH for each
of the remaining n - 1 periods. The first part in the max expression above gives
the expected profits of sticking to vH for all designs for one more period. The
first term, kpqv,, gives the expected profits of selling one of k designs at the
fashion price VH. The second term, P(l - kpq)w,-,(p'), gives the optimal dis-
counted profits after unsuccessfully charging vH for all designs, with an updated
estimate p' and number of periods n - 1.
Since the salvage value is zero, we have w:(p)
= 0 for all p. Suppose
n = 1. The following solution is easily obtained:
if p > vLI[qvH+ (k - l)vL]
w;(p) = (1 - kp + p)vL + (k - l)pqvH otherwise.
Thus, ty is the threshold fashion market size when n = 1.
For n 2 2, since the updated estimate p' of the fashion market size is always
smaller than the current estimate p after an unsuccessful sale, the principle of
optimality implies that the threshold fashion market size t," is determined by the
condition that the monopoly store is indifferent between having sales in the cur-
rent period and having sales in the next period after charging vH for the current
period. That is, the threshold t," satisfies
Seasonal Sales
which implies that t: = tm,as given in the statement of the proposition. Q.E.D.
11. Proof of Proposition 2
occur with positive probability if and only if each store's estimate of its fashion
market size is smaller than t:.
Proof. The proof is by induction. Suppose that n = 1. Since consumers have
not made the purchase, stores have symmetric estimates of their fashion market
size. Let the stores' estimate be p. Then, if p > t;, each store charging v, is a
pure-strategy Nash equilibrium because
PROPOSITION Suppose there are n periods left in the season. Then sales
If p < t;, there is no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium. Each store randomly selects
a price from the support [xl,vL]U {v,]. The lower bound of the support xl is
determined by the condition that each store is indifferent between charging this
price and charging V H , which implies that
The probability Fl(x)that each store charges a price below a price x E xl, vL]
is determined by the condition that each store is indifferent between the price x
Since either it is optimal for each store to charge vHor each store is indifferent
between V H and a price below V L , the expected profit of each store as a function
of its estimated size of fashion market is given by w',(p) = pqv,. The proposition
holds for n = 1.
Suppose n = 2 and each store estimates that its design is fashionable with
probability p. Against a price of vHby other stores, charging vHis optimal if
P P H+ ( 1 -
2 [1 l ) p l v ~ ,
k ~ q ) p w ; ( ~ ' )
(k where p' = p(1 - q)l(l - kpq). Therefore, when n = 2, charging vHis optimal
against a price of V Hby the other store if
If p < ti, each store charging v, cannot be an equilibrium. As in the case of n =
1, there is no pure strategy equilibrium, and both stores must randomize with
positive probability of charging v, and having sales. Note that regardless of the
prices charged by other stores, charging v, gives a store the same expected profits
of pqvH + pp(1 - q)qvH:we have seen that this is the payoff if all other stores
charge v,; if 1stores charge discount prices (v, or lower), the payoff of charging
V His pqv, + [ p ( l - q ) + (k - 1 - l ) p ] pw;(pf), wherep' = p(1 - q)l[p(l q ) + (k - 1 - l ) p ] ,resulting in the same expected payoff. Since either it is
Journal of Business
optimal for a store to charge vHor the store is indifferent between charging vH
and a discount price from the randomization support, the expected profit as a
function of the estimated fashion market size p is
The lower bound of the support .x2is determined by the condition that each store
is indifferent between charging this price and charging V H , implying
The probability F2(x)that each store charges a price below a price x E [.x2, vL]
is determined by the condition that each store is indifferent between the price x
The proposition holds for n = 2.
The argument is similar for n = 3: given the function wi(p) and symmetric
estimates of fashion market sizes, all stores charge vHif the estimate p 2 tg,
while they randomize with positive probability of charging vHand having sales
if p < tg. By induction, for any n, the expected profit to each store, as a function
of the estimate p of its fashion market size, is
and the threshold fashion market size t: satisfies
w:(t:) = [I - t:(k - l)]vL,
which gives the expression for t: stated in the proposition. Q.E.D.
111. The Asymmetric Case
PROPOSITIONA l . Suppose n =1, pAqAvH< (1 - pB)vL,and pBqBvH<
(1 - pA)vL,but pA(l - pA)qA> pB(l - pB)qB.Then, in the random-strategy
equilibrium, store A's probability of having sales is positive and less than one,
while store B has sales with probability one.
Proof. First, we show that store B charges vHwith zero probability. Let gA
be the greatest lower bound of prices that store A charges in equilibrium. Store
A always has the option of charging vHand getting profits ofpAqAvH.By charging
xA,store A can earn profits at most equal to (1 - pB)sA.Therefore, we have xAr
pAqAvH/(l- pB).NOW store B can always undercut store A by charging a price
just below xAand get profits equal to (1 - pA)zA.Since
2 pAqAvHl(l- pB),
store B's profit is at least as great as (1 - pA)pAqAvH/(l- pB).By assumption,
this profit is greater than pBqBvH,which is what store B gets by charging vH.
Therefore, store B never charges vH.
Next, we show that store A charges vHwith positive probability. Suppose not.
Let X A and X B be the smallest upper bound of equilibrium prices of store A and
store B, respectively. We already know ZA,iB5 VL.In equilibrium X A = X B =
Seasonal Sales
F, otherwise the store with the greater-upper bound of randomization support has
no incentives to charge the prices between the two upper bounds. Suppose that
there is no mass point at 2 for store B. Since store B never charges V H ,by charging
2 store A gets zero share of the discount market. Store A's equilibrium profit is
therefore arbitrarily close to pAZ, which is smaller than pAqAvH,contradicting
the assumption that store A never charges V H Thus, store B assigns a positive
probability to X. Similarly, since by assumption store A never charges V H , and
we already know store B never charges V H ,store A must assign a positive proba-
bility to 2. But then each store could get greater profits by reassigning the proba-
bility mass from F to just below it, which is a contradiction.
Next, we show that the upper bound of the price support for store B is vL.By
the above argument, since store A charges vHwith positive probability and store
B never charges V H , there is a mass point at 2 in store B's price support, and
there is no mass point at iin store A's price support. It follows that, by charging
2, store B gets all the discount market when store A chooses vHand zero share
of the market when store A is not charging V H If X < vL, store B could obtain
greater profits by reassigning the probability mass at F to a price between iand
vL,which is a contradiction.
Clearly, in equilibrium the lower bound of the price support for the two stores
must be equal, otherwise the store with the smaller lower bound of randomization
support has no incentives to charge the prices between the two lower bounds.
Denote the common lower bound as 5. Since store A is indifferent between charg-
ing 5 and V H ,5 is equal topAqAvH/(l- pB).For Store A to be indifferent between
charging 5 and charging any price in the interval [g,vL],the price distribution
FB(x)function of store B satisfies
which gives
Similarly, the price distribution function FA(x)of store A must satisfy
It can be verified that FA(vL)< 1, SO that store A charges v~ with positive proba-
bility, and FB(vL)< 1, SO that store B puts a probability mass at V L Q.E.D.