Journal of Learning Design
DESIGNING FOR EFFECTIVE LEARNING
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
Sharing the journey of facilitator and learner:
Online pedagogy in practice
Shirley Reushle
Faculty of Education
University of Southern Queensland, AUSTRALIA
 
Maxine Mitchell
University of the Sunshine Coast, AUSTRALIA
 
Two perspectives are used to reflect on the learning design of a postgraduate
online course – that of the designer/facilitator and that of the learner. While
the course focus is on online pedagogical approaches, the main aim is to
connect learners with each other and with the facilitator so that together they
may investigate, trial, challenge and formulate ideas about online pedagogy.
The design is influenced by the principles of transformative learning where
the concept of a “dilemma” leads to disorientation and then to learning.
Learners are presented with a number of educational dilemmas, given a
process for addressing those dilemmas and are required to authentically
demonstrate how principles and practices can be applied to enhance online
learning and teaching. The design addresses the theory/practice nexus and
illustrates that research is best situated in real world contexts, and effective
practice should be framed and informed by research.
Online pedagogy, transformative learning, dilemmas, authentic assessment.
Introduction – starting the journey
In this paper, the authors critique the learning design of a postgraduate online course, Online
Pedagogy in Practice from the perspectives of Author 1 (the course designer/facilitator) and
Author 2 (the learner) to demonstrate alignment between design and authentic learning
experiences that promote rich environments of theory-embedded practice. The course is offered in
the Faculty of Education Masters program at the University of Southern Queensland. Author 1
drew on her doctoral research into transformative learning and her experience as
an online educator to design and facilitate the course. She provides this background:
My interest in transformative learning emerged from a serendipitous incident which
occurred in the early stages of my doctoral study in 2000. On a whim, I attended a
Transformative Learning conference in the USA and found myself surrounded by positive,
supportive, enthused educators – for me a transformative experience as my educational
perspectives were both challenged and affirmed. This set me on a path to find out more
about transformative learning and how the principles could be applied to my practice as an
online educator. Despite the lack of extant research at that time linking the concept of
transformation to learning online, I felt that online settings could provide a “friendly”
environment that would support learning contexts promoted by adult education theorists
such as Knowles , Mezirow and Cranton - collaborative, interactive
learning communities that support and promote transformative learning.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
Author 2 provides an account of her experiences in the course and how participating in the course
challenged her conception of online pedagogy. She provides this background:
My goal for studying the Master of Online Education was to advance my career prospects,
capitalising on my strengths to influence my career direction. The Masters program was the
vehicle to orientate myself into this new world – the online learning phenomena. In
particular, the course which is the focus of this paper enabled me to test my assumptions,
practices and beliefs against external reference points – the educational literature, my peers,
the facilitator and the course content, and validate these experiences in my work context.
My experience in the course enabled me to align my teaching philosophy and practice with
the educational literature. It facilitated the marrying of theory and practice, but better, built
my confidence to advance my teaching that resulted in a seamless exchange between theory
and the practical applicability to my professional life. My studies have given me the
confidence to explore, negotiate, challenge, interact and collaborate across boundaries to
enhance my professional knowledge and practice. As an advocate of lifelong learning, the
Master of Online Education has positioned me as an active inquirer in my own learning.
Learning design - theoretical framework
While the course is focused on pedagogical approaches to online learning, the main aim is to
connect the learners so that together they may explore, investigate, formulate and challenge their
own ideas – and the ideas of others – about online pedagogy. The course design draws on existing
theory and knowledge relating to the following themes evident in the literature: 
theories of learning, particularly transformation theory (transformative learning), 
learning and teaching in online settings (online pedagogy), and 
principles of adult learning.
The design reflects the concept of learning as a lifelong journey where adults have a wealth of
experience on which to draw. The design focus is on providing authentic activity that is taskcentred, practical and with immediate application to the learner‟s work and takes into account the
self-directedness of adults who can usually identify their learning needs and most often pace
themselves. Adults prefer flexibility, but with structure and purpose – educational experiences that
are isolated and unrelated to the “now” can be irrelevant for these learners. Adults also need to be
able to reflect – on the activity, on the content, on their interactions with others and then relate it to
what they already know and do .
The course design is shaped by transformative learning principles and the concept of a dilemma
leading to disorientation and then to learning . According to Mezirow , all
meaning is based on the learner interpreting experience with the critical dimension of an adult‟s
learning being reflection, or the process of validating ideas and assumptions based on prior
learning. He believes the role of the educator is to help learners focus on, and examine, the
assumptions that underlie their beliefs, feelings and actions, assess the consequences of these
assumptions, identify and explore alternative sets of assumptions, and test the validity of
assumptions through effective participation in reflective dialogue. Transformative learning is the
process by which we call into question our taken for granted habits of mind or mindsets to make
them more inclusive, discriminating, open and reflective in order to guide our actions. Mezirow
 states that transformative educators should facilitate dialogue to help others, and perhaps
themselves, explore beliefs and to move towards a fuller and more dependable understanding of
the meaning of experiences. According to the tenets of transformative learning, adult learners need
to be reflective, critical thinkers who are open to other perspectives and accepting of new ideas.
Dialogue is crucial in this process. A transformative educator should aim to engender a sense of
community and provide a safe place for exploration and discovery through shared trust and a sense
of possibility .
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
..."dilemmas"...leading to learning...
Catalysts for transformative learning, according to Mezirow are “disorienting dilemmas”,
situations that do not fit one‟s preconceived notions. These dilemmas prompt critical reflection and
in the event of a new experience, our existing meaning perspectives (our central meaning
structures) “act as a sieve through which each new experience is interpreted and given meaning”
 . The interpretation of this new experience may either reinforce existing
perspectives, be rejected, or an existing meaning perspective may be transformed to accommodate
the new experience.
This concept is reflected in the course design where learners are presented with a number of
educational dilemmas or triggers – for example, “how to create and sustain a sense of presence in
an online learning environment” – and are provided with a process to engage rigorously with the
dilemma content, with each other and the facilitator to explore appropriate theory and related
practice. The course assessment requires the learners to practically demonstrate how principles and
practices can be applied to enhance online learning and teaching by conducting a pedagogical
event in the virtual environment using their peers as learners. In addition, guided by a number of
stimulus questions, learners keep a reflective diary of their learning journey accompanied by their
analyses of changes in their perspectives and the resultant pedagogical shifts in their approaches to
learning and teaching.
The concept of a dilemma leading to disorientation and then to learning is not a
new one. In Dewey's work, he declared that the capacity to reflect is initiated only after
recognition of a problem or dilemma and the acceptance of uncertainty. Learning is driven by the
learner's sense of disequilibrium (cognitive dissonance) when confronted by new experiences and
ideas, rather than by reinforcement of existing ideas. The dissonance created in understanding that
a problem exists engages the reflective thinker to become an active inquirer, involved both in the
critique of current conclusions and the generation of new hypotheses. Dewey believed that
traditional reinforcement of information only led to superficial learning. He believed the educator
to be responsible for creating events in which the learner is presented with problematic situations
that he/she would be motivated to solve.
The theoretical concept of disorientation/dissonance/disequilibrium leading to learning is at the
heart of the work of other developmental theorists such as Bruner and Piaget and
these concepts are evident in much of more recent educational thinking. What Dewey 
referred to as “perplexity, hesitation, doubt”, Greene calls “dislocations”, Brookfield 
refers to as “inner discomforts” and Larrivee identifies as “inner conflict” or “inner
turmoil”. Greene believes that a learner‟s central concern is with “ordering [or bringing
harmony to] his own life-world when dislocations occur” (p. 307) – when the learner experiences
“moments when the recipes he has inherited for solving problems no longer seem to work”, or
when “what was once familiar abruptly appears strange” . The failure of
recipe learning often leads to critical reflection and perspective transformation (a world view
shift), a move “beyond what she has been” . She notes that “it is at moments
like these that the individual reaches out to reconstitute meaning, to close the gaps, to make sense
once again”. Reference to “critical incidents” parallels the concept of disorienting dilemmas.
However, the disorientation caused by dilemmas must be carefully monitored to ensure that their
impact does not result in negative outcomes for the learner. It is one thing to be disoriented but to
have a compass or map on hand; it is another situation entirely to be totally lost without any
support or guidance!
The course design aims to dispel the myth of the theory-practice divide. Rather than theory and
practice being separate and even mutually exclusive, the intent is to demonstrate the
interconnectedness of the two. That is, effective educational research must be situated in real
world contexts and effective practice must be explicitly framed and informed by research.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
Author 2 (the learner) observes that:
…the learning design intentionally establishes a series of learning experiences that require
the learners to situate themselves on the structure-flexibility continuum and take
responsibility for shifts along this continuum as the learning episodes unfold.
The facilitator’s perspective: assessment as authentic experience
Boud advocates that assessment practices should prepare learners to be effective in the
learning society and equip individuals with a learning approach for life, that is, assessment should
enhance learning and be an integral part of the learning and teaching process. The role of
assessment is also to enable learners to make judgements about their learning by engaging in selfassessment rather than considering each task as a discrete event in their learning journey. A key
aim of the course design is to create opportunities for learners to explore online pedagogy in
practice - a “prac online” experience.
As previously mentioned, the course design presents learners with a number of educational
dilemmas or triggers (called “themes”) and provide a process for addressing those dilemmas.
Learners are encouraged to engage rigorously with online learning and teaching theories and work
collaboratively to consider, explore, trial and adapt online pedagogical principles in practice. Each
theme is accompanied by suggestions for focus topics and a selection of online literature.
Themes include: 
Creating and sustaining a sense of presence online; 
Creating and sustaining online learning communities; 
Promoting and supporting online conversations; 
Finding tools to support online pedagogy; 
Providing authentic assessment and meaningful feedback in online environments; 
Nominating your own dilemma.
Learners maintain a diary or journal of events and dilemmas or critical incidents throughout the
semester along with associated reflective thoughts. The purpose of reflective tasks is to assist the
learner in making meaning from their personal experiences. Given that the underlying educational
purpose of the course is to focus on online pedagogical approaches that connect learners with each
other and with the facilitator to enact a learning community approach, learners are encouraged to
consider any number of ways to maintain this diary, mediated through web applications including
blogging, wikis and discussion forums to provide a shared account of their journey through the
learning dilemma.
Course assessment consists of a five-stage process that aligns with Mezirow‟s phased
approach to addressing disorienting dilemmas. Learners select a dilemma, focus on their own
context, but work as a community of learners. Because the success of the course relies very much
on learning as a community process and on understanding roles and responsibilities within a
group, learners are guided through a group formation process early in the course.
Table 1 illustrates how the stages of assessment relate to the phases of addressing a dilemma. The
topic (“providing authentic assessment and meaningful feedback in online environments”) selected
by Author 2 (the learner) of this paper has been used as an example.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
Table 1: Assessment stages and dilemma phases
Assessment
Dilemma phases
 
Questions, activities
preparation of a
literature review
1 Experience
disorienting dilemma
and undergo selfexamination
2 Presentation of a
1 What issue concerns you? What do you
want to find out more about?
2 What does the literature say about
authentic assessment and the provision of
meaningful feedback?
3 Define authentic assessment, meaningful
2 Participation in
and contribution
to discussion
activities
2 Critical assessment
of the dilemma
3 Exploration and
consideration of
options and courses of
1 How can I ensure that assessment in my
online environments is authentic?
2 How can I ensure feedback is
meaningful, timely and effective?
3 Facilitate and
pedagogical
(teaching) event
4 Planning a course of
5 Acquiring knowledge
and skills for
implementing one’s
6 Provisionally trying
out new roles
7 Building of
competence and selfconfidence in a safe
environment
1 Select means of creating authentic
assessment and meaningful feedback
2 Facilitate a teaching event online that
demonstrates authentic
assessment/meaningful feedback
3 Ensure the activity is relevant to you and
your professional practice. Ensure there is
a sense of substantive, meaningful
purpose for the existence of this activity.
4 Each group member to participate in a
seminar discussion around this topic
4 Prepare and
present a paper
at the Virtual
8 A reintegration into
society on the basis of
conditions dictated by
the new perspective
1 Prepare a joint or individual paper
according to the author guidelines provided
(suitable for publication)
2 Present the paper at the Virtual Seminar
and invite interaction with peers
5 Reflective diary
Maintained throughout the course
Author 1 (the designer/facilitator) makes this observation about her own reflective practice:
Keeping my own reflective journal and taking the opportunity to write about the course
with one of my students has enabled me to better understand professional practice by
interrogating and challenging my assumptions and practice and seeking inspiration and
guidance to alter my perspectives and improve that practice. In addition to keeping a
journal, I invite learners, partway through the course to give anonymous feedback on the
course and on their experiences and I use this feedback to help guide my in action decisionmaking. To reflect in action (while doing something) and on action (after you have done it)
should be integral to the role of a reflective practitioner.
The learner's perspective: learning design and authentic learning
experiences
As an adult learner reflecting on her experiences in the course Online Pedagogy in Practice, I was
fascinated by the way the course opened the flood gates in my confidence to explore, negotiate,
challenge, interact and collaborate across pedagogical and physical boundaries.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
My positive learning experiences are in direct contrast to the findings of Garrett who cites
many online projects that failed to realise their aims and goals which has led to questions about the
quality and capabilities of online as a form of educational delivery. This “dissonance” between
my reality and that described by Garrett prompted me to counter the misrepresentation of
online pedagogy by critiquing the alignment between learning design and authentic learning
experiences in this course.
The staged assessment task required the learners to self-nominate into groups based on shared
interest. I joined a group which we named the Online Pedagogy Networkers and chose to focus on
the topic of authentic assessment. A key design element of the course is for the assessment tasks to
align with real-world tasks of professional practice. This meant the assessment tasks created an
individualised, personalised learning experience that authenticated the application of theoretical
knowledge to the learner‟s professional real-life. Further, the problems inherent in the assessment
tasks were intentionally ill-defined and open to multiple interpretations rather than easily solved by
the application of an existing sequence of instructions. Learners were required to identify their
own unique tasks and sub-tasks, and challenge their own beliefs and attitudes in order to make
sense of and complete the staged activities in the assessment task . The pedagogical tools of authentic assessment and learning dilemmas
enabled me to construct and critically reflect on my knowledge by situating it in my own
profession practice. I was able to evaluate my learning through collaboration and interaction with
my peers in an online community of practice.
A cautionary note is required though. Assessment tasks that guide in the exploration of learning
dilemmas require a level of sophistication in the teacher‟s philosophy of learning and teaching.
The course facilitator had a clear assessment vision and was able to articulate that vision to
students by establishing an unambiguous purpose and theoretical framework around the learning
dilemma that served as signposts for students to connect theory to practice as they challenged their
meaning scheme. While learners had flexibility to self-select approaches, processes and even the
end product to be successful in the assessment tasks, there was a structured framework that
intentionally acted as points of reference as learners faced their inner discomforts and
disorientations from actively engaging in the dilemma activity and with each other. As I
experienced this inner turmoil and conflict, the structure served as „just-in-time‟ learning - it was
there as a learning resource to sustain my transition from disorientation to transformation, enabling
the alignment of learning tasks, learning resources and learning support . In addition,
the facilitator cultivated a nurturing, supportive learning environment where students felt
empowered to interpret and experiment with their peers, construct new knowledge and be in
charge of the learning process.
There are a number of other design elements that support the principles of transformative learning
in an online environment. The text-based nature of dialogue enabled learner-learner, learnerfacilitator and learner-content interaction to be visible and accessible to all students. The layers of
interaction stimulated peer conversations, collaboration and a collegial atmosphere that allowed
me, as a learner, to operate socially and affectively in a virtual learning space. The online
environment also provided opportunities for me to access, share, digest and critique information
quickly and easily.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
The facilitator utilised a number of tactics to create a supportive, safe learning environment such
as: establishing a clear purpose, structure and expectations; providing collaborative, shared spaces
such as discussion forums for introductions and student profiles; using „ice-breaker‟ activities to
encourage a supportive atmosphere and human presence; using emoticons and informal written
text to promote online „friendliness‟ (talk to you soon; see you tomorrow); and modelling a read,
reflect and respond approach to encourage questions and online dialogue. This provided
documentary evidence of the student‟s learning and integration of new ideas with existing
knowledge as they interpreted and addressed their learning dilemmas. This also provided a
platform for critical reflection and self-evaluation to give meaning to the learning experience.
When I reflect on this experience, I cannot put a metric on the knowledge generation, growth and
emotional reactions I have experienced. The course demystified online pedagogy and built my
confidence to position myself as an online practitioner demonstrating a focus on the learning
process rather than the learning product. Author 1 experienced delight in reading the learner‟s final
reflective statement where she remarks:
As this is the final course in my Master of Online Education, the reality of how it has
reconfirmed my passions and direction, while cross-pollinating a number of future
opportunities for me, is an incredible and exciting outcome. This course…has helped to
transition me into the next stage of my lifelong learning journey.
Herrington et al. advocates a number of design elements to ensure that authentic assessment
tasks achieve authentic learning in an online learning environment. Table 2 compares these design
elements with the assessment tasks in the course.
Table 2: Design elements for authentic tasks in Online Pedagogy in Practice
Design elements
 
How assessment tasks achieve authentic learning in the course
Authentic tasks have realworld relevance
The assessment tasks align to the real-world tasks of professional
practice. This meant the assessment tasks create an individualised,
personalised learning experience that authenticates the application of
theoretical knowledge to the learner’s professional real-world.
Authentic tasks are illdefined, requiring students
to define the tasks needed
to complete the activity
The problems inherent in the assessment tasks are intentionally illdefined and open to multiple interpretations rather than easily solved
by the application of an existing sequence of instructions. Learners
are required to identify their own unique tasks and sub-tasks, and
challenge their own beliefs and attitudes in order to make sense of
and complete the activities.
Authentic tasks are
seamlessly integrated with
assessment
Assessment stages 2, 3 and 4 are intentionally scaffolded into the
next stage of learning to enable students to make judgements and
descriptions of their work and the work of their peers. The reflective
diary (stage 5) requires students to critically reflect on their journey,
evaluate their achievements and actions, and situate their reflection
in their professional real-world. Stage 5 also asks students to
speculate on the next stage of their lifelong learning journey.
Authentic tasks comprise
complex tasks to be
investigated by students
over a sustained period of
The assessment stages adopts a learning-centred approach which
focuses on the learning to be achieved over a sustained period in the
course. It requires significant investment of time, intellect and
resources at the individual and collaborative group level to digest,
interpret, construct an understanding, and identify a pathway to
achieve success in the assessment task.
Authentic tasks provide
the opportunity for
students to examine the
task from different
perspectives using a
variety of resources
All assessment tasks adopt a learner-centred approach that provide
students with the opportunity to examine the task from a variety of
theoretical and practical perspectives, rather than from a single
perspective that learners must imitate to be successful. Further,
students are encouraged to situate their life experiences and
professional practice in the process of learning to achieve the
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
requirements of the assessment tasks. Students are provided with a
range of resources as a starting point in the learning dilemma and
encouraged to investigate and explore the context surrounding the
dilemma to stimulate autonomous, self-directed thinking.
Authentic tasks provide
the opportunity to
collaborate
The social and collaborative nature of the staged assessment, and
the design and facilitation of the course in general, foster a
community of learners that enable students to share experiences and
professional practice, learn from each other and assimilate the new
learning experiences into the individual’s knowledge structures. The
assessment tasks result in a rich diversity of ways in which students
engage with the learning dilemmas.
Authentic tasks provide
the opportunity to reflect
All assessment tasks enable the learners to make choices and
interpret the meaning of the assessment task framework. This
fosters critical reflection and self-assessment to challenge the
learner’s meaning scheme resulting in students achieving a deeper
approach to learning.
Authentic tasks can be
integrated and applied
across different discipline
areas and lead beyond
domain-specific outcomes
The assessment tasks and learning activities embrace and
encourage interdisciplinary perspectives which enable diversity in
roles, expertise and practice to be integrated into the construction of
knowledge and understanding at the individual and collaborative
level. Further the assessment tasks and related activities encourage
diversity of outcomes, and are open to multiple solutions stemming
from the original context.
Table 2 provides evidence that the assessment tasks in this course are designed to have real-world
relevance and utility. Further, the assessment tasks provide appropriate levels of complexity that
enable students to select the level of difficulty or involvement that challenges their meaning
scheme resulting in a holistic rather than fragmented learning experience. This encourages learners
to be self-assessors of their learning . When online pedagogy embraces a holistic approach to authentic assessment
and learning dilemmas, students develop the skills, knowledge and capacity to transfer their
learning to a range of situations in their professional world.
Conclusion
This paper has been written to share the intent of the designer/facilitator of a postgraduate online
course and the experiences of a learner in that course. In contemporary societies, where the
challenge for educators is to prepare learners to engage effectively with situations in their
professional lives, quality learning experiences must cultivate authentic activity that develops
transferable skill sets, fosters critical reflection, challenges learner perspectives and engenders new
ways of seeing and doing. The course design aims to dispel the myth of the theory-practice divide.
Rather than theory and practice being separate and even mutually exclusive, the intent is to
demonstrate the interconnectedness of the two. That is, effective research must be situated in real
world contexts and effective practice must be explicitly framed and informed by research.
The design described in this paper reflects Mezirow‟s view of transformative learning and
demonstrates that one of the roles of the educator is to guide the learner to focus on and examine
the assumptions that underlie their beliefs, feelings and actions, assess the consequences of these
assumptions, identify and explore alternative sets of assumptions and test their validity through
effective participation in reflective dialogue. The paper advocates online pedagogy as a means of
providing rich diversity in learning experiences by demonstrating the connectedness between
learning design, the principles of transformative learning and the ability of the learning
experiences to reflect effective practice in real life. This aims to demonstrate the notion of
authentic assessment.
Journal of Learning Design
Reushle and Mitchell
2009 Vol. 3 No. 1
The learning design evokes the principles of adult learning and promotes a learner-centred
approach. This challenges the learner to interpret new experiences through a journey of supported
educational dilemmas and experience disorientation and critical reflection in order to reconstitute
meaning and understanding within a guided learning community.