The Rapid Development of High Speed, Resolution and
Precision in fMRI
David A. Feinberg1 and Essa Yacoub2
1University of California, Berkeley and Advanced MRI Technologies
2Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Minnesota
MRI pulse sequences designed to increase the speed and spatial resolution of fMRI have always
been a hot topic. Here, we review and chronicle the history behind some of the pulse sequence
ideas that have contributed not only to the enhancement of fMRI acquisition but also to diffusion
imaging. (i) Partial Fourier EPI allows lengthening echo trains for higher spatial resolution while
maintaining optimal TE and BOLD sensitivity. (ii) Inner-volume EPI renamed zoomed-EPI,
achieves extremely high spatial resolution and has been applied to fMRI at 7 Tesla to resolve
cortical layer activity and columnar level fMRI. (iii) An early non-BOLD approach while
unsuccessful for fMRI created a diffusion sequence of bipolar pulses called ‘twice refocused spin
echo’ now widely used for high resolution DTI and HARDI neuronal fiber track imaging. (iv)
Multiplexed EPI shortens TR to a few hundred millisecond, increasing sampling rates and
statistical power in fMRI.
EPI; partial Fourier; zoomed EPI; inner volume; multiplexed EPI; multiband; simultaneous; SIR;
SER; twice-refocused SE diffusion; bipolar gradient; layer specific; resting state; columnar level;
BOLD; functional imaging; fMRI
Early Echo Planar Imaging in North America
Echo planar imaging (EPI), invented by Sir Peter Mansfield at the
University of Nottingham, England, is now the technique most frequently used for fMRI and
diffusion imaging. Paradoxically, EPI required such fast gradient switching that it was not
possible to perform on conventional MR scanners and therefore its use was confined to the
Nottingham laboratory for many years. The first EPI research and imaging outside of
Nottingham was in North America at the UCSF Radiological Imaging Laboratory (RIL)
directed by Leon Kaufman. The experiments were conducted on a whole body scanner
operating at 0.35 Tesla, the first to use a superconducting magnet (Oxford Magnets) in the
USA, called “P-0” for prototype, that had relatively slow gradients so only a few echoes
could be refocused in the echo train during the T2* signal decay, resulting in small image
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Corresponding Author: David A. Feinberg, PhD, MD, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA Advanced MRI Technologies, Sebastopol, CA, .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
 
Neuroimage. 2012 August 15; 62(2): 720–725. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.049.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
matrices and low SNR. The gradient rise time was 1.4 ms to a maximum of 4 mT/m. So, in
an EPI acquisition, 2.8 ms was required to switch the read gradient (−peak to + peak),
resulting in a 5.0 ms echo spacing with a 2.2 ms (ADC) echo readout. In comparison, a
typical modern scanner’s gradients (Siemens, 3T Trio) with 40 mT/m maximum, can
achieve an echo spacing of 0.5 ms. The P-0 scanner was about an order of magnitude slower
than the Nottingham EPI scanner and it could only produce 24 echoes in a T2* decay period
of 120 ms. The resulting image had very low spatial resolution, long TEs (~60ms) and
considerable T2* dependent voxel blurring and geometric distortions.
Considerable innovation in pulse sequence design was directed to overcome the limitations
of spatial resolution and low SNR in EPI due to the slow gradients on the P-0 scanner at
UCSF RIL. This resulted in several (Fig. 1) novel EPI variants; partial Fourier EPI, zoomed-
EPI and spin echo EPI, all now commonly employed in fMRI. When these EPI variants
were later performed on fast gradient systems they were, as the EPI sequence itself, even
more useful and are now common in both routine fMRI and for achieving very high spatial
resolution fMRI at ultra-high field. What follows is a more detailed review of this early EPI
development up to the more recent fMRI applications at columnar level resolutions, as well
as early attempts to perform functional MRI that led to new diffusion sequences. Finally, we
review a recent pulse sequence innovation, multiplexed-EPI (simultaneous slice and
multiband EPI), which provides unprecedented increases in temporal resolution and higher
statistical power for fMRI.
Partial Fourier EPI
The realization that the requisite number of phase encoded signals in k-space can be nearly
halved to reduce the scan time of MRI came from DF’s graduate research at Berkeley with
electron diffraction in which only half of a digital diffraction pattern reconstructed by 2D FT
was required to visualize the entire crystal lattice. The other half of the diffraction pattern
was by Hermitian symmetry simply obtained from the transposed complex conjugate
number, avoiding unnecessary printouts requiring additional computer paper. Two groups
independently developed and published papers on the general technique of half Fourier
imaging within months of each other, one effort was led by Paul Margosian at Siemens in
Germany and the other effort led by DF at UCSF RIL and in November 1985, DF combined Half Fourier with EPI to improve performance
on the slow gradient system . In January of 1986 Lawrence
Crooks completed the building of a faster switching gradient coil insert for head and
pediatric imaging within the P-0 scanner at UCSF and the fast switching coil considerably
improved the quality of Half Fourier EPI . The full description of the
pediatric echo planar scanner was published two years later , by which
time the fields attention was on the resonance coil technology of Richard Redzian and Ian
Pykett used to make EPI at MGH. The UCSF RIL gradient coil
insert was used to acquire the first published diffusion weighted EPI images in 1988 with
human brain diffusion imaging presented at the SMRM .
Reduced Field of View EPI
Spatial resolution in EPI can be increased without additional signals provided the image
field of view (FOV) can be reciprocally reduced. Reduced FOV imaging , originally called ‘inner-volume EPI’ later called ‘zoomed
EPI’ uncoupled the otherwise direct dependence of spatial
resolution (R) on the number of phase encoded echoes (N) in the echo train, limited by
gradient performance and T2* decay, where in general terms: R = FOV/N. By restricting the
signal volume and commensurately reducing FOV, the resolution is increased (smaller R)
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
without increasing N and without signal aliasing. There are now three different means of
restricting signal regions and reducing the FOV to achieve zoomed-EPI i) inner-volume
imaging utilizing intersecting planes of excitation and refocusing creating a SE refocused
region, ii) 2D selective excitation pulses with tailored RF pulses
restricting excitation in two axes and iii) outer volume suppression to reduce the extent of signal on phase encoded
axes. The inner-volume variant is limited to single slice 2D or 3D imaging because one of
the two perpendicular oriented RF regions has a secondary effect of saturating spins in
locations of adjacent slices ). Outer volume suppression methods can be used for GE
EPI and for multi-slice acquisitions, but to varying degrees it has incomplete saturation/
suppression which is a potential source of physiological noise in fMRI.
Spin Echo EPI
A major focus of the UCSF RIL lab throughout the 1980s was to explore and develop spin
echo imaging. Many of the scientists at this lab came from UC Berkeley where Erwin Hahn
who discovered spin echoes , was a professor of physics. It was logical to
develop spin echo refocused EPI to improve the image quality by controlling field
inhomogeneity and susceptibility artifacts. On the slow gradient system of P-0, a CPMG
spin echo sequence was combined with EPI so the signal decay was determined primarily by
T2 instead of T2*, enabling a longer echo train for higher resolution and reduced distortions
in the final images . The short EPI echo trains were between
multiple 180° refocusing pulses to create both gradient echoes and spin echoes in one echo
train. This EPI variant combining CPMG sequence was later more fully developed and
given the acronym for gradient-and-spin echo (GRASE) and is
now used at 7T for high resolution fMRI. Other variants of SE EPI; two images per echo
train at different TE and inversion recovery EPI were also reported .
Whereas BOLD T2* weighted EPI images are now mainly used for fMRI, it was not in the
beginning unreasonable to explore other contrast mechanisms to make fMRI images, as
certainly today it is known that changes in blood volume and blood flow also contribute to
fMRI contrast mechanisms. One such early approach was explored by DF beginning in
1986. In an attempt to make functional images of activity in primary visual cortex, diffusion
and T2 weighted SE imaging was used in block designed experiments (lights on versus
lights off) first performed on a Diasonics 0.35 Tesla scanner identical to P-0 at Huntington
Research Institute in Pasadena, California. Regrettably, several hours after using the scanner
for this experiment the magnet quenched for no apparent reason; i.e. lost its electrical
current and boiled off much of the liquid helium. Over the next six months the magnet
quenched two more times, several hours after performing the fMRI experiment using large
diffusion gradient pulses, so the experiment was discontinued until it could be performed on
a more stable magnet. It was assumed, but never confirmed, that the long diffusion gradient
pulses caused eddy currents and mechanical shaking of the magnet’s internal structures
contributing to the instability in this second delivered Oxford superconducting magnet in the
This diffusion based fMRI experiment continued a few years later in Boston in 1989, at
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, on a scanner built by Leo
Neuringer’s group in an MIT-IBM collaboration, as IBM was considering entering the MRI
business (the radar and radio manufacturing company, Marconi, was another early entrant in
commercializing MRI scanners). This MIT-IBM scanner had for its time, extremely strong
20mT/m gradient strength, which would be very useful for diffusion encoding permitting
much shorter pulses than was previously needed with the 5mT/m gradients. The gradients,
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
however, had incorrectly calibrated shielding causing considerable eddy currents.
Overcoming the eddy currents led to two distinct pulse sequence innovations for EPI-based
imaging. A severe Nyquist ghost caused by eddy currents was entirely eliminated using an
asymmetric read gradient waveform which eliminated echo time reversal, now known as the
“fly-back” k-space trajectory .
Twice refocused spin echo diffusion sequence
The second pulse sequence innovation was a diffusion pulse sequence that drastically
reduced problems of eddy currents by means of using two 180° refocusing pulses combined
with four gradient pulses of alternating polarities (G+−+−) hence bipolar which cancelled
eddy currents, and is now called the twice refocused spin echo (TRSE) diffusion sequence or
simply the bipolar sequence (Fig. 2). Karlicek and Lowe earlier
developed a very different alternating pulsed gradient sequence utilizing five 180°
refocusing pulses and gradient polarities (G+−−+) to measure restricted diffusion
independent of cross terms from field inhomogeneity . In
comparison, the Stejskal-Tanner diffusion sequence uses a pair of monopolar gradient pulses
(G++) with a single 180° refocusing pulse between them. By exploring several different
possible gradient polarities (Fig. 2) we discovered the TRSE diffusion sequence had much
greater diffusion sensitivity, achieved a higher b-value in the same time than other polarity
configurations, and had far less image artifact from eddy currents, which were largely
cancelled by the opposite polarity (bipolar) gradients. Cautions on combining data from
diffusion sequences with different eddy currents were discussed in our paper and eddy
current improvements of the TRSE sequence were described at several conferences
 , however, the sequence’s impact would come years later with
the invention of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and
subsequently, Oliver Heid at Siemens modified the gradient pulse widths in
TRSE as an additional means to spoil stimulated echoes and to achieve shorter TEs. The
TRSE diffusion sequence is now in common use in neurosciences for high resolution
neuronal fiber tracks, however, its invention was motivated by diffusion based functional
MRI experiments.
Efforts towards higher spatial resolution fMRI in humans at the CMRR
At the Center for Magnetic Resonance (CMRR) at the University of Minnesota, under the
support and direction of Kamil Ugurbil, the push to higher spatial resolution fMRI in
humans was from the beginning a primary goal. Not long after fMRI images were produced
in CMRR , the efforts to push the spatial resolution began in
collaboration with Dr. Ravi Menon in the mid-90s, mapping ocular dominance columns in
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
human subjects with fMRI . These early studies were temporally
inefficient, taking on the order of 15 sec or more to make a single high-resolution FLASH
image. It was also clear that the sensitivity and specificity of high-resolution GE-BOLD
fMRI images were limiting, even at 4 Tesla. In 1998, with the installation of the world’s first
7 Tesla human magnet at the CMRR, the opportunity presented itself to increase both the
specificity and sensitivity of BOLD images. Early studies established not only the feasibility
of 7T fMRI in humans , but also the expected field-dependent increases in BOLD contrast and
specificity to the microvasculature . SE-based
BOLD contrast, as predicted , provided even more
spatial specificity by reducing signals from large vessels whereby enhancing signals from
small vessels in grey matter. The challenge at 7 T would be to generate BOLD images at
high resolution with temporal efficiency and sufficient functional contrast-to-noise (fCNR).
The strategy used was to reduce the imaging FOV sufficiently such that sub-millimeter
resolution images could be generated quickly. Further, the RF coil ,
built by Dr. Gregor Adriany, was optimized for studies of the human visual cortex. The coil
had an open design for visual presentation and for use with a bite bar to restrict subject
motion. It also provided the needed sensitivity in posterior parts of the visual cortex using 6cm quadrature receiver loops and a separate large half volume transmitter for uniform B1+
fields. The RF coil profile maximized signal in visual areas, with a sharp drop off in
sensitivity beyond that, permitting acquisition of high-resolution images with a smaller
phase FOV. The echo train was then also reduced substantially, which was critical at 7T due
to the short T2*s. Further, a high performance (Magnex) gradient coil insert, designed for
head imaging (38 cm ID), had been installed at the 7T allowing gradients of 40 mT/m in 200
μsec further reducing the echo spacing. The use of multi-shot (2–4 segments) resulted in
GE-EPI TRs of 6 s for 0.5 mm in-plane resolutions . Outer volume suppression was also explored to reduce the FOV enough so that single
shot EPI might also be used , however, it did not achieve the necessary
SNR nor the spatial coverage necessary for high resolution columnar imaging. Prior to
parallel imaging techniques , ‘zoomed’ EPI
was useful for obtaining high resolution SE EPI. The needed refocusing pulse allowed
selective excitation along a 2nd dimension, allowing FOV reduction to any arbitrary 2D
volume. The acquisition of efficient high-resolution SE and GE BOLD images at 7T
permitted robust columnar mapping, peaking with the first demonstrations of orientation
columns in humans and demonstrating the superiority of SE-based
methods for high resolution mapping questions . Despite this success, it
was clear that single slice (anisotropic) acquisitions for BOLD images would be problematic
due to the locations and curvatures of cortical regions of interest and because of motion
correction and anatomical registration in small volumes.
7 Tesla columnar level and cortical layer fMRI with Zoomed EPI and 3D GRASE
Some years later, in 2006 at a Gordon Conference on Cerebral blood flow and Metabolism
held in Oxford, DF saw movies of ODC and orientation columns in humans , and was impressed by the spatial resolution but was unaware of the techniques used
by Essa Yacoub (EY) and Noam Harrel (NH) at Minnesota. The 2D columnar images were
acquired in individuals with a flat calcarine sulcus, positioning a thick slice with high in
plane resolution over this flat region of gray matter. The limitation to a single slice plane
was due to inner-volume 2D SE-EPI in which the orthogonal refocusing planes used to
restrict the FOV prevented multi-slice acquisition. A collaboration was initiated by DF and
NH at the 2007 ISMRM High Field Workshop when it was realized that making a singleshot inner-volume 3D GRASE sequence , would overcome several
limitations. 3D-SE fMRI utilizing 3D GRASE increased the sensitivity of the high-
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
resolution fMRI images by means of the longer echo trains possible using the multiple
refocusings of GRASE rather than the single refocusing of SE-EPI. The GRASE sequence
created stimulated echoes in addition to gradient and spin echoes, which came from
magnetization stored on the longitudinal axis, hence they had slower T1 relaxation
(~1500ms in grey matter) compared to T2 (~50ms) to maintain the signal amplitude in the
echo train. This zoomed 3D GRASE image achieved SE type contrast in a single-shot, with
resolutions as high as 0.6 mm isotropic. Recently, 3D GRASE was used to map axis of
motion organization in human MT . The SE contrast mechanism
has been repeatedly demonstrated to be important at high fields because it minimizes signals
from large vessels, which can preclude accurate high-resolution mapping. This was
especially the case in human studies were limited imaging FOVs are needed, limiting the
flexibility of avoiding areas with contaminating vessels. Approaches for zoomed GE-EPI
using outer volume suppression with parallel imaging for fMRI at 7 Tesla have been
demonstrated by Bob Turner’s group at Max Planck Institute in Leipzig . Future directions will aim to optimize zoomed imaging to extend the volume
coverage with even more slices, likely involving parallel imaging, multi-slab, and
multiplexed-EPI approaches. These advances can also be applied to increase spatial and
temporal resolution in whole brain coverage using EPI at 7 Tesla (Fig. 3).
High Speed fMRI
An inherent demand of high-resolution imaging is the need for thinner slices. Many more
slices are required to cover the entire brain than in a lower resolution study. This severely
limits the temporal efficiency of high-resolution applications, possibly lengthening the TR
from 2–3 sec to 4–8 sec, giving fewer time points in fMRI time series and precluding certain
event-related paradigms. For multi-slice SE EPI at 7T this is further complicated because the
refocusing pulses result in the SAR limits being reached rather quickly, preventing
acquisitions of many slices in reasonable TRs for fMRI. A sequence developed for
simultaneous image readout (SIR) EPI appeared particularly useful at
7T due to the sharing of refocusing pulses between adjacent EPI slices simultaneously
acquired. The fewer refocusing pulses resulted in a reduced SAR. The drawback of the
longer echo train time in SIR was countered by using high performance gradient systems
and parallel imaging to shorten the echo train. The images looked promising on the fast 7T
gradient insert (80 mT/m maximum, 333 T/m/s slew rate). When SIR SE EPI was
implemented on 7T we noticed a further SAR advantage as the inherent chemical shifted
lipid ghost was eliminated without fat sat pulses leading to a further reduction of SAR. This
was achieved without lengthening RF refocusing pulses as required in
related methods and without slice gradient reversal .
While the initial collaboration involved extending high resolution images to larger 3D
volumes, it was then extended to explore multiplexed EPI sequences to improve the
temporal efficiency of multi-slice EPI acquisitions for fMRI. The CMRR at the University
of Minnesota had been developing and published the first demonstration of multi-banded
(MB) 2D-EPI slice excitation for fMRI at 7T, resulting in several fold reductions in volume
TRs . While the achievable acceleration using the
SIR technique was limited by longer echo trains, the MB technique was limited by coil
geometry and the higher RF power of the MB pulses. What was obvious was that even
larger slice accelerations could be achieved if the two techniques were combined. In
collaboration between CMRR in Minnesota and UC-Berkeley, a multiplexed imaging
approach was implementing resulting in: M = SIR × MB, where M is the number of slices
recorded instead of a single image in each EPI echo train. We now had a multiplexed-EPI
sequence, modified for higher resolution and higher acquisition speed, utilizing partial
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fourier, SIR, MB, parallel imaging, and high fields to increase SNR. This work coincided
with the onset of the NIH Human Connectome Project (HCP) and the WashU-Minn
Consortium. Our HCP collaborator at Oxford, Steve Smith performed ICA analysis of the
highly accelerated resting state fMRI time series once the data file sizes were reduced to
several gigabytes facilitating downloading at Oxford. It was not clear to us and certainly not
to Steve, whether there would be any significant advantages (either from hemodynamic
information or fMRI sensitivity) to the much faster TRs due to the source images’ SNR
losses (i.e. from faster TRs/reduced flip angles) and because of the slow hemodynamic
response. After modifying his tools to handle the unprecedented data sizes and after days of
computational time per data set, it was found that the RSN Z-scores, after high dimensional
ICA analysis, improved by 60% in the fast TR acquisitions (Fig. 4), as we reported in 2010
in a PLoS ONE paper .
Controlled aliasing techniques by RF phase cycling in multi-banded simultaneous slice
excitations were modified for EPI using linearly blipped gradients
 but with limitations from voxel tilting. This was recently modified to
use a balanced blipped gradient approach which resulted in minimal voxel tilting in
controlled aliasing EPI and significantly reduced g-factors. With
this refinement and continued improvements in signal refocusing and image reconstructions
 we are able to image the entire brain in under 100 ms at 2.5 mm
isotropic resolution using higher SIR-3 × MB-12 while also using in-plane parallel imaging
 ) (a 72 fold acceleration at 3T) and more
conservatively with 300–500 ms TRs using MB factors of up to 8. We anticipate more
advanced RF receiver arrays and further optimizations of MB and SIR with closer echo
spacing will together give routine performance of fast fMRI sequences regardless of field
strength. However, because of the sluggish and variable hemodynamic response function, it
is unclear whether higher sampling rates alone will prove fruitful in further disentangling
neuronal processes from the BOLD response. This topic just recently generated much debate
at the 2011 OHBM meeting in Quebec City. While the debate focused on modeling and
theories, what brought life to one side of the debate was the unprecedented opportunity,
made possible by multiplexed EPI, of achieving whole brain TRs within hundreds of
milliseconds. The faster scan times may also have advantages in suppressing motion,
allowing exclusion of data with motion artifacts while still having sufficient sampling rates
to observe BOLD changes in an fMRI time series. It is clear that the greater power in the
data, because of the many more time points, will permit a better understanding of functional
processes and/or allow for significant reduction in scan times for fMRI or diffusion imaging
of fiber tracks.
Future directions and new dimensions in fMRI
What is also promising is if the significantly larger number of data points yields not only
more powerful analyses in functional connectivity studies, but also whether more robust
analyses in the temporal as opposed to the spatial domain can be performed. Similarly, in
task based fMRI faster sampling rates may be advantageous in measuring BOLD responses
with greater statistical power. Potential advances in neurosciences achieved by exploring
higher bandwidths and spatial resolutions will likely change fMRI from that of time
averaged stationary maps to new spatial and temporal views of brain activity made possible
only with faster MR imaging.
Acknowledgments
Work supported in part by National Institutes of Health (grants, R01 EB000331, P41 RR08079, RO1EB002009,
1R44NS073417 and 5R44NS063537).
Feinberg and Yacoub
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript