DeepLesion: automated mining of
large-scale lesion annotations and
universal lesion detection with deep
Xiaosong Wang
Ronald M. Summers
Ke Yan, Xiaosong Wang, Le Lu, Ronald M. Summers, “DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion
annotations and universal lesion detection with deep learning,” J. Med. Imag. 5(3), 036501 ,
doi: 10.1117/1.JMI.5.3.036501.
DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale
lesion annotations and universal lesion detection
with deep learning
Ke Yan,a Xiaosong Wang,a Le Lu,b and Ronald M. Summersa,*
aNational Institutes of Health, Clinical Center, Imaging Biomarkers and Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
bNational Institutes of Health, Clinical Center, Clinical Image Processing Service, Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States
Abstract. Extracting, harvesting, and building large-scale annotated radiological image datasets is a greatly
important yet challenging problem. Meanwhile, vast amounts of clinical annotations have been collected
and stored in hospitals’ picture archiving and communication systems (PACS). These types of annotations,
also known as bookmarks in PACS, are usually marked by radiologists during their daily workflow to highlight
significant image findings that may serve as reference for later studies. We propose to mine and harvest these
abundant retrospective medical data to build a large-scale lesion image dataset. Our process is scalable and
requires minimum manual annotation effort. We mine bookmarks in our institute to develop DeepLesion, a dataset with 32,735 lesions in 32,120 CT slices from 10,594 studies of 4,427 unique patients. There are a variety of
lesion types in this dataset, such as lung nodules, liver tumors, enlarged lymph nodes, and so on. It has the
potential to be used in various medical image applications. Using DeepLesion, we train a universal lesion detector that can find all types of lesions with one unified framework. In this challenging task, the proposed lesion
detector achieves a sensitivity of 81.1% with five false positives per image. © 2018 Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) [DOI: 10.1117/1.JMI.5.3.036501]
Keywords: medical image dataset; lesion detection; convolutional neural network; deep learning; picture archiving and communication
system; bookmark.
Paper 18043R received Mar. 7, 2018; accepted for publication Jun. 14, 2018; published online Jul. 20, 2018.
Introduction
Computer-aided detection/diagnosis (CADe/CADx) has been
a highly prosperous and successful research field in medical
image processing. Recent advances have attracted much
interest to the application of deep learning approaches.1,2
Convolutional neural network (CNN) based deep learning algorithms perform significantly better than conventional statistical
learning approaches combined with handcrafted image features.
However, these performance gains are often achieved at the cost
of requiring tremendous amounts of labeled training data.
Unlike general computer vision tasks, medical image analysis
currently lacks a large-scale annotated image dataset (comparable to ImageNet3 and MS COCO4), which is mainly because
the conventional methods for collecting image labels via Google
search + crowd-sourcing from average users cannot be applied
in the medical image domain, as medical image annotation
requires extensive clinical expertise.
Detection and characterization of lesions are important topics
in CADe/CADx. Existing detection/characterization algorithms
generally target one particular lesion type, such as skin lesions,5
lung nodules,6,7 liver lesions,8 sclerotic lesions, and colonic
polyps.9 While some common types of lesions receive much
attention, vast infrequent types are ignored by most CADe programs. Besides, studying one lesion type at a time differs from
the method radiologists routinely apply to read medical images
and compile radiological reports. In practice, multiple findings
can be observed and are often correlated. For instance, metastases can spread to regional lymph nodes or other body parts. By
obtaining and maintaining a holistic picture of relevant clinical
findings, a radiologist will be able to make a more accurate diagnosis. However, it remains challenging to develop a universal or
multicategory CADe framework, capable of detecting multiple
lesion types in a seamless fashion, partially due to the lack of
a multicategory lesion dataset. Such a framework is crucial
to building an automatic radiological diagnosis and reasoning
In this paper, we attempt to address these challenges.
First, we introduce a paradigm to harvest lesion annotations
from bookmarks in a picture archiving and communication system (PACS) with minimum manual effort. Bookmarks are
metadata10 marked by radiologists during their daily work to
highlight target image findings. Using this paradigm, we collected a large-scale dataset of lesions from multiple categories
(Fig. 1). Our dataset, named DeepLesion, is composed of 32,735
lesions in 32,120 bookmarked CT slices from 10,594 studies of
4427 unique patients. Different from existing datasets, it contains a variety of lesions including lung nodules, liver lesions,
enlarged lymph nodes, kidney lesions, bone lesions, and so on.
DeepLesion is publicly released and may be downloaded
from Ref. 11.
Using this dataset, we develop an automatic lesion detection
algorithm to find all types of lesions with one unified
*Address all correspondence to: Ronald M. Summers, E-mail: 
2329-4302/2018/$25.00 © 2018 SPIE
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Journal of Medical Imaging 5(3), 036501 
framework. Our algorithm is based on a regional convolutional
neural network (faster RCNN13). It achieves a sensitivity of
77.31% with three false positives (FPs) per image and 81.1%
with five FPs. Note that the clinical bookmarks are not complete
annotations of all significant lesions on a radiology image.
Radiologists typically only annotate lesions of focus to facilitate
follow-up studies of lesion matching and growth tracking. There
are often several other lesions left without annotation. We
empirically find that a large portion of the so-called FPs is
actually true lesions, as demonstrated later. To harvest and distinguish those clinician unannotated lesions from “true” FPs will
be an important future work.
Materials and Methods
In this section, we will first introduce bookmarks as radiology
annotation tools. Then, we will describe the setup procedure and
Fig. 1 Visualization of a subset (15%) of the DeepLesion dataset. The x- and y-axes of the scatter map
correspond to the x- and z-coordinates of the relative body location of each lesion, respectively.
Therefore, this map is similar to a frontal view of the human body. Colors indicate the manually labeled
lesion types. Sample lesions are exhibited to show the great diversity of DeepLesion, including: (a) lung
nodule; (b) lung cyst; (c) costophrenic sulcus (lung) mass/fluid; (d) breast mass; (e) liver lesion; (f) renal
mass; (g) large abdominal mass; (h) posterior thigh mass; (i) iliac sclerotic lesion; (j) perirectal lymph
node (LN); (k) pelvic mass; (l) periportal LN; (m) omental mass; (n) peripancreatic lesion; (o) splenic
lesion; (p) subcutaneous/skin nodule; (q) ground glass opacity; (r) axillary LN; (s) subcarinal LN; (t) vertebral body metastasis; (u) thyroid nodule; and (v) neck mass. Reproduced from the supplementary
material of Ref. 12.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
data statistics of the DeepLesion dataset. The proposed universal
lesion detector will be presented afterward.
Radiologists routinely annotate and measure hundreds of clinically meaningful findings in medical images, which have been
collected for two decades in our institute’s PACS. Figure 2
shows a sample of a bookmarked image. Many of the bookmarks are either tumors or lymph nodes measured according
to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST)
guidelines.14 According to RECIST, assessment of the change
in tumor burden is an important feature of the clinical evaluation
of cancer therapeutics. Therefore, bookmarks usually indicate
critical lesion findings. It will be extremely useful if we can
collect them into a dataset and develop CADe/CADx algorithms
to detect and characterize them.
To get an overview of the bookmarks, we analyze them by
year, image modality, and annotation tool. From Fig. 3, we can
see that the number of studies with bookmarks increases each
year with a boost in 2015. This indicates that bookmarks are
becoming more and more popular as radiologists discover
that it is a helpful tool.15 By collecting these bookmarks
every year, we can easily obtain a large-scale lesion dataset.
The image modalities of the bookmarks are shown in Fig. 4.
CT images make up the largest percentage, followed by MR
and nuclear medicine.
Radiologists can use various annotation tools to annotate the
bookmarks, including arrows, lines, ellipses, bidimensional
RECIST diameters, segmentations, and text. We downloaded
all the bookmarks in CT studies and counted the usage of
the tools (Fig. 5). RECIST diameters were applied most frequently. Each RECIST-diameter bookmark consists of two
lines: one measuring the longest diameter of the lesion and
the second measuring its longest perpendicular diameter in
the plane of measurement. Examples can be found in Fig. 2.
The RECIST-diameter bookmarks can tell us the exact location
and size of a lesion. A line bookmark contains only one length
measurement, which may be the longest or shortest diameter of
a lesion, or even a measurement of a nonlesion. For line, ellipse,
text, or arrow bookmarks, while we can infer the approximate
location of a lesion, the exact location and/or size is not
available.
DeepLesion Dataset
Because bookmarks can be viewed as annotations of critical
lesions, we collected them to build a lesion dataset for
Fig. 2 An example of a bookmarked image. A mass in or adjacent to
the left nephrectomy bed is bookmarked using the RECIST-diameter
tool. The bookmark identifiers indicate that this is bookmark number 6
(B06) and that this bookmark is part of follow-up set number 3 of bookmarks on the same lesion (F03).
Fig. 3 Number of studies with bookmarks in the PACS of our institute
in each year (all image modalities included).
Fig. 4 Proportion of different image modalities of the bookmarks in
our institute. CT, computed tomography; MR, magnetic resonance;
NM, nuclear medicine; CR, computed radiography; PT, positron emission tomography (PET); and US, ultrasound.
Fig. 5 Proportion of different annotation tools of the CT bookmarks in
our institute.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
CADe/CADx algorithms. This research has been approved by
our Institutional Research Board. Without loss of generality,
currently, we only focus on CT bookmarks, which are the
most abundant. As for the annotation tools, now, we only consider RECIST diameters. Until January 2017, we have collected
33,418 bookmarks of this type. After filtering some noisy bookmarks (detailed in Sec. 2.2.1), we obtained the DeepLesion dataset with 32,120 axial slices from 10,594 CT studies of 4427
unique patients. There are one to three bookmarks in each
slice, for a total of 32,735 bookmarks. The dataset will be introduced in detail from the following aspects: setup procedure, data
statistics, advantages, limitations, and potential applications.
Setup procedure
First, we acquired the accession numbers of the CT studies with
(Carestream
V12.1.6.0117). Then, the bookmarks were downloaded according to them using a Perl script provided by the PACS manufacturer. We selected only the RECIST-diameter ones, which are
represented by four vertices. Most of them were annotated on
the axial plane. We filtered the nonaxial ones, and then converted the vertices to image coordinates. The conversion was
done by first subtracting the “ImagePositionPatient” (extracted
from the DICOM file) from each vertex and then dividing the
coordinates of each vertex with the pixel spacing.
The CT volumes that contain these bookmarks were also
downloaded. We used MATLAB to convert each image slice
from DICOM files to 16-bit portable network graphics (PNG)
files for lossless compression and anonymization. Real patient
IDs, accession numbers, and series numbers were replaced by
self-defined indices of patient, study, and series (starting from 1)
for anonymization. We named each volume with the format
“{patient index}_{study index}_{series index}.” Note that
one patient often underwent multiple CT examinations (studies)
for different purposes or follow-up. Each study contains multiple volumes (series) that are scanned at the same time point but
differ in image filters, contrast phases, etc. Every series is
a three-dimensional (3-D) volume composed of tens to hundreds
of axial image slices. Metadata,10 such as pixel spacing, slice
interval, intensity window, and patient gender and age, were
also recorded. The slice intervals were computed by differentiating the “ImagePositionPatient” (extracted from DICOM) of
neighboring slices. We made sure that the slice indices increased
from head to feet.
To facilitate applications such as computer-aided lesion
detection, we converted the RECIST diameters into bounding-boxes. Denote the four vertices as ðx11; y11Þ, ðx12; y12Þ,
ðx21; y21Þ, and ðx22; y22Þ. The z coordinates are omitted since
the vertices are on the same axial plane. A bounding box
(left, top, right, and bottom) was computed to enclose the lesion
measurement with 5-pixel padding in each direction, i.e.,
ðxmin −5; ymin −5; xmax þ 5; ymax þ 5Þ, where xmin ¼ minðx11;
x12; x21; x22Þ, xmax ¼ maxðx11; x12; x21; x22Þ, and similarly for
ymin and ymax. The 5-pixel padding was applied to cover the
lesion’s full spatial extent.
There are a limited number of incorrect bookmarks. For
example, some bookmarks are outside the body, which is possibly caused by annotation error by the user. To remove these
label noises, we computed the area and width-height-ratio of
each bounding-box, as well as the mean and standard deviation
of the pixels inside the box. Boxes that are too small/large/flat/
dark or small in intensity range were manually checked. Another
minor issue is duplicate annotations. A small number of lesions
were bookmarked more than once possibly by different radiologists. We merged bounding-boxes that have more than 60%
overlap by averaging their coordinates.16
Data statistics
The slice intervals of the CT studies in the dataset range between
0.25 and 22.5 mm. About 48.3% of them are 1 mm and 48.9%
are 5 mm. The pixel spacings range between 0.18 and
0.98 mm∕pixel with a median of 0.82 mm∕pixel. Most of
the images are 512 × 512 and 0.12% of them are 768 × 768
or 1024 × 1024. Figure 6 displays the distribution of the
sizes of the bounding-boxes. The median values of the width
and height are 22.9 and 22.3 mm, respectively. The diameter
range of the lesions is 0.42 to 342.5 mm for long diameter
and 0.21 to 212.4 mm for short diameter.
To explore the lesion types in DeepLesion, we randomly
selected 9816 lesions and manually labeled them into eight
types: lung (2426), abdomen (2166), mediastinum (1638),
liver (1318), pelvis (869), soft tissue (677), kidney (490), and
bone (232). These are coarse-scale attributes of the lesions.
The mediastinum type mainly consists of lymph nodes in the
chest. Abdomen lesions are miscellaneous ones that are not
in liver or kidney. The soft tissue type contains lesions in the
muscle, skin, and fat. Examples of the lesions in the eight
types can be found in Fig. 1, where a subset of the lesions is
drawn on a scatter map to show their types and relative body
coordinates. The map is similar to a frontal view of the
human body. To obtain the approximate z-coordinate of each
lesion, we adopted the unsupervised body part regressor17 to
predict the slice score of each image slice. From Fig. 1, we
can find that the dataset is clinically diversified.
Universal Lesion Detection
In this section, we will introduce our universal lesion detector in
detail. It is trained on DeepLesion, thus can detect all types of
lesions that radiologists are interested in measuring with one
Fig. 6 Distribution of the sizes of the bounding-boxes in DeepLesion.
The bounding-boxes were computed from the RECIST diameters
after dilation by 5 pixels. The width and height are the size of the
x- and y-axes of the boxes, respectively.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
unified framework. The algorithm is adapted from the faster
RCNN method.13 Its flowchart is illustrated in Fig. 7.
Image preprocessing
The 12-bit CT intensity range was rescaled to floating-point
numbers in using a single windowing (−1024 to
3071 HU) that covers the intensity ranges of lung, soft tissue,
and bone. Every image slice was resized to 512 × 512. To
encode 3-D information, we used three axial slices to compose
a three-channel image and input it to the network. The slices
were the center slice that contains the bookmark and its neighboring slices interpolated at 2-mm slice intervals. No data augmentation was used since our dataset is large enough to train a
deep neural network.
Network architecture
The VGG-1618 model was adopted as the backbone of the network. We also compared deeper architectures including ResNet-
5019 and DenseNet-12120 and the shallower AlexNet21 on the
validation set and observed that VGG-16 had the highest accuracy. As shown in Fig. 7, an input image was first processed by
the convolutional blocks in VGG-16 (Conv1–Conv5) to produce
feature maps. We removed the last two pooling layers (pool4
and pool5) to enhance the resolution of the feature map and
to increase the sampling ratio of positive samples (candidate
regions that contain lesions), since lesions are often small
and sparse in an image.
Next, a region proposal network13 parsed the feature maps
and proposes candidate lesion regions. It estimated the probability of “lesion/nonlesion” on a fixed set of anchors on each
position of the feature maps. At the same time, the location
and size of each anchor were fine-tuned via bounding box
regression. After investigating the sizes of the boundingboxes in DeepLesion, we used five anchor scales (16, 24, 32,
48, and 96) and three anchor ratios (1:2, 1:1, and 2:1) in
this paper.
Afterward, the lesion proposals and the feature maps were
sent to a region of interest (RoI) pooling layer, which resampled
the feature maps inside each proposal to a fixed size (7 × 7 in
this paper). These feature maps were then fed into two convolutional layers, Conv6 and Conv7. Here, we replaced the original
4096D fully-connected (FC) layers in VGG-16 so that the model
size was cut to 1/4 while the accuracy was comparable. Conv6
consisted of 512 3 × 3 filters with zero padding and stride 1.
Conv7 consisted of 512 5 × 5 filters with zero padding and
stride 1. Rectified linear units were inserted after the two convolutional layers. The 512D feature vector after Conv7 then
underwent two FC layers to predict the confidence scores for
each lesion proposal and ran another bounding box regression
for further fine-tuning. Nonmaximum suppression (NMS)13 was
then applied to the fine-tuned boxes to generate the final predictions. The intersection-over-union (IoU) thresholds for NMS
were 0.7 and 0.3 in training and testing, respectively.
Implementation details
The proposed algorithm was implemented using MXNet.22 The
weights in Conv1 to Conv5 were initialized with the ImageNet
pretrained VGG-16 model, whereas all the other layers were
randomly initialized. During training, we fixed the weights in
Conv1 and Conv2. The two classification and two regression
losses were jointly optimized. This end-to-end training strategy
is more efficient than the four-step strategy in the original faster
RCNN implementation.13 Each mini-batch had eight images.
The number of region proposals per image for training was
32. We adopted the stochastic gradient descent optimizer and
set the base learning rate to 0.002, and then reduced it by a factor
of 10 after six epochs. The network converged within eight
To evaluate the proposed algorithm, we divided DeepLesion
into training (70%), validation (15%), and test (15%) sets by
randomly splitting the dataset at the patient level. The proposed
algorithm only took 34 ms to process a test image on a Titan X
Pascal GPU. Here, we report the free receiver operating characteristic (FROC) curves on the test set in Fig. 8. The sensitivity
reaches 81.1% when there are five FPs on average on each
image. In addition, the performance steadily improves as
more training samples are used. As a result, the accuracy is
expected to be better as we harvest more data in the future.
The FROC curves of different lesion types are shown in
Fig. 9. Note that our network does not predict the type of
each detected lesion, so the x-axis in Fig. 9 is the average number of FPs of all lesion types per image. Thus, the curves could
Fig. 7 Flowchart of the lesion detection algorithm. Yellow dashed and cyan solid boxes in each image
indicate the ground-truth and the predicted bounding-boxes, respectively.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
not be directly compared with the literature.7–9 Instead, they
reflect the relative performance of different types and sizes.
From Fig. 9, we can find that liver, lung, kidney, and mediastinum lesions are among the easiest ones to detect. This is probably because their intensity and appearance is relatively
distinctive from the background. It is more difficult to detect
abdominal and pelvic lesions, where normal and abnormal
structures including bowel and mesentery clutter the image
and may have similar appearances (Figs. 18–21). Soft tissue
and bone lesions have fewer training samples and small contrast
with normal structures, thus have the lowest sensitivity.
The FROC curves of different lesion sizes are shown in
Fig. 10. The size is computed by averaging the long and
short diameters. In Fig. 10, it is not surprising that small lesions
(<10 mm) are harder to detect. It is also easy to find very large
(≥50 mm) lesions. However, when lesion size is between 10 and
50 mm, the sensitivity is not proportional with lesion size, which
is possibly because detection accuracy can be affected by multiple factors, such as lesion size, lesion type, number of training
samples, etc. The algorithm performs the best when the lesion
size is 15 to 20 mm.
The detection accuracy also depends on the selected IoU
threshold. From Fig. 11, we can find that the sensitivity
decreases if the threshold is set higher.
Some qualitative results are randomly chosen from the test
set and are shown in Figs. 12–21. The figure shows examples of
true positives, FPs, and false negatives (FNs).
Discussion
DeepLesion Dataset
Advantages
Compared to most other lesion medical image datasets23–28 that
consist of only certain types of lesions, one major feature of our
DeepLesion database is that it contains all kinds of critical
Fig. 8 FROC curves of lesion detection on the test set of DeepLesion
when different proportions of training data are used.
Fig. 9 FROC curves of lesion detection on the test set of DeepLesion
with respect to different lesion types. The x-axis is the average number of FPs of all lesion types per image. The numbers in the legend
are the numbers of lesions of a specific type in the test set.
Fig. 10 FROC curves of lesion detection on the test set of
DeepLesion with respect to different lesion sizes. The x-axis is the
average number of FPs of all sizes per image. The numbers in the
legend are the numbers of lesions of a specific size in the test set.
Accuracy can be affected by multiple factors, such as lesion size,
lesion type, number of training samples, etc. Thus, its order does
not strictly follow the order of lesion size.
Fig. 11 Sensitivity of lesion detection on the test set of DeepLesion
with respect to different IoU thresholds and the numbers of average
FPs per image.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
radiology findings, ranging from widely studied lung nodules,
liver lesions, and so on, to less common ones, such as bone and
soft tissue lesions. Thus, it allows researchers to:
• Develop a universal lesion detector. The detector can help
radiologists find all types of lesions within one unified
Fig. 13 The ground-truth is detected but split into two parts. Some
minor areas of scarring are not marked.
Fig. 14 A correct detection with high confidence.
Fig. 15 An enlarged lymph node is correctly detected, but two unenlarged ones are also marked (red boxes). This is probably because
the universal lesion detector is robust to small scale changes.
Therefore, small and large lymph nodes are sometimes both
Fig. 16 A mass is correctly detected with high confidence, but
another one posterior to the trachea is missed.
Fig. 17 The ground-truth and two enlarged lymph nodes are correctly
detected, even though the lymph nodes are not annotated in the
Fig. 12 Detection results randomly chosen from the test set. The
ground-truth and correct predictions are marked with yellow dashed
boxes and green solid boxes, respectively. FPs and FNs are marked
with red and blue solid boxes, respectively. The numbers beside the
predictions are confidence scores. Predictions with scores >0.5 are
shown. The same explanation applies to Figs. 13–21. In the figure,
a tiny lung nodule is detected with high confidence. An area of scarring in the lingula is not detected, which is possibly because there are
few bookmarks of scars in the dataset.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
computing framework. It may open the possibility to serve
as an initial screening tool and send its detection results to
other specialist systems trained on certain types of lesions.
• Mine and study the relationship between different types of
lesions.12 In DeepLesion, multiple findings are often
marked in one study. Researchers are able to analyze
their relationship to make discoveries and improve
CADe/CADx accuracy, which is not possible with other
Another advantage of DeepLesion is its large size and small
annotation effort. ImageNet3 is an important dataset in computer
vision, which are composed of millions of images from thousands of classes. In contrast, most publicly available medical
image datasets have tens or hundreds of cases, and datasets
with more than 5000 well-annotated cases are rare.10,29
DeepLesion is a large-scale dataset with over 32K annotated
lesions from over 10K studies. It is still growing every year,
see Fig. 3. In the future, we can further extend it to other
image modalities, such as MR, and combine data from multiple
hospitals. Most importantly, these annotations can be harvested
with minimum manual effort. We hope the dataset will benefit
the medical imaging area just as ImageNet benefitted the computer vision area.
Potential applications
• Lesion detection: This is the direct application of
DeepLesion. Lesion detection is a key part of diagnosis
and is one of the most labor-intensive tasks for
radiologists.2 An automated lesion detection algorithm
is highly useful because it can help human experts to
improve the detection accuracy and decrease the reading
• Lesion classification: Although the type of each lesion
was not annotated along with the bookmarks, we can
extract the lesion types from radiology reports coupled
with each study. Nowadays, radiologists often put
hyperlinks in reports to link bookmarks with lesion
descriptions.15 Consequently, we can use natural language
processing algorithms to automatically extract lesion
types and other information cues.30,31
• Lesion segmentation: With the RECIST diameters and
bounding-boxes provided in the dataset, weakly supervised segmentation algorithms32 can be developed to automatically segment or measure lesions. One can also select
lesions of interest and manually annotate them for training
Fig. 18 The ground-truth and another liver lesion are detected.
A small liver lesion is missed. Two small lymph nodes are FPs.
Fig. 19 The ground-truth liver lesion is detected with high confidence.
A renal cyst and a bone metastasis are also detected correctly. FPs
include normal pancreas (0.947), gallbladder (0.821), and bowel
(0.608). A subtle bone metastasis (blue box) is missed. Note the complexity and clutter of the appearance of abdominal structures.
Fig. 20 The ground-truth iliac lymph node is missed. Note the complexity and clutter of the appearance of pelvic structures.
Fig. 21 The ground-truth inguinal lymph node is detected with high
confidence, although its appearance is similar to the surrounding
muscles and vessels. FP is on a normal bladder.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
and testing. During the annotation process, active learning
may be employed to alleviate human burden.
• Lesion retrieval: Considering its diversity, DeepLesion is
a good data source for the study of content-based or textbased lesion retrieval algorithms.33,34 The goal is to find
the most relevant lesions given a query text or image.
• Lesion growth analysis: In the dataset, lesions (e.g.,
tumors and lymph nodes) are often measured multiple
times for follow-up study.14 With these sequential data,
one may be able to analyze or predict the change of
lesions based on their appearance and other relative
information.35
Limitations
Since DeepLesion was mined from PACS, it has a few
limitations:
• Lack of complete labels: DeepLesion contains only twodimensional diameter measurements and bounding-boxes
of lesions. It has no lesion segmentations, 3-D boundingboxes, or fine-grained lesion types. We are now working
on extracting lesion types from radiology reports.
• Missing annotations: Radiologists typically mark only
representative lesions in each study.14 Therefore, some
lesions remain unannotated. The unannotated lesions
may harm or misrepresent the performance of the trained
lesion detector because the negative samples (nonlesions)
are not purely true. To solve this problem, one can leverage machine learning strategies, such as learning with
noisy labels.36 It is also feasible to select negative samples
from another dataset of healthy subjects. Furthermore, to
more accurately evaluate the trained detector, it is better to
have a fully labeled test set with all lesions annotated. The
newly annotated lesions should also be similar to those
already in DeepLesion, so lesions that do not exist in
DeepLesion should not be annotated.
• Noise in lesion annotations: According to manual examination, although most bookmarks represent abnormal
findings or lesions, a small proportion of the bookmarks
is actually measurement of normal structures, such as
lymph nodes of normal size. We can design algorithms
to either filter them (e.g., by using extracted lesion
types from reports) or ignore them (e.g., by using machine
learning models that are robust to noise).
Universal Lesion Detection
Because radiologists typically mark only representative lesions
in each study,14 there are missing annotations in the test set.
Therefore, the actual FP rates should be lower. We would
argue that the current result is still a nonperfect but reasonable
surrogate of the actual accuracy. From the qualitative detection
results in Figs. 12–21, we can find that the universal lesion
detector is able to detect various types of lesions in the test
set of DeepLesion, including the annotated ones (groundtruth) as well as some unannotated ones, although a few FPs
and FNs still present.
• Lung, mediastinum, and liver lesions can be detected
more accurately, as their intensity and appearance patterns
are relatively distinctive from the background.
• Lung scarring is not always detected, which is possibly
because it is not commonly measured by radiologists,
thus DeepLesion contains very few training samples.
• Unenlarged lymph nodes are sometimes detected as FNs.
This is probably because the design of faster RCNN (e.g.,
the RoI pooling layer) allows it to be robust to small scale
changes. We can amend this issue by training a special
lymph node detector and a lesion size regressor.
• There are more FPs and FNs in the abdominal and pelvic
area, as normal and abnormal structures bowel and mesentery clutter inside the image and may have similar
appearances (Figs. 18–21). This problem may be mitigated by applying ensemble of models and enhancing
the model with 3-D context.6,7,9
It is not proper to directly compare our results with others’
since most existing work7–9 can only detect one type of lesion.
However, we can use them as references. Roth et al.9 proposed
CNNs with random view aggregation to detect sclerotic bone
lesions, lymph nodes, and colonic polyps. Their detection
results are 70%, 77%, and 75% at three FPs per patient for
the three types of lesions, respectively. Ben-Cohen et al.8
applied fully convolutional network and sparsity-based dictionary learning for liver lesion detection in CT. Their result is
94.6% at 2.9 FPs per case. Multilevel contextual 3-D CNNs
were used7 to detect lung nodules with a sensitivity of 87.9
at two FPs per scan. The main reason that our result
(77.31% at three FPs per image) is still inferior than those in
Refs. 7–9 is that our task is considerably harder, which tries
to detect all kinds of lesions including lung nodules, liver
lesions, bone lesions, lymph nodes, and so on. Besides, our dataset is much larger (32,735 lesions with about 25% lung lesions
and 13% liver ones, versus 123 liver lesions8 and 1186 lung
nodules7) with lesion sizes ranging widely from 0.21 to
342.5 mm. Furthermore, we did not use a fully annotated dataset
of a specific lesion to train a sophisticated detection model such
as those in Refs. 7–9. Improving the detection accuracy is one of
our future works.
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a paradigm to collect lesion annotations and build large-scale lesion datasets with minimal
manual effort. We made use of bookmarks in PACS, which
are annotations marked by radiologists during their routine
work to highlight significant clinical image findings that
would serve as references for longitudinal studies. After analyzing their characteristics, we harvested and sorted them to create
DeepLesion, a dataset with over 32K lesion bounding-boxes and
measurements. DeepLesion is composed of a variety of lesions
and has many potential applications. As a direct application, we
developed a universal lesion detector that can find all types of
lesions with one unified framework. Qualitative and quantitative
results proved its effectiveness.
In the future, we will keep on improving the DeepLesion
dataset by collecting more data and extracting lesion types
from radiology reports. We also plan to improve the universal
lesion detector by leveraging 3-D and lesion type information.
Journal of Medical Imaging
Jul–Sep 2018 • Vol. 5(3)
Yan et al.: DeepLesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations. . .
Disclosures
Author R.M.S. has pending and/or awarded patents for automated image analyses, and received royalty income from iCAD,
Zebra Medical, Imbio, ScanMed and Koninklijke Philips. His
lab received research support from Ping An Technology
Company Ltd. and NVIDIA. The other authors declare no
disclosures.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program
of the National Institutes of Health, Clinical Center. We thank
Sue Powell and Douglas Milewski in our department’s PACS/
RIS section for help downloading the bookmarks.