ADIEU FEATURES? END-TO-END SPEECH EMOTION RECOGNITION USING
A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL RECURRENT NETWORK
George Trigeorgis1, Fabien Ringeval2,3, Raymond Brueckner3,4, Erik Marchi3
Mihalis A. Nicolaou5, Björn Schuller1,2,6,Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
2Chair of Complex & Intelligent Systems, University of Passau, Passau, Germany
3Machine Intelligence & Signal Processing Group, MMK,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
4Nuance Communications Deutschland GmbH, Ulm, Germany
5Department of Computing, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK
6audEERING UG, Gilching, Germany
 
The automatic recognition of spontaneous emotions from
speech is a challenging task.
On the one hand, acoustic
features need to be robust enough to capture the emotional
content for various styles of speaking, and while on the other,
machine learning algorithms need to be insensitive to outliers
while being able to model the context. Whereas the latter
has been tackled by the use of Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks, the former is still under very active investigations, even though more than a decade of research
has provided a large set of acoustic descriptors. In this paper, we propose a solution to the problem of ‘context-aware’
emotional relevant feature extraction, by combining Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with LSTM networks, in
order to automatically learn the best representation of the
speech signal directly from the raw time representation. In
this novel work on the so-called end-to-end speech emotion
recognition, we show that the use of the proposed topology
signiﬁcantly outperforms the traditional approaches based
on signal processing techniques for the prediction of spontaneous and natural emotions on the RECOLA database.
Index Terms— end-to-end learning, raw waveform, emotion recognition, deep learning, CNN, LSTM
1. INTRODUCTION AND PRIOR WORK
With the advent of deep neural networks in the last decade a
number of groundbreaking improvements have been observed
in several established pattern recognition areas such as object,
speech and speaker recognition, as well as in combined problem solving approaches, e.g. in audio-visual recognition, and
in the rather recent ﬁeld of paralinguistics. For this purpose
a series of new neural network architectures have been proposed, such as autoencoder networks, convolutional neural
networks (CNN), or memory enhanced neural network models such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models .
Numerous studies have shown the favourable property of
these network variants to model inherent structure contained
in the speech signal , with more recent research attempting end-to-end optimisation utilising as little human a-priori
knowledge as possible . Nevertheless, the majority of these
works make use of commonly hand-engineered features have
been used as input features, such as Mel-Frequency Cepstral
Coefﬁcients (MFCC), Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP) coefﬁcients, and supra-segmental features such as those used in
the series of ComParE and AVEC challenges , which
build upon knowledge gained in decades of auditory research
and have shown to be robust for many speech domains.
Recently, however, a trend in the machine learning community has emerged towards deriving a representation of the
input signal directly from raw, unprocessed data. The motivation behind this idea is that, ultimately, the network learns
an intermediate representation of the raw input signal automatically that better suits the task at hand and hence leads to
improved performance.
1.1. Related Work
In one of the ﬁrst studies that suggested learning better
features for automatic speech recognition (ASR) that used
directly the speech waveform was Jaitly and Hinton .
Although they did not train the system in an end-to-end manner, they proposed learning an intermediate representation
by training a Restricted Boltzmann Machine directly on the
speech time signal.
Experiments on the TIMIT phoneme
recognition task demonstrated results that were on-par, or
better than, state-of-the-art results at the time. More interestingly, the resulting learnt ﬁlters show the bandpass behaviour
that auditory research has shown to exist in the human inner
Bhargava and Rose used stacked bottleneck deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on windowed speech waveforms
and obtained results only slight worse than corresponding
MFCC on the same architecture. Sainath et al. match the performance of a large-vocabulary speech recognition (LVCSR)
system based on log-Mel ﬁlterbank energies by using a Convolutional, LSTM-DNN . They observed that a time
convolution layer helps in reducing temporal variation, another frequency convolution layer aids in preserving locality
and reducing frequency variation, while the the LSTM layers
serve for contextual modelling of the speech signal.
Palaz et al. used CNNs directly trained on the
speech signal to estimate phoneme class conditional probabilities and observed that the features learnt between the ﬁrst
two convolution layers tend to model the phone-speciﬁc spectral envelope of sub-segmental speech signal, which leads to
a more robust performance in noisy conditions. Deep CNN
end-to-end learning was successfully applied on a music information retrieval task , and a similar model architecture
was recently used for polyphonic music transcription .
In the ﬁeld of paralinguistics, several studies have been
carried out using CNNs for feature learning, e.g., recently by
Milde and Biemann , and Mao et al. . However, these
works rely on a low-dimensional Mel ﬁlterbank feature vector
and hence did not do a full end-to-end training of their system.
1.2. Contribution of this work
In this work we study automatic affect sensing and prediction
by training – directly on the underlying audio time signal – an
end-to-end model that combines CNN and memory enhanced
neural networks. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work in
literature that applies such a model to an emotion recognition
task and our results show that this can successfully outperform state-of-the-art approaches based on designed features.
Furthermore, we suggest using explicit maximisation of the
concordance correlation coefﬁcient (ρc) in our model
and show that this improves performance in terms of emotion
prediction compared to optimising the mean square error objective, which is traditionally used. Finally, by further studying the activations of different cells in the recurrent layers, we
ﬁnd the existence of interpretable cells, which are highly correlated with several prosodic and acoustic features that were
always assumed to convey affective information in speech,
such as the loudness and the fundamental frequency.
2. MODEL DESIGN
One of the ﬁrst steps in a traditional feature extraction process
in audio is to use ﬁnite impulse response ﬁlters which perform time-frequency decomposition to reduce the inﬂuence of
background noise . More complicated hand-engineered
kernels, such as gammatone ﬁlters , which were formulated by studying the frequency responses of the receptive
ﬁelds of auditory neurons of grassfrogs, can be used as well.
A key component of our model are the 1-d convolutions
that operate on the discrete-time waveform h(k).
(f ⋆h)(t) =
f(t) · h(t −k)
where f(x) is a kernel function whose parameters are learnt
from the data of the task in hand. After the spatial-modelling
of the signal which removes background noise and enhances
speciﬁc parts of the signal for the task in hand, we model
the temporal structure of speech by using a recurrent network with LSTM cells. We use LSTM for (i) simplicity, and
(ii) to fairly compare against existing approaches which concentrated in the combination of hand-engineered features and
LSTM networks. Finally, both subparts of our model are then
trained jointly by backpropagation using the same objective
function, cf. Equation 2.
2.1. Topology of the network
In contrast to previous work done in the ﬁeld of paralinguistics, where acoustic features are ﬁrst extracted and then
passed to a machine learning algorithm, we aim at learning the feature extraction and regression steps in one jointly
trained model for predicting the emotion. Our convolutional
reccurrent model is depicted in Figure 1 and summarised
We segment the raw waveform to 6 s long sequences after we preprocess the time-sequences to have zero
mean and unit variance to account for variations in different
levels of loudness between the speakers. At 16 kHz sampling
rate, this corresponds to a 96000-dimensional input vector.
Temporal Convolution. We use F = 40 space time ﬁnite
impulse ﬁlters with a 5ms window in order to extract ﬁnescale spectral information from the high sampling rate signal.
Pooling across time. The impulse response of each ﬁlter is passed through a half-wave rectiﬁer (analogous to the
cochlear transduction step in the human ear) and then downsampled to 8 kHz by pooling each impulse response with a
pool size = 2.
Temporal Convolution. We use M = 40 space time ﬁnite
impulse ﬁlters of 500ms window. These are used to extract
more long-term characteristics of the speech and the roughness of the speech signal.
Max pooling across channels. We perform max-pooling
across the channel domain with a pool size of 20. This reduces the dimensionality of the signal while preserving the
necessary statistics of the convolved signal.
Recurrent layers. We segment the 6 s sequences to 150
smaller sub-sequences to match the granularity of the annotation frequency of 40 ms. We use two bidirectional LSTM
layers with 128 cells each , although we get similar
performance with the uni-directional approach.
Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed convolutional recurrent network topology for emotion prediction from the raw waveform
signal. The convolutional layers replace the need for hand-engineering features which were used till now in the paralinguistics
community.
2.2. Objective function
To evaluate the agreement level between the predictions of
the network and the gold-standard derived from the annotations, the concordance correlation coefﬁcient (ρc) has
recently been proposed . Nonetheless, previous work
minimised the MSE during the training of the networks, but
evaluated the models with respect to ρc . Instead, we
propose to include the metric used to evaluate the performance in the objective function (Lc) used to train the networks. Since the objective function is a cost function, we
deﬁne Lc as follow:
Lc = 1 −ρc = 1 −
σ2x + σ2y + (µx −µy)2
where ψ = σ2
y + (µx −µy)2 and µx
µy = E(y), σ2
x = var(x), σ2
y = var(y) and σ2
xy = cov(x, y)
Thus, to minimise Lc (or maximise ρc), we backpropagate
the gradient of the last layer weights with respect to Lc,
where all vector operations are done element-wise.
3. EXPERIMENTS AND DATA SET
Time-continuous prediction of spontaneous and natural emotions (arousal and valence) is investigated on speech data by
using the RECOLA database ; the full dataset is used for
the purpose of this study, which corresponds to speech recordings from 46 French-speaking participants with 5 minutes for
each. The dataset is split equally in three partitions – train
(16 subjects), validation (15 subjects) and test (15 subjects)
– by stratifying (i.e., balancing) the gender and the age of
the speakers. The same procedure as the one used in the latest edition of the Audio-Visual Emotion Recognition Challenge is used to extract acoustic features
from the speech recordings: the extended Geneva minimalistic acoustic feature set (eGeMAPS) is applied at a rate
of 40 ms using overlapping windows of 3 s length. Because
the complexity of this feature set is quite low, and could thus
make the comparison unfair with the CNN approach, we also
extracted the low-level descriptors (LLDs) that are used in
the series of computational paralinguistic challenges (Com-
ParE) .
We then applied functionals (max, min, range,
mean, and standard-deviation) with the same rate and
window length as used for eGeMAPS, on those LLDs.
As a ﬁrst baseline machine learning algorithm, we used
Support Vector Regression models with a linear kernel – polynomial and RBF kernels provided lower performance, using
the libsvm library. The complexity parameter is optimised
with a logarithmic grid in the range [10−6−100]. As a second
baseline algorithm, we utilised a BLSTM-DRNNs with the
architecture preserved from , i.e., we used three hidden
layers with 64 units for each layer. Input noise with σ = 0.1
is added and early stopping is also used to prevent overﬁtting.
Stochastic gradient descent with a batch size of 5 sequences
is used in all experiments. The learning rate of the network is
optimised on the validation set for each emotional dimension
(arousal, valence) and objective function (MSE, ρc), using the
ρc as evaluation performance, which is computed on the goldstandard and prediction values concatenated over all recordings, in accordance with the approach deﬁned in the AV+EC
challenge .
For training our proposed model, we utilised stochastic
optimisation, with a mini-batch of 50 samples, Adam optimisation method , and a ﬁxed learning rate of 2 · 10−3
throughout all experiments. Also, for regularisation of the
network, we used dropout with p = 0.5 for all layers except the recurrent ones. This step is important as our models
have a large amount of parameters (≈1.5M) and not regularising the network makes it prone on overﬁtting on the training
Finally, for all investigated methods, a chain of postprocessing is applied to the predictions obtained on the development set: (i) median ﬁltering (with size of window ranging
from 0.4 s to 20 s) , (ii) centring (by computing the bias between gold-standard and prediction) , (iii) scaling (using
the ratio of standard-deviation of gold-standard and prediction as scaling factor) and (iv) time-shifting (by shifting
the prediction forward in time with values ranging from 0.04 s
to 10 s), to compensate for delays in the ratings . Any of
these post-processing steps is kept when an improvement is
observed on the ρc of the validation set, and applied then with
the same conﬁguration on the test partition.
Results obtained for each method are shown in Table 1. In
all of the experiments, our model outperforms the designed
features in terms of ρc.
One may note, however, that the
eGEMAPS feature set provides close performance on valence, which is much more difﬁcult to predict from speech
compared to arousal. Furthermore, we show that by incorporating ρc directly in the optimisation function of all networks
allows us to optimise the models on the metric (ρc) on which
we evaluate the models. This provides us with i) a more elegant way to optimise models, and ii) gives consistently better
results across all test-runs as seen in Table 1.
a. Mean squared error objective
.318 (.489)
.169 (.210)
.366 (.491)
.180 (.178)
.300 (.404)
.192 (.187)
.132 (.221)
.117 (.152)
raw signal
.684 (.728)
.249 (.312)
b. Concordance correlation coefﬁcient objective
.316 (.445)
.195 (.190)
.382 (.478)
.187 (.246)
raw signal
.686 (.741)
.261 (.325)
Table 1. RECOLA dataset results (in terms of ρc) for prediction of arousal and valence. In parenthesis are the performance obtained on the development set. In a) we optimised
the models wrt. MSE whereas in b) wrt. ρc.
4. RELATION TO EXISTING ACOUSTIC AND
PROSODIC FEATURES
The speech signals convey information about the affective
state either explicitly, i.e., by linguistic means, or implicitly,
i.e., by acoustic or prosodic cues. It is well accepted amongst
the research community that certain acoustic and prosodic
features play an important role in recognising the affective
state . Some of these features, such as the mean of the
fundamental frequency (F0), mean speech intensity, loudness,
as well as pitch range , should thus be captured by our
Time (mins)
cell activations
prosodic feature
Fig. 2. A visualisation of three different gate activations vs.
different acoustic and prosodic features that are known to affect arousal for an unseen recording to the network. From
top to bottom: range of RMS energy (ρ = 0.81), loudness (ρ = 0.73), mean of fundamental frequency (ρ = 0.72)
To gain a better understanding of what our model learns,
and how this relates to existing literature, we study the statistics of gate activations in the network applied on an unseen
speech recording; a visualisation of the hidden-to-output connections of different cells in the recurrent layers of the network is given in Figure 2. This plot shows that certain cells
of the model are very sensitive to different features conveyed
in the original speech wave form.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a convolutional recurrent model that
operates on the raw signal, to perform an end-to-end spontaneous emotion prediction task from speech data. Further, we
propose the direct optimisation of the concordance correlation coefﬁcient, which is used to evaluate the agreement rate
between the predictions and the gold-standard. The proposed
method achieves signiﬁcantly better performance in comparison to traditional designed features on the RECOLA database,
thus demonstrating the efﬁcacy of learning features that better suit the task-at-hand. As a ﬁnal contribution, we study
the gate activations of the recurrent layers and ﬁnd cells that
are highly correlated with prosodic features that were always
assumed to cause arousal.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
George Trigeorgis is a recipient of the fellowship of the Department of Computing, Imperial College London, and this
work was partially funded by it.
This work was partially
supported by the EC’s 7th Framework Programme through
the ERC Starting Grant No. 338164 (iHEARu), and the EU’s
Horizon 2020 Programme through the Innovative Action
No. 644632 (MixedEmotions), No. 645094 (SEWA) and the
Research Innovative Action No. 645378 (ARIA-VALUSPA).
We would like to thank the NVIDIA Corporation for donating
a Tesla K40 GPU used in this work.
7. REFERENCES
 J. Schmidhuber,
“Deep learning in neural networks:
overview,”
Neural Networks, vol. 61, pp. 85–117, January
 G. Hinton, L. Deng, Y. Dong, G.E. Dahl, A. Mohamed,
N. Jaitly, A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T.N. Sainath,
and B. Kingsbury, “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research
groups,” Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–
97, November 2012.
 A. Graves and N. Jaitly, “Towards end-to-end speech recognition with recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. ICML, Beijing,
China, 2014, pp. 1764–1772.
 B. Schuller, S. Steidl, A. Batliner, A. Vinciarelli, K. Scherer,
F. Ringeval, M. Chetouani, F. Weninger, F. Eyben, E. Marchi,
M. Mortillaro, H. Salamin, A. Polychroniou, F. Valente, and
S. Kim, “The INTERSPEECH 2013 Computational Paralinguistics Challenge: Social signals, conﬂict, emotion, autism,”
in Proc. INTERSPEECH, Lyon, France, August 2013, pp. 148–
152, ISCA.
 F. Ringeval et al., “AV+EC 2015 – The First Affect Recognition Challenge Bridging Across Audio, Video, and Physiological Data,” in Proc. AVEC, Fabien Ringeval, Björn Schuller,
Michel Valstar, Roddy Cowie, and Maja Pantic, Eds., Brisbane,
Australia, October 2015, pp. 3–8, ACM.
 N. Jaitly and G. Hinton, “Learning a better representation of
speech sound waves using restricted Boltzmann machines,” in
Proc. ICASSP, Prague, Czech Republic, May 2011, pp. 5884–
5887, IEEE.
 M. Bhargava and R. Rose, “Architectures for deep neural network based acoustic models deﬁned over windowed speech
waveforms,”
in Proc. INTERSPEECH, Dresden, Germany,
September 2015, pp. 6–10, ISCA.
 T. Sainath, O. Vinyals, A. Senior, and H. Sak,
“Convolutional, long short-term memory, fully connected deep neural
networks,” in Proc. ICASSP, Brisbane, Australia, April 2015,
pp. 4580–4584, IEEE.
 T. Sainath, R. Weiss, A. Senior, K. Wilson, and O. Vinyals,
“Learning the speech front-end with raw waveform cldnns,” in
Proc. INTERSPEECH, Dresden, Germany, September 2015,
pp. 1–5, ISCA.
 D. Palaz, R. Collobert, and M. Magimai-Doss, “Estimating
phoneme class conditional probabilities from raw speech signal using convolutional neural networks,”
in Proc. INTER-
SPEECH, Lyon, France, August 2013, pp. 1766–1770, ISCA.
 D. Palaz, M. Magimai-Doss, and R. Collobert, “Analysis of
cnn-based speech recognition system using raw speech as input,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH, Dresden, Germany, September
2015, pp. 11–15, ISCA.
 S. Dieleman and B. Schrauwen, “End-to-end learning for music audio,” in Proc. ICASSP, Florence, Italy, April 2014, pp.
7014–7018.
 S. Sigtia, E. Benetos, and S. Dixon,
“An end-to-end neural network for polyphonic music transcription,” arXiv, vol.
 
 B. Milde and C. Biemann,
“Using representation learning
and out-of-domain data for a paralinguistic speech task,” in
Proc. INTERSPEECH, Dresden, Germany, September 2015,
pp. 904–908, ISCA.
 Q. Mao, M. Dong, Z. Huang, and Y. Zhan, “Learning salient
features for speech emotion recognition using convolutional
neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 16,
no. 8, pp. 2203–2213, Dec 2014.
 L. I-Kuei Lin, “A concordance correlation coefﬁcient to evaluate reproducibility,” Biometrics, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 255–268,
March 1989.
 H.G. Hirsch, P. Meyer, and H.W. Ruehl, “Improved speech
recognition using high-pass ﬁltering of subband envelopes,” in
Proc. EUROSPEECH, Genoa, Italy, September 1991, pp. 413–
 R. Schlüter, L. Bezrukov, H. Wagner, and H. Ney,
“Gammatone features and feature combination for large vocabulary
speech recognition,”
in Proc. ICASSP. IEEE, April 2007,
vol. 4, pp. 649–652.
 A. Graves and J. Schmidhuber, “Framewise phoneme classiﬁcation with bidirectional lstm and other neural network architectures,” Neural Networks, IJCNN Special Issue, vol. 18, no.
5-6, pp. 602–610, July-August 2005.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 F. Ringeval et al., “Prediction of asynchronous dimensional
emotion ratings from audiovisual and physiological data,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 66, pp. 22–30, November 2015.
 F. Ringeval, A. Sonderegger, J. Sauer, and D. Lalanne, “Introducing the RECOLA Multimodal Corpus of Remote Collaborative and Affective Interactions,” in Proc. of EmoSPACE, FG,
Shanghai, China, 2013.
 F. Eyben et al., “The Geneva Minimalistic Acoustic Parameter
Set (GeMAPS) for Voice Research and Affective Computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 2015, in press.
 D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
 N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, January 2014.
 M. Kächele, P. Thiam, G. Palm, F. Schwenker, and M. Schels,
“Ensemble methods for continuous affect recognition: Multimodality, temporality, and challenges,” in Proc. AVEC, Fabien
Ringeval, Björn Schuller, Michel Valstar, Roddy Cowie, and
Maja Pantic, Eds., Brisbane, Australia, October 2015, pp. 9–
 S. Mariooryad and C. Busso,
“Correcting time-continuous
emotional labels by modeling the reaction lag of evaluators,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
97–108, April-June 2015.
 K. Scherer, “Vocal communication of emotion: A review of
research paradigms,” Speech Communication, vol. 40, no. 1-2,
pp. 227–256, April 2003.