Anomaly detection models for IoT time series data
Federico Giannoni
Mtr: 187406
 
Marco Mancini
Mtr: 187403
 
Data Mining - Project Report
Federico Marinelli
1. INTRODUCTION
In-situ sensors and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have
become more and more popular in the last decade, due to their
potential to be used in various applications of many different
fields. As of today, WSNs are pretty much used by any
monitoring system: from those that are health care related, to
those that are used for environmental forecasting or surveillance
All applications that make use of in-situ sensors, strongly rely on
their correct operation, which however, is quite difficult to
guarantee. These sensors in fact, are typically cheap and prone to
malfunction. Additionally, for many tasks (e.g. environmental
forecasting), sensors are also deployed under potentially harsh
weather condition, making their breakage even more likely. The
high probability of erroneous readings or data corruption during
transmission, brings up the problem of ensuring quality of the
data collected by sensors. Since WSNs have to operate
continuously and therefore generate very large volumes of data
every day, the quality-control process has to be automated,
scalable and fast enough to be applicable to streaming data.
The most common approach to ensure the quality of sensors’ data,
consists in automated detection of erroneous readings or
anomalous behaviours of sensors. In the literature, this strategy is
known as anomaly detection and can be pursued in many
different ways.
2. RELATED WORK
Algorithms for anomaly detection in sensor’s time series data, can
be subdivided in the following macro-classes:
Statistical methods; these methods use past measurements
to approximate a model of the correct behaviour of a sensor
(or of whatever component we are trying to monitor).
Whenever a new measurement is registered, it is compared to
the model and, if it results to be statistically incompatible
with it, then it is marked as an anomaly. Statistical methods
can not only be applied on single readings , but also on
windows of readings . A window-based approach
typically helps in reducing the number of false positives. An
example of a very common statistical anomaly detection
method, is the so-called low-high pass filter, which
classifies readings as anomalies based on how different they
are from the running average of past measurements.
Probabilistic methods; these methods revolve around the
definition of a probabilistic model that can either be
parametric or non-parametric (depending on whether or not
the sensors’ measurements follow a well-known distribution
or not). Classification of anomalies is then performed by
measuring the probability of a reading with respect to the
model. If the probability falls below a predefined threshold,
then it is labelled as an anomalous event. The models defined
by probabilistic methods can be very simple, but also very
complicated,
measurements through time, using either Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs) or Bayesian Networks (BNs) .
Methods based on BNs and HMMs however, are typically
very computationally expensive and do not scale well,
especially with streaming data.
Proximity-based methods; these methods rely on distances
between data measurements to distinguish between
anomalous and correct readings. A very famous proximitybased algorithm is the Local Outlier Factor (LOF) , which
assigns an outlier score to each reading ri based on the
density of measurements around its k nearest neighbours and
the density of measurements around ri. Readings with high
outlier scores are labelled as anomalies.
Clustering-based methods; these methods are a subset of
proximity-based algorithms. Here, measurements are first
used to create clusters. Then, new measurement that are
assigned to small and isolated clusters or measurements that
are very far from their cluster’s centroid, are labelled as
anomalous .
Prediction-based methods; these methods use past
measurements to train a model that can predict the value of
the next measurement in the sensors’ time series data. If the
actual measurement is too different from the predicted one,
then it is labelled as anomalous. There are many predictionbased algorithms for anomaly detection, some are based on
very simple machine learning models, such as 1-class SVMs
 , while others are way more complex and make use of
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) with Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) cells as their predictive model .
Obviously, deciding which algorithm to use strongly depends
on the type of data to be monitored. For instance, clustering
approaches and proximity based approaches do not work
well with high dimensional data, as distances between points
tend to dilate as the number of dimensions increases.
Similarly, techniques based on HMMs and BNs can not
efficiently handle multivariate data and are therefore suitable
for 1-dimensional samples only.
3. A CONCRETE CASE STUDY
Our objective was to design and develop an anomaly detection
algorithm for sensors deployed in the ETC wastewater plant in
Riccione. A synthetic map of the plant is shown in Figure 1. As it
is possible to see, the wastewater is pumped from the same source
into three separate tanks. In each tank, a trace of four sensors is
used to monitor the concentration of oxygen, ammonia, suspended
solids and nitrates in the water. Valves and blowers are also
present and piloted by a central PLC controller, based on the
sensors’ readings. The controller can open the valves and
manipulate the blowers’ power to trigger certain chemical
reactions and adjust the level of the compounds that are present in
the water. The correct operation of the system strongly depends
on the quality of sensors’ readings, since the controller
manipulates the actuators based on the current advertised state of
the water.
Mtr: 187419
 
Figure 1 Schema of the ETC Riccione wastewater plant. Each
line has four sensors that register the levels of ammonia, oxygen,
nitrates and suspended solids in the respective tanks. All lines are
connected by pipes to a controller, which can open and close
valves to regulate the level of oxygen in each tank.
Given their particular importance, we decided to focus on the
ammonia sensors. Our objective was to ensure the quality of the
data they recorded, by detecting any potential anomaly and
then use the event frequency as a flag to detect (possibly
preemptively) any fault (e.g. drifting) or breakage of the sensors.
Formally, given a time series of readings of an ammonia
sensor, x1, x2, …, xi, …, xN, (where the subscript represents the
instant in which the reading was recorded), we are interested in
detecting all anomalous events X. Additionally, fixed a time
interval Δt, we would like to determine the number of anomalies
m, such that, if { xi, …, xi + Δt } ∊ X and | { xi, …, xi + Δt } | ≥
m, then P(sensor breakage) ≥ M, with M as close as possible to 1.
The following Sections report our thought process and our plan of
action to solve the aforementioned problem.
4. DATA ANALYSIS AND PRE-PROCESSING
Choosing which algorithm to use obviously requires a certain
level of knowledge of both the problem and the data. In order to
understand what could be used to identify anomalies in the
ammonia sensors, we first had to analyze the dataset that was
provided to us by the people at ETC Riccione.
The original dataset consisted of several CSV files, each
containing one hour of acquisitions. However, we reorganized it
to obtain a separate CSV file per sensor (e.g. one file for all
acquisitions of the ammonia sensor on trace one, another for all
acquisitions of the ammonia sensor on trace two and so on).. Each
line of these new CSV files contained a sensor reading, together
with its acquisition timestamp, the name of the sensor and an
integer value. Acquisitions were sampled with a per-minute
frequency, for a total of 1440 acquisitions per day. The dataset
covered the period from the beginning of April 2016, to the
beginning of July 2017.
4.1 Data Cleaning
We began by applying a threshold-based noise filter to remove
faulty sensors’ readings. The filter worked by identifying and
removing all measurements that were either NaN, occurred very
rarely (e.g. values of the order of 1032), or did not make sense
(e.g. negative values).
Once all sudden spikes, NaNs and negative values were removed,
we had to face another issue, this time with the acquisitions’
timestamps. Some of the timestamps in fact, were not unique, due
to the fact that on the 31st of October, the switch to standard time
pushed the clock back one hour from 3:00 AM to 2:00 AM. This
lead to duplicate keys in the sensors’ data time series. To fix this
problem and make the time series usable, we decided to condense
the two hours of acquisitions after 2:00 AM of the 31st October,
into a single hour, therefore removing the repeating timestamps.
This was done by condensing pairs of acquisitions taken in two
consecutive minutes ti and ti+1, turning them into a single one
represented by their average ½ (ti + ti+1).
4.2 Data Visualization
Once our dataset was cleaned, we proceeded with data
visualization. We plotted the sensors’ time series and their values’
distributions and analyzed them. We decomposed the ammonia
acquisitions time series and looked at their trend, seasonal and
residual (shown in Figure 2). We also ran a Dickey-Fuller test on
it and discovered that it presented stationary properties (meaning
that there was a repeated behaviour with respect to calendar time).
More precisely, we identified similar patterns in ammonia
acquisitions relative to the same month and season. This
informed us that time of acquisition could prove to be a valuable
additional feature for our anomaly detection algorithm.
Additionally, we also noticed that the residual of the ammonia
time series followed a normal distribution.
Figure 2 Above the decomposition of a time series of ammonia
acquisitions . Below we have the distribution of the residual,
which is normal. The Dickey-Fuller test results for the time series
in the figure were the following: Test Statistic -5.385561; p-
Value 0.000004; # Lags Used 18.0; Number of Observations
Used 1421.0; Critical Value (5%) -2.863576; Critical Value
(1%) -3.434960; Critical Value (10%) -2.567854. Since the test
statistic has a negative value that surpasses the critical values, the
null hypothesis of a unit root is rejected while the alternate
hypothesis of data stationarity is accepted instead.
Moving on to the distribution of recorded values, we were
interested
acquisitions
approximately fit any well known model, which would have made
it possible to apply a parametric probabilistic algorithm for
anomaly detection. We therefore plotted histograms for the
cleaned acquisitions of oxygen, ammonia and nitrate sensors.
Histograms for densities of ammonia readings are shown in
Figure 4. As it is possible to see, values registered by ammonia
sensors are approximately normally distributed, which means
that a univariate-based probabilistic approach would make a
decent candidate for our detection algorithm.
Figure 3 Histograms for ammonia sensors’ readings densities.
On the left we have densities for readings rounded to 1 decimal
digit, on the left densities for readings rounded to integers
(smoothed). Top row is for ammonia sensor in trace one, middle
for ammonia sensor in trace two, bottom for ammonia sensor in
trace three. As we can see, all histograms have a single peak
value and the vast majority of readings are concentrated around
said peak.
5. UNCOVERING DATA CORRELATIONS
To understand if there were other measurements we could use as
informative features to detect anomalies in the ammonia sensors’
acquisitions, we ran some statistical tests on our dataset, in an
attempt to discover whether or not there were any correlations
between ammonia levels, oxygen level, nitrate levels and
suspended solids levels.
We began our analysis with a few simple statistical correlation
tests, such as the Pearson correlation test, the Spearman test and
the Kendall test. The tests were run on the following pairs of
readings: ammonia and oxygen; ammonia and nitrates; ammonia
and suspended solids. The correlation factors for ammonia and
nitrates was found to be very weak (approximately 0.015
Kendall’s value, -1.9e-06 Pearson’s correlation coefficient and
0.02 Spearman’s value). Acquisitions of ammonia and suspended
solids were also found to be statistically independent by our tests
(0.03 Kendall’s value and 0.04 Spearman’s value). The only
significant (yet still weak) dependency was found between
ammonia and oxygen readings (approximately 0.25 Kendall’s
value and 0.38 Spearman’s value1).
1 The Kendall test assigns a correlation value between 0 and 1 to two time
series and so does the Spearman test (normally, a Spearman’s value below 0.39
is representative of a weak correlation, while a value above 0.59 indicates a
strong correlation) . The Pearson correlation coefficient is instead a number
between -1 and 1, with -1 denoting maximum inverse correlation and 1
maximum direct correlation.
We also ran a causal discovery algorithm called PCMCI on
the sensors acquisitions’ time series of ammonia, oxygen, nitrates
and suspended solids. PCMCI produces a causal time series graph
given a dataset sample. This graph (visible in Figure 4), represents
the spatial-temporal dependency structure from which causal
pathways can be read off. In particular, the nodes of a time
series graph are defined as the variables at different times and a
link exists if two lagged variables are not conditionally
independent given the whole past process. Assuming stationarity,
the links are repeated in time. The parents P of a variable are
defined as the set of all nodes with a link towards it (blue and red
boxes in Figure 4). The color of the link represents the correlation
value, the more intense it is, the higher is the correlation between
the nodes. A link could be either blue or red depending whether
its correlational value is positive or not. From the Figure, we can
see how the ammonia values are correlated with the oxygen
values, which in turn are correlated with the values registered by
the nitrates sensors.
Figure 4 Spatial-temporal causality graph between ammonia
(bottom line), oxygen (mid line) and nitrates (top line) obtained
from the PCMCI test. Ammonia and oxygen acquisitions have a
greater correlation than oxygen and nitrates, if we look at the
intensity of the links’ colors. This implies that there is some sort of
causal correlation between O2 and NH4 readings.
To make sure not to miss anything, we also asked some of the
experts working at ETC Riccione to explain to us how the levels
of each compound influences the others. They confirmed that
oxygen and ammonia levels are somewhat correlated (and the
same goes for ammonia and nitrates), because oxygen levels are
responsible for triggering certain chemical reactions that increase
or decrease ammonia concentration in the water. More
specifically, when the oxygen is above a certain threshold, the
ammonia concentration in the water decreases and vice versa,
when the oxygen is low, the ammonia is higher. We concluded
that these correlations were not properly captured by the Pearson,
the Spearman and the Kendall tests due to the fact that they are
trend-based correlation tests, while the correlation between the
compounds was threshold-based (meaning that it is not
necessarily true that oxygen and ammonia increase/decrease
together, but it is true that when the oxygen is above certain
levels, the ammonia is low and vice versa).
Our findings informed us that oxygen and nitrate levels could be
used as additional features for anomaly detection in the
ammonia acquisitions. We concluded that these features could not
only help in identifying when anomalies are being registered, but
also in discriminating false positive events from true positive ones
(for instance, a very low ammonia reading may be considered
anomalous by itself, but if the oxygen levels at that same time are
very high, then it could be that the ammonia concentration truly is
that low, given the fact that the chemical reactions triggered by
high oxygen levels are taking place).
6. EXPLORED SOLUTIONS
Instead of limiting ourselves to develop and fine-tune a single
algorithm, we decided to explore different approaches. The
following subsections will be dedicated to the description of our
solutions. Results will be discussed in the next Section.
6.1 Running Average Low-High Pass Filter
The first solution that we implemented was a fairly simple one,
yet widely used in the field of sensors’ anomaly detection. The
basic idea behind it, is to make use of the running average
computed based on the last W acquisitions (where W is a sliding
window of fixed size), as a means to identify anomalies. More
precisely, new acquisitions that differ too much from the running
average, are registered as anomalous events. We implemented two
different versions of this algorithm, one for online detection and
one for offline detection.
We start by describing the offline detection version, which is the
simpler one. Here, we assume that the entire time series is already
available to the algorithm, which can compute its standard
deviation. Then, the algorithm computes the running average for
each new acquisition xi, based on that acquisition and the
previous W - 1. Each xi is registered as anomalous, if its distance
from the running average is greater than the standard deviation
previously computed. Pseudo-code for the entire algorithm is
shown below.
Initialize:
X ← { x1 , … , xn }
W ← window_size
series_std ← std(X)
window ← array[W]
Algorithm:
foreach xi in X do:
if window is full:
window.remove(0)
window.append(xí)
if (xi · α > average(window) + series_std) OR
(xi · α < average(window) - series_std):
register_anomaly(xi)
Where alpha is a hyper-parameter (between 0 and 1) that regulates
the algorithm sensitivity to anomalies (the larger alpha, the greater
the number of readings that will be listed as anomalies).
The offline version of the algorithm works similarly to a softwarebased low-high pass filter, cutting off all readings that are either
above or below a certain threshold, computed based on the
running average and standard deviation in the series.
The online version is fairly similar. The only difference is that we
assume that our algorithm does not have access to the whole
series a-priori, therefore it cannot compute the standard deviation
as previously shown. Instead, an approximated standard deviation
is computed at each iteration, based on the acquisitions in the
Both versions of the algorithm work exclusively on univariate
data, meaning that no additional feature can be used, unless
feature transformation is applied.
6.2 Univariate Gaussian Predictor
As discussed in Section [Data Visualization], ammonia readings
followed a distribution that is more or less approximable to a
Gaussian one. We therefore tried to see if a Gaussian probabilistic
model could be used to identify anomalous behaviours.
The Univariate Gaussian Predictor is a fairly simple one. It is
trained on a time series and uses Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE) to approximate the sufficient statistics of the Gaussian
model, which are the mean and variance. Once these are
computed, the model classifies each new acquisition xi based on
the probability of that value in the distribution p(xi). A threshold
has to be set to decide which probabilities are too low to be
considered non-anomalous. Following is the pseudo-code for the
algorithm.
Initialize:
Xtrain ← { x1, …, xn }
µ ← 1ni = 1nxi
2← 1ni = 1n(xi-µ)2
Algorithm:
foreach new sample zi do:
if p(zi) < eps:
register_anomaly(zi)
This algorithm can be run either on windows of acquisitions2 or
on single ones. The main issue of the Univariate Gaussian
Predictor is that the probability of each acquisition is computed
as if it was independent from all the previous ones, which is
obviously not the case. To relax the independence assumption one
would have to rely on either HMM-based models or BN-based
models, which, however, are much more demanding in terms of
computational resources.
6.3 Seasonal ESD Algorithm
Other than the low-high pass filter, we also tested another
statistical-based method, called Seasonal Extreme Studentized
Deviate (S-ESD) . This algorithm was released by Twitter in
2017 and can be applied only on time series that have their
residual component symmetrically distributed. In our case, the
constraint is met, since the residual of the ammonia acquisitions
series was found to be normally distributed as shown in Figure 2
S-ESD starts by decomposing a time series X. First, its seasonal
component S and its trend T are extracted. Then, the median X* is
computed from the series’ trend. The median can be seen as a
stable approximation of the trend. At this point, the residual R is
computed from X, S and X* as R = X - S - X*. Using the median
instead of the actual trend in the computation of the residual
makes it so that the residual does not present any spurious
anomalies (such as spikes or negative acquisitions), which are not
interesting anyway.
Once the residual is computed, S-ESD uses the Generalized
Extreme Studentized Deviate (ESD) statistical test 3 to
2 In this case the probability of the window is computed as the product of
probabilities of all the acquisitions in the window.
3 In short, the ESD test matches the null hypothesis that no outlier are presents,
against the alternate hypothesis that at most k outliers are present, where k is
provided to the algorithm prior to its execution. ESD computes a value Vj =
maxi( |xi - µ| ) / σ2 and a critical value λj for k samples, where µ and σ2 are the
mean and variance of the series. Vj and λj are then used to find the outliers.
identify any anomalous events based on the value of R and the
other series’ components and k, the upper bound on the number of
anomalous events in the provided series. Below, the pseudo-code
of the algorithm is provided.
X ← { x1, …, xn }
S ← extract_seasonal(X)
T ← extract_trend(T)
X* ← median(T, X)
R ← X - S - X*
anomalies ← ESD(R, X, X*, S, T, k)
Just like all the algorithms that we described up to now, this one
can also only be used on univariate data. Additionally, the upper
bound on the number of anomalies (k) has to be fixed a-priori as a
hyper parameter.
6.4 Local Density Cluster-Based Outlier
The final algorithm that we decided to implement is a clusterbased one that can be used on multivariate data, therefore
allowing us to use additional features to discover anomalies in the
ammonia acquisitions. The Local Density Cluster-Based Outlier
Factor (LDCOF) is an extension of the Cluster-Based Local
Outlier Factor (CBLOF) algorithm. CBLOF works by clustering
samples using any available clustering algorithm (e.g. k-means)
and then divides the clusters into small and large ones. Outlier
scores are assigned to new samples xi based on the distance
between xi and the closest large cluster centroid. LDCOF is based
on the same principle, but it also borrows from the proximitybased Local Outlier Factor (LOF) algorithm, to apply the local
density principle when assigning outlier scores, which helps in
identifying small clusters as outlying clusters.
To make things clearer, LDCOF first applies a clustering
algorithm to a training dataset and it then makes use of two
coefficients and (which are hyper-parameters to be tuned), to
separate large clusters from small ones. At this point, an average
distance from centroid distavg(Ci) is computed for each large
cluster Ci. These distances are used to approximate the densities
of large clusters. If a sample is placed into a small cluster, its
outlier score is computed as the ratio between its distance to the
closest large cluster centroid and the average distance of points in
that large cluster, from their centroid. On the other hand, if a
sample is placed into a large cluster, its outlier score is simply
computed as the ratio between its distance from the cluster’s
centroid and the average distance of points in the cluster from the
Formally, the outlier score for each new sample p is defined in the
following way:
min( d(p, Ci) )distavg(Ci) if pCj where Cj is a small
clusters and Ci are large clusters
d(p, Ci)distavg(Ci) if pCi where Ci is a large cluster
While the distinction between large and small clusters is
performed first by sorting the K clusters so that |C1| |C2| … |CK|
and then, given and , we define b as the boundary between large
and small clusters, if any of the following conditions hold:
|C1| + |C2| + … |Cb| ·|D|, where |D| is the size of the
training set
|Cb| / |Cb-1|
Based on the outlier score, a point will be classified as outlier or
not. Typically, since outlier scores are ratios in LDCOF, a value
above 1.0 would indicate an anomaly, but this may not always be
true and can therefore be tuned accordingly to how the data is
distributed. Below is a sketch of the pseudo-code of the entire
algorithm.
Xtrain ← { x1, …, xn }
Model ← Kmeans.fit(X, K)
% cluster training samples
SC, LC ← separate_large_and_small(Model)
% separate large and small clusters as discussed
foreach new sample zi do:
cluster ← Model.fit(zi)
if cluster in SC then assign_SC_outlier_score(zi, Model,
cluster, SC, LC)
else assign_LC_outlier_score(zi, Model, cluster, SC, LC)
7. EXPERIMENTS RESULTS
We ran several experiments for each one of the previously
discussed algorithms, trying to fine-tune their hyper-parameters to
obtain solid results. Testing was organized in the following way.
We generated two test sets (under the form of CSV files): one
containing an actual labelled anomalous series of acquisitions that
was provided to us by the people at ETC Riccione (Figure 5) and
the other containing only artificial anomalies. The artificial
anomalies were inserted into a series of legitimate acquisitions, by
adding a random offset to a percentage of them (more precisely,
1% of the readings were altered by adding a random value
between -4.0 and 4.0; no offsets between -1 and 1 were used
because we considered them to be too subtle to be captured).
Acquisitions to be altered were randomly sampled from the series.
Figure 5 Time series for ammonia acquisitions on trace 1 from
the 9th of November to the 11th. No labels for single acquisitions
were available (we only have a labelled window), however, we
can pretty much consider any acquisition from the beginning of
anomalous behaviour to the ammonia sensor calibration as an
As a base of comparison, we designed a very naive anomaly
detector. This baseline solution works by taking the integer
component of the distance between each new measurement and
the previous one. If the integer part of the distance is greater than
1, the new acquisition is registered as an anomaly. This solution is
obviously prone to produce high false positive ratios. Figure 6
shows how the baseline classified each acquisition in the two test
Figure 6 Baseline results on the two test sets. On top, results on
the documented anomaly. Orange triangles are readings
classified as anomalous by the baseline. In the bottom picture,
results on the synthetic test set. Green triangles are true positives,
reds are false negative, blues are false positives.
As foreseeable, many false positives were generated by the
baseline algorithm. On the synthetic test set, results were the
following: 32 TP, 57 FP and 9 FN yielding a precision of 35.95%
and recall of 78.04% and accuracy of 98.35%. Obviously, the
accuracy measure is biased by the fact that only 1% of the
readings are actually anomalies, therefore the very large number
of true negatives pushes its value close to 100%. The value on
which we’ll evaluate the performance of algorithms on the
synthetic dataset is instead the F1-measure, that for the baseline
amounts to 49.23%.
Evaluating performance on the first test set is harder. Since we do
not have per-acquisition labels, we can’t compute precision, recall
and F1-score there. Manually labelling all acquisitions inside the
anomaly window as events wouldn’t be optimal as well, as it
would produce biased measures if we were to consider all those
acquisitions as anomalies. Instead, we base our assessment on the
frequency of anomalies inside the window. As we can see in
Figure 6, the baseline solution did not produce any noticeable
increment in the frequency of alarms during the anomaly period.
This means that an event such as this one would have not been
captured by the algorithm.
7.1 Low-High Pass Filter Results
Despite its simplicity, the low-high pass filter is highly
customizable and therefore required several test runs to
understand which configuration worked best. The algorithm, as
already discussed in Section [Running Average Low-High Pass
Filter], can be run either in online or offline mode, but always on
univariate data. Since we were interested in detecting anomalies in
the ammonia sensors, we obviously ran the algorithm on ammonia
acquisitions, but also on the distance between ammonia and
oxygen levels. We decided to try to use the difference in O2 and
NH4 measurements as feature because we knew. from our
previous analysis, that the two were correlated. From what the
ETC experts told us in fact, under normal circumstances, high
ammonia concentrations were accompanied by low oxygen levels
and vice-versa. This meant that the distance between the two
should pretty much remain the same during non-anomalous
situations.
The two algorithm variants proved to behave similarly. In
particular, we noticed that large window sizes for the computation
of the running average, were necessary to identify anomalous
trends such as that in the first test set (Figure 5). On the other side,
to identify accurately sporadic outliers such as those that are
present in test set two, a smaller window size was necessary. The
configurations that gave the best results are the following:
For the online version, a window size of 20 acquisitions and
an alpha value of 0.2 worked best to identify sporadic
anomalies in the second test set. We obtained a precision of
64.58%, a recall of 75.61% and a F1-score of 69.66%.
However, to identify the anomalous trend of the first test set,
a larger window of 1440 acquisitions was required, together
with an alpha value of 0.5. Results are shown in Figure 7. As
we can see, this time in the first test set a high frequency of
anomalies was detected during the period of interest
(highlighted in Figure 5), meaning that an incorrect
behaviour would have been correctly detected.
Figure 7 Results with the online version of the high-low pass
filter. The black line is the ammonia acquisition time series, the
orange line is the running average. On the top image, the orange
triangles are the anomalies identified by the algorithm. On the
bottom image, green triangles are true positives (31), reds are
false negatives (10), blues are false positives (17).
For the offline version, a window size of 5 was found to be
better to identify sporadic anomalies in the second test set,
together with an alpha value of 1, yielding a precision of
68.42% a recall of 95.12% and a F1-score of 79.59%.
However, again, to detect an anomalous trend rather than a
single anomalous acquisition, a larger window was
necessary. In this case, we found that a window of size 600
(with alpha 1) produced reasonable results. For the offline
versions, experiments are shown in Figure 8. Again, in the
first test set, we can see how the frequency of anomalies
spikes up during the period of interest.
Figure 8 Results with the offline version of the high-low pass
filter. The black line is the ammonia acquisition time series, the
orange line is the running average. On the top image, the orange
triangles are the anomalies identified by the algorithm. On the
bottom image, green triangles are true positives (39), reds are
false negatives (2), blues are false positives (18).
Both versions of the algorithm proved to work better when ran on
ammonia acquisitions, while our attempt of using the distance
between O2 and NH4 levels always yielded inferior results. As
expected, the offline version performed better, thanks to its access
to the standard deviation of acquisitions.
The main problem of this algorithm is that it requires different
settings depending on whether we are interested in capturing
single anomalous acquisitions or anomalous trends in the time
series. For this reason, we can conclude that the solution is not
optimal. An idea to obtain a more solid algorithm would be to
fuse two separate instances of the algorithm, one using settings to
identify single outliers and one tuned to detect unusual trends and
intelligently combine their output.
7.2 Univariate Gaussian Predictor Results
Tuning the univariate gaussian predictor did not take too long,
since there was only a single hyper-parameter to set. As
mentioned in Section [Univariate Gaussian Predictor], two
different versions of the algorithm were designed: one that ran on
single acquisitions and one that instead ran on windows of
acquisitions.
identically,
performance is easier to evaluate on the former. For this reason,
we only discuss results obtained by said version of the algorithm.
Just like the low-high pass filter, the univariate gaussian predictor
only works on mono-dimensional data that fits a Gaussian
distribution. We already knew (as discussed in Section [Data
Visualization]) that ammonia acquisitions met such a constraint.
Additionally, we also found out that the distance between O2 and
NH4 levels, also was approximately Gaussian, as shown in Figure
9. We therefore applied the algorithm on both the time series to
see which one would give better results. Just like the low-high
pass filter, the univariate gaussian predictor performed better
when ran over ammonia acquisitions, rather than over O2 NH4
distances.
Figure 9 Histograms of values’ densities for O2 NH4 distances.
The x axis contains the registered values, the y axis their densities.
On the left we have densities of values rounded to 1 decimal digit.
On the right densities for values rounded to integers. The first row
is for first trace’s sensors, the second row for second trace’s
sensors, the third row for third trace’s sensors.
We trained our predictor over all the trace two’s acquisitions
(after they were cleaned as discussed in Section [Data Cleaning])
and then tested it over the usual two test sets. We tried out several
values for the outlier threshold epsilon. The one that worked best
was a value of 0.08, meaning that all acquisitions xi with
probability p(xi) < 0.8% would be registered as events. Figure 10
shows the performance of the predictor on both the test sets. As
we can see, results are impressive for the first one, in which pretty
much every acquisition inside the labelled window was marked as
an anomaly. For the test set containing sporadic synthetic
anomalies, the algorithm obtained a precision of 65.21%, a recall
of 73.17% and a F1-score of 68.96%, which was less impressive.
Figure 10 Results for the univariate gaussian predictor over the
two test sets. On top we have the dataset with the documented
anomalous trend. Here, orange triangles mark acquisitions that
were reported as anomalous. In the bottom picture we instead
have performance on the second test set, with synthetic anomalies.
Here, green triangles are true positives (30), reds are false
negatives (11), blue are false positives (16).
The univariate gaussian predictor produced decent results overall,
even though it had some issues in identifying smaller synthetic
anomalies in the second test set. In order to be able to capture
these as well, the algorithm requires a higher epsilon value, which
in turn however, would generate many more false positives. We
concluded that this behaviour can be explained by the fact that the
probability of each measurement is computed in a context-less
fashion, which may be too much of a simplifying assumption.
7.3 Seasonal-ESD Results
The Seasonal-ESD algorithm proved to be the best algorithm to
identify sporadic outliers. In the second test set in fact, the
algorithm obtained a precision of 96.96%, a recall of 78.04% and
a F1-score of 86.48%. S-ESD however, did not perform well at all
when used to identify anomalous trends. As we can see in Figure
11 in fact, almost no anomalies were detected in the window of
interest. The only events registered by the algorithm took place at
the beginning of the period, however, since they are fairly close in
time, they may be enough to realize that something is wrong.
Figure 11 Results for the Seasonal-ESD algorithm over the two
test sets. On top we have the dataset with the documented
anomalous trend. Here, orange triangles mark acquisitions that
were reported as anomalous. In the bottom picture we instead
have performance on the second test set, with synthetic anomalies.
Here, green triangles are true positives (30), reds are false
negatives (11), blue are false positives (16).
The main problem of this algorithm is obviously the fact that slow
drifting of sensors acquisitions are not captured by it. This makes
it inadequate to identify anomalous trends. As far as sporadic
outliers are concerned however, this is the algorithm that yielded
the best results.
7.4 LDCOF Results
LDCOF was the only algorithm, among the ones that we
proposed, that could work with multiple features. This, together
with the numerous hyper-parameters (, , the outlier score
threshold and the number of clusters k), makes it very
customizable and very difficult to tune. Testing every possible
configurations would require an incredible amount of time. We
therefore limited our explorations to those that made more sense.
Since increasing the dimensionality of samples too much hinders
clustering performance and LDCOF is based on the k-means
clustering algorithm, we decided to use only a small set of
features consisting of: ammonia acquisitions, oxygen acquisitions
and a temporal feature (either day of the week, month or season)
to exploit the stationary property of the ammonia time series that
was discussed in Section [Data Visualization] and the correlation
between ammonia and oxygen levels. In Figure 12, we can see
how feature selection impacts clustering.
Figure 12 Clusters obtained from ammonia acquisitions in trace
two, when using: 2 clusters with ammonia and oxygen as features
(top picture), 4 clusters with ammonia, oxygen and season as
features (middle picture), 12 clusters with ammonia, oxygen and
month as features (bottom picture).
After trying out several configurations for the algorithm, we
obtained reasonable results on both datasets. LDCOF proved to be
able to identify both anomalous trends and single outliers. The
best results were obtained by running k-means with k = 12, =
0.75, = 0.25 and the outlier score threshold equal to the average
distance of points in large clusters from their centroids, plus the
standard deviation (samples that received a score above this
threshold, were classified as outliers). As far as feature selection
was concerned, we used ammonia acquisitions, oxygen
acquisitions (since the two were correlated) and month of
acquisitions (the reason why we selected a k = 12, was due to the
fact that we were using months as features). Training (clustering)
was performed on all the sensors’ acquisitions of trace two.
Results are shown in Figure 12. In the first test set, we can see
how the frequency of registered anomalies increases dramatically
during the period of interest. As far as the second test set is
concerned, the algorithm was able to identify all major outliers,
scoring a precision of 68.88%, a recall of 75.69% and a F1measure of 72.09%. If we look at Figure 12 (bottom picture), we
can see how only smaller anomalies were not captured.
Figure 13 Results of the LDCOF algorithms on both test sets.
Above, we have the test set with the anomalous window of
acquisitions that was provided to us by the experts at ETC.
Orange triangles represent anomalies detected by the algorithm.
Below, results over the dataset containing synthetic anomalies.
Green triangles are true positives (31), reds are false negatives
(10), blues are false positives (14).
The algorithm produced average results on both the test sets.
LDCOF, together with the univariate gaussian predictor, were the
only algorithms that performed well at detecting both anomalous
acquisitions and anomalous trends. However, our opinion is that,
between the two, the univariate gaussian predictor has the
advantage due to its simplicity and fast training time.
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
Our experiments yielded very diverse results. In general, it is hard
to identify which algorithm is better than the others overall, due to
the fact that some perform better in identifying single outliers,
while others are better in identification of anomalous trends. For
this reason, an optimal solution could only be obtained by
selecting a few of the proposed solutions to form a model based
on an ensemble of experts. The experts’ outputs would then be
combined using either a majority vote approach, or a weightbased strategy, to decide which acquisition is to be classified as
anomalous. Judging from our experiments, there are many
reasonable combinations of experts. For instance, one may use
two separate instances of the low-high pass filter, one tuned to
detect single anomalies and one tuned to detect anomalous trends.
Alternatively, one could use S-ESD to identify sporadic outliers,
as this was the algorithm that performed better given such task
and the univariate gaussian predictor to identify anomalous trends.
As far as being able to detect sensor faults or damage from
detected anomalies, we can only propose our solution, due to the
fact that we did not have enough labelled anomalous trends (such
as the one covering the period between the 9th and the 11th of
November, that was used as test set) to test it. Our idea was to fix
an interval t and then use the frequency of events that were
usually registered in such interval during anomalous behaviours,
to train a linear regressor that would be able to predict a frequency
threshold T. Once we learned T, we would consider a sensor
damaged whenever it was responsible for more than T detected
anomalies in an interval t .
9. REFERENCES
 J. Tukey, Exploratory Data Analysis, Addison Wesley, MA,
 Y. Yu, Y. Zhu, S. Li, D. Wan, Time Series Outlier Detection
Based on Sliding Window Prediction, College of Computer &
Information, Hohai University, CN, 2014.
 N. Gornitz, M. Braun, M. Kloft, Hidden Markov Anomaly
Detection, Berlin Institute of Technology, 2014.
 D. Hill, B. Minsker, E. Amir, Real-time Bayesian Anomaly
Detection for Environmental Sensor Data, University of Illinois,
 M. Breunig, H. Kriegel, R. Ng, J. Sander, LOF: Identifying
Density-Based Local Outliers, ACM SIGMOD, 2000.
 Z. He, X. Xu, and S. Deng. Discovering cluster-based local
outliers, Pattern Recognition Letters, 2003.
 N. Shahid, I. Naqvi, S. Qaisar, One-class support vector
machines: analysis of outlier detection for wireless sensor
networks in harsh environments, 2013.
 P. Malhotra, L. Vig, G. Shroff, P. Agarwal, Long Short Term
Memory Networks for Anomaly Detection in Time Series, 2015.
 M. Hayes, M. Capretz, Contextual Anomaly Detection in Big
Sensor Data, 2014.
 J. Hochenbaum, O. Vallis, A. Kejariwal, Automatic Anomaly
Detection in the Cloud via Statistical Learning, Twitter Inc., 2017.
 R. Cleveland, W. Cleveland, J. McRae, I. Terpenning, STL:
A Seasonal-Trend Decomposition Procedure Based on LOESS,
Journal of Official Statistics, 1990.
 M. Amer, M. Goldstein, Nearest-Neighbor and Clustering
based Anomaly Detection Algorithm for RapidMiner, 2011.
 Runge Jakob, Sejdinovic Dino. Detecting causal associations
in large nonlinear time series datasets, 2017