3D U-Net: Learning Dense Volumetric
Segmentation from Sparse Annotation
¨Ozg¨un C¸i¸cek1,2, Ahmed Abdulkadir1,4, Soeren S. Lienkamp2,3, Thomas
Brox1,2, and Olaf Ronneberger1,2,5
1 Computer Science Department, University of Freiburg, Germany
2 BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Freiburg, Germany
3 University Hospital Freiburg, Renal Division, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Germany
4 Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center Freiburg,
5 Google DeepMind, London, UK
 
Abstract. This paper introduces a network for volumetric segmentation that learns from sparsely annotated volumetric images. We outline two attractive use cases of this method: (1) In a semi-automated
setup, the user annotates some slices in the volume to be segmented.
The network learns from these sparse annotations and provides a dense
3D segmentation. (2) In a fully-automated setup, we assume that a representative, sparsely annotated training set exists. Trained on this data
set, the network densely segments new volumetric images. The proposed
network extends the previous u-net architecture from Ronneberger et
al. by replacing all 2D operations with their 3D counterparts. The implementation performs on-the-ﬂy elastic deformations for eﬃcient data
augmentation during training. It is trained end-to-end from scratch, i.e.,
no pre-trained network is required. We test the performance of the proposed method on a complex, highly variable 3D structure, the Xenopus
kidney, and achieve good results for both use cases.
Keywords: Convolutional Neural Networks, 3D, Biomedical Volumetric Image Segmentation, Xenopus Kidney, Semi-automated, Fully-automated,
Sparse Annotation
Introduction
Volumetric data is abundant in biomedical data analysis. Annotation of such
data with segmentation labels causes diﬃculties, since only 2D slices can be
shown on a computer screen. Thus, annotation of large volumes in a slice-by-slice
manner is very tedious. It is ineﬃcient, too, since neighboring slices show almost
the same information. Especially for learning based approaches that require a
signiﬁcant amount of annotated data, full annotation of 3D volumes is not an
eﬀective way to create large and rich training data sets that would generalize
 
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
manual sparse annotation
dense segmentation
apply trained 3D u-net
dense segmentation
Fig. 1: Application scenarios for volumetric segmentation with the 3D u-net.
(a) Semi-automated segmentation: the user annotates some slices of each volume to be segmented. The network predicts the dense segmentation. (b) Fullyautomated segmentation: the network is trained with annotated slices from a
representative training set and can be run on non-annotated volumes.
In this paper, we suggest a deep network that learns to generate dense volumetric segmentations, but only requires some annotated 2D slices for training.
This network can be used in two diﬀerent ways as depicted in Fig. 1: the ﬁrst
application case just aims on densiﬁcation of a sparsely annotated data set; the
second learns from multiple sparsely annotated data sets to generalize to new
data. Both cases are highly relevant.
The network is based on the previous u-net architecture, which consists of a
contracting encoder part to analyze the whole image and a successive expanding
decoder part to produce a full-resolution segmentation . While the u-net is an
entirely 2D architecture, the network proposed in this paper takes 3D volumes
as input and processes them with corresponding 3D operations, in particular,
3D convolutions, 3D max pooling, and 3D up-convolutional layers. Moreover, we
avoid bottlenecks in the network architecture and use batch normalization
 for faster convergence.
In many biomedical applications, only very few images are required to train
a network that generalizes reasonably well. This is because each image already
comprises repetitive structures with corresponding variation. In volumetric images, this eﬀect is further pronounced, such that we can train a network on just
two volumetric images in order to generalize to a third one. A weighted loss function and special data augmentation enable us to train the network with only few
manually annotated slices, i.e., from sparsely annotated training data.
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
We show the successful application of the proposed method on diﬃcult confocal microscopic data set of the Xenopus kidney. During its development, the
Xenopus kidney forms a complex structure which limits the applicability of
pre-deﬁned parametric models. First we provide qualitative results to demonstrate the quality of the densiﬁcation from few annotated slices. These results
are supported by quantitative evaluations. We also provide experiments which
shows the eﬀect of the number of annotated slices on the performance of our network. The Caﬀe based network implementation is provided as OpenSource1.
Related Work
Challenging biomedical 2D images can be segmented with an accuracy close
to human performance by CNNs today . Due to this success, several
attempts have been made to apply 3D CNNs on biomedical volumetric data.
Milletari et al. present a CNN combined with a Hough voting approach for
3D segmentation. However, their method is not end-to-end and only works for
compact blob-like structures. The approach of Kleesiek et al. is one of few
end-to-end 3D CNN approaches for 3D segmentation. However, their network
is not deep and has only one max-pooling after the ﬁrst convolutions; therefore, it is unable to analyze structures at multiple scales. Our work is based on
the 2D u-net which won several international segmentation and tracking
competitions in 2015. The architecture and the data augmentation of the u-net
allows learning models with very good generalization performance from only
few annotated samples. It exploits the fact that properly applied rigid transformations and slight elastic deformations still yield biologically plausible images.
Up-convolutional architectures like the fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation and the u-net are still not wide spread and we know of only
one attempt to generalize such an architecture to 3D . In this work by Tran
et al., the architecture is applied to videos and full annotation is available for
training. The highlight of the present paper is that it can be trained from scratch
on sparsely annotated volumes and can work on arbitrarily large volumes due
to its seamless tiling strategy.
Network Architecture
Figure 2 illustrates the network architecture. Like the standard u-net, it has an
analysis and a synthesis path each with four resolution steps. In the analysis
path, each layer contains two 3 × 3 × 3 convolutions each followed by a rectiﬁed
linear unit (ReLu), and then a 2 × 2 × 2 max pooling with strides of two in
each dimension. In the synthesis path, each layer consists of an upconvolution
of 2 × 2 × 2 by strides of two in each dimension, followed by two 3 × 3 × 3
convolutions each followed by a ReLu. Shortcut connections from layers of equal
resolution in the analysis path provide the essential high-resolution features to
1 
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
Fig. 2: The 3D u-net architecture. Blue boxes represent feature maps. The number of channels is denoted above each feature map.
the synthesis path. In the last layer a 1×1×1 convolution reduces the number of
output channels to the number of labels which is 3 in our case. The architecture
has 19069955 parameters in total. Like suggested in we avoid bottlenecks
by doubling the number of channels already before max pooling. We also adopt
this scheme in the synthesis path.
The input to the network is a 132 × 132 × 116 voxel tile of the image with 3
channels. Our output in the ﬁnal layer is 44×44×28 voxels in x, y, and z directions
respectively. With a voxel size of 1.76×1.76×2.04µm3, the approximate receptive
ﬁeld becomes 155 × 155 × 180µm3 for each voxel in the predicted segmentation.
Thus, each output voxel has access to enough context to learn eﬃciently.
We also introduce batch normalization (“BN”) before each ReLU. In ,
each batch is normalized during training with its mean and standard deviation
and global statistics are updated using these values. This is followed by a layer
to learn scale and bias explicitly. At test time, normalization is done via these
computed global statistics and the learned scale and bias. However, we have
a batch size of one and few samples. In such applications, using the current
statistics also at test time works the best.
The important part of the architecture, which allows us to train on sparse
annotations, is the weighted softmax loss function. Setting the weights of unlabeled pixels to zero makes it possible to learn from only the labelled ones and,
hence, to generalize to the whole volume.
Implementation Details
We have three samples of Xenopus kidney embryos at Nieuwkoop-Faber stage
36-37 . One of them is shown in Fig. 1 (left). 3D Data have been recorded in
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
four tiles with three channels at a voxel size of 0.88×0.88×1.02µm3 using a Zeiss
LSM 510 DUO inverted confocal microscope equipped with a Plan-Apochromat
40x/1.3 oil immersion objective lens. We stitched the tiles to large volumes using
XuvTools . The ﬁrst channel shows Tomato-Lectin coupled to Fluorescein at
488nm excitation wavelength. The second channel shows DAPI stained cell nuclei
at 405 nm excitation. The third channel shows Beta-Catenin using a secondary
antibody labelled with Cy3 at 564nm excitation marking the cell membranes. We
manually annotated some orthogonal xy, xz, and yz slices in each volume using
Slicer3D2 . The annotation positions were selected according to good data
representation i.e. annotation slices were sampled as uniformly as possible in all
3 dimensions. Diﬀerent structures were given the labels 0: “inside the tubule”; 1:
“tubule”; 2: “background”, and 3: “unlabeled”. All voxels in the unlabelled slices
also get the label 3 (“unlabeled”). We ran all our experiments on down-sampled
versions of the original resolution by factor of two in each dimension. Therefore,
the data sizes used in the experiments are 248 × 244 × 64, 245 × 244 × 56 and
246 × 244 × 59 in x × y × z dimensions for our sample 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
The number of manually annotated slices in orthogonal (yz, xz, xy) slices are
(7, 5, 21), (6, 7, 12), and (4, 5, 10) for sample 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Besides rotation, scaling and gray value augmentation, we apply a smooth dense
deformation ﬁeld on both data and ground truth labels. For this, we sample
random vectors from a normal distribution with standard deviation of 4 in a
grid with a spacing of 32 voxels in each direction and then apply a B-spline
interpolation. The network output and the ground truth labels are compared
using softmax with weighted cross-entropy loss, where we reduce weights for the
frequently seen background and increase weights for the inner tubule to reach
a balanced inﬂuence of tubule and background voxels on the loss. Voxels with
label 3 (“unlabled”) do not contribute to the loss computation, i.e. have a weight
of 0. We use the stochastic gradient descent solver of the Caﬀe framework for
network training. To enable training of big 3D networks we used the memory
eﬃcient cuDNN3 convolution layer implementation. Data augmentation is done
on-the-ﬂy, which results in as many diﬀerent images as training iterations. We ran
70000 training iterations on an NVIDIA TitanX GPU, which took approximately
Experiments
Semi-Automated Segmentation
For semi-automated segmentation, we assume that the user needs a full segmentation of a small number of volumetric images, and does not have prior
2 
3 
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
segmentations. The proposed network allows the user to annotate a few slices
from each volume and let the network create the dense volumetric segmentation.
For a qualitative assessment, we trained the network on all three sparsely
annotated samples. Figure 3 shows the segmentation results for our 3rd sample.
The network can ﬁnd the whole 3D volume segmentation from a few annotated
slices and saves experts from full volume annotation.
Fig. 3: (a) The confocal recording of our 3rd Xenopus kidney. (b) Resulting
dense segmentation from the proposed 3D u-net with batch normalization.
To assess the quantitative performance in the semi-automated setup, we uniformly partitioned the set of all 77 manually annotated slices from all 3 samples
into three subsets and did a 3-fold cross validation both with and without batch
normalization. To this end, we removed the test slices and let them stay unlabeled. This simulates an application where the user provides an even sparser
annotation. To measure the gain from using the full 3D context, we compare the
results to a pure 2D implementation, that treats all labelled slices as independent
images. We present the results of our experiment in Table 1. Intersection over
Union (IoU) is used as accuracy measure to compare dropped out ground truth
slices to the predicted 3D volume. The IoU is deﬁned as true positives/(true positives + false negatives + false positives). The results show that our approach is
able to already generalize from only very few annotated slices leading to a very
accurate 3D segmentation with little annotation eﬀort.
We also analyzed the eﬀect of the number of annotated slices on the network
performance. To this end, we simulated a one sample semi-automated segmentation. We started using 1 annotated slice in each orthogonal direction and
increased the number of annotated slices gradually. We report the high performance gain of our network for each sample (S1, S2, and S3) with every few
additional ground truth (“GT”) slices in Table 2. The results are taken from
networks which were trained for 10 hours with batch normalization. For testing
we used the slices not used in any setup of this experiment.
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
Table 1: Cross validation results for
semi-automated segmentation (IoU)
w/o BN with BN with BN
Table 2: Eﬀect of # of slices for
semi-automated segmentation (IoU)
slices voxels
0.331 0.483 0.475
0.676 0.579 0.738
0.761 0.808 0.835
0.856 0.849 0.872
Table 3: Cross validation results for fully-automated segmentation (IoU)
Fully-automated Segmentation
The fully-automated segmentation setup assumes that the user wants to segment
a large number of images recorded in a comparable setting. We further assume
that a representative training data set can be assembled.
To estimate the performance in this setup we trained on two (partially annotated) kidney volumes and used the trained network to segment the third
volume. We report the result on all 3 possible combinations of training and test
volumes. Table 3 summarizes the IoU as in the previous section over all annotated 2D slices of the left out volume. In this experiment BN also improves the
result, except for the third setting, where it was counterproductive. We think
that the large diﬀerences in the data sets are responsible for this eﬀect. The
typical use case for the fully-automated segmentation will work on much larger
sample sizes, where the same number of sparse labels could be easily distributed
over much more data sets to obtain a more representative training data set.
Conclusion
We have introduced an end-to-end learning method that semi-automatically and
fully-automatically segments a 3D volume from a sparse annotation. It oﬀers an
accurate segmentation for the highly variable structures of the Xenopus kidney.
We achieve an average IoU of 0.863 in 3-fold cross validation experiments for
the semi-automated setup. In a fully-automated setup we demonstrate the performance gain of the 3D architecture to an equivalent 2D implementation. The
network is trained from scratch, and it is not optimized in any way for this application. We expect that it will be applicable to many other biomedical volumetric
segmentation tasks. Its implementation is provided as OpenSource.
Volumetric Segmentation with the 3D U-Net
Acknowledgments. We thank the DFG (EXC 294 and CRC-1140 KIDGEM
Project Z02 and B07) for supporting this work. Ahmed Abdulkadir acknowledges funding by the grant KF3223201LW3 of the ZIM (Zentrales Innovationsprogramm Mittelstand). Soeren S. Lienkamp acknowledges funding from DFG
(Emmy Noether-Programm). We also thank Elitsa Goykovka for the useful annotations and Alena Sammarco for the excellent technical assistance in imaging.