DOCUMENT RESUME
ED 428 326
CS 013 450
Tracey, Diane H.; Young, John W.
Mothers' Helping Behaviors during Children's At-Home Oral
Reading Practice: Effects of Children's Reading Ability,
Children's Sex, and Mother's Educational Level.
1999-00-00
Reports - Research (143)
EDRS PRICE
MF01/PC03 Plus Postage.
DESCRIPTORS
Comparative Analysis; Educational Attainment; Family
Environment; *Grade 3; *High Risk Students; *Mothers;
*Parent Student Relationship; Primary Education; *Reading
Achievement; *Reading Aloud to Others; Reading Research; Sex
Differences
Educators frequently recommend that children read aloud to
parents at home in the belief that the activity will positively contribute to
children's literacy growth. From a research perspective, however, little is
known about these at-home reading experiences. Using a social constructivist
theoretical perspective, the present study investigated the relationships
between children's reading ability, children's sex, mothers' educational
level, and mothers' helping behaviors during children's at-home oral reading
practice. Seventy-six mother-child pairs from a suburban, middle-class
community participated in the project. Accelerated and at-risk third grade
readers took home a tape recorder and a third grade science text to read
aloud to mothers. The conversations were audiotaped, professionally
transcribed, and then coded. Results of the study indicated that the
conversations between at-risk readers and their mothers were marked by the
frequent use of error correction interventions, while the conversations
between accelerated readers and their mothers were marked by children's
extensive verbal involvement. A pattern of richer language interaction was
also seen in the conversations of mothers and daughters when compared to
those of mothers and sons. High school educated mothers used significantly
more error correction interventions than did college educated mothers despite
the fact that there were equal numbers of accelerated and at-risk readers in
each of the educational groups. Additionally, college educated mothers asked
significantly more high level questions than did high school educated
mothers. Implications for practice are discussed. (Contains 58 references and
5 figures of data; appendixes contain the coding scheme and guidelines for
using the scheme.)
(Author/RS)
********************************************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made
from the original document.
********************************************************************************
Running Head: MOTHERS' HELPING BEHAVIORS
Mothers' Helping Behaviors During Children's At-Home Oral Reading Practice:
Effects of Children's Reading Ability, Children's Sex, and Mother's Educational Level
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Office of Educational Research and Improvement
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
CENTER (ERIC)
ill This document has been reproduced es
received from the person or organization
originating it.
El Minor changes have been made to
improve reproduction quality.
Points of view or opinions stated in this
document do not necessarily represent
official OERI position or policy.
Diane H. Tracey
Kean University
John W. Young
Rutgers University
EST COPY AVAILABLE
PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS
BEEN GRANTED BY
TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
Educators frequently recommend that children read aloud to parents at home in the belief that the
activity will positively contribute to children's literacy growth. From a research perspective,
however, little is known about these at-home reading experiences. Using a social constructivist
theoretical perspective, the present study investigated the relationships between children's
reading ability, children's sex, mothers' educational level, and mothers' helping behaviors during
children's at-home oral reading practice. 76 mother-child pairs from a suburban, middle-class
community participated in the project. Accelerated and at-risk third grade readers took home a
tape recorder and a third grade science text to read aloud to mothers. The conversations were
audio taped, professionally transcribed, and then coded according to a pre-determined coding
scheme based on types of reading error corrections made by mothers, types of comments made
by mothers, types of questions asked by mothers, and the number of words spoken by the
children, text reading aside. Results of the study indicated that the conversations between at-risk
readers and their mothers were marked by the frequent use of error correction interventions,
while the conversations between accelerated readers and their mothers were marked by
children's extensive verbal involvement. A pattern of richer language interaction was also seen
in the conversations of mothers and daughters when compared to those of mothers and sons.
High school educated mothers used significantly more error correction interventions than did
college educated mothers despite the fact that there were equal numbers of accelerated and atrisk readers in each of the educational groups. Additionally, college educated mothers asked
significantly more high level questions than did high school educated mothers. Implications for
practice are discussed.
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
Mothers' Helping Behaviors During Children's At-Home Oral Reading Practice:
Effects of Children's Reading Ability, Children's Sex, and Mothers' Educational Level
In a broad sense the issue of children reading aloud to parents at home is an issue of
family literacy. Within the past decade awareness of the powerful influence of the family on
children's literacy development has gained national prominence . Increasingly,
educators, parents, and policy makers have been told of the importance of children's home
literacy experiences and of the value of parent involvement in children's school activities.
Researchers have validated the significance of family literacy with investigations of: (1) the
design, implementation, and evaluation of programs to facilitate the literacy development of
family members (2) the relationships between literacy use in families and students'
academic achievement and (3) the ways in which literacy is
naturally used within the context of the home . The present paper examines one dimension of the
way literacy is used in the home environment, specifically, how mothers help their children when
children read aloud at home.
The practice of children reading aloud to parents is extensively recommended by
educators . Despite the
frequency with which the activity is recommended, however, little is known about the quality of
these at-home reading sessions . For example,
few studies to date have examined the quality of the shared literacy experiences when poor
readers read at home to their parents . The results of these investigations have suggested that at-home, oral
reading practice may be a far less positive experience for at-risk readers than for their more
accomplished peers. These studies found that the at-home, oral reading practice ofpoor readers
was marked by frustration and failure for the children and by a high incidence of error
interventions by well-intentioned parents. Despite the potential significance of these findings,
however, at-home oral reading practice remains a cornerstone of teachers' recommendations. It
seems apparent that further investigation into the quality of children's at-home oral reading
practice should be conducted in order to provide a clearer and objective foundation on which
educators' recommendations can be based.
In addition to providing a foundation for practitioners' recommendations, investigations
of children's at-home oral reading offer researchers potentially rich data on an alternative form
of shared literacy experiences. To date, the literacy research community has given extensive
attention to shared literacy experiences in which parents read to children . These studies and
others have provided critically valuable information with regard to the role of parents in
children's literacy acquisition. In contrast, far less research attention has been given to shared
literacy experiences in which children read to parents. It seems promising that further valuable
insights into children's literacy development can be gained from examinations of shared literacy
experiences from this alternative perspective.
Studies of Children Reading to Parents
In one of the earliest studies of its type, Francis studied the relationships between
early reading achievement, parents reading to children, and children reading to parents. In an
examination of middle-class and lower class, six-year-old students in England, Francis found a
stronger correlation between the frequency with which children read to parents and reading
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
achievement, than between the frequency with which parents read to children and reading
achievement. The finding of a very high correlation between the frequency with which children
read to parents and reading achievement was replicated and extended in a series of three studies
by Hewison and Tizard . In the first study, the parents of children from working class
homes were interviewed in order to examine the relationships between parental attitudes toward
reading, parental practices with respect to reading, and children's reading behavior. The results
indicated that whether or not mothers heard their children read was strongly correlated to their
children's reading test scores. While the incidence with which children read to mothers was
related to the mothers' attitudes towards reading, it was demonstrated that simply possessing a
positive attitude toward reading was insufficient to produce the reading gains that resulted from a
combination of both a positive attitude and reading practice. In the second study of the series,
parental attitudes toward reading, parental practices with respect to reading, ahd children's
reading behavior were once again examined in working class families. Additionally, however, in
this study, children's IQ scores as determined by performance on the WISC, and a measure of the
mother's language behavior was assessed. Again, it was determined that the strongest correlation
existed between children reading to parents (coaching) and reading test performance. In the third
study, while the IQ and maternal language factors were not included in the study, the amount of
reading done by the child to the parent was addressed. The amount of coaching"provided by the
parents was classified as either "regular help", "occasional help" or "no help". With respect to
the findings the authors stated:
The results are very consistent indeed. They fully confirm the earlier findings, and
suggest in addition that reading attainment scores vary in stepwise fashion with the
amount of coaching in reading which the children have received. 
The work of Tizard, Schofield, and Hewison was designed to experimentally
investigate the correlational findings of Hewison & Tizard . In the study, which became
known as the Haringey Project, three groups of multi-racial, inner-city children were randomly
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
assigned to experimental conditions. In the first experimental group, children's parents were
recruited, minimally trained, and occasionally visited and supervised in carrying out an
intervention in which they committed themselves to frequently hearing their child read aloudat
home and recording what their children read. In the second experimental group, after-school
help in reading was provided to children in small groups by a highly qualified and experienced
teacher, however, no special parental involvement was initiated. In the control group, children
received neither form of extra help. The study was carried out in four classrooms, with students
of varied reading ability, and over a period of two years. The results of the study indicated that
highly significant gains were made in the parent involvement group in contrast to the control
group, but no comparable gain was observed for the students that received the extra help at
school. Although this study has been criticized for weaknesses in its experimental design with
reference to the comparison of the after-school and parental involvement programs, 
it clearly supports a causal relationship between children reading aloud to parents and improved
reading achievement, and remains one of the most frequently cited studies in the examination of
children reading aloud to parents. With respect to the impact that the study has had in England,
Bald wrote, "These results immediately established parental involvement in reading as a
national focal point for professional activity and for research..." .
One of the studies prompted by the results of The Haringey Project was the work
of Hannon . In an attempt to further investigate the relationship between children's
reading achievement and children reading aloud to parents at home, Hannon designed an
experiment in which children from working class backgrounds read to their parents aloud at
home on an "almost daily" basis over a period of three years. In contrast to the Haringey Project,
however, researchers did not regularly visit the homes to support and supervise the shared
literacy experiences. Furthermore, rather than having a concurrent control group, Hannon 
compared the performance of the children in the experimental group with the performance of
similar children who had passed through the school in previous years. When parental
involvement in reading was examined from this perspective, no significant differences between
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
the two groups were found. In interpreting the findings, Hannon suggested that the
supportive and instructional role provided by the researchers in Tizard, Schofield, and Hewison's
 work during their home visitations may have contributed to the experimental effect found.
Also, Hannon noted that the populations for the two study were somewhat different; although
both represented working class communities, in the Haringey Project the sample was
comprised of primarily minority and ethnic groups, while in Hannon's study this was not
While the practice of children reading aloud to parents has been supported by important
correlational and experimental findings, there exists a paucity of studies which examines these
literacy events from a descriptive perspective . According to Francis who
wrote a review on the topic, the work of Hannon, Jackson, and Weinberger was, "Perhaps
the only detailed report of parental practices in hearing children read during the early school
years" . In this study, Hannon, Jackson, and Weinberger compared
descriptions of the interactions of children from working-class backgrounds reading aloud to
their parents, and reading aloud to their teachers. Analyses of these categories suggested that the
most frequent moves for both parents and teachers were in the categories of "providing words"
and "giving directions" about reading. Among other observations it was found that a greater
proportion of parent's moves were in response to miscues, whereas teachers were more likely to
make moves at other times, and that parents were more likely to use criticism than were teachers.
Advantages to parent reading sessions were found in the categories of longer at-home reading
sessions than school reading sessions, and fewer external interruptions during reading. In
summarizing the research, Hannon, Jackson, and Weinberger concluded that there was no
support for the belief that working class parents were inadequate to hear their children read.
While this study has added considerably to our knowledge of the reading practices between
parents and children, it has also been criticized for a lack of authenticity since parents in the
study were provided with a list of "Do's and Don'ts" to adhere to during reading. As Francis
 stated " Since the parents were actually advised by the teachers to act in this manner it is
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
useful to know that they could do so, but one can only speculate on what they might have done
without guidance" . While Francis emphasized the importance of
the "Do's and Don't" sheet on the quality of the reported findings, the authors minimized its
influence in the study.
Lancey, Draper, and Boyce pioneered descriptive work of the differences between
the helping behaviors of parents of good and poor readers during children's oral reading practice.
In their first study they examined kindergarten and first grade children from ethnically mixed and
working class backgrounds during parent-child reading interactions. The children were divided
into two groups: good readers who were early, fluent readers and poor, non-fluent readers who
were late reading skill acquisition. According to the authors' "global analysis" of the
interactions, the two groups differed in important ways. Parents of the early readers reported
reading to their children frequently at home, held positive attitudes toward reading, and felt that
the most important feature of their children reading aloud was that the experience should be fun.
During their children's reading, parents of the good, early readers adopted what the authors
coined an "overall underlying expansionist strategy" entailing much scaffolding. Also, the
interactions between the good readers and their parents were characterized by great sensitivity on
the part of the parents to avoid frustration for the child. In contrast to these points, parents of the
poor readers reported rarely reading to their children at home, and perceived reading, and
learning to read, as work. The interactions between the poor readers and their parents were
characterized by a high degree of frustration for the children and the frequent use of criticism by
the parents which was sometimes harsh. The authors reported that the parents of poor readers
used "reductionist" strategies when their children read in which the children were taught to use
only a very limited array of cues, for example, an almost solo reliance on decoding cues. In
another example of a reductionist strategy, the authors cited an instance in which a mother
repeatedly covered the pictures when her child read so that the child did not "cheat" when
learning to read.
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
The topic of mothers' helping behaviors during children's at-home oral reading practice
was further articulated by Authors . In this study, the variables of the frequency of
children's oral reading practice, children's sex, children's reading ability, and text difficulty were
examined within the context of children's at-home oral reading. The results of the study
indicated that in homes of middle-class, college educated mothers, children read aloud an
average of 100 minutes per week at the first grade level, 85 minutes per week at the second grade
level, and 53 minutes per week at the third grade level. Unexpectedly, it was also found that atrisk second and third readers read aloud significantly more frequently to their parents than did
accelerated second and third grade readers. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that as
the accelerated readers matured, their oral reading to parents was replaced by independent silent
reading, while at-risk readers continued reading aloud to parents for practice. Thus, the work of
Authors underscored the importance of the quality of the at-home practice experience for
at-risk readers. The study also highlighted the effects of text difficulty and children's reading
ability during children's at-home reading practice. Throughout the study, the use of harder texts
were associated with a greater use of questioning, commenting, and error interventions by
mothers, and with greater verbal involvement (text reading aside) by children. Mothers' helping
behaviors were affected by children's reading ability differentially, depending on the difficulty
of the text read. Children's sex was not found to be a significant variable affecting middle-class,
college-educated mothers' helping behaviors.
Most recently, a study by Evans, Barraball, & Eberle investigated parental
responses to children's oral reading and compared parent's philosophical beliefs about reading
with their actual helping behaviors during the reading experience. The results suggested that
parents' behaviors were consistent with their beliefs; Parents who held a bottom-up philosophy
of reading tended to make corrections that were primarily decoding in nature, while parents that
held a top-down philosophy tended to make error corrections that used context and meaning for
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
Current Investigation
The review of the research presented suggests that the issue of children reading aloud at
home is a frequently recommended practice by educators, but one that is largely underexamined
from a research perspective .
Although a handful of studies have been completed which suggest that children's at-home
reading practice may be significantly related to their reading achievement , the existing research base suffers from several deficits. First, the number of
studies completed on the subjeci is small, particularly in light of the frequency with which athome reading practice is recommended by educators. Second, the research which has been
completed has not been related to a theoretical model which would assist in increased
understanding of the issue and with the integration of this body of knowledge.with other related
bodies of work. Third, and relatedly, the existing research has not demonstrated that the
examined variables were selected from a theoretically driven perspective. The failure to provide
a theoretical basis for the selection of research variables further diminishes the ability of studies
in this field to move forward in a grounded and integrated manner.
The present study attempts to address each of these concerns. First, the study aims to
extend the amount of work that has been done on the subject in a way that allows for meaningful,
practical implications to be drawn from the investigation. Second, great care is taken to situate
the study within a theoretical framework and to use the framework to connect this area of work
with other studies of home literacy. Third, selection of the studied variables is theoretically
driven, allowing for a more meaningful understanding of the interactions observed and for
increased application of the findings of the work to the general field of literacy research.
A Theoretical Framework for Examining Children's At-Home Oral Reading Practice
From a theoretical perspective, research regarding children's at-home oral reading can be
viewed as being based on, and offering the potential to inform, the construct of social
constructivism. This perspective suggests that during shared literacy experiences one of the
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
primary phenomena occurring is the construction of literacy meaning through the social and
verbal interactions of the participants. Multiple writers have developed and contributed to this
theoretical perspective of literacy acquisition . In brief, Piaget facilitated the general theory of constructivism with
his suggestion that children actively construct knowledge as they interact with objects in the
world around them . Vygotsky added the social dimension to
this perspective with his ideas regarding the educational role served by more mature individuals
interacting with less mature individuals. Bloome articulated the ways in which social
contructivist theory applied to the reading experience. Most recently, Rogoff utilized the
term guided participation to depict the social constructivism that contributes to children's
cognitive development. She stated, "Interaction with other people assists children in their
development by guiding their participation in relevant activities, helping them adapt their
understanding to new situations, structuring their problem-solving attempts, and assisting them
in assuming responsibility for managing problem solving" . The application of
social constructivism as a theoretical basis for studying literacy acquisition has been used by
many researchers and in a great variety of contexts .
Social constructivism has been used as a theoretical model for studies that fall under the
umbrella of family literacy. Most notably, it has been used as a basis for studies of shared book
reading in which parents read to young children .
Such investigations are based on the premises that children's knowledge about literacy is
facilitated by the ways in which parents share books with their young children, and that
differences in the quality of these literacy events may lead to differential development of
children's literacy abilities. Book sharing studies situated in social constructivism often use
language analysis as a method of investigation through which parent-child social interactions can
be captured . Within the field of family literacy, in
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
addition to using social constructivism to illuminate storybook reading experiences, this
theoretical model has been applied to the study of the effects of parents' literacy habits and the
effects of non-book shared literacy experiences on children's literacy development .
Social constructivism is applicable to studies of children reading to parents in the same
ways in which it is applicable to the studies of parents reading to children. Such a viewpoint
suggests that the social interactions through which parents help children with their oral reading
practice at home have the potential to shape children's perceptions, attitudes, and achievement
with literacy. As in studies of parents reading to children, aspects of the social interactions that
take place during children's oral reading to parents can be captured through language analysis.
Examinations of other studies related to family literacy and grounded within a social
constructivist theoretical framework can provide direction for the selection of variables likely to
be significant in the study of children's at-home oral reading. For example, Leseman &
DeJong's recent and extensive investigation regarding the relationship between home
literacy characteristics and children's literacy achievement suggested that socio-economic status,
as computed by parents' educational level, was the most potent factor affecting the frequency
and quality of at-home literacy events. The importance of parental educational level has also
been reported by Pellegrini, Perlmutter, Galda, & Brody in relation to parental style of
storybook reading.
A second significant variable identified by family literacy studies grounded in social
constructivism is that of children's sex. Solsken has reported that her work and others
have "raised the possibility that literacy itself may be regarded, in some subcultures or social
classes at least, as primarily a female activity, and that males' engagement is literacy is therefore
appropriately restricted" (p. 215). The social constructivist explanation for this finding is that
parents may treat sons and daughters differently with regard to, and during, literacy events, and
this, in turn, shapes children's differential development in attitude and achievement. Such an
explanation may be applied to the recent findings of a large-scale, governmental investigation on
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
educational progress which indicated that girls scored better than boys in the area of reading
achievement at all grade levels examined .
A third variable suggested by social constructivist research in family literacy is that of
children's reading ability. Presumably because of its profound implications for educators, this
variable is widely investigated. As described above, the hypothesis that differences in the ways
in which parents interact with their children at home during and around literacy events are
related to differences in children's reading ability has been investigated with regard to parental
book reading styles, parental literacy habits, and non-book shared literacy experiences who
met the following criteria was included in the present study: (a) Children were either accelerated
or at-risk 3' grade readers as measured by performance on local percentiles of the California
Achievement Test and by classroom teacher evaluations. Children were grouped as either
accelerated readers, scoring at or above the 65th percentile, or as at-risk readers scoring at or
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
below the 35th percentile. Following this determination, teacher's recommendations were used to
confirm the accuracy of the students' placement. In six cases the children's teachers did not
agree with the placement determined by the standardized test performance, and subsequently
those students' data were not included in the present analysis. (b) Children came from homes in
which English was the primary language spoken. (c) Children were free of special education
classification; and (d) Mothers had either a high school or a college level education. 40 students
were accelerated readers and 36 were at-risk readers. 24 of the mothers had high school degrees
and 52 had bachelor's degrees. 18 boys were low readers and 16 were high readers. 22 girls
were low readers and 20 were high readers. 8 of the boys had mothers who were high school
educated and 26 of the boys had mothers who were college educated. 16 of the girls had mothers
who were high school educated and 26 of the girls had mothers who were college educated. In
both the college educated and high school educated groups, half of the children were at-risk
readers and the other half were accelerated readers. The at-home reading conversations of the 52
college-educated mother-child pairs were previously examined and reported on by Authors
 . The data are re-examined here to provide a basis for statistical comparison regarding the
variable of mothers' educational level.
Procedure Each child met individually with a researcher on one occasion at school. During this
time the child was given a tape recorder, a blank audiocassette, and set of third grade reading
materials to take home and read to his or her mother that evening. Mothers, rather than fathers,
were chosen for this research because it has been demonstrated that mothers tend to help their
children with schoolwork, including at-home reading, more often than do fathers . Grade level material was
used rather than instructional level material in order to minimize the problems associated with
comparing children reading different texts and also because the reading of a grade level science
text was viewed as being ecologically valid.
Data Analysis Audio tapes were professionally transcribed and then coded according to a predetermined coding scheme. The coding scheme, developed by the authors and adapted
from DeBaryshe, Daly, & Rodarmel, and Snow , was based on four main
categories and accompanying sub-categories of interaction: (a) Error Correction Strategies Used
by Mothers (decoding, semantic, word supplied, modeling, error indicated, and pause); (b)
Questions Used by Mothers (yes/no, what questions, attribute questions, distancing questions,
directions, and other); (c) Comments Used by Mothers (praise, repetitions, expansions, topic
continuations, directions, and other); and (d) Total Words Spoken by the Child (aside from text
reading). A fuller description of the coding system is presented in Appendix A, with guidelines
for use presented in Appendix B.
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
Inter-rater reliability for the coding system was established by randomly choosing 10
transcripts and having them coded independently by two, trained graduate student research
assistants. The percentage of agreement between two coders was established by dividing the
number of instances of agreement by the total number of possible agreements. The inter-rater
reliability between the two research assistants was .88, which is consistent with findings from
similar studies .
The data were examined using a three-way factorial analysis of variance with children's
reading ability, children's sex, and mother's educational level as independent variables, and the
scores on the components of the coding system previously described as the dependent variables.
Following use of ANOVA, post-hoc analyses were completed to further clarify the direction of
the significant differences.
Reading Ability Effects Within the category of error correction, mothers of accelerated readers
used word supplied error corrections most frequently (x=1.75), followed by modeling error
corrections (x=.86) and error indicated error corrections (x=.72). Mothers of at-risk readers used
word supplied error corrections most frequently (x=7.33), followed by error indicated error
corrections (x=3.68) and modeling error corrections (x=2.90).
Within the category of types of questions used, mothers of accelerated readers used
yes/no questions most frequently (x=7.39) followed by distancing questions (x=4.33) and what
questions (x=1.78). Mothers of at-risk readers used yes/no questions most frequently (x=9.13),
followed by distancing questions (x=5.15) and what questions (x=1.78).
Within the category of types of comments used, mothers of accelerated readers used topic
continuation comments most frequently (x=14.25), followed by other comments (x=9.19) and
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
direction comments (x=6.25). Mothers of at-risk readers used topic continuation comments most
frequently (x=15.58), followed by other comments (x=9.00) and direction comments (x=7.93).
Mothers of at-risk readers made significantly more Total Error Corrections during their
children's oral reading practice than did mothers of accelerated readers (F= 16.84, p<.001).
Mothers of at-risk readers corrected their children significantly more often than did mothers of
accelerated readers in the following subcategories: decoding error corrections made by the
mother (F= 8.25, p< .01), word supplied error corrections made by the mother (F= 11.71,
p<.001) modeling error corrections made by the mother (F= 10.25, p< .01), and error indicated
error corrections made by the mother (F= 9.73, p< .01). In the main category of Total Words
Spoken by the child, text reading aside, accelerated readers spoke significantly more than did atrisk readers (F= 6.27, p<.05). The effects of children's reading ability on mothers' helping
behaviors are reported in Table 1.
Insert Table 1 about here
Children's Sex Effects Mothers of males used word supplied error corrections most frequently
(x=5.53), followed by error indicated error corrections (x=2.53) and modeling error corrections
(x=1.94). Mothers of females used word supplied error corrections most frequently (x=4.0)
followed by error indicated error corrections (x=2.07) and modeling error corrections (x=1.93).
Mothers of males used yes/no questions most frequently (x=7.00), followed by distancing
questions (x=4.09) and what questions (x=0.97). Mothers of females used yes/no questions most
frequently (x=9.36), followed by distancing questions (x=5.31) and what questions (x=2.62).
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
Mothers of sons used topic continuation comments most frequently (x=9.76), followed by
direction comments (x=6.12) and other comments (x=5.71). Mothers of daughters used topic
continuation comments most frequently (x=19.14), followed by other comments (x=11.83) and
direction comments (x=7.95).
Mothers of daughters made nearly significant more topic continuation comments than did
mothers of sons (F=3.72, p<.057) and mothers of daughters made significantly more other
comments than did mothers of sons (F=5.37, p<.05). Girls spoke significantly more than did
boys during these conversations, text reading aside (F=11.87, p<.001). The effects of children's
sex on mothers' helping behaviors are presented in Table 2.
Insert Table 2 about here
Mother's Educational Level High school educated mothers used word supplied error corrections
most frequently (x=8.71), followed by error indicated error corrections (x=2.83) and modeling
error corrections (x=2.08). College educated mothers used word supplied error corrections most
frequently (x=2.83), followed by error indicated error corrections (x=2.02) and modeling error
corrections (x=1.87).
High school educated mothers used yes/no questions most frequently (x=4.96), followed
by what questions (x=3.13) and attribute questions (x=1.63). College educated mothers used
yes/no questions most frequently (x=9.85), followed by distancing questions (x=6.63) and what
questions (x=1.31).
High school educated mothers used topic continuation comments most frequently
(x=16.21), followed by other comments (x=11.79) and direction comments (x=8.79). College
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
educated mothers used topic continuation comments most frequently (x=14.37), followed by
other comments (x=7.85) and direction comments (x=6.37).
High-school educated mothers made significantly more Total Error Corrections during
their children's reading than did college-educated mothers (F=3.85, p<.05). High-school
educated mothers made significantly more word supplied error corrections than did college
educated mothers (F=9.64, p<.01) and and high-school educated mothers used significantly more
semantic error corrections (F=3.89, p<.05). High-school educated mothers asked significantly
more what questions than did the college-educated mothers (F=7.67, p<.01). High-school
educated mothers also asked significantly more attribute questions than did college-educated
mothers (F=8.64 p<.01). College-educated mothers asked significantly more yes/no questions
than did high-school educated mothers (F=4.48, p<.01), and college-educated mothers asked
significantly more distancing questions than did high-school educated mothers (F=17.61,
p<.001). The effects of mothers' educational level on mothers' helping behaviors are reported in
Insert Table 3 about here
Interaction Effects Several statistically significant interactions were observed between children's
reading ability and mother's education level. For the variable of what questions (F=5.48, p<.05),
the higher mean occurred for the accelerated reader if the mother was high school educated, but
the higher mean occurred for the at-risk reader if the mother was college educated. This same
pattern of interaction was observed for other questions (F=5.09, p<=05), expansion comments
(F=4.63, p<.05), topic continuation comments (F=6.13, p<.05), other comments (F=5.17, p<.05),
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
and Total Words spoken by children (text reading aside) (F=16.76, p<.001). Interactions
between children's reading ability and mother's educational level are reported in Table 4.
Insert Table 4 about here
Several statistically significant interactions were observed between mother's educational
level and children's sex. For the variable of attribute questions (F=8.99, p<.001), the higher
mean occurred for high school educated mothers if the child was a girl while the higher mean
occurred for college educated mothers if the child was a boy. This same pattern of interaction
was observed for what questions (F=5.31, p<.05), direction questions (F=6.80, p<.05), praise
comments (F=4.28, p<.05), other comments (F=5.30, p<.05), direction comments (F=9.20,
p<.001), and Total Comments (F=6.54, p<.01). Interactions between children's sex and
mother's educational level are reported in Table 5.
Insert Table 5 about here
Discussion
The purpose of the present project was to meaningfully extend the body of knowledge
available regarding the study of mothers' helping behaviors during children's at-home reading.
The work supplemented previously existing studies on the topic by providing a theoretical basis
from which the issue could be viewed and by examining variables related to the topic whose
selection was theoretically driven. Using a social-constructivist theoretical lens, the research
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
examined the relationships between the variables of children's reading ability, children'ssex,
mother's educational level, and mother's helping behaviors during children's at-home reading
Reading Ability Effects
A descriptive analysis of the effects of reading ability illustrates that mothers of
accelerated readers used word supplied error corrections most frequently, followed by modeling
error corrections and error indicated error corrections. Mothers of at-risk readers used word
supplied error corrections most frequently, followed by error indicated error corrections and
modeling error corrections. Within the category of types of questions used, mothers of both
accelerated and at-risk readers used yes/no questions most frequently, followed by distancing
questions, and what questions. Within the category of types of comments used, mothers of both
groups of readers used topic continuation comments most frequently, followed by other
comments and direction comments.
While the above descriptive statistics revealed similar profiles of helping behaviors for
mothers of both at-risk and accelerated readers, a comparative analysis revealed that mothers of
at-risk readers used significantly more total error corrections during their children's at-home
reading than did mothers of accelerated readers. Moreover, accelerated readers spoke
significantly more (text reading aside) than did at-risk readers. Although these finding are
understandable in light of the fact that the text was more difficult for the at-risk readers than it
was for the accelerated readers, they are also illuminating because they illustrate the qualitative
differences in conversations between at-home reading experiences of at-risk and accelerated
students. When at-risk students practice reading at home with grade level material their
experiences are dominated by mothers' error correction interventions. In short, they are
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
experiences of frustration and failure. In contrast, the quality of the accelerated readers' at-home
reading experience is one of rich conversation with the parent. Thus, when examining the effect
of children's reading achievement on mothers' helping behaviors when grade level text is used
the results of this study underscore the dramatic differences between the quality of the at-home
reading experiences of accelerated and at-risk readers.
These findings, which are consistent with earlier works on the effects of children's
reading ability on parents' helping behaviors during children's at-home reading suggest important directions to guide recommendations
regarding children's at-home reading practice. In the belief that conversations dominated by
excessive error correction interventions will be damaging to children's self esteem and
motivation to read, as advocates of careful attention to text readability levels presume , educators can attempt to minimize this effect in at least three ways. First, in
understanding the propensity of mothers of poor readers to intervene in this direction, educators
can forewarn such parents and advise them to minimize their error corrections by intervening
only when absolutely necessary, for example, to intervene only when the meaning of the text has
been altered. Second, educators can suggest that parents read to their children instead of having
children read to them when the text is found to be at the frustration level of difficulty, as is often
the case when at-risk readers are faced with the task of reading grade level materials. Third, and
most desirable, educators can send home instructional level texts rather, than grade level text for
at-risk readers. A comparison of accelerated and at-risk readers reading at home with their
middle-class, college educated mothers revealed that maternal error correction interventions are
greatly reduced when at-risk readers practice with instructional level rather than grade level text
 . While it is acknowledged that many practitioners strive to achieve this goal in
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
the area of reading, it is believed that most often grade level texts are sent home in the other
content areas such as science and social studies. Finally, educators can strengthen the helping
behaviors of mothers of at-risk readers by teaching them about the role and importance of
general verbal ability in literacy acquisition, and providing them with information about how to
facilitate their children's verbal expressions during practice reading sessions.
Children's Sex Effects
A descriptive analysis of the effects of children's sex on mother-child conversations
illustrates that mothers of both males and females used word supplied error corrections most
frequently, followed by error indicated error corrections and modeling error corrections.
Mothers of both groups of children used yes/no questions most frequently, followed by
distancing questions and what questions. Mothers of both sons and daughters used topic
continuation comments most frequently, followed by direction comments and other comments.
A comparative analysis between these groups showed that mothers of girls used topic
continuations (comments which embellish on a previous comment) nearly significantly more
often than did mothers of boys. Furthermore, girls spoke significantly more during the
conversations than did boys. Combined, these findings draw another picture, one of richer
conversations for mothers and daughters than for mothers and sons during at-home reading
practice. It is plausible that the differences captured in this literacy situation may be ultimately
related to the consistent findings of higher reading achievement scores and more favorable
attitudes for reading among girls rather than boys questions than did high-school educated mothers.
Again, the pictures drawn for these two groups are different, with high-school educated mothers
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
using an abundance of error correction interventions while college-educated mothers use high
level, thought provoking questions. This finding is particularly potent in light of the fact that
there were equal numbers of accelerated and at-risk readers in both the high school educated and
college educated groups. Practical implications from this finding include helping high school
educated mothers learn to make error corrections only when the meaning of the text is altered by
a child's reading error, and also helping them learn how to construct and use more high level,
thought provoking questions during their children's reading practice.
Interaction Effects
Several statistically significant interactions were observed between children's reading
ability and mother's education level. For the variable of what questions, the higher mean
occurred for the accelerated reader if the mother was high school educated, but the higher mean
occurred for the at-risk reader if the mother was college educated. This same pattern of
interaction was observed for other questions, expansion comments, topic continuation comments,
other comments, and Total Words spoken by children (text reading aside). The consistency of
the pattern of interactions suggests that actual, rather than random, profiles of interaction are
being captured. One interpretation of these findings is that in both cases mothers are using these
helping behaviors to facilitate further growth in their children. In the case of the high school
educated mothers, this may be related to the accelerated performance of their children. In the
case of the college educated mothers, this may be related to their attempts to help improve their
at-risk children's performance.
Similarly, several statistically significant interactions were observed between children's
sex and mother's educational level. For the variable of attribute questions, the higher mean
occurred for high school educated mothers if the child was a girl while the higher mean occurred
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
for college educated mothers if the child was a boy. This same pattern of interaction was
observed for what questions, direction questions, praise comments, direction comments, other
comments, and Total Comments. Although the patterns revealed in these interactions are, again,
consistent, an interpretation of them is not readily apparent, and further investigation of the
findings seem warranted.
Significant interactions between children's the variables of sex and children's reading
ability were not found.
Social Constructivist Theory
In addition to extending the research base in this area of shared literacy experience and
providing direction for practitioners, the present work also further informs the social
constructivist perspective on reading through articulation of the specific ways in which mothers
of different educational backgrounds scaffold the literacy growth of their sons, daughters, better,
and poorer readers. Application of the social-constructivist perspective to this area of study
indicates that children's literacy performance is related to parent-child interactions during these
episodes in much the same way that children's literacy performance is related to parent-child
interactions when parents read to children. In both cases, language analyses show that mothers'
higher level questions and richer commenting behaviors are associated with increased literacy
achievement for children .
Application of the social-constructivist theory to this area of investigation also extends the
usefulness of the theory for examining parental error correction interventions, an area not
examined in the case of parents reading to children. In short, the application of socialconstructivism to this area of study allows the results of this work to be more meaningfully
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
integrated with the results of other family literacy investigations, which in turn facilitates a more
cohesive understanding of the field of family literacy as a whole.
Limitations Important limitations regarding this work need to be noted. First, the power of the
research findings is limited by the nature of the single reading episodes in which each of the
mother-child pairs participated. It is likely that the validity of this work would be further
increased if participants had completed the reading sessions several times rather than just once.
While the requirement of a single reading session most likely increased participation rates, it is
recognized that the validity of the findings would be greater if multiple reading sessions had
been examined. Second, it is recognized that the presence of the tape recorder may have affected
the mother-child interactions, despite repeated requests by the researchers that the mothers help
their children in "as natural a way as possible". On this point, however, it is also important to
note that the presence of the tape recorder most likely influenced all participants in the same
direction, that is, to help their children in ways that they perceived as most desirable. A third
limitation of the study is that of text effects. Text effects for difficulty and genre
 have been reported in studies of shared reading. It is essential that
readers be reminded that any interpretations drawn from this work are relevant only to readings
of grade level, expository text. A fourth limitation of the study is in the area of experiment-wise
error. It must be noted that the possibility exists that one or more of the significant results
revealed within this paper were spurious, resulting from the large number of variables examined.
Finally, this work is limited by the theoretical lens through which it is viewed. We have chosen
to examine mother-child interactions during children's at-home reading from a socialconstructivist perspective that uses language analysis as its basis in the belief that this theoretical
stance is best suited for capturing and explaining the phenomena. A choice of a different
Mothers' Helping Behaviors
theoretical lens would most likely lead to the choice of different variables for examination,
different methods of analysis, and different conclusions drawn.
Summary and Conclusions This paper is built on the premise that the practice of children
reading at home is a highly recommended yet infrequently researched topic within the area of
family literacy. The findings suggest children's reading achievement, children's sex, and
mother's educational level are all factors that are significantly related to mother-child
interactions during children's at-home reading. Furthermore, the results of the analyses indicate
that unique within group profiles of mother-child interactions exist for each of the groups. The
findings from this work confirm the usefulness of applying a social-contructivist theoretical
stance to this type of shared literacy experience, allow for greater understanding of the
relationship between children's oral at-home reading practice and other family literacy
experiences, and provide direction to educators for educational interventions. Future research in
this area should include examining the helping behaviors of mothers of average ability readers in
contrast with those of accelerated and at-risk readers, creating and assessing interventions to
remedy the problematic interactions uncovered in this work, and documenting the chronological
development of the mother-child patterns revealed within this paper.