Adopting Disruptive Technologies in
Traditional Universities: Continuing
Education as an Incubator for Innovation
Walter Archer, University of Alberta
Randy Garrison, University of Alberta
Terry Anderson, University of Alberta
A recent book by Clayton M.
Christensen, Associate Professor of
Business at Harvard University,
discusses the sometimes devastating
impact in the corporate environment
of what he refers to as “disruptive
technologies.” Successful, wellmanaged firms that dominate their
markets have sometimes gone into a
sharp decline or even collapsed
when a new technology disrupts the
pattern of their market segment.
Other firms, however, have handled
such transitions smoothly,
maintaining their position of
dominance in the market by
employing specific techniques to
integrate the new and disruptive
Un livre récent de Clayton M.
Christensen, Professeur adjoint en
Administration des affaires à
l’Université Harvard, examine
l’impact parfois dévastateur dans le
milieu des affaires de ce qu’il
appelle les “technologies
perturbatrices.”
Les universités traditionnelles
axées sur la recherche dominent le
“marché” de l’éducation supérieure,
mais commencent à ressentir
l’impact des technologies
perturbatrices comme l’éducation à
distance. Elles pourraient s’inspirer
de l’étude de Christensen sur
l’impact des technologies dites
perturbatrices dans le monde des
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
INTRODUCTION
As employees of university continuing education units, we have become
used to the idea that we are working in a business. We have dutifully
studied articles and books about good business practices and have
attempted to apply them, where appropriate, in our practice of providing
continuing education. We have engaged in Total Quality Management, Re-
Engineering, and Just-In-Time learning. We have analyzed the trends in our
markets, we have listened to our customers, we have made investments
(including investments in technology) in products and services that our
customers have told us they want. Overall, by following what are widely
considered to be effective management practices we have improved our
practice of university continuing education, at least from the viewpoint of
technology into their operations.
Traditional research universities
enjoy a dominant position in the
higher education “market,” but they
are beginning to feel the impact of
disruptive technologies such as
distance education. They may
benefit not only from an
examination of the insights that
Christensen has derived from his
study of the impact of disruptive
technologies in the corporate
environment but also from a
selective application of the
techniques for coping with
disruptive technologies that
Christensen has found to be
effective in the business world.
Some of these techniques imply an
important role for continuing
education units as semiautonomous incubators of
disruptive innovations.
affaires. Elles pourraient aussi
sélectionner et appliquer les
techniques pour faire face aux
technologies perturbatrices que
Christensen considère efficaces dans
le monde des affaires. Certaines de
ces techniques impliquent un rôle
important pour les unités
d’éducation permanente comme
incubateurs semi-autonomes
d’innovations perturbatrices.
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
economic viability in the “business climate“ within which our units and our
universities operate.
However, a recent book suggests that we cannot always expect a happy
outcome from following good business practices. Harvard professor
Clayton M. Christensen, in his book, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail , cites many cases of highly
successful companies, leaders in their fields and acknowledged to be
exemplars of good management practice, that have rather suddenly lost
their dominant position in the market and in some cases gone bankrupt.
This happened not because they suddenly adopted bad management
practices, but precisely because they persisted in adhering to good
management practices.
Christensen’s analysis of why this happens is fascinating in itself, but
even more so because it may have implications for universities in general,
and their continuing education units in particular. He argues that the
unexpected failure of once-dominant firms is often related to a change in
the technology employed in their industry.
Although universities currently enjoy a dominant position in the postsecondary education “industry,” this “industry” now seems to be entering a
period of rapid technological change — the sort of period in which the
leading firms in an industry may find themselves abruptly eclipsed by new
players. The next few years could see a sudden change for the worse in the
position of universities in an educational marketplace that is being
transformed by new technologies.
Such a decline is far from inevitable, however. Christensen notes ways in
which successful firms can continue to be successful while passing through
a technological discontinuity. Applying his suggestions, selectively, to the
university context could result in a new and critically important role for the
continuing education unit within the university.
DISRUPTIVE AND SUSTAINING TECHNOLOGIES
According to Christensen, the main reason why successful and apparently
well-run organizations can and do fail is their failure to recognize the
distinction between sustaining technologies and disruptive technologies.
Sustaining technologies improve the performance of established products.
Indeed, they are often developed by successful companies, the leaders in
their fields, for and in close collaboration with their most important and
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
lucrative clients. In other words, they are often the result of those successful
firms following the excellent business practice of listening closely to their
customers. Technologies, in the sense that Christensen uses the word, may
refer to either “hard” technologies that result in new types of physical
goods (e.g., hard disk drives) or “soft” technologies that result in new ways
of organizing work or providing a service (e.g., new systems of pricing,
inventory, or production).
In contrast to sustaining technologies, which improve the performance of
established products, disruptive technologies often result in worse product
performance in the mainstream market, at least in the short run, for example, a
gravel truck unable to haul as big a load as existing models. “But they have
other features that a few fringe (and generally new) customers value.
Products based on disruptive technologies are typically cheaper, simpler,
smaller, and, frequently, more convenient to use.” (p. xv). One example of
such a technology cited by Christensen is the transistor, as compared to
vacuum tubes. He suggests that in the near future “internet appliances” may
become disruptive technologies, as compared to personal computers (p. xv).
In the brief summary that follows, Christensen (p. xvii) suggests why
successful companies often fail to invest aggressively in disruptive
technologies, which costs them in the long run.
First, disruptive products are simpler and cheaper; they generally
promise lower margins, not greater profits. Second, disruptive
technologies typically are first commercialized in emerging or
insignificant markets. And third, leading firms’ most profitable
customers generally don’t want, and indeed initially can’t use,
products based on disruptive technologies. By and large, a disruptive
technology is initially embraced by the least profitable customers in a
market. Hence, most companies with a practised discipline of
listening to their best customers and identifying new products that
promise greater profitability and growth are rarely able to build a case
for investing in disruptive technologies until it is too late.
Christensen makes a convincing case that the very rational refusal by
successful companies such as Sears and DEC to invest in disruptive hard or
soft technologies can lead to their rather sudden loss of dominance in their
respective fields, if not their total disappearance. But, what does this have
to do with university continuing education? In the following sections, it
will be argued that much of Christensen’s analysis of cases in which
disruptive technologies have undermined the position of previously
successful business firms can be applied directly to the university context.
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
Furthermore, his recommendations for coping with the effects of disruptive
technologies can also be applied in this context.
THE UNIVERSITY CONTEXT
Public universities are not business firms. There are enough similarities,
however, to allow Christensen’s insights, built on his observations in the
business environment, to be selectively applied to universities.
It should first be noted that the distribution of power is considerably
different at universities than it is in business firms. Christensen discusses
(pp. 103–104) the limited power that employees of a corporation have to
either thwart or further the directions of their senior administrators. In
contrast, as a result of a consensual governance structure, the ability of the
lower ranks in universities to assert their will, individually and collectively,
is considerably greater. With this in mind, the university faculty will be
referred to in the discussion that follows as a quasi-distinct entity, as
compared to “the corporate university” led by its administrators, board,
and public funders.
It should also be noted that universities, as opposed to corporations,
have some of the characteristics of a service-providing government
bureaucracy, which is most evident in undergraduate teaching. The
university environment is quite unlike the corporate environment in that
there is a more or less captive clientele, there is little or no competition, and
the effects of good or poor performance on the part of the person dealing
with the client, that is, the professor, are neither serious nor cumulative. In
short, professors’ bank accounts and future career prospects are not much
affected by undergraduate teaching, so long as their performance is
maintained above a certain minimal level.
In research-intensive universities, this picture changes drastically when
we shift the focus to the research function of the university. Intensively
competitive, successes in attracting research funding and publishing the
results of research are trumpeted in the curricula vitae of individual
professors, in the publicity documents of their departments, and by the
university as a whole. Success, or lack of it, does have a serious and
cumulative effect on the careers of professors: research funding attracts
more research funding and more graduate students to do the detail work;
publications generate more publications, which in turn attract more
students and more funding. Research is the lucrative part of the “market”
addressed by research universities and the professors who work in, and to a
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
large extent run them. Part of the profit derived from this segment of the
market is in money (salary increments), but much of it is in those
intangibles that are so important to professors, namely, prestige among
peers and career satisfaction .
Applying Christensen’s terms to the environment of public universities
in Canada, it is easy to identify undergraduates as being among the
university’s “least profitable customers” (continuing education students
have also fallen into this category, but this may be changing). The monetary
return derived from these undergraduate “customers” is largely controlled
by provincial government regulations, and competition is much reduced by
factors of geography. For most professors, teaching undergraduates
generates little in the way of the intangible rewards of prestige among
peers, and it takes time away from the graduate student supervision and
research activities that do generate such rewards. Therefore, there is little
incentive among research-intensive universities and their professors to pay
much attention to this unprofitable “market segment.”
It is among a few customers with special needs in this unprofitable
market segment that some mainly small and new institutions have
nurtured a disruptive technology — the same type of market segment,
according to Christensen, where disruptive technologies first penetrate the
business environment. The special needs customers in the higher education
market are those who cannot access a conventional university program, and
the disruptive technology that has emerged is distance education. An
increasingly well-known example of a new, small institution that has
mastered this disruptive technology by serving these low-profit-margin
customers is Athabasca University. An interesting parallel to the leading
corporations that have cheerfully relinquished the lower end of the market
to such small, upstart users of disruptive technology is the University of
Alberta. Over the past two decades, it has largely withdrawn from its
previously extensive program of off-campus delivery of undergraduate
programs as its professors were no longer willing to invest the time and
effort required to take part in such programs, even when there were
requests from communities. The University of Alberta professors (and the
institution, in its strategic planning documents) have preferred to focus
instead on the more profitable market segments of research and graduate
programs, leaving the bottom end of the market to Athabasca. That small,
new institution could thrive in this apparently insignificant segment of the
market, while the large, established University of Alberta could not.
In “retreating upmarket,” the University of Alberta and its professors
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
have mirrored the practice of such leading corporations as US Steel, which
abandoned the making of rebar, the lowest segment of the steel market, to
small, new companies that had learned how to use a new, disruptive
technology, the mini-mill. US Steel and the other leading steel companies
moved upmarket, concentrating on higher grade, higher margin products
for their best (most lucrative) customers. Ironically, those companies that
mastered the mini-mill in low margin rebar have followed the leading
companies upmarket, using their steadily improving mini-mills to produce
higher quality steels for the more lucrative segments of the market, with a
resulting increase in overall market share and profitability.
An interesting parallel in the educational marketplace of this process of a
new player establishing itself at the bottom of the market and then moving
upmarket is Athabasca University’s recent and successful launching of two
new distance–delivered graduate programs. The upmarket position of
established institutions such as the University of Alberta is beginning to
look less secure, although at present the authors are not aware of any
Canadian public university having to actually close its doors, the fate of
many of the corporations mentioned by Christensen that failed to cope with
disruptive technologies and were subsequently eclipsed by new more
savvy competitors. As Turoff and others have noted, however, we are
now entering an era of worldwide competition in higher education, and the
survival of the fittest dynamic that has governed business for so long may
start to claim casualties among universities as well.
DISTANCE EDUCATION AS A DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGY
IN UNIVERSITY EDUCATION
University education has been delivered, for many decades, mainly via that
mixture of hard and soft technologies referred to as the lecture method. The
“hard” aspect of this technology consists of a physical lecture hall that may
be enhanced with various audio-visual equipment. The “soft” aspect of the
lecture method consists of the organizational framework devised by the
individual instructor within a discipline-based content and disseminated in
real time. Various sustaining technologies have refined and improved
lectures over time, including improved audio-visual equipment and
presentation software, and in some cases better training of lecturers and
more effective methods of collecting evaluative feedback from students on a
systematic basis.
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
Distance education is in dramatic contrast to this standard “product” in
that it eliminates the “same place” feature of the lecture method, and in
some forms of distance education the “same time” feature as well. It may
also eliminate the lecturer per se, with this function being divided among
“subject matter experts,” instructional designers, and course section tutors.
Clearly, it is a discontinuity in university education. However, according to
Christensen, discontinuity with previous practice is not the defining feature
of disruptive innovations; some sustaining technologies have also been
discontinuous. Thus, it is necessary to consider whether distance delivery
of university education meets his description of a disruptive technology,
that is, 1) that it results in a product that is typically smaller, cheaper, and
less profitable to the producer; 2) that it is first commercialized in emerging
or insignificant markets; and 3) that leading firms’ most profitable
customers generally do not want products based on disruptive technologies
— these products are initially embraced by the least profitable customers in
1. Is distance education simpler and cheaper than the lecture method, and
does it promise lower margins, not higher profits? Yes, it is cheaper, if
not necessarily simpler, for certain students to enrol in a distance
program rather than moving to a city where there is a university
and perhaps giving up employment in order to accommodate the
rigid schedule of conventional programs. And, yes, it certainly
does offer a lower monetary margin to the conventional campusbased university, as it is generally more expensive to create a
special program for distance students than to add them into
existing on-campus courses.1 In terms of the non–monetary reward
system, creating and teaching distance courses is unlikely to earn a
professor the prestige that the same amount of time invested in
research and publication would garner.
2. Was it first commercialized in emerging or insignificant markets? Yes,
distance education, in both the correspondence format developed
in the 19th century and the technology-enhanced form pioneered
by the British Open University in the 20th century, has addressed
small groups of learners peripheral to the central concerns of
universities, whose core clientele has traditionally been the young
adults who are able to attend on-campus lectures.
3. Is it the case that universities’ most profitable customers generally do not
want, and indeed initially cannot use, products based on distance
education? Here Christensen’s criteria are less successfully met.
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
Although few of the universities’ most profitable customers (i.e.,
graduate students) initially accessed distance-delivered programs,
this may have been largely the result of university policies
enforced by such gatekeepers as deans of graduate studies . The initial lack of distance-delivered programs
at the graduate level may, therefore, have been the result of a
reluctance to provide such programs, rather than these “most
profitable customers” not wanting them. Whatever the cause of the
initial lack of penetration of distance education into this segment
of the market, the situation is changing very rapidly with the
recent introduction of distance-delivered graduate programs from
new providers such as Athabasca University, and the entry into the
market of established leading universities such as Queen’s and
Western Ontario with their upscale, distance-delivered MBAs.
Considering the above three defining criteria, distance delivery of
university education does seem to correspond relatively well to
Christensen’s description of a disruptive technology. What, then, should
established conventional universities do to avoid having their position in
the educational marketplace eroded by the disruptive technology of
distance education? Christensen has some suggestions based on his
observations in the world of business that might possibly be applied
selectively in the higher education environment by universities wanting to
ensure their continued survival and success.
The following section discusses four techniques which, according to
Christensen, have allowed current leading business firms to cope
successfully with disruptive technologies in the corporate environment. The
final sections suggest how these techniques can be and are being applied in
the university environment.
HOW A LEADING FIRM CAN ENCOUNTER A DISRUPTIVE
TECHNOLOGY AND LIVE TO TELL THE TALE
Christensen describes four techniques by which leading firms can defend
their position in the face of the intrusion of a disruptive technology into
their market (pp. xix–xxii, 99, and 101–211 passim). These techniques are
based on what he refers to (p. 99) as four principles of organizational
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 24, No. 2, Automne
1. Resource dependence: Customers effectively control the patterns
of resource allocation in well-run companies.
2. Small markets don’t solve the growth needs of large companies.
3. The ultimate uses or applications for disruptive technologies are
unknowable in advance. Failure is an intrinsic step toward success.
4. Technology supply may not equal market demand. The attributes
that make disruptive technologies unattractive in established
markets often are the very ones that constitute their greatest value
in emerging markets.
Clearly, these principles tend to militate against the adoption of
disruptive technologies by successful, established firms. Managers who
have tried to introduce disruptive technologies directly in the teeth of these
principles have almost always failed. For example, managers at DEC, the
leader in the mini-computer market, failed repeatedly in their attempts to
penetrate the personal computer market. However, Christensen (p. 99) goes
on to note techniques that successful managers of established firms have
used, in judo fashion, to turn these principles to their advantage while
successfully adopting disruptive technologies.
1. They embedded projects to develop and commercialize disruptive
technologies within an organization whose customers needed
2. They placed projects to develop disruptive technologies in
organizations small enough to get excited about small
opportunities and small wins.
3. They planned to fail early and inexpensively in the search for the
market for a disruptive technology. They found that their markets
generally coalesced through an iterative process of trial, learning,
and trial again.
4. When commercializing disruptive technologies, they found or
developed new markets that valued the attributes of the disruptive
products, rather than search for a technological breakthrough so
that the disruptive product could compete as a sustaining
technology in mainstream markets.
How can these same techniques be used to successfully introduce
disruptive technologies such as distance education into a conventional
university?
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
CONTINUING STUDIES AS INCUBATOR
How can universities invest in disruptive technologies that may be crucial
to their long-term success, if not survival; that is, how might they apply the
four judo-like strategies described above in the university context? The
answer to this question will vary from one institution to the next, as each is
operating in a somewhat different environment and has a unique history
and structure. The University of Alberta will be offered as a case study of an
established conventional university, that has developed some strategies that
correspond for the most part to some of those developed by Christensen in
the corporate environment.
Christensen’s first two strategies outlined above assert that the only
viable means for a large, successful, established organization to invest in
and develop disruptive technologies is to create (or acquire) a unit that can
operate relatively independently of the rest of the organization. This unit
must be protected from the corporate demands, success criteria, and
volume demands of the mainstream organization in order for it to
successfully define and develop new markets. In most universities such a
unit already exists under the various designations of “continuing
education,” “continuing studies,” “extension,” or “outreach.” These units
generally have a cost structure that can achieve profitability with small
markets and low margins and a decision-making process that supports
rapid prototyping and development of courses and learning products. This
is the ideal context in which to incubate disruptive technologies such as
distance education. As Christensen states:
The innovator’s task is to ensure that this innovation — the disruptive
technology that doesn’t make sense — is taken seriously within the
company without putting at risk the needs of present customers who
provide profit and growth (p. xxiv).
In the university context, with its much higher level of employee
(professoriate) control, this safeguarding of the interests of present
customers is particularly necessary, as their interests are closely bound up
with the interests of the faculty. In conventional universities it is of utmost
importance to recognize the legitimate needs of full-time, on-campus
learners and the traditional, core values of the institution, including the
intense interest of the professoriate in the research function. If these
interests are not safeguarded, the mainstream of the university faculty,
administration, and even students will most certainly resist disruptive
developments such as the introduction of distance delivery of instruction.
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
For internal political reasons, the continuing mainstream operation of the
university must be maintained in a state of reasonable contentment, so that
both the university as a corporate entity and its powerful professoriate will
continue to tolerate and support the “skunkworks” that operates outside
the mainstream and is charged with adopting disruptive technologies such
as distance education. Attention to new, disruptive technologies should not
preclude sufficient attention being paid to the sustaining technologies that
will allow the central core of the institution to maintain its favourable
position in the marketplace.
The Faculty of Extension at the University of Alberta has recently been
given the mandate to provide leadership to the University in adopting
learning technologies to enhance on-campus learning, as well as to improve
access to off-campus learners. A unit of the faculty, Academic Technologies
for Learning (ATL) ( was created and funded
centrally by the University specifically to support, champion, and advocate
application of instructional technologies to the teaching/learning function
of the University. In retrospect, this move has proven to be very insightful.
Although the reasons for this assignment of responsibility to the marginal
Faculty of Extension were complex, the central administration understood
the need to position this “disruptive unit” somewhat outside the
mainstream of the University — a technique that Christensen suggests in
the business context. That is, the function of adopting both sustaining and
disruptive technologies was placed in a faculty committed to change, with a
record of entrepreneurial initiatives and an understanding of emerging
markets, audiences, and technologies.
Leadership of such units, which are on the one hand charged with
development of disruptive technologies and on the other hand have to
maintain credibility within the value system of the parent institution, is of
critical importance. ATL and Extension are led by academics who have a
responsibility for teaching and research that is similar to academics in the
mainline departments. This equivalent status and job skill set are critically
important for the survival of the disruptive unit within the power context
of the modern research university . In other words,
the inhabitants of the skunkworks should not smell entirely different from
the inhabitants of the main part of the institution.
Following the establishment of ATL, the Faculty of Extension identified
the development of an Institute for Professional Development (IPD) as a
major strategic initiative. The purpose of the institute is to be a catalyst and
coordinator for professional development activities as well as to provide
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
services in the areas of market research, program planning, knowledge
management, and research in professional development. The establishment
of the institute not only draws attention to an important and growing
market but also provides an opportunity for buy-in and ownership of the
initiative by the mainstream faculties and departments. In this way it
supports faculties in partnering with professional associations and business
organizations.
The IPD and ATL are semi-autonomous units designed to help the
University maximize the advantages of disruptive technologies by
operating somewhat outside the often cumbersome set of rules and
demands that apply within the main body of the institution. Each provides
consulting expertise and training opportunities, both mediated and face-toface. In addition, ATL maintains a 35-station production studio where
faculty and graduate students receive technological and pedagogical
assistance in creating or converting courses using technological delivery
and support. The IPD also focuses on knowledge management, in which
technologies are used to develop and apply knowledge-based decisions
“just in time” to practical workplace problems. Both the IPD and ATL are
closely analogous to the “spin-off” units implied by Christensen’s first two
techniques for successfully coping with disruptive technologies in the
corporate environment.
Christensen’s third technique — failing early and inexpensively in the
search for a market for the disruptive technology — presents a considerable
challenge to the core values of the conventional university as it is based on
the principle that applications of disruptive technologies are unknowable in
advance and failure is an intrinsic step toward success. Prestigious
universities do not like to fail; their self-concept is tied to a process of
carefully building up a cadre of experts in a given field before offering any
teaching/learning program in that field. The expected result is an excellent
program that will not fail to attract students, and will add to the prestige of
the institution. Clearly, this can be a very expensive and slow process, as the
academic staff who constitute this cadre of expertise demand a long-term —
and therefore expensive — commitment from the university (i.e., a tenured
appointment), and they often take years or decades to establish themselves
as recognized experts in their field.
As noted previously, continuing education units at universities have
been exceptions to the general rule that development of a new university
program is a slow and expensive, but almost always successful,
undertaking. Known for rapid prototyping and production of new
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
programs and quick reaction to emerging markets, continuing education
units have done this through extensive use of adjunct staff hired on a justin-time basis, with no expensive long-term commitment. Their quickly
conceived and implemented programs often fail, but this failure is
inexpensive and becomes evident early, as Christensen’s third technique
recommends.
This process of failing early and inexpensively has been tolerated by
universities as long as their small, marginal continuing education unit
operates only at the bottom of the market, particularly in non-degree
programs. When there is an attempt to apply this technique at a higher
level in the market place, a collision with the core values of the university
occurs. A current example at the University of Alberta is an attempt by the
Faculty of Extension to do rapid prototyping and production of a new
Master of Arts in Communications and Technology (MACT). This is to be a
distance-delivered program oriented toward an emerging profession of
knowledge workers whose primary preoccupation is the use of technology
for internal and external communications in various types of organizations.
So new, this profession does not have a name, much less a tradition of
university programs to help define it. Therefore, the designing and
implementation of a program aimed at this emerging profession will
necessarily be a process similar to that employed by the business managers
mentioned by Christensen who discovered a market for their new,
disruptive product through a process of trial, learning, and trial again.
Since the knowledge workers who constitute this emerging market
generally have baccalaureate degrees, any program addressing their needs
should logically be a graduate program. However, trying to implement a
graduate program at a well-established conventional university through a
rapid, iterative process of trial, failure, adjustment of the program, retrial,
etc., conflicts with the graduate program approval process; this requires the
build-up of a cadre of tenure track staff with proven academic expertise
before the program can be offered, not to mention the considerable amount
of time consumed in the several stages of the approval process itself. The
skunkworks (in this case, the Faculty of Extension) cannot use the “try-failadjust-retry” technique recommended by Christensen under this set of
conditions laid down by the parent university: it is impossible to build up a
permanent, expensive body of on-campus expertise before the outlines of
the program become clear, which may only happen after a number of trial
offerings in the emerging market, and the long process of program approval
may mean that the market opportunity has been lost to another player
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
before the product is ready. These and other contradictions between what is
required for the marketing of a disruptive product and the processes
demanded by the established core of the institution may mean that the
MACT may never be implemented. This situation, where the autonomy of
the skunkworks is compromised by the necessity of having a new product
approved according to the rules laid down by the parent institution,
illustrates why Christensen’s suggestion that disruptive technologies
should first be implemented by autonomous units within the overall
organization is so important.
In higher education, serving new client groups best defines disruptive
technologies, and this corresponds closely to Christensen’s fourth technique
for successful introduction of a disruptive technology, that is, introducing it
into a new market segment. Perhaps the greatest opportunity to incubate
disruptive technologies, and one that is consistent with the mandate and
leadership of the continuing studies units, is addressing the continuing
professional development (CPD) needs of part-time learners. This client
group is not exactly new, as universities have for many years served this
need with non-degree programs, but it has always been among the
university’s “least profitable clients” discussed earlier in this paper. That
situation is changing, as demand for CPD is shifting to longer, graduatelevel programs. The part-time learner who is already well educated and is
willing to pay substantial fees to access a graduate-level program is
essentially the basis of a new client group, one that is profitable to the
university in both monetary terms and in terms of the intangible rewards
that accrue to academic staff who work with graduate students.
Providing CPD learning opportunities to experienced, working
professionals presents additional delivery challenges, as compared to those
presented by more traditional university students. These clients of the
university are less tolerant of passive approaches to learning; for them,
learning must be relevant and practical . The challenge in
CPD courses is to translate relevant knowledge to practice. Through
collaborative learning activities, learners attempt to make sense of the new
knowledge within the context of their experiences and workplace.
Moreover, these learning activities must be conveniently accessed.
Anderson provides data suggesting that critical thinking and a
community of learners can be created among widely dispersed
professionals engaged in audio conference-based distance delivery. There is
abundant evidence from many sources that other forms of
distance delivery technologies can also be used effectively in this segment
Revue canadienne de l’éducation permanente universitaire
Vol. 25, No. 1, Printemps
of the higher education marketplace. If the difficulties with university
approval of distance-delivered graduate programs, discussed earlier in this
paper, can be surmounted, this relatively new group of clients can also be
served through part-time professional Master’s degrees that are consistent
with the overall goals of the research university.
The fact that distance-delivered CPD programs also have the ability to
operate on a cost-recovery basis is a helpful, or even necessary, factor for
enticing conventional universities to invest in disruptive technologies for
delivery of such programs. CPD is a market segment in which it is possible
to serve a new group of clients with little financial risk. Doing this out of a
small, semi-autonomous unit such as the Institute for Professional
Development at the University of Alberta makes use of all four of
Christensen’s techniques for dealing with disruptive technologies.
CONCLUSION
In ignoring disruptive communication and learning technologies,
traditional research universities risk sliding into mediocrity and perhaps
irrelevancy as far as the teaching function of the university is concerned. As
in the corporate environment studied by Christensen, a “retreat upmarket”
in response to competitors who have mastered disruptive technologies in
the lower segments of the market is not likely to be a successful strategy.
These more aggressive institutions will simply expand their teaching/
learning operations upmarket as well, eventually leaving only the research
function to the traditional research-intensive university. A high-quality
teaching/learning function has always been the hallmark of leading
universities; an institution that has abandoned the teaching/learning
function may, perhaps, be an excellent research institute, but it will not be a
university.
Traditional research universities must prepare themselves for changes in
the marketplace of higher education by incubating disruptive communication
and learning technologies. This is best done in a semi-autonomous unit, such
as continuing studies, which can address new markets with low margins.2 The
directors of continuing studies should recognize this opportunity for
leadership. Paradoxically, it is also an opportunity for the marginal continuing
studies unit to become more integrated into the mainstream of the university.
Although continuing studies units have always lived with paradoxes, this
should be a creative and invigorating one.
Canadian Journal of University Continuing Education
Vol. 25, No. 1, Spring
Adopting Disruptive Technologies in Traditional Universities
The economics of large-scale, distance-delivered programs are
completely different, particularly for institutions that do only
distance delivery .
Moving the incubated innovations from the semi-autonomous,
peripheral unit into the main body of the institution is a
substantial problem—a subject for another paper.