Safety in Numbers: Learning Categories from Few Examples with Multi Model
Knowledge Transfer
Tatiana Tommasi1,2 , Francesco Orabona3 , Barbara Caputo1
1Idiap Research Institute, Martigny CH
2Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, EPFL, Lausanne CH
3DSI, Universita’ degli Studi di Milano, Milan IT
 , , 
Learning object categories from small samples is a challenging problem, where machine learning tools can in general provide very few guarantees. Exploiting prior knowledge may be useful to reproduce the human capability of
recognizing objects even from only one single view. This
paper presents an SVM-based model adaptation algorithm
able to select and weight appropriately prior knowledge
coming from different categories. The method relies on the
solution of a convex optimization problem which ensures to
have the minimal leave-one-out error on the training set.
Experiments on a subset of the Caltech-256 database show
that the proposed method produces better results than both
choosing one single prior model, and transferring from all
previous experience in a ﬂat uninformative way.
1. Introduction
The ability to learn from few samples is a hallmark of human intelligence. We rapidly and reliably learn many kinds
of regularities and this enables us to make inductive inference even from only small amount of data .
Although current state of the art categorization methods
reach impressive results on difﬁcult datasets , they don’t
handle well small training sets. Without additional information, learning from few examples always reduces to an
ill-posed optimization problem. A possible solution is exploiting prior knowledge, a strategy known in the literature
as learning to learn, knowledge transfer or transfer learning.
The basic intuition is that, if a system has already
learned k categories, learning the k + 1 should be easier,
even from one or few training samples . Besides boosting the learning process, knowledge transfer can give three
other advantages ( , see Figure 1): (1) higher start: the
initial performance is higher (one-shot learning); (2) higher
slope: performance grows faster, and (3) higher asymptote:
Figure 1. Three ways in which transfer might improve learning .
the ﬁnal performance is better.
The contribution of this paper is a method for learning
object categories from few examples. We focus on three
key issues for knowledge transfer: how to transfer, what to
transfer and when to transfer . We propose a discriminative method based on Least Square Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) (how to transfer) that learns the new
class through adaptation. We deﬁne the prior knowledge as
the hyperplanes of the classiﬁers w′
j, j = 1, · · · , k of the
k classes already learned (what to transfer). Hence knowledge transfer is equivalent to constrain the hyperplanes w
of the k + 1 new category to be close to those of a subset of the k classes. This strategy is in between the choice
of transferring acritically from all previously learned models and transferring from one single model . We
learn the sub-set of classes from where to transfer, and how
much to transfer from each of them, via the Leave-One-Out
(LOO) error on the training set. Determining how much to
transfer helps avoiding negative transfer. Therefore, in case
of non-informative prior knowledge, transfer might be disregarded completely (when to transfer).
Experiments on various subsets of the Caltech-256 
database show that our approach consistently reproduces
the curve depicted in Figure 1 with a higher start, and higher
slope compared to what is obtained by not exploiting prior
knowledge, and to current state of the art knowledge transfer approaches . Furthermore, when the number k
of known classes grows, our algorithm presents a one-shot
learning behaviour.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: we give an
overview of previous work in Section 2. Section 3 describes
LS-SVM and the knowledge transfer algorithm in , on
which we build. Section 4 describes our new algorithm and
discusses its properties. Experimental results are reported
in Section 5. We conclude with an overall discussion and
pointing out possible avenues for future research.
2. Related Work
Several authors addressed in the past the issues of what,
how and when to transfer. We review below the most prominent approaches.
What to Transfer. We can ﬁnd three answers to this
question in the literature (see for a survey). The ﬁrst is
the instance-transfer approach: although the source domain
data cannot be reused directly, there are certain parts of
them that can still be considered together with a few labelled
data in the target domain.
A second solution is deﬁned
by transferring feature representations. It means learning
a common feature structure, e.g. a kernel in SVM-based
approaches, from different domains that can bridge related
tasks. The third strategy can be described as parametertransfer approach. It assumes that the source task and the
target tasks share some parameters of their model or priors.
How to Transfer. Wu and Dietterich transferred source
training examples either as support vectors or as constraints
(or both) and demonstrated improved image classiﬁcation
by SVMs . Fei-Fei et al. proposed a Bayesian transfer learning approach for object recognition that learns a
common prior over visual classiﬁer parameters. Zweig and
Weinshall investigated transfer learning with a method
based on combining object classiﬁers from different hierarchical levels into a single classiﬁer. Using discriminative (maximum margin) object models, Fink developed a
method that learns distance metrics from related problems.
Quattoni et al. proposed to use knowledge transfer in
an unsupervised setting learning a representation based on
kernel distances to available unlabelled data.
When to Transfer. Works focusing on when to transfer evaluate the limit of transfer learning power. Rosenstain
et al. showed empirically that if two tasks are dissimilar, then the transferring hurts the performance on the target task. Ideally, a transfer method should produce positive
transfer between appropriately related tasks while avoiding
negative transfer when the tasks are not a good match. However it might be easier to avoid negative transfer if, given
multiple source tasks, one transfers from several or all of
Research on knowledge transfer is still in its infancy,
especially applied to object recognition.
Although there
are many publication in this area, given the slightly different tasks deﬁned in each paper, none of them compare
against the others. Moreover there is not an ofﬁcial testbed
database, nor a standard experimental setup. In this work
we propose a reproducible experimental setting that can be
used in the future to test new knowledge transfer algorithms
and we benchmark our algorithm against two other methods
in literature . We address three open problems of :
(1) the possibility that a sophisticated multimodal prior is
beneﬁcial in learning; (2) if it is easier to learn new categories which are similar to some of the “prior” categories;
(3) if exist another point of view besides the Bayesian one
that allows to incorporate prior knowledge.
We present
a discriminative method which exploits a combination of
multiple visual features and selects automatically the most
useful prior knowledge models to use when learning a new
3. Problem Statement
Consider the following scenario. We have k visual categories and a classiﬁer trained to distinguish each of them
from background. This corresponds to deﬁne k functions
fj(x) →{1, −1}, j = 1, ..., k, such that the image x is assigned to the jth category if and only if fj(x) = 1. Now
suppose that we want to learn a new k + 1 category from
just one or few instances, plus some background examples.
To obtain fk+1 we can train using only the available data, or
we can take advantage of what already learned. In the following we brieﬂy review the LS-SVM theory and how it can
be used in a model adaptation framework . We review
how this approach can be formulated to derive a knowledge
transfer algorithm that exploits prior knowledge from only
one of the k classes (Section 3.1). The contribution of
this paper is how to extend this method to exploit all the
suitable prior knowledge. The used strategy is presented in
Section 4.
3.1. LS-SVM Adaptation Method: learning from
small samples
Suppose to have a binary problem and a set of l samples
i=1, where xi ∈X ⊂Rd is an input vector describing the ith sample and yi ∈Y = {−1, 1} is its label.
We want to learn a linear function f(x) = w · φ(x) + b
which assigns the correct label to an unseen test sample x.
φ(x) is used to map the input samples to a high dimensional
feature space, induced by a kernel function K(x, x′) =
φ(x) · φ(x′) . In LS-SVM the model parameters (w, b)
are found by solving the following optimisation problem:
[yi −w · φ(xi) −b]2 .
It can be shown that the optimal w is expressed by
i=1 αiφ(xi), and (ααα, b) are found solving
where K is the kernel matrix. Let us call G the ﬁrst term in
left-hand side of (2). The least-square optimisation problem
can be solved by simply inverting G. Another advantage of
the LS-SVM formulation is that it gives the possibility to
write the LOO error in closed form . The LOO error is
an unbiased estimator of the classiﬁer generalization error
and can be used for model selection .
Slightly changing the classical LS-SVM regularization
term, it is possible to deﬁne a learning method based on
adaptation . The idea is to constrain a new model to be
close to one of a set of pre-trained models:
2∥w −βw′∥2 + C
[yi −w · φ(xi) −b]2,
where w′ is the parameter describing the old model and β
is a scaling factor in (0, 1) necessary to control the degree
to which the new model is close to the old one. The LOO
error in the modiﬁed formulation is:
(−i)[ˆy1, . . . , ˆyi−1, ˆyi+1, . . . , ˆyl, 0]T , G(−i) is
the matrix obtained when the ith sample is omitted in G and
ˆyi = (w′ · φ(xi)), i.e. ˆyi is the prediction of the old model
on the ith sample. r(−i)
is then used to obtain an estimate
of the Weighted Error Rate (WER) :
ζiΨ{yir(−i)
1 + exp{−10 ∗z}
if yi = +1
if yi = −1 .
Here l+ and l−represent the number of positive and negative examples respectively. Introducing the weighting factors ζi is asymptotically equivalent to re-sampling the data
so that object and non-object examples are balanced .
Hence, without explicitly running cross validation experiments, the best learning parameters which maximise the
LS-SVM model generalisation performance can be found as
those minimising WER. Since r(−i)
depends on β, for each
known model it is possible to ﬁnd the best β producing the
lowest WER. Then, comparing all the criterion errors, the
lowest one will identify the best prior knowledge model to
use for adaptation.
To further increase robustness to unbalanced distributions of the data, the model parameters (w, b) can be found
via minimisation of a regularised weighted least-square loss
function :
ζi[yi −w · φ(xi) −b]2.
This introduces just a small variation in the LS-SVM solution: the optimal model parameters (ααα, b) are deﬁned by a
modiﬁed system of linear equations :
where W = diag{ζ−1
2 , . . . , ζ−1
} and ζi are deﬁned
as in (7). Hence the model adaptation method changes to its
weighted formulation :
2∥w −βw′∥2 + C
ζi[yi −w · φ(xi) −b]2 . (10)
In this way the weighting factors ζi take into account that
the proportion of positive and negative examples in the
training data are known not to be representative of the operational class frequencies. In particular they help to balance
the contribution of the sets of positive and negative examples to the data misﬁt term .
Experiments show that this method is able to learn new
visual categories from few examples. However, the algorithm can choose only one prior known model.
will show in Section 5, this is not always the best solution.
Moreover this approach can suffer for instability in time, i.e.
when the number of training images increases.
4. Multi Model Knowledge Transfer
Consider the following situation. Suppose to be given
the task to learn from few examples the class motorbike,
having already learned the categories bicycle, car, dog and
cat. We would expect to achieve better results by transferring from bicycle and car, rather than transferring from bicycle or car. Also, we would expect better results compared
to transferring equally from all known categories, as cat and
dog might induce negative transfer.
This kind of scenario motivates us to design a knowledge
transfer algorithm able to ﬁnd autonomously the best subset of known models from where to transfer. In the rest of
the Section we deﬁne the new model (Section 4.1) and we
discuss its properties (Section 4.2).
4.1. Multi Model Knowledge Transfer: Deﬁnition
We start from Equation (10) and we rewrite it substituting the single coefﬁcient β with a vector βββ containing as
many elements as the number of prior models, k:
ζi(yi −w · φ(xi) −b)2 .
Here βββ has to be chosen in the unitary ball, i.e. ∥βββ∥2 ≤1.
It is similar to the regularization term used in LS-SVM in
Equation (1), and it is a natural generalization of the original
constraint 0 ≤β ≤1. This term is necessary to avoid
overﬁtting problems. They can happen when the number of
known models is large compared to the number of training
samples. With this new formulation the optimal solution is
Hence w is expressed as a weighted sum of the pre-trained
models scaled by the parameters βj, plus the new model
built on the incoming training data.
To ﬁnd the optimal βββ we use again the possibility of LS-
SVM to write the LOO error in closed form:
= yi −˜yi =
i(j) = G−1
1, . . . , ˆyj
i+1, . . . , ˆyj
l , 0]T , ˆyj
j·φ(xi)) and ˜yi are the LOO predictions. By multiplying
by yi we obtain:
yi˜yi = 1 −yi
The best values of βj are those minimizing the LOO error,
i.e. the values producing positive values for yi˜yi, for each
i. However minimizing directly the sign of those quantities
would result in a non-convex formulation with many local
minima. We propose instead the following loss function:
loss(yi, ˜yi) = ζi max [1 −yi˜yi, 0]
This loss function is similar to the hinge loss used in Support Vector Machines. It is a convex upper bound to the
LOO misclassiﬁcation loss and favours solution in which ˜yi
has a value of 1, beside having the same sign of yi. Moreover it has a smoothing effect, similar to the function in (6).
Finally, the objective function is:
loss(yi, ˜yi)
∥βββ∥2 ≤1 .
Notice that this formulation is equivalent to the more common optimization problem (1/2)∥βββ∥2
2 + CJ for a proper
choice of C . By minimizing J we can ﬁnd the best values of βj to weight the known prior models in the transfer
learning process. The scaling factors ζi are introduced in
the loss function to take care of the data unbalance between
positive and negative samples in the training set, as in .
We implement the optimization process using a simple
projected sub-gradient descent algorithm, where at each iteration βββ is projected onto the l2-sphere, ∥βββ∥2 ≤1.
4.2. Multi Model Knowledge Transfer: Properties
The main advantage of our approach is the ability to
transfer from multiple prior model, instead of choosing just
one. At the same time, the knowledge is not transfered in
a ﬂat, uninformative way, but we evaluate the importance
of each model and their interaction. The loss used is convex
and the constraint in (16) is convex too, hence the minimizer
of (16) is unique. This is opposed to the formulation proposed in , where (7) is non-convex. This means that the
algorithm in can have many local minima.
An important property of this new formulation is also
its “stability”. Stability here means that the behaviour of
the algorithm does not change much if a point is removed
or added. This notion is closely related to the LOO error,
which is exactly calculated measuring the performance of
the model every time a point is removed. Recent works
have shown that a stable algorithm has a better generalization ability . The algorithm in can choose only
one model at each time step, to be used to transfer knowledge. This means that everytime the algorithm “changes its
mind”, i.e. it chooses a different prior model on two consecutive time steps, the behaviour of the algorithm will change
completely. On the other hand, our method selects more
than one prior model at each time step, so we expect that
differences between steps in the vector βββ will be small. The
regularization is also important in this sense . In Section
5.2 we show empirically that this is true.
From a computational point of view the current algorithm’s runtime is O(l3 + kl2), with l the number of training samples (of the order of 10 images) and k the number
of known prior models. The ﬁrst term is related to inverting
G, while the second term is the computational complexity
of (13). We match the complexity of a plain SVM, which
in the worst case is known to be O(l3) , and is the
standard out-of-the-shelf classiﬁcation method commonly
used on datasets with more than 103 images. The computational complexity of each step of the projected sub-gradient
descent is O(kl) and it is extremely fast.
For instance,
our MATLAB implementation takes just half a second with
l = 12 and k = 3.
5. Experiments
We present here three sets of experiments designed to
illustrate how our algorithm performs (a) when the prior
knowledge is related/unrelated to the new class (Section
5.2); (b) when prior knowledge increases (Section 5.3); (c)
compared to the current state of the art (Section 5.4).
We ﬁrst describe the experimental setup (Section 5.1) and
then we report our ﬁndings in the three scenarios described
above. The algorithms presented here were implemented in
MATLAB. The code for the Multi Model Knowledge Transfer method and all the scripts used for the experiments are
available online1.
5.1. Experimental Setting
Our working assumption is to have k category models
stored in memory, built using LS-SVM. We used the Gaussian kernel K(x, x′) = exp(−γ∥x −x′∥2) for all our experiments; the parameters C and γ were chosen by crossvalidation. When the new k +1 category comes, the system
starts learning.
All experiments are run on subsets of the Caltech-256
database . We selected in total 41 classes + background
class, obtaining a data set with a fair amount of clutter and
scale variation.
We didn’t perform any image selection
or preprocessing. The training data consists of m images
from the background dataset and an increasing number of
instances of the new category from 1 to m. The test set consists of 100 images, half from the background and half from
the new category. Images are chosen randomly by splitting each class into two disjoint sets: m training images are
drawn randomly for the ﬁrst, a set of 50 are taken from the
second. As we focus on learning from small samples, we
varied m from 1 to 6, repeating the experiments 10 times
for each value and using different sets of training and test
images. To get a reliable estimate of the performance on
all the categories, we used a leave-one-class-out approach,
considering in turn each class for adaptive learning and using all the rest as prior knowledge.
We used the pre-computed features of which the authors made available on their website2.
Speciﬁcally, we
used four different image descriptors: PHOG Shape Descriptors , Appearance Descriptors , Region Covariance and Local Binary Patterns. All of the image descriptors were computed in a spatial pyramid, we considered just the ﬁrst level (i.e. informations extracted from the
1 
2 
projects/iccv09/
whole image) and combined the features using the average
In the following we will compare the performance of our
Multi Model Knowledge Transfer aglorithm (Multi-KT) to
that obtained with a ﬂat average mixture of prior knowledge (Average-KT) and to the method presented in 
that we call here Single-KT. We also benchmark all the
results against No Adapt. This corresponds to learn from
scratch using weighted-LS-SVM, i.e. solving the optimization problem in Equation (10) with β = 0. The signiﬁcance
of the comparisons are evaluated through the sign test .
5.2. Related/Unrelated Prior Knowledge
In the ﬁrst set of experiments we considered different
groups of related and unrelated categories. The goal is to
study how Multi-KT chooses the reliable prior knowledge,
and its impact on performance.
Related Classes.
We considered two sets of 6 classes
belonging respectively to the Caltech-256 general classes
“transportation, ground, motorized” ( bulldozer, ﬁretruck,
motorbikes, schoolbus, snowmobile, car-side) and “food
hamburger,
ice-cream-cone,
spaghetti, sushi). Figure 2(a)-(d) show the respective classi-
ﬁcation results. In both cases we see that all KT algorithms
obtain an impressive advantage over starting from scratch.
As Figure 2(c)-(f) shows, Multi-KT performs clearly better
than Single-KT, with (p < 0.02) for less than four images
in both cases. This conﬁrms the intuition that it pays off
to transfer from multiple sources, as opposed to one, when
they all bring useful information. There is no signiﬁcant
difference in accuracy between Multi-KT and Average-KT
(Figure 2(b)-(e)). This suggests that, when all prior knowledge is useful, learning the weights does not give a real advantage over a ﬂat average.
Mixed Classes. To consider what happens in a more confused situation, we selected the following 10 classes: dog,
horse, zebra, helicopter, ﬁghter-jet, motorbikes, car-side,
dolphin, goose and cactus. The classiﬁcation results in Figure 2(g) show that here Multi-KT performs better both than
Average-KT and Single-KT (Figure 2(h)-(i), in both cases
p < 0.02 for less than four images). This experiment illustrates very clearly the power of our approach: when the
prior knowledge is partially related to the new class, transferring from only one model does not exploit fully previous
experience. At the same time, using acritically all the prior
knowledge induces partial negative transfer behaviours, that
affect the overall performance. Notice that the situation of
knowledge transfer from a mixture of related and unrelated
classes is the most common.
We can also compare Multi-KT to Single-KT in terms of
stability. Let us consider the unique β used by Single-KT as
an element of the βββ vector where all the remaining elements
are zero. There are 6 steps in time corresponding to a new
Figure 2. (a-d-g) Classiﬁcation performance as a function of the number of object training images, when learning respectively one out of six
related categories “transportation, ground, motorized”, “food, edibles”, and one out of ten mixed categories. The results shown correspond
to average recognition rate over the categories, considering each class-out experiment repeated 10 times; (b-e-h) average difference in
classiﬁcation performance ± stand. dev., obtained by Multi-KT with respect to Average-KT; (c-f-i) average difference in classiﬁcation
performance ± stand. dev., obtained by Multi-KT with respect to Single-KT.
positive sample entering the training set. For each couple of
subsequent steps we calculated the difference between the
obtained βββ vectors of Single-KT. We did the same with the
βββ vectors produced by the Multi-KT algorithm. Figure 3
shows the average norm of these differences. It is evident
that choosing a combination of the prior known models for
transfer learning is more stable (lower average variations in
the βββ vectors) than relying on just a single known category.
5.3. Increasing Prior Knowledge
Here we studied how performance varies when the number of known category grows. We are especially interested
in how Multi-KT behaves when learning from a single pos-
Figure 3. Norm of the differences between two βββ vectors correspondent to two subsequent steps in time. The norms are averaged
both on the classes and on the splits. These results are obtained
considering 10 randomly chosen classes.
Figure 4. (a) One-shot learning performance of Multi-KT, Average-KT and Single-KT respect to No Adapt when varying the number of
prior known categories; (b) classiﬁcation performance as a function of the number of training images when learning on 30 object categories.
The results correspond to average recognition rate over the 30 categories (each class out repeated 10 times), we run this experiment 3 times,
the error bars denote ± standard deviation.
itive image (one-shot learning). We selected 30 classes3,
extracting 3 visually related classes from 10 general categories of Caltech-256.
We run six set of experiments,
considering 3/5/7/10/15/20 categories plus a ﬁnal one with
all the 30 categories. We ﬁrst extracted three categories
through random selection and then we went on adding new
ones till covering the whole 30 class dataset. We repeated
the experiments three times: Figure 4(a) shows the average
recognition rate and the corresponding standard deviations
when training only on one object image. We expect that
the overall performance will increase along with the number of stored models, since there is a larger probability to
have stored useful prior knowledge. This intuition is con-
ﬁrmed by the increasing accuracy of the one-shot learning
for Multi-KT. Average-KT shows a decreasing behaviour,
indicating that as the prior knowledge grows, the number of
unrelated classes in memory usually outnumbers the related
one. The performance of Single-KT is more or less constant
except for an evident jump in performance passing from 3
to 5 categories. Finally, Figure 4(b) shows the average classiﬁcation results in case of 30 categories. It is evident here
that, when learning from few samples (≤4), Multi-KT outperforms both Average-KT and Single-KT. These results,
jointly with those reported in the previous section, make
us conclude that Multi-KT is the most effective knowledge
transfer algorithm, compared to Average-KT and Single-KT.
5.4. Comparison with previous work
The most famous one-shot learning algorithm in the
computer vision literature is , where the authors ex-
3“transportation, ground, motorized”:car-side, ﬁre-truck, motorbike;
“animal,land”:
dog, horse, zebra; “animal,water”:
goldﬁsh, dolphin,
killer-whale; “transportation, water”: canoe, kayak, speed-boat; “music,
stringed”: electric-guitar, harp, mandolin; “food, containers”: beer-mug,
coffee-mug, teapot; “transportation, air”: airplanes, helicopter, ﬁghter-jet;
“animals, air”’: duck, goose, swan; “plants”: bonsai, cactus, fern; “structures, buildings”: light-house, windmill, smokestack.
Figure 5. Classiﬁcation performance as a function of the number
of object training images, when learning one out of four unrelated
categories. The results showed correspond to average recognition
rate over the four categories, considering each class-out experiment repeated 10 times.
Error Rate
Best Rec. Rate
pos. images
pos. image
airplanes: 90.8
+6 backgr.
Single-KT 
airplanes: 88.1
+6 backgr.
faces: 82.0
Table 1. Comparison between our Multi-KT algorithm, Single-KT
 , and the Bayesian One-Shot learning method presented in
 . Since both Multi-KT and Single-KT are a discriminative approaches, besides the positive samples we need few background
images in the training set.
tract a “general knowledge” from previously learned categories. Their approach makes no assumptions on the reliability of prior knowledge, which is always considered as
an average of all the known classes. To compare against
this method, we repeated the four classes experiment presented in . Unfortunately it was not possible to reproduce exactly their experimental setting, as the features used
are no more available4, and the algorithm was not publicly
4L. Fei Fei, personal communication.
released. We opted therefore for benchmarking our results
against those reported in Table 1 in .
We considered the classes faces, motorbikes, leopards
(originally spotted-cats) and airplanes. The average recognition rate over the categories as a function of the number of
object training images is shown in Figure 5. Table 1 compares the results of Multi-KT and Single-KT to that reported
in considering also the best one-shot result per class.
This analysis conﬁrms that our method performs better than
Single-KT, and it obtains results comparable to .
6. Conclusions
We presented an SVM-based method for learning object categories from few examples. The algorithm transfers prior knowledge selecting a subset of the known classes
and weighting them appropriately. It decides automatically
from where and how much to transfer, adapting the old
models to the incoming data and solving a convex optimization problem which minimizes an estimate of the generalization error. Experiments show that it outperforms both the
results obtained in and those produced using an average
of all the previous experience. This last choice can induce
negative transfer, in particular when the number of known
category increases. On the contrary, when prior knowledge
grows our method shows a one-shot learning behaviour. By
using the features provided in and making available our
code we are offering to the community a reproducible experimental setting that can be used in the future to test new
knowledge transfer algorithms. By using several features
we also showed that the behaviour of the method is not affected by the feature’s choice. Future work will investigate
ways to reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm for large number of known categories and analyze its
asymptotical behaviour when the number of training samples increases.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the EU project DIRAC
(FP6-0027787), by the EMMA project thanks to the Hasler
foundation (www.haslerstiftung.ch) (T.T. & B.C), and by
the PASCAL Network of Excellence (F.O.). We are thankful to Nicol`o Cesa-Bianchi for his helpful comments and
suggestions.