Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
ISSN Impreso 0121-1129, ISSN Online 2357-5328, DOI: 
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to
predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
Evaluación del comportamiento de métodos de machine learning para
predecir la actividad de péptidos antimicrobianos
Avaliação do comportamento de métodos de machine learning para
predizer a atividade de peptídeos antimicrobianos
Francy Liliana Camacho*
Rodrigo Torres-Sáez**
Raúl Ramos-Pollán***
This study demonstrates the importance of obtaining statistically stable results when using machine learning
methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides, due to the cost and complexity of the chemical processes
involved in cases where datasets are particularly small (less than a few hundred instances). Like in other fields
with similar problems, this results in large variability in the performance of predictive models, hindering any
attempt to transfer them to lab practice. Rather than targeting good peak performance obtained from very
particular experimental setups, as reported in related literature, we focused on characterizing the behavior of the
machine learning methods, as a preliminary step to obtain reproducible results across experimental setups, and,
ultimately, good performance. We propose a methodology that integrates feature learning (autoencoders) and
selection methods (genetic algorithms) thorough the exhaustive use of performance metrics (permutation tests and
bootstrapping), which provide stronger statistical evidence to support investment decisions with the lab resources
at hand. We show evidence for the usefulness of 1) the extensive use of computational resources, and 2) adopting
a wider range of metrics than those reported in the literature to assess method performance. This approach allowed
us to guide our quest for finding suitable machine learning methods, and to obtain results comparable to those in
the literature with strong statistical stability.
Keywords: antimicrobial peptides; learning curves; machine learning; statistical stability; support vector
regression.
Universidad Industrial de Santander (Bucaramanga-Santander, Colombia). .
** Universidad Industrial de Santander (Bucaramanga-Santander, Colombia). .
*** Universidad Industrial de Santander (Bucaramanga-Santander, Colombia). .
Fecha de recepción: 7 de agosto de 2016
Fecha de aprobación: 18 de diciembre de 2016
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
pp. 167-180
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
Este trabajo demuestra la importancia de obtener resultados estadísticamente estables cuando se emplean métodos
de aprendizaje computacional para predecir la actividad de péptidos antimicrobianos donde, debido al costo y
la complejidad de los procesos químicos, los conjuntos de datos son particularmente pequeños (menos de unos
cientos de instancias). Al igual que en otros campos con problemas similares, esto produce grandes variabilidades
en el rendimiento de los modelos predictivos, lo que dificulta cualquier intento por transferirlos a la práctica. Por
ello, a diferencia de otros trabajos que reportan rendimientos predictivos máximos obtenidos en configuraciones
experimentales muy particulares, nos enfocamos en caracterizar el comportamiento de los métodos de aprendizaje
de máquina, como paso previo a obtener resultados reproducibles, estadísticamente estables y, finalmente, con
una capacidad predictiva competitiva. Para este propósito se diseñó una metodología que integra el aprendizaje
de características (autoencoders) y métodos de selección (algoritmos genéticos) a través del uso exhaustivo de
métricas de rendimiento (test de permutaciones y bootstrapping), permitiendo obtener la evidencia estadística
suficiente como para soportar la toma de decisiones de inversión con los recursos disponibles del laboratorio. En
este trabajo se muestra evidencia de la utilidad de: 1) el uso extensivo de los recursos computacionales y 2) la
adopción de una gama más amplia de métricas que las reportadas en la literatura para evaluar el funcionamiento
de los métodos. Este enfoque permitió orientar la búsqueda de métodos de aprendizaje de máquinas adecuados y,
además, se obtuvieron resultados comparables a los de la literatura con una gran estabilidad estadística.
Palabras clave: aprendizaje de máquina; curvas de aprendizaje; estabilidad estadística; péptidos antimicrobianos;
regresión de vectores de soporte.
Este trabalho demonstra a importância de obter resultados estatisticamente estáveis quando empregam-se
métodos de aprendizagem computacional para predizer a atividade de peptídeos antimicrobianos onde, devido
ao custo e à complexidade dos processos químicos, os conjuntos de dados são particularmente pequenos (menos
de algumas centenas de instâncias). Igualmente, em outros campos com problemas similares, isto produz grandes
variabilidades no rendimento dos modelos preditivos, o que dificulta qualquer intento por transferi-los à prática.
Consequentemente, ao contrario de outros trabalhos que reportam rendimentos preditivos máximos obtidos em
configurações experimentais muito particulares, enfocamo-nos em caracterizar o comportamento dos métodos de
aprendizagem de máquina, como passo prévio para obter resultados reproduzíveis, estatisticamente estáveis e,
finalmente, com uma capacidade preditiva competitiva. Para este propósito, desenhou-se uma metodologia que
integra a aprendizagem de características (autoencoders) e métodos de seleção (algoritmos genéticos) através do
uso exaustivo de métricas de rendimento (teste de permutações e bootstrapping), permitindo obter a evidência
estatística suficiente como para suportar a tomada de decisões de inversão com os recursos disponíveis do
laboratório. Neste trabalho mostra-se evidência da utilidade de: 1) o uso extensivo dos recursos computacionais
e 2) a adoção de uma gama mais ampla de métricas que as reportadas na literatura para avaliar o funcionamento
dos métodos. Este enfoque permitiu orientar a busca de métodos de aprendizagem de máquina adequados e, além
disso, obter resultados comparáveis aos da literatura com uma grande estabilidade estatística.
Palavras chave: Peptídeos antimicrobianos, Aprendizagem de máquina, Estabilidade estatística, Regressão de
Vetores de Suporte, Curvas de aprendizagem.
Cómo citar este artículo:
F. L. Camacho, R. Torres-Sáez, and R. Ramos-Pollán, “Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to
predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides,” Rev. Fac. Ing., vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180, Ene. 2017
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
I. Introduction
Recently, different methods of pattern recognition
have been used to estimate the activity of biological
molecules. For instance, Quantitative Structure-
Activity Relationship (QSAR) methodologies are
widely used to predict the activity of synthetic and
natural antimicrobial peptides. QSAR correlates the
physicochemical properties (descriptors) computed
from sequence or peptide structure with the peptide
biological activity using a mathematical function .
Datasets used in the field are characterized by the
high dimensionality in the descriptors, and their small
sample size.
Some of the methods that have been used to predict
antimicrobial peptides include Partial Least Squares
 , Artificial Neural Networks , Multiple Linear
Regression , and Support Vector Regression
(SVR) , among others. Performance assessment
of these methods is typically limited to few metrics
obtained with fixed validation sets, measuring the
distance of prediction from the real output, but
providing little evidence on whether the used methods
have found a real correlation. Traditionally used
metrics include the root mean square error (RMSEext),
the correlation coefficient of multiple determination
(R2ext), the Pearson correlation coefficient (Rext), and
R2 pred. (R2 predictive) for the fixed validation set
 . The convention Xext, as used in related literature,
indicates that metric X was used with the validation
set (or external validation set).
Metrics to measure the performance of the training
set are not always the same as the ones used for
validation, and include RMSE, R, R2, Crossvalidated correlation coefficient (Leave One Out, ),
and y-randomization . This, along with the great
variability of the performance results both reported
in the literature and observed experimentally by
ourselves, lead us to believe that it is necessary to
obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the
machine learning methods behavior when applied in
the field, as a necessary step before targeting good
performance. In order to acquire this understanding,
we propose a methodology that integrates feature
learning and selection methods by using performance
metrics, providing us with stronger foundations to
support our decisions and investments with the lab
resources at hand. The proposed methodology includes
stacked autoencoders, genetic algorithms, learning
curves, permutation tests, and bootstrapping. Using
this methodology, we obtained predictors with good
generalization capability, stable correlations between
descriptors and activity, and competitive performance
with respect to literature.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a
brief description of previous work. Section 3 describes
the used datasets, and provides a general overview
of the workflow. Section 4 explains the devised
experiment. Section 5 describes the obtained results,
and provides some insights into their interpretation.
Finally, the last section draws the conclusions.
II. Background
Different algorithms and descriptors have been
traditionally used to predict the activity of
antimicrobial peptides. For example, Zhou et al.
 used approximately 1500 descriptors, which
were reduced to 711 after preprocessing, together
with Genetic Algorithms (GA), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO), and Support Vector Regression
(SVR). However, they only used two metrics (R and
RMSE) in the model assessing phase, and according to
the literature, it is convenient to use additional metrics
such as R2 and R2pred .
In another study, Borkar et al. used Genetic
Function Approximation and Partial Least Square
with 43 descriptors; however, the true performance is
not clear because the results of the reported metrics
are based on the activity prediction in a logarithmic
scale. In another study, Wang et al. showed good
results with the training set; however, with the test
set the performance is low. Torrent et al. created
a model with 8 descriptors, and reported only R2 for
the validation set, which does not guarantee the good
behavior of the model . An important aspect
in some of these studies is that the training and test
sets are explicit, that is, a single data split is made,
and every case indicates which data are used for each
split, which clearly bias the results. Consequently, our
work takes a resampling approach, where data are split
several times to ensure the statistical robustness of the
III. Materials and methods
This section describes the procedure by which we
created our datasets for experimentation, and describes
the novel methods we apply: Stacked Autoencoders for
automatic learning of new representations for peptides,
Learning Curves for assessing the generalization
capabilities of our models, and Permutation Tests
to assess their statistical significance. Since Support
Vector Machines and Genetic Algorithms are more
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
commonly used in the field, we refer the reader to for further information.
A. Dataset and descriptors
The dataset used is this study is CAMELs, which has
101 sequences of peptides, each one composed of 15
amino acids, and whose antimicrobial activity has
been reported as the mean antibiotic potency .
From the peptides primary structure, it is possible to
compute a wide range of descriptors. Therefore, we
started off from the properties described by Zhou
et al. , who used the web tool PROFEAT to
compute ten groups of properties (Table 1); however,
due to PROFEAT technical problems, we used instead
a Python library called propy .
Ten groups of descriptors extracted from the dataset. Columns ‘Initial’ and ‘Final’
represent the number of descriptors before and after the preprocessing, respectively 
DESCRIPTORS
Dipeptide Composition (Ddcd)
Normalized Moreau-Broto autocorrelation (Dnmba)
Moran autocorrelation (Dmad)
Geary autocorrelation (Dgad)
Composition, transition and distribution (Dctd)
Sequence order coupling number(Dsoc)
Quasi sequence order (Dqso)
Pseudoaminoacid composition type I (Dpaac)
Pseudoaminoacid composition type II (Dapaac)
All Descriptors (AllDesc)
Additionally, since the order of amino acids plays
an important role in the peptides function , we
computed the Composition Moment Vector descriptor
(CMV) that measure the order and frequency of
amino acids in the sequence. In total, we considered
11 descriptor groups.
B. Stacked Autoencoders (SAE)
According to Camacho et al. , a stacked autoencoder
is a “neural network with two or more layers of
autoencoders that are used in an unsupervised manner.
The main idea with SAE is to capture high order
features from the data. Training is conducted using the
approach called greedy-wise, i.e. each hidden layer is
trained separately and the output of each one is used
as input for the next layer . If training succeeds
to reconstruct the input data at the output layer, the
hidden layer will contain a new representation of the
input data which will be more compact if the hidden
layer has less neurons than the input layer, or more
sparse if it has more neurons.”
In the case of an autoencoder with two hidden layers,
we first trained an autoencoder with only the first layer
 (Fig. 1a). Then, we kept the obtained weights,
add the second layer, and performed another training
process in this setup (Fig. 1b). This can be seen, first
as obtaining an intermediate representation by training
only the first layer, and then, feeding it to the second
layer to obtain a final representation.
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
Fig. 1. Stacked autoencoder with 2 hidden layer. a) contains 6 input neurons and four neurons in the hidden layer.
Note this is a compressing autoencoder. It contains (6+1)*4+(4+1)*6 = 58 connections .
C. Learning Curves (LC)
A learning curve is a graphical representation of the
performance of a machine learning method trained
with increasing data. For a given metric, performance
is measured in the train and test part of a dataset,
increasing the size of the dataset split from, typically,
10 % to 90 % in steps of 10 % (e.g., 10 % is used for
training, and 90 % for testing, then, 20 % for training
and 80 % for testing, until 90 % is used for training and
10 % for testing). This process is conducted n times by
sampling with replacement, and then the average and
standard deviation are calculated for that particular
train/test split percentage . Learning curves
allow us to assess the generalization capabilities of
the method in hand, identifying scenarios such as
high variance (overfitting) or high bias (under fitting)
 , and supporting our decisions to improve the
performance of our experiments (acquire more data,
reduce or augment the complexity of our algorithm,
etc.) (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Three typical learning curves for accuracy metric. The dotted line represents the accuracy in the validation
part of the data, the solid line on the training part. The size of the training data increases in each curve as in the
right direction. a) shows a typical case of overfitting (adding data does not help increasing validation performance).
b) shows a typical case of high bias (the model cannot perform well even with training data). c) shows a good
performing model, were both training and validation performances finally converge to high values as data is added.
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
D. Permutation Test (PT)
The permutation test is a procedure to evaluate the
reliability of a performance metric using a notion of
statistical significance; in other words, it measures
the probability that the observed metric is a result of
chance. A significant predictor should reject the null
hypothesis that the data and labels are independent
 through a small p-value. This procedure takes
the original data, randomly permutes the labels, trains
the predictor, and computes the metric. The process is
repeated k times, and thus, a distribution of the metric
values is obtained. The p-value is computed according
to definition 1 in :
is the data with their
respective labels, 𝑓 is the function learned by the
predictor algorithm, is the set of all possible original
dataset permutations, 𝑒(𝑓, 𝐷′) is the error of the
predictor with permuted labels, and 𝑒(𝑓, 𝐷) is the error
with original data.
E. Processing workflow
The processing workflow was composed of five
a) Preprocessing: all descriptors are preprocessed by
standardizing their values, and removing entries with
the same value for all peptides (standard deviation of
b) Unsupervised Feature Learning: to create the new
representation of the data, preprocessed descriptors
with different configurations of autoencoders (AE)
and stacked autoencoders (SAE) are trained and run
c) Feature selection: genetic algorithms to select the
most useful descriptors are used.
d) Supervised prediction: different configurations of a
Support Vector Regression (SVR) task are run on the
descriptors to effectively predict antimicrobial activity
of the initial peptides.
e) Assessing the performance: the performance of the
models with different metrics using learning curves
and permutation tests are verified.
IV. Experimental setup
A. Experimental configurations
Starting off from the 11 groups of descriptors for each
peptide obtained with propy and CMV, we designed
five general experimental setups, and run each
descriptor group through each setup after following
the workflow described above . Below, we describe
the five setups.
Original: to obtain a baseline against which to
measure the behavior of further setups, we performed
a Support Vector Regression directly on each group of
physicochemical properties without further processing
or feature learning (Fig. 3).
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
Fig. 3. Graphical representation of the methodology used in this work. The Train/test and Validation set were taken
from Zhou et al. . CMV: Composition Moment Vector. Dqso: Quasi sequence order. LC: learning curve. PT:
permutation test.
GA: We optimized each group of descriptors
using Genetic Algorithms (GA) (Fig. 3). In GA, a
chromosome is a representation of the solution of a
problem (different chromosomes or possible solutions
may be generated); in this case, each chromosome is
formed by a binary vector with one bit per feature,
where 1 represents the selected feature, and 0 the nonselected. Then, a fitness function is used to evaluate
each chromosome and determinate the best. In this
study, we took the fitness function from Zhou et al.
where p is a weight coefficient that controls the tradeoff
between precision of the regression model and number
of selected descriptors, 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 is Root Mean Square
Error, n is the number of selected descriptors, and N
is the total of descriptors. Throughout the evolution,
the chromosomes are subject to selection, crossing,
and mutation. For each chromosome, we trained and
tested a SVR with 5-fold cross-validation, after the
optimization of free parameters, and computed the
average 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 across the cross-validation folds. A total
of 200 K Support Vector Regressions were trained and
tested only for this experiment setup. The parameters
of genetic algorithm were taken from Shu et al. ,
where the population was 200, the maximum number
of generations were 200, the crossover frequency was
0.5, and the mutation was 0.005. We used Pyevolve as
the genetic algorithm framework.
Regarding the architecture of the autoencoders, we
followed the same experimental setup as in , which
is herewith reproduced for completeness:
“AE: We trained different configurations of
autoencoders (AEs) to learn a new set of features
which were then fed to a Support Vector Regression
task. In each AE configuration we vary the number of
neurons in the hidden layer from 20 to 1000 neurons.
This allows for configurations producing both compact
and sparse representations with respect to the number
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
of descriptors in each group. When the number of
neurons in the hidden layer was between 20 and 500 it
was varied with a step of 20, and it was between 500
and 1000 it was varied with a step of 50. This resulted
in 35 AE configurations which were used for each
group of descriptors. Each one of these configurations
contains several thousand connections that need to
be trained. For instance an AE with 500 neurons in
the hidden layer for descriptor group Ddcd with 106
descriptors contains around 106K connections.
SAE2: For each AE configuration we created a two
layer stacked autoencoder by adding an additional
hidden layer with half the neurons, producing
therefore another 35 configurations. As explained,
each configuration was trained layer-wise. Sizes
of SAE2 configurations ranged between 800
connections and 1.6 million.
SAE4: Likewise SAE2 but the number of neurons
in the second hidden layer was obtained by dividing
the number of neurons in the first hidden layer
by 4 yielding, again, another 35 configurations.
Sizes of SAE4 configurations ranged between 600
connections and 1.1 million.”
Since we have 11 descriptor groups, in total we run
1177 experimental configurations: 385 for AE, SAE2,
and SAE4, 11 for Original, and 11 for GA.
B. Validation and supervised training
For supervised training, first, we split the data into
a subset for training and another for validation,
according to Zhou et al. , and then, optimized the
free parameters of the Support Vector Regression task
(Fig. 3, step 5). For this, we created a grid varying (C,
γ, ε), and for each combination of parameters, we used
the train data split to train a SVR with 5-fold crossvalidation, and with the average score of 𝑅2
chose the parameters yielding the maximum score
(Fig. 3, step 6). Our parameter grid contained 1872
parameter combinations, which were run with each
configuration described in Section 3.1. Therefore,
we trained 4,382,752 Support Vector Regression,
cross validation processes, and selected one for each
one of the 1177 Original, GA, AE, SAE2, and SAE4
configurations.
With the best parameter combination (C, γ, ε) for
each configuration, we trained a SVR with the full
training split (no cross-validation), and tested it
with the validation data split to obtain the final
performance (Fig. 3, step 7). The performance
metrics used for the validation set were 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑅𝑒𝑥𝑡,
and 𝑅2𝑒𝑥𝑡 (𝑅2 predictive) . For each experimental
configuration, we took the group of descriptors with
the best performance in each one, and applied the two
methods aforementioned:
LC: The learning curve (LC) was computed from
the entire dataset, using the SVR with the best
combination of parameters obtained through the
experimental setups described above (Fig. 3, step 8).
This process was conducted 30 times by sampling
with replacement.
PT: The permutation test (PT) was applied on different
train/test (these sets were taken when we applied
bootstrapping to the full dataset, which is divided into
train/test and validation r times). This process was
conducted 10 times (r = 10), and it randomly permuted
the labels 100 times (k = 100) for each r. (Fig. 3, step 9).
We used the best combination of parameters obtained
through the experimental setups described above.
V. Results
Table 2 summarizes the results obtained using the
experimental setup described in the previous section,
and those referenced in the literature. The results are
shown along with the descriptor group, and GA, AE
or SAE configuration with which they were obtained.
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
Comparative results for different algorithms used to predict the activity of
antimicrobial peptides. The best configuration is represented when the 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸val score is
closer to zero, and R2VAL, RVAL and R2 pred are closer to one
R2VAL 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸val R2VAL R2 pred
PSO-GA-SVM
Original (CMV+SVR)
GA (Dqso + GA+ SVR)
AE (Dctd(900)+SVR)
SAE2 (Dqso(140,70)+SVR)
SAE4 (Dqso(800,200)+SVR)
Initially, we implemented the original setup (i.e.,
without further processing or feature learning), and
the set with the best performance was Composition
Moment Vector (CMV) (Table 2); however, the
performance was poorer than GA, SAE2, and SAE4.
Then, we applied the methodology described in the
methods section. The GA setup was used on each
group of descriptors, and the best performance was
obtained with Dqso. This result is better than the one
reported by Zhou et al. , and the computation time
is also less (without a parallelism strategy, contrary to
Zhou et al. ). For AE configurations, the best groups
of original descriptors were consistently Dctd (with
147 original descriptors) obtained with 900 hidden
neurons, performing better than in literature reports
only in the R2ext metric. However, SAEs performed
consistently better than results in the literature with
different sets of descriptor groups, mostly Dqso and
Dctd. The complete set of experiments took about 48
compute hours, using a computer with 4GB RAM,
and a processor Intel Core i3 2.4 GHz. The computing
time for each set of descriptors, and AE or SAE
configuration varied greatly depending on the number
of connections of the specific configuration.
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
Fig. 4. Learning curves with the best descriptors for each experimental setup, and the score corresponding to R2ext
metric. a) Composition Moment Vector. b) GA with Quasi Sequence Order. c) AE and Composition, Transition and
Distribution descriptors. d) SAE2 with Dqso. e) SAE4 with Dqso. The train test score is the performance parameter
calculated from the union of the train and test set (the same dataset used to optimize the free parameters in the model).
The next step was assessing the setup configurations
shown in Table 2, using learning curves and
permutation tests. We computed the learning curve
with the R2ext metric on each experimental setup
(Original, GA, AE, SAE2, and SAE4) (Fig. 4).
Figure 4b shows the best behavior as the validation
score progressively converges to high values, with the
train score showing the lowest bias and overfitting.
Therefore, we can confidently state that performance
stabilized at 0.84 in the R2 metric. Figures 4a, 4d,
and 4e show slightly worse performance, where data
addition did not remove the gap between train and
validation. This constitutes a clear case of methods
being unable to generalize on data not seen during
training (overfitting). This behavior is observed more
drastically in figure 4c. Note that best performance
(Fig. 4b) is obtained with GA. Fixing the behavior of
the rest of the cases would probably require adding
more data.
Subsequently, we used permutation tests on the same
selected models. Figure 5 shows the results obtained
on each experimental setup for Original, GA, AE,
and SAE4, respectively. The permutation test shows
whether the performance in the models was a result
of chance (this problem is common when there are
high dimensionality descriptors, and small sample
sizes ). Each black square represents the original
error of each bootstrapping, and the circles show the
average of the permutation error with one standard
deviation (the vertical line that crosses the circle). If
the squares fall well below the circles, we can reject the
null hypothesis, however, if that is not the case (or the
error is similar), we cannot reject the null hypothesis
with significance level α=0.01. Figure 5 shows that the
null hypothesis is indeed rejected, which means that
the predictors found a dependency between the data
and the labels.
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
Fig. 5. Permutation test for each iteration of bootstrapping with experimental setup. a) Original. b) GA. c) AE.
d) SAE2. e) SAE4.
Table 3 shows the p-value obtained for each
experimental setup, where Err (in Original Label)
represents the error average with original labels,
and Std the standard deviation computed with 10
bootstraps. The Err (in Permutation Test) represents
the error average with permuted labels, and Std the
standard deviation computed out of 1000 permutations
(r x k, with r=10, k=100). In each experimental
configuration, the predictors are significant under the
null hypothesis with a confidence level of 95 % (Table
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Assessing the behavior of machine learning methods to predict the activity of antimicrobial peptides
Average error with original label, permutation test,
and p-value for each experimental setup
Original Label
Permutation Test
0.61 (0.08)
1.15 (0.15)
0.39 (0.12)
1.20 (0.13)
0.12 (0.006)
0.57 (0.14)
0.39 (0.09)
0.94 (0.12)
0.19 (0.12)
0.66 (0.15)
In order to verify in which ranges the results varied when
we randomly changed the train/test and validation,
we conducted an additional test with 10 bootstraps
(random splits), following the same methodology than
in figure 3. We found that the models using GA and
SAE2 had low variability, and that changing the data
in the train/test would result in good performances
(Table 4). Moreover, the validation set indicated by
Zhou et al. seems to bias the results because the
performance reported with this set is outside of the
ranges shown with the bootstrapping.
Additionally, we measured the frequency of parameters
for SVR, and found that C, γ, and ε are most frequently
equal to 10, 0.32, and 0.1, respectively.
Bootstrapping on different experimental setups used in this work. Split Zhou indicates
the results obtained by Zhou et al. with a specified train/test and validation set.
Bootstrapping corresponds to the results obtained in this work using the same split
indicated by Zhou et al. 
Split Zhou
Bootstrapping
Split Zhou
Bootstrapping
Setup Original
Setup SAE2
Setup SAE4
Zhou et al. (PSO-GA-SVM)
VI. Conclusions
In this study, we used traditional metrics for evaluating
models to predict the antibiotic activity of peptides,
and we used additional methods for assessing their
statistical stability: learning curves, bootstrapping,
and permutation tests. Furthermore, we constructed
different experimental configurations using GA, AE
and SAE to select or obtain additional descriptors of
the peptides, obtaining better performance than other
studies in the literature.
When feeding new features to a supervised
machine learning method, we showed how learnt
representations (by SAE) or selected features (by GA),
consistently provided satisfactory results as compared
with recent studies. This indicates the importance of
the feature learning, and selection of the original set of
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería (Rev. Fac. Ing.) Vol. 26 (44), pp. 167-180. Enero-Abril, 2017. Tunja-Boyacá, Colombia.
Francy Liliana Camacho - Rodrigo Torres-Sáez - Raúl Ramos-Pollán
descriptors from which the learning process starts. We
believe this approach can be explored in other areas of
protein prediction that share data characteristics, and
problem complexity.
According to the learning curves, AE configurations
show overfitting, suggesting an increase in the number
of samples in the original datasets necessary to improve
the performance. In the case of GA, SAE2, and SAE4,
overfitting is only very mildly observed, showing
the generalization capability of these models. With
permutation test we found a real dependency between
descriptors and activity with all models, showing that
our models are statistically stable; furthermore, this
suggests the necessity of exploring similar descriptors
or combinations of CMV, Dctd, and Dqso.
Using a single data split, as proposed in other works,
clearly biases the performance, supporting our
approach of randomly and repeatedly splitting the
dataset, and of verifying metrics with cross-validation
or bootstrapping. Finally, we identified descriptor
groups that consistently behave better: Composition
Moment Vector and Quasi Sequence Order descriptors,
which show evidence that the order and frequency of
amino acids in the sequence play an important role in
the peptides activity. This could help designing better
candidate peptides in the future.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the support of the High Performance
and Scientific Computing Centre (www.sc3.uis.edu.
co), and the Grupo de Investigación en Bioquímica
y Microbiología GIBIM at Universidad Industrial
de Santander (UIS). This project was funded by
Colciencias (Project number: 1102-5453-1671), and
Vicerrectoría de Investigación y Extensión from UIS
 .
Contributors
RT and RR conceived and designed the experiments;
FLC and RR performed the experiments; FLC and
RR prepared the datasets, and analyzed the data; FLC,
RR, and RT wrote the paper; and RR, RT, and FLC
discussed the results and implications, and commented
on the manuscript.