Title: Deep Learning Microscopy
Authors: Yair Rivenson1,2,3, Zoltán Göröcs1,2,3†, Harun Günaydın1†, Yibo Zhang1,2,3, Hongda
Wang1,2,3, Aydogan Ozcan1,2,3,4*
Affiliations:
1Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
2Bioengineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
3California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095,
4Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
*Correspondence: 
Address: 420 Westwood Plaza, Engr. IV 68-119, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Tel: +1(310)825-0915
Fax: +1(310)206-4685
†Equal contributing authors.
We demonstrate that a deep neural network can significantly improve optical microscopy,
enhancing its spatial resolution over a large field-of-view and depth-of-field. After its training,
the only input to this network is an image acquired using a regular optical microscope, without
any changes to its design. We blindly tested this deep learning approach using various tissue
samples that are imaged with low-resolution and wide-field systems, where the network rapidly
outputs an image with remarkably better resolution, matching the performance of higher
numerical aperture lenses, also significantly surpassing their limited field-of-view and depth-offield. These results are transformative for various fields that use microscopy tools, including e.g.,
life sciences, where optical microscopy is considered as one of the most widely used and
deployed techniques. Beyond such applications, our presented approach is broadly applicable to
other imaging modalities, also spanning different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, and can
be used to design computational imagers that get better and better as they continue to image
specimen and establish new transformations among different modes of imaging.
Introduction
Deep learning is a class of machine learning techniques that uses multi-layered artificial neural
networks for automated analysis of signals or data 1,2. The name comes from the general
structure of deep neural networks, which consist of several layers of artificial neurons stacked
over each other. One type of a deep neural network is the deep convolutional neural network
(CNN). Typically, an individual layer of a deep convolutional network is composed of a
convolutional layer and a non-linear operator. The kernels (filters) in these convolutional layers
are randomly initialized and can then be trained to learn how to perform specific tasks using
supervised or unsupervised machine learning techniques. CNNs form a rapidly growing research
field with various applications in e.g., image classification3, annotation4, style transfer5,
compression6, and deconvolution in photography7–9, among others10–13. Recently, deep neural
networks have also been used for optical phase recovery and holographic image reconstruction14.
Here, we demonstrate the use of a deep neural network to significantly enhance the performance
of an optical microscope without changing its design or hardware. This network uses a single
image that is acquired under a standard microscope as input, and quickly outputs an improved
image of the same specimen, e.g., in less than 1 sec using a laptop, matching the resolution of
higher numerical aperture (NA) objectives, while at the same time surpassing their limited fieldof-view (FOV) and depth-of-field (DOF). The first step in this deep learning based microscopy
framework involves learning the statistical transformation between low-resolution and high
resolution microscopic images, which is used to train a CNN. Normally, this transformation can
be physically understood as a spatial convolution operation followed by an under-sampling step
(going from a high resolution and high magnification microscopic image to a low-resolution and
low magnification one). However, the proposed CNN framework is detached from the physics of
light-matter interaction and image formation, and instead focuses on training of multiple layers
of artificial neural networks to statistically relate low-resolution images (input) to high-resolution
images (output) of a specimen. In fact, to train and blindly test this deep learning based imaging
framework, we have chosen bright-field microscopy with spatially and temporally incoherent
broadband illumination, which presents challenges to provide an exact analytical or numerical
modelling of light-sample interaction and the related physical image formation process, making
the relationship between high-resolution images and low-resolution ones significantly more
complicated to exactly model or predict. Although bright-field microscopy images have been our
focus in this manuscript, the same deep learning framework is broadly applicable to other
microscopy modalities, including e.g., holography, dark-field, fluorescence, multi-photon,
optical coherence tomography, among others.
Results and Discussion
To initially train the deep neural network, we acquired microscopy images of Masson's trichrome
stained lung tissue sections using a pathology slide, obtained from an anonymous pneumonia
patient. The lower resolution images were acquired with a 40×/0.95NA objective lens providing
a FOV of 150µm×150µm per image, while the higher resolution training images were acquired
with a 100×/1.4NA oil-immersion objective lens providing a FOV of 60µm×60µm per image,
i.e., 6.25-fold smaller in area. Both the low-resolution and high-resolution images were acquired
with 0.55-NA condenser illumination leading to a diffraction limited resolution of ~0.36 µm and
~0.28µm, respectively, both of which were adequately sampled by the image sensor chip, with
an ‘effective’ pixel size of ~0.18µm and ~0.07µm, respectively. Following a digital registration
procedure to match the corresponding fields-of-view of each set of images (Supplementary
Information), we generated 179 low-resolution images corresponding to different regions of the
lung tissue sample, which were used as input to our network, together with their corresponding
high-resolution labels for each FOV. Out of these images, 149 low-resolution input images and
their corresponding high-resolution labels were randomly selected to be used as our training
image set, while 10 low-resolution images and their corresponding high-resolution labels were
used for selecting and validating the final network model, and the remaining 20 low-resolution
inputs and their corresponding high-resolution labels formed our test images used to blindly
quantify the average performance of the final network. This training dataset was further
augmented by extracting 60×60-pixel and 150×150-pixel image patches with 40% overlap, from
the low resolution and high resolution images, respectively, which effectively increased our
training data size by more than 6-fold. As shown in Fig. 1a and further detailed in
(Supplementary Information, Section 1), these training image patches were randomly assigned to
149 batches, each containing 64, randomly drawn, low and high-resolution image pairs, forming
a total of 9,536 input patches for the network training process (see Supplementary Information,
Section 5). The pixel count and the number of the image patches were empirically determined to
allow rapid training of the network, while at the same time containing distinct sample features in
each patch. In this training phase, as further detailed in Supplementary Information, we utilized
an optimization algorithm to adjust the network’s parameters using the training image set and
utilized the validation image set to determine the best network model, also helping to avoid
overfitting to the training image data.
After this training procedure, which needs to be performed only once, the CNN is fixed (Fig. 1b,
and Supplementary Information, Section 1) and ready to blindly output high resolution images of
samples of any type, i.e., not necessarily from the same tissue type that the CNN has been trained
on. To demonstrate the success of this deep learning enhanced microscopy approach, first we
blindly tested the network’s model on entirely different sections of Masson's trichrome stained
lung tissue, which were not used in our training process, and in fact were taken from another
anonymous patient. These samples were imaged using the same 40×/0.95NA and 100×/1.4NA
objective lenses with 0.55NA condenser illumination, generating various input images for our
CNN. The output images of the CNN for these input images are summarized in Fig. 2, which
clearly demonstrate the ability of the network to significantly enhance the spatial resolution of
the input images, whether or not they were initially acquired with a 40×/0.95NA or a
100×/1.4NA objective lens. For the network output image shown in Fig. 2a, we used an input
image acquired with a 40×/0.95NA objective lens and therefore it has a FOV that is 6.25-fold
larger compared to the 100× objective FOV, which is highlighted with a red-box in Fig. 2a.
Zoomed in regions of interest (ROI) corresponding to various input and output images are also
shown in Fig. 2b-p better illustrating the fine spatial improvements in the network output images
compared to the corresponding input images. To give an example on the computational load of
this approach, the network output images shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2 c,h,m (with FOVs of 378.8
× 378.8 µm and 29.6 × 29.6 µm, respectively) took on average ~0.695 sec and 0.037 sec,
respectively, to compute using a dual graphics processing unit (GPU) running on a laptop
computer (Supplementary Information, Section 7) .
In Fig. 2, we also illustrate that ‘self-feeding’ the output of the network as its new input
significantly improves the resulting output image, as demonstrated in Fig. 2d,i,n. A minor
disadvantage of this self-feeding approach is increased computation time, e.g., ~0.062 sec on
average for Fig. 2d,i,n on the same laptop computer, in comparison to ~0.037 sec on average for
Fig. 2c,h,m (Supplementary Information, Section 7). After one cycle of feeding the network with
its own output, the next cycles of self-feeding do not change the output images in a noticeable
manner, as also highlighted Supplementary Figure 5.
Quite interestingly, when we use the same deep neural network model on input images acquired
with a 100×/1.4NA objective lens, the network output also demonstrates significant enhancement
in spatial details that appear blurry in the original input images. These results are demonstrated in
Fig. 2f,k,p and Supplementary Figure 6 revealing that the same learnt model (which was trained
on the transformation of 40×/0.95NA images into 100×/1.4NA images) can also be used to
super-resolve images that were captured with higher-magnification and higher numericalaperture lenses compared to the input images of the training model. This feature suggests the
scale-invariance of the image transformation (from lower resolution input images to higher
resolution ones) that the CNN is trained on.
Next, we blindly applied the same lung tissue trained CNN for improving the microscopic
images of a Masson's trichrome stained kidney tissue section obtained from an anonymous
moderately advanced diabetic nephropathy patient. The network output images shown in Fig. 3
emphasize several important features of our deep learning based microscopy framework. First,
this tissue type, although stained with the same dye (Masson's trichrome) is entirely new to our
lung tissue trained CNN, and yet, the output images clearly show a similarly outstanding
performance as in Fig. 2. Second, similar to the results shown in Fig. 2, self-feeding the output of
the same lung tissue network as a fresh input back to the network further improves our
reconstructed images, even for a kidney tissue that has not been part of our training process; see
e.g., Fig. 3d,i,n. Third, the output images of our deep learning model also exhibit significantly
larger DOF. To better illustrate this, the output image of the lung tissue trained CNN on a kidney
tissue section imaged with a 40×/0.95NA objective was compared to an extended DOF image,
which was obtained by using a depth-resolved stack of 5 images acquired using a 100×/1.4NA
objective lens (with 0.4µm axial increments). To create the gold standard, i.e., the extended DOF
image used for comparison to our network output, we merged these 5 depth-resolved images
acquired with a 100×/1.4NA objective lens using a wavelet based depth-fusion algorithm15. The
network’s output images, shown in Fig. 3d,i,n, clearly demonstrate that several spatial features of
the sample that appear in-focus in the deep learning output image can only be inferred by
acquiring a depth-resolved stack of 100×/1.4NA objective images because of the shallow DOF of
such high NA objective lenses – also see the yellow pointers in Fig. 3n and p to better visualize
this DOF enhancement. Stated differently, the network output image not only has 6.25-fold
larger FOV (~379 × 379 µm) compared to the images of a 100×/1.4NA objective lens, but it also
exhibits a significantly enhanced DOF. The same extended DOF feature of the deep neural
network image inference is further demonstrated using lung tissue samples shown in Fig. 2n and
Until now, we have focused on bright-field microscopic images of different tissue types, all
stained with the same dye (Masson's trichrome), and used a deep neural network to blindly
transform lower resolution images of these tissue samples into higher resolution ones, also
showing significant enhancement in FOV and DOF of the output images. Next, we tested to see
if a CNN that is trained on one type of stain can be applied to other tissue types that are stained
with another dye. To investigate this, we trained a new CNN model (with the same network
architecture) using microscopic images of a hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained human breast
tissue section obtained from an anonymous breast cancer patient. As before, the training pairs
were created from 40×/0.95NA lower resolution images and 100×/1.4NA high-resolution images
(see Supplementary Tables 1,2 for specific implementation details). First, we blindly tested the
results of this trained deep neural network on images of breast tissue samples (which were not
part of the network training process) acquired using a 40×/0.95NA objective lens. Figure 4
illustrates the success of this blind testing phase, which is expected since this network has been
trained on the same type of stain and tissue (i.e., H&E stained breast tissue). To compare, in the
same Fig. 4 we also report the output images of a previously used deep neural network model
(trained using lung tissue sections stained with the Masson’s trichrome) for the same input
images reported in Fig. 4. Except a relatively minor color distortion, all the spatial features of the
H&E stained breast tissue sample have been resolved using a CNN trained on Masson’s
trichrome stained lung tissue. These results, together with the earlier ones discussed so far,
clearly demonstrate the universality of the deep neural network approach, and how it can be used
to output enhanced microscopic images of various types of samples, from different patients and
organs and using different types of stains. A similarly outstanding result, with the same
conclusion, is provided in Supplementary Figure 7, where the deep learning network trained on
H&E stained breast tissue images was applied on Masson’s trichrome stained lung tissue
samples imaged using a 40×/0.95NA objective lens, representing the opposite case of Fig. 4.
Finally, to quantify the effect of our deep neural network on the spatial frequencies of the output
image, we have applied the CNN that was trained using the lung tissue model on a resolution test
target, which was imaged using a 100×/1.4NA objective lens, with a 0.55NA condenser. The
objective lens was oil immersed as depicted in Supplementary Figure 8a, while the interface
between the resolution test target and the sample cover glass was not oil immersed, leading to an
effective NA of ≤ 1 and a lateral diffraction limited resolution of ≥ 0.355µm. The modulation
transfer function (MTF) was evaluated by calculating the contrast of different elements of the
resolution test target (Supplementary Information, Section 8). Based on this experimental
analysis, the MTFs for the input image and the output image of the deep neural network that was
trained on lung tissue are compared to each other in (Supplementary Information, Section 8). The
output image of the deep neural network, despite the fact that it was trained on tissue samples
imaged with a 40×/0.95NA objective lens, shows an increased modulation contrast for a
significant portion of the spatial frequency spectrum, at especially high frequencies, while also
resolving a period of 0.345 µm (Supplementary Information, Section 8).
To conclude, we have demonstrated how deep learning significantly enhances optical
microscopy images, by improving their resolution, FOV and DOF. This deep learning approach
is extremely fast to output an improved image, e.g., taking on average ~ 0.69 sec per image with
a FOV of ~ 379 x 379 µm even using a laptop computer, and only needs a single image taken
with a standard optical microscope without the need for extra hardware or user specified postprocessing. After appropriate training, this framework is universally applicable to all forms of
optical microscopy and imaging techniques and can be used to transfer images that are acquired
under low resolution systems into high resolution and wide-field images, significantly extending
the space bandwidth product of the output images. Furthermore, using the same deep learning
approach we have also demonstrated the extension of the spatial frequency response of the
imaging system along with an extended DOF. In addition to optical microscopy, this entire
framework can also be applied to other computational imaging approaches, also spanning
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, and can be used to design computational imagers
with improved resolution, FOV and DOF.
Sample Preparation: De-identified formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) stained human breast tissue section from a breast cancer patient, Masson's
trichrome stained lung tissue section from 2 pneumonia patients, and Masson's trichrome stained
kidney tissue section from a moderately advanced diabetic nephropathy patient were obtained
from the Translational Pathology Core Laboratory at UCLA. Sample staining was done at the
Histology Lab at UCLA. All the samples were obtained after de-identification of the patient and
related information and were prepared from existing specimen. Therefore, this work did not
interfere with standard practices of care or sample collection procedures.
Microscopic Imaging: Image data acquisition was performed using an Olympus IX83
microscope equipped with a motorized stage and controlled by MetaMorph® microscope
automation software (Molecular Devices, LLC). The images were acquired using a set of Super
Apochromat objectives, (UPLSAPO 40×2/0.95NA, 100×O/1.4NA – oil immersion objective
lens). The color images were obtained using a Qimaging Retiga 4000R camera with a pixel size
of 7.4 µm.
References
1. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 .
2. Schmidhuber, J. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Netw. 61, 85–117
3. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 25 (eds. Pereira, F., Burges, C. J. C., Bottou, L. & Weinberger, K. Q.) 1097–1105
 .
4. Murthy, V. N., Maji, S. & Manmatha, R. Automatic Image Annotation Using Deep Learning
Representations. in Proceedings of the 5th ACM on International Conference on Multimedia
Retrieval 603–606 . doi:10.1145/2671188.2749391
5. Gatys, L. A., Ecker, A. S. & Bethge, M. Image Style Transfer Using Convolutional Neural
Networks. in 2414–2423 .
6. Dong, C., Deng, Y., Change Loy, C. & Tang, X. Compression Artifacts Reduction by a Deep
Convolutional Network. in 576–584 .
7. Kim, J., Kwon Lee, J. & Mu Lee, K. Accurate Image Super-Resolution Using Very Deep
Convolutional Networks. in 1646–1654 .
8. Dong, C., Loy, C. C., He, K. & Tang, X. Image Super-Resolution Using Deep Convolutional
Networks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 38, 295–307 .
9. Shi, W. et al. Real-Time Single Image and Video Super-Resolution Using an Efficient Sub-
Pixel Convolutional Neural Network. in 1874–1883 .
10. Esteva, A. et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks.
Nature 542, 115–118 .
11. Gulshan, V. et al. Development and Validation of a Deep Learning Algorithm for Detection
of Diabetic Retinopathy in Retinal Fundus Photographs. JAMA 316, 2402–2410 .
12. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature
529, 484–489 .
13. Jean, N. et al. Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty. Science
353, 790–794 .
14. Rivenson, Y., Zhang, Y., Gunaydin, H., Teng, D. & Ozcan, A. Phase recovery and
holographic image reconstruction using deep learning in neural networks. arXiv:1705.04286
 , Available at: 
15. Forster, B., Van De Ville, D., Berent, J., Sage, D. & Unser, M. Complex wavelets for
extended depth-of-field: A new method for the fusion of multichannel microscopy images.
Microsc. Res. Tech. 65, 33–42 .
Acknowledgements
Data and materials availability: All the data and methods needed to evaluate the conclusions in
this work are present in the main text and the Supplementary Information. Additional data
related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Funding: The Ozcan Research Group at UCLA acknowledges the support of the Presidential
Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE), the Army Research Office
(ARO; W911NF-13-1-0419 and W911NF-13-1-0197), the ARO Life Sciences Division,
the National Science Foundation (NSF) CBET Division Biophotonics Program, the NSF
Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (EFRI) Award, the NSF EAGER Award,
NSF INSPIRE Award, NSF Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity
(PFI:BIC) Program, Office of Naval Research (ONR), the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Vodafone Americas Foundation,
the Mary Kay Foundation, Steven & Alexandra Cohen Foundation, and KAUST. This
work is based upon research performed in a laboratory renovated by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 0963183, which is an award funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA). Yair Rivenson is partially supported
by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No H2020-MSCA-IF-2014-659595
Author contributions: Y.R. and A.O. conceived the research, Z.G., Y.R. and H.W. conducted
the experiments, Y.R., H.G., Z.G. and Y.Z. processed the data. Y.R., H.G., Z.G. and A.O.
prepared the manuscript and all the other authors contributed to the manuscript. A.O.
supervised the research.
Competing financial interests: None.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Aydogan Ozcan,
 
Figures and Figure Captions
Fig. 1. Schematics of the deep neural network trained for microscopic imaging. a, The input is
composed of a set of lower resolution images and the training labels are their corresponding
high-resolution images. The deep neural network is trained by optimizing various parameters,
which minimize the loss function between the network’s output and the corresponding highresolution training labels. b, After the training phase is complete, the network is blindly given an
N×N pixel input image and rapidly outputs an (N×L)×(N×L) image, showing improved spatial
resolution, field-of-view and depth-of-field.
Fig. 2. Deep neural network output image corresponding to a Masson's trichrome stained lung
tissue section taken from a pneumonia patient. The network was trained on images of a Masson's
trichrome stained lung tissue sample taken from another patient. a, Image of the deep neural
network output corresponding to a 40×/0.95NA input image. The red highlighted region denotes
the FOV of a 100×/1.4NA objective lens. (b, g, l) Zoomed-in regions of interest (ROIs) of the
input image (40×/0.95NA). (c, h, m) Zoomed-in ROIs of the neural network output image. (d, i,
n) Zoomed-in ROIs of the neural network output image, taking the first output of the network,
shown in c, h and m, as input. (e, j, o) Comparison images of the same ROIs, acquired using a
100×/1.4NA objective lens. (f, k, p) Result of the same deep neural network model applied on
the 100×/1.4NA objective lens images (also see Fig. S6). The yellow arrows in o point to some
of the out-of-focus features that are brought to focus in the network output image shown in N.
Red circles in j, k point to some dust particles in the images acquired with our 100×/1.4NA
objective lens, and that is why they do not appear in g-i. The average network computation time
for different ROIs is listed in Supplementary Table 3.
Fig. 3. Deep neural network output image of Masson's trichrome stained kidney tissue section
obtained from a moderately advanced diabetic nephropathy patient. The network was trained on
images of a Masson's trichrome stained lung tissue taken from another patient, a, Result of twosuccessive applications of the same deep neural network on a 40×/0.95NA image of the kidney
tissue that is used as input. The red highlighted region denotes the FOV of a 100×/1.4NA
objective lens. (b, g, l) Zoomed-in ROIs of the input image (40×/0.95NA). (c, h, m) Zoomed-in
ROIs of the neural network output image, taking the corresponding 40×/0.95NA images as input.
(d, i, n) Zoomed-in ROIs of the neural network output image, taking the first output of the
network, shown in c, h and m, as input. (e, j, o) Extended depth-of-field image, algorithmically
calculated using Nz = 5 images taken at different depths using a 100×/1.4NA objective lens. (f, k,
p) The auto-focused images of the same ROIs, acquired using a 100×/1.4NA objective lens. The
yellow arrows in p point to some of the out-of-focus features that are brought to focus in the
network output images shown in n. Also see Fig. S6.
Fig. 4. Deep neural network based imaging of H&E stained breast tissue section. The output
images of two different deep neural networks are compared to each other. The first network is
trained on H&E stained breast tissue, taken from a different tissue section that is not used in the
training phase. The second network is trained on a different tissue type and stain, i.e., Masson’s
trichrome stained lung tissue sections. (c-n) illustrate zoomed-in images of different ROIs of the
input and output images, similar to Figs. 2-3. A similar comparison is also provided in Fig. S7.
Supplementary Information - Deep Learning Microscopy
1. Deep Learning Network Architecture
The schematics of the architecture for training our deep neural network is depicted in
Supplementary Fig. 1. The input images are mapped into 3 color channels: red, green and blue
(RGB). The input convolutional layer maps the 3 input color channels, into 32 channels, as
depicted in Supplementary Fig. 2. The number of output channels of the first convolutional layer
was empirically determined to provide the optimal balance between the deep neural network’s
size (which affects the computational complexity and image output time) and its image transform
performance. The input convolutional layer is followed by K=5 residual blocks16. Each residual
block is composed of 2 convolutional layers and 2 rectified linear units (ReLU)17,18, as shown in
Supplementary Fig. 1. The ReLU is an activation function which performs
. The formula of each block can be summarized as:
ReLU(ReLU(
where  refers to convolution operation,
X is the input to the k-th block,
X denotes its output,
denote an ensemble of learnable convolution kernels of the k-th block, where the
bias terms are omitted for simplicity. The output feature maps of the convolutional layers in the
network are calculated as follows:
is a learnable 2D kernel (i.e., the (i,j)-th kernel of
W ) applied to the i-th input
feature map,
(which is an M×M-pixel image in the residual blocks),
is a learnable bias
term, Ω is an M×M matrix with all its entries set as 1, and
is the convolutional layer j-th
output feature map (which is also an M×M-pixel image in the residual blocks). The size of all the
kernels (filters) used throughout the network’s convolutional layers is 3×3. To resolve the
dimensionality mismatch of Eq. (2), prior to convolution, the feature map
is zero-padded to
a size of (M+2)×(M+2) pixels, where only the central M×M-pixel part is taken following the
convolution with kernel
To allow high level feature inference we increase the number of features learnt in each
layer, by gradually increasing the number of channels, using the pyramidal network concept18.
Using such pyramidal networks helps to keep the network’s width compact in comparison to
designs that sustain a constant number of channels throughout the network. The channel increase
formula was empirically set according to19:
, k=[1:5], which is the residual block number, K=5 is the total number of residual
blocks used in our architecture and α is a constant that determines the number of channels that
will be added at each residual block. In our implementation, we used α=10, which yields
channels at the output of the final residual block. In addition, we utilized the concept of residual
connections (shortcutting the block’s input to its output, see Supplementary Fig. 1), which was
demonstrated to improve the training of deep neural networks by providing a clear path for
information flow18 and speed up the convergence of the training phase. Nevertheless, increasing
the number of channels at the output of each layer leads to a dimensional mismatch between the
inputs and outputs of a block, which are element-wise summed up in Eq. (1). This dimensional
mismatch is resolved by augmenting each block’s input channels with zero valued channels,
which virtually equalizes the number of channels between a residual block input and output.
In our experiments, we have trained the deep neural network to extend the output image
space-bandwidth-product by a non-integer factor of L2=2.52=6.25 compared to the input images.
To do so, first the network learns to enhance the input image by a factor of 5×5 pixels followed
by a learnable down-sampling operator of 2×2, to obtain the desired L=2.5 factor (see
Supplementary Fig. 3). More specifically, at the output of the K-th residual block AK = A5 = 62
channels are mapped to
channels (Supplementary Fig. 3), followed by resampling of
these 75 (
pixels channels to three channels with (
pixels grid13,20. These
pixels channels are then used as input to an additional convolutional
layer (with learnable kernels and biases, as the rest of the network), that two-times down-samples
these images to three(
color pixels. This is performed by using a two-pixel
stride convolution, instead of a single pixel stride convolution, as performed throughout the other
convolutional layers of the network. This way, the network learns the optimal down-sampling
procedure for our microscopic imaging task. It is important to note that during the testing phase,
if the number of input pixels to the network is odd, the resulting number of output image pixels
will be determined by the ceiling operator. For instance, a 555×333-pixel input image will result
in a 1388×833-pixel image for L=2.5.
The above-discussed deep network architecture provides two major benefits: first, the upsampling procedure becomes a learnable operation with supervised learning, and second, using
low resolution images throughout the network’s layers makes the time and memory complexities
of the algorithm L2 times smaller13 when compared to approaches that up-sample the input image
as a precursor to the deep neural network. This has a positive impact on the convergence speed
of both the training and image transformation phases of our network.
2. Data Pre-processing
To achieve optimal results, the network should be trained with accurately aligned lowresolution input images and high-resolution label image data. We match the corresponding input
and label image pairs using the following steps: (A) Color images are converted to grayscale
images. (B) A large field-of-view image is formed by stitching a set of low resolution images.
(C) Each high-resolution label image is down-sampled (bicubic) by a factor L. This downsampled image is used as a template image to find the highest correlation matching patch in the
low-resolution stitched image. The highest correlating patch from the low-resolution stitched
image is then digitally cropped. This cropped low-resolution image and the original highresolution image, form an input-label pair, which is used for the network’s training and testing.
(D) Additional alignment is then performed on each of the input-label pairs to further refine the
input-label matching, mitigating rotation, translation and scaling discrepancies between the lower
resolution and higher resolution images.
3. Network Training
The network was trained by optimizing the following loss function ( ) given the highresolution training labels
denote the u,v-th pixel of the c-th color channel (where in our
implementation we use three color channels, RGB) of the network’s output image and the high
resolution training label image, respectively. The network’s output is given by
 , where F is the deep neural network’s operator on the low-resolution input
and  is the network’s parameter space (e.g., kernels, biases, weights). Also,
is the total number of pixels in each color channel, λ is a regularization
parameter, empirically set to ~0.001.
is u,v-th pixel of the c-th color channel of the
network’s output image gradient21, applied separately for each color channel, which is defined
and (.)T refers to the matrix transpose operator.
The above defined loss function balances between the mean-squared-error (MSE) and the
image sharpness with a regularization parameter, λ. The MSE is used as a data fidelity term and
the l2-norm image gradient approximation helps mitigating the spurious edges that result from
the pixel up-sampling process. Following the estimation of the loss function, the error is
backpropagated through the network, and the network’s parameters are learnt by using the
Adaptive Moment Estimation (ADAM) optimization22, which is a stochastic optimization
method, that we empirically set a learning rate parameter of 10-4 and a mini-batch size of 64
image patches (Supplementary Table 2). All the kernels (for instance
) used in convolutional
layers have 3×3 elements and their entries are initialized using truncated normal distribution with
0.05 standard deviation and 0 mean16. All the bias terms (for instance,
) are initialized with 0.
4. Network Testing
A fixed network architecture, following the training phase is shown in Supplementary
Fig. 4, which receives an input of P×Q-pixel image and outputs a (
image, where .
 is the ceiling operator. To numerically quantify the performance of our trained
network models, we independently tested it using validation images, as detailed in
Supplementary Table 2. The output images of the network were quantified using the structural
similarity index23 (SSIM). SSIM, which has a scale between 0 and 1, quantifies a human
observer’s perceptual loss from a gold standard image by taking into account the relationship
among the contrast, luminance, and structure components of the image. SSIM is defined as 1 for
an image that is identical to the gold standard image.
5. Implementation Details
The program was implemented using Python version 3.5.2, and the deep neural network
was implemented using TensorFlow framework version 0.12.1 (Google). We used a laptop
computer with Core i7-6700K CPU @ 4GHz (Intel) and 64GB of RAM, running a Windows 10
professional operating system (Microsoft). The network training and testing were performed
using GeForce GTX 1080 GPUs (NVidia). For the training phase, using a dual-GPU
configuration resulted in ~33% speedup compared to training the network with a single GPU.
The training time of the deep neural networks for the lung and breast tissue image datasets is
summarized in Table Supplementary Table 2 (for the dual-GPU configuration).
Following the conclusion of the training stage, the fixed deep neural network intakes an
input stream of 100 low-resolution images each with 2,048×2,048-pixels, and outputs for each
input image a 5,120×5,120-pixel high-resolution image at a total time of ~119.3 seconds (for all
the 100 images) on a single laptop GPU. This runtime was calculated as the average of 5
different runs. Therefore, for L=2.5 the network takes 1.193 sec per output image on a single
GPU. When employing a dual-GPU for the same task, the average runtime reduces to 0.695 sec
per 2,048×2,048-pixel input image (see Supplementary Table 3 for additional details on the
network output runtime corresponding to other input image sizes, including self-feeding of the
network output).
6. Modulation Transfer Function (MTF) Analysis
To quantify the effect of our deep neural network on the spatial frequencies of the output
image, we have applied the CNN that was trained using the Masson’s trichrome stained lung
tissue samples on a resolution test target (Extreme USAF Resolution Target on 4×1 mm Quartz
Circle Model 2012B, Ready Optics), which was imaged using a 100×/1.4NA objective lens, with
a 0.55NA condenser. The objective lens was oil immersed as depicted in Supplementary Fig. 8a,
while the interface between the resolution test target and the sample cover glass was not oil
immersed, leading to an effective objective NA of ≤1 and a lateral diffraction limited resolution
≥ 0.354µm (assuming an average illumination wavelength of 550 nm). MTF was evaluated by
calculating the contrast of different elements of the resolution test target24. For each element, we
horizontally averaged the resulting image along the element lines (~80-90% of the line length).
We then located the center pixels of the element’s minima and maxima and used their values for
contrast calculation. To do that, we calculated the length of the element’s cross-section from the
resolution test target group and element number in micrometers, cut out a corresponding cross
section length from the center of the horizontally averaged element lines. This also yielded the
center pixel locations of the element’s local maximum values (2 values) and minimum values (3
values). The maximum value,
, was set as the maximum of the local maximum values and
the minimum value,
, was set as the minimum of the local minimum values. For the
elements, where the minima and maxima of the pattern matched their calculated locations in the
averaged cross section, the contrast value was calculated as:
elements where the minima and maxima were not at their expected positons, thus the modulation
of the element was not preserved, we set the contrast to 0. Based on this experimental analysis,
the calculated contrast values are given Supplementary Table 4 and the MTFs for the input image
and the output image of the deep neural network (trained on Masson’s trichrome lung tissue) are
compared to each other in Supplementary Fig. 8e.
Supplementary Figures
Supplementary Figure 1. Detailed schematics of the deep neural network training phase.
Supplementary Figure 2. Detailed schematics of the input layer of the deep neural network.
Supplementary Figure 3. Detailed schematics of the output layer of the deep neural network for
Supplementary Figure 4. Detailed schematics of the deep neural network high-resolution image
inference (i.e., the testing phase).
Supplementary Figure 5. Result of applying the deep neural network in a cyclic manner on
Masson's trichrome stained kidney section images. a, Input image acquired with a 40×/0.95NA
objective lens. The deep neural network is applied on this input image once, twice and three
times, where the results are shown in b, c and d, respectively. e, 100×/1.4NA image of the same
field-of-view is shown for comparison.
Supplementary Figure 6. Deep neural network output image corresponding to a Masson's
trichrome stained lung tissue section taken from a pneumonia patient. The network was trained
on images of a Masson's trichrome stained lung tissue taken from a different tissue block that
was not used as part of the CNN training phase. a, Image of the deep neural network output
corresponding to a 100×/1.4NA input image. (b, f, d, h) Zoomed-in ROIs of the input image
(100×/1.4NA). (c, g, e, i) Zoomed-in ROIs of the neural network output image.
Supplementary Figure 7. a, Result of applying the lung tissue trained deep neural network
model on a 40×/0.95NA lung tissue input image. b, Result of applying the breast tissue trained
deep neural network model on a 40×/0.95NA lung tissue input image. (c, i, o) Zoomed in ROIs
corresponding to the 40×/0.95NA input image. (d, j, p) Neural network output images,
corresponding to input images c, i and o, respectively; the network is trained with lung tissue
images. (e, k, q) Neural network output images, corresponding to input images d, j, and p,
respectively; the network is trained with lung tissue images. (f, l, r) Neural network output
images, corresponding to input images c, i and o, respectively; the network is trained with breast
tissue images stained with a different dye, H&E. (g, m, s) Neural network output images,
corresponding to input images f, l, and r, respectively; the network is trained with breast tissue
images stained with H&E. (h, n, t) Comparison images of the same ROIs acquired using a
100×/1.4NA objective lens.
Supplementary Figure 8. Modulation transfer function (MTF) comparison for the input image
and the output image of a deep neural network that is trained on images of a lung tissue section.
a, Experimental apparatus: the US air-force (USAF) resolution target lies on a glass slide, with
an air-gap in-between, leading to an effective numerical aperture of ≤ 1. The resolution test
target was illuminated using a condenser with a numerical aperture of 0.55, leading to lateral
diffraction limited resolution of ≥ 0.355µm. b, Input image acquired with a 100×/1.4NA. c,
Zoom-in on the green highlighted region of interest highlighted in (b). d, Output image of the
deep neural network applied on (b, c). e, MTF calculated from the input and output images of the
deep network. f, Cross-sectional profile of group 11, element 4 (period: 0.345µm) extracted from
the network output image shown in (d).
Supplementary Tables
Bicubic up-sampling
Deep neural network
Masson’s trichrome
stained lung tissue
(224×224 pixels)
H&E stained breast
(660×660 pixels)
Supplementary Table 1. Average structural similarity index (SSIM) for the Masson’s trichrome
stained lung tissue and H&E stained breast tissue datasets, comparing bicubic up-sampling and
the deep neural network output.
Number of inputoutput patches
(number of pixels
for each lowresolution image)
Validation set
(number of pixels
for each lowresolution image)
epochs till
convergence
Training time
stained lung
9,536 patches
(60×60 pixels)
(224×224 pixels)
4hr, 35min
breast tissue
51,008 patches
(60×60 pixels)
(660×660 pixels)
14hr, 30min
Supplementary Table 2. Deep neural network training details for the Masson’s trichrome
stained lung tissue and H&E stained breast tissue datasets.
Single GPU runtime (sec)
Dual GPU runtime (sec)
(Self-feeding)
(Self-feeding)
378.8 × 378.8 µm
(e.g., Fig. 2A)
151.3 × 151.3 µm
(e.g., red box in
29.6 × 29.6 µm
(e.g., Figs. 2B-L)
Supplementary Table 3. Average runtime for different regions-of-interest shown in Fig. 2.
Period (Cycles/mm)
100×/1.4NA input contrast (a.u.) Network output contrast (a.u.)
Supplementary Table 4. Calculated contrast values for the USAF resolution test target