Received 13 Oct 2014 | Accepted 3 Feb 2015 | Published 11 Mar 2015
Gut microbiome development along the colorectal
adenoma–carcinoma sequence
Qiang Feng1,2,*, Suisha Liang1,3,*, Huijue Jia1,*, Andreas Stadlmayr4,*, Longqing Tang1,*, Zhou Lan1,
Dongya Zhang1, Huihua Xia1, Xiaoying Xu1, Zhuye Jie1, Lili Su1, Xiaoping Li1, Xin Li1, Junhua Li1,3,5, Liang Xiao1,
Ursula Huber-Scho¨nauer4, David Niederseer4, Xun Xu1, Jumana Yousuf Al-Aama1,6, Huanming Yang1, Jian
Wang1, Karsten Kristiansen1,2, Manimozhiyan Arumugam1,7, Herbert Tilg8, Christian Datz4 & Jun Wang1,2,6,9
Colorectal cancer, a commonly diagnosed cancer in the elderly, often develops slowly from
benign polyps called adenoma. The gut microbiota is believed to be directly involved in
colorectal carcinogenesis. The identity and functional capacity of the adenoma- or carcinomarelated gut microbe(s), however, have not been surveyed in a comprehensive manner.
Here we perform a metagenome-wide association study (MGWAS) on stools from advanced
adenoma and carcinoma patients and from healthy subjects, revealing microbial genes,
strains and functions enriched in each group. An analysis of potential risk factors indicates
that high intake of red meat relative to fruits and vegetables appears to associate with
outgrowth of bacteria that might contribute to a more hostile gut environment. These ﬁndings
suggest that faecal microbiome-based strategies may be useful for early diagnosis and
treatment of colorectal adenoma or carcinoma.
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
1 BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. 2 Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. 3 School of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. 4 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Oberndorf,
Teaching Hospital of the Paracelsus Private University of Salzburg, Paracelsusstrasse 37, 5110 Oberndorf, Austria. 5 BGI Hong Kong Research Institute, Hong
Kong, China. 6 Princess Al Jawhara Center of Excellence in the Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. 7 The
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.
8 First Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. 9 Macau University of Science and Technology,
Avenida Wai long, Taipa, Macau 999078, China. * These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to J.W. (email: ) or to C.D (email: ) or to H.T. (email: ).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
olorectal cancer (CRC) is among the top three most
frequently diagnosed cancer worldwide and a leading
cause of cancer mortality1,2. The incidence is higher in
more developed countries, but is rapidly increasing in historically
low risk areas such as Eastern Asia, Spain and Eastern Europe,
attributable to a so-called western lifestyle1–3. Genetic changes
accumulate for many years in the development of colorectal
cancer, often involving loss of the tumour suppressor gene
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), followed by activating and
inactivating mutations in KRAS, PIK3CA and TP53 (refs 3,4).
Most CRC cases are sporadic, but are preceded by dysplastic
adenomas which could progress into malignant forms, referred to
as the adenoma–carcinoma sequence3.
CRC is among the most studied diseases implicated with the
gut microbiota. Causal relationships, however, were typically
investigated by application of antibiotic cocktails that eradicate
the gut microbiota without knowing the exact microbial strains
and genes at play5–7. Fusobacterium has been detected in
colorectal carcinoma relative to normal colon tissue8,9, and was
found to be enriched in adenomas10. Fusobacterium nucleatum, a
periodontal pathogen, has been shown to promote myeloid
inﬁltration of intestinal tumours in ApcMin/ þ mice and associate
with increased expression of proinﬂammatory genes such as
Ptgs2(COX-2), Scyb1(IL8), Il6, Tnf(TNFa) and Mmp3 in mice and
humans11. It is not clear, however, whether more bacteria or
archaea serve as markers for, or contribute to the aetiology of,
colorectal carcinomas. Moreover, as perhaps the most important
environmental
genome’12,13, it remains to be explored whether and how the
gut microbiome integrate other risk factors, for example, diet,
smoking, obesity1–3,14,15 and generate a coherent signal for
colorectal carcinogenesis.
Here, we present 156 metagenomic shotgun-sequenced faecal
samples from colorectal adenoma and carcinoma patients and
healthy controls, identify metagenomic linkage groups (MLG)16
characteristic of the tumours, and reveal the possible impact of
various risk factors, especially red meat versus fruit and vegetable
consumption on gut microbial alterations along the colorectal
adenoma–carcinoma sequence.
Global shifts in the gut microbiome. To investigate changes in
the gut microbiome in colorectal adenoma and carcinoma, we
performed metagenomic shotgun sequencing on 156 faecal
carcinoma patients (Supplementary Data 1). The high-quality
sequencing reads (5 GB per sample on average, Supplementary
Data 2) were assembled de novo, and the genes identiﬁed
were compiled into a non-redundant catalogue of 3.5 million
genes, which allowed on average 76.3% of the reads in each
sample to be mapped.
We ﬁrst investigated the richness and evenness of the gut
microbiota in the three groups (Fig. 1). Rarefaction analysis based
on the starting cohort of 55 healthy controls, 42 advanced
adenoma and 41 carcinoma patients showed that the gene
richness approached saturation in each group, and is higher in
advanced adenoma than in control, and higher in carcinoma than
in advanced adenoma (Fig. 1a). Both gene and genus richness
were signiﬁcantly different among the three groups (P ¼ 0.005,
P ¼ 3.2e–7, respectively, Kruskal–Wallis test; Fig. 1b,e), while the
a-diversities were not (Fig. 1c,f), consistent with previous 16S
ribosomal RNA gene pyrosequencing analysis on adenoma and
healthy controls17. The number of virulence genes according
to the virulence factor database18 also signiﬁcantly differed
among the groups (P ¼ 1.2e–5, Kruskal–Wallis test; Fig. 1d,
Supplementary Data 3). Thus, greater richness in genes or genera
is not a sign of a healthy gut microbiota in this cohort,
but likely indicates overgrowth of a variety of harmful bacteria
or archaea in patients with advanced colorectal adenoma or
carcinoma.
Enterotype, another general measure of the gut microbiota19,20,
divided the cohort into two or three clusters (depending on the
method used, Fig. 2a,b, Supplementary Fig. 1a), each containing
healthy controls, adenoma and carcinoma patients. Yet, a greater
percentage of carcinoma and adenoma patients were seen with
the enterotype containing a high level of Bacteroides, while more
healthy samples were found in the enterotype represented by
Ruminococcus (Fig. 2c,d, Supplementary Fig. 1b,c). Neither the
original partitioning around medoid (PAM) clustering method19
nor the Dirichlet multinomial mixture model-based method20
detected a Prevotella-dominated enterotype, in agreement with
population-speciﬁc features or continuity of enterotypes21. The
analyses conﬁrmed profound shifts in the gut microbiota before
or during the development of colorectal cancer.
MLGs characteristic of adenoma or carcinoma. To explore
signatures of the gut microbiome in healthy or tumour samples,
we identiﬁed 130,715 genes that displayed signiﬁcant abundance
differences in any two of the three groups (Kruskal–Wallis test,
Benjamin–Hochberg q-valueo0.1; Fig. 3). None of the available
phenotypes other than tumour status displayed a signiﬁcant difference among the controls, adenoma and carcinoma patients,
except for serum ferritin and red meat consumption (Po0.05,
Kruskal–Wallis test, Supplementary Data 4). About 58.9% of the
gene markers were signiﬁcantly elevated in carcinoma compared
with both healthy and advanced adenoma samples (Fig. 3a),
indicating that they were speciﬁc to colorectal cancer; another
24.3% of the genes were signiﬁcantly more abundant in carcinomas than controls, with intermediate levels in advanced adenomas. Among the genes with a descending trend, 5,388 (4.1% of
total) were signiﬁcantly reduced in carcinoma compared with
both healthy and advanced adenoma samples; 2,601 (2.0% of
total) were signiﬁcantly less abundant in carcinomas than controls, with intermediate levels in advanced adenomas. These
control-enriched genes were more often mapped to Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways than the
adenoma- or carcinoma-enriched genes (Fig. 3b). The disparity in
the number of increasing and decreasing genes suggests that the
increase in pathobionts is more pronounced than the decrease in
beneﬁcial bacteria during the development of carcinoma.
The signiﬁcantly different genes were clustered into MLGs
according to their abundance co-variations among all samples,
which allowed identiﬁcation of microbial species characteristic of
each group16. A number of Bacteroides and Parabacteroides
species, along with Alistipes putredinis, Bilophila wadsworthia,
Lachnospiraceae bacterium and Escherichia coli were enriched in
carcinoma samples compared with both healthy and advanced
adenoma samples (Fig. 4, Supplementary Data 5). The likely oral
Fusobacterium sp. oral taxon 370, Pavimonas micra, Gemella
morbillorum and Peptostreptococcus stomatis, respectively) and
mlg-77 formed a cluster of positive correlations relatively separate
from other carcinoma-enriched MLGs (Fig. 4b,c). mlg-75, mlg-88
and mlg-77 were also elevated in adenoma compared with control
samples (Fig. 4a). Gut commensals such as Biﬁdobactium
animalis and Streptococcus thermophilus, on the other hand,
decreased in faeces from adenoma or carcinoma patients,
consistent with deviation from a healthy microbiome.
Ruminococcus,
Biﬁdobacterium
Streptococcus
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
signiﬁcantly overrepresented in the controls, while Bacteroides,
Alistipes, Escherichia, Parvimonas, Bilophila and Fusobacterium
were overrepresented in the carcinoma patients (Supplementary
E. coli, mlg-331, mlg-711 and mlg-1607 were more abundant in
samples histologically determined as carcinoma in situ compared
with samples from adenocarcinoma, whereas mlg-75, mlg-83,
mlg-84 and mlg-1697 were more abundant in adenocarcinoma
(FDR) ¼ 0.7216; Supplementary Fig. 3). Seven of the 126 MLGs
(containing over 100 genes) exhibited signiﬁcant differences
Kruskal–Wallis
FDR ¼ 0.531), often peaking in Stage II or III (Supplementary
Fig. 4). Many of the carcinoma-associated MLGs were more
abundant in samples from patients with carcinoma in the rectum
or left colon (the splenic ﬂexure, descending colon and sigmoid
colon) than in the right colon (the caecum, ascending colon and
transverse colon) (Supplementary Fig. 5), indicating that faeces
were best proxy for the environment at the end of the
gastrointestinal tract, yet could still reveal malignancy at the
beginning of the colon.
MLG-based classiﬁcation of adenoma or carcinoma. To illustrate diagnostic value of the faecal microbiome for colorectal
cancer, we constructed a random forest classiﬁer that could detect
carcinoma samples. Five repeats of 10-fold cross-validation (that
is, 50 tests) in the training set consisted of 55 controls and 41
carcinoma samples led to the optimal selection of 15 MLG
markers that performed nicely on the training set (Fig. 5a–c,
Supplementary Data 1 and 5). The classiﬁcation error remained
low on the test set (8 controls, 47 advanced adenomas and 5
carcinomas), showing an area under receiver operating curve
(AUC) of 96% (advanced adenoma considered as non-carcinoma,
Fig. 5d,e, Supplementary Data 1). Including age and body mass
index (BMI) together with the 126 MLGs did not change the
markers selected. Consistently, most of the MLGs were similarly
enriched in (AUC) elderly and middle-aged subjects (above and
below 65 years old; Supplementary Fig. 6, Supplementary Data 5),
indicating common characteristics of the carcinoma-associated
gut microbiome.
Among the MLG markers were the likely oral anaerobes
mlg-75 and mlg-84, the former also showed a high odds ratio for
adenoma (Supplementary Data 5), suggesting an early role in
Genus α-diversity
P value= 0.98
Genus count
P value=3.23e−07
Virulence factor count
P value=1.228e−05
Number of genes
Number of genera
Shannon index
Rarefaction of genes
Number of samples
Number of genes
Advanced adenoma
Colorectal cancer
Gene α–diversity
P value= 0.127
Gene count
P value= 0.005
Number of genes
Shannon index
Figure 1 | Increased gut microbiome richness in CRC. (a) Rarefaction for gut microbial gene content in healthy, advanced adenoma and carcinoma
samples56. The number of genes in each group was calculated after 100 random sampling with replacement. Plotted are interquartile ranges (IQRs; boxes),
medians (dark lines in the boxes), the lowest and highest values within 1.5 times IQR from the ﬁrst and third quartiles (whiskers above and below the
boxes), and outliers beyond the whiskers (circles). (b,c) Richness and a-diversity (Shannon index) of the three cohorts at the gene level. Violin plots
showing both the richness or diversity values and their density. (d) Richness of genes encoding virulence factors18 (Supplementary Data 3).
(e,f) Richness and a-diversity (Shannon index) of the three cohorts at the genus level. n ¼ 55 healthy controls, 42 advanced adenoma and 41
carcinoma patients. P values from Kruskal–Wallis tests are shown.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
pathogenesis.
Bacteroides
massiliensis, mlg-2985, mlg-121 and ten more taxonomically
undeﬁned MLGs (Supplementary Data 5). Thus, MLGs selected
by the carcinoma classiﬁer captured important features of the
deteriorating gut microbiome in adenoma and carcinoma and
have great potential for early and non-invasive diagnosis of these
We directly investigated the utility of the gut MLGs for
identifying adenoma, which is more difﬁcult to screen than
colorectal carcinoma but important for early intervention3,23.
After ﬁve repeats of 10-fold cross-validation, the random forest
model chose 10 MLGs that allowed optimal classiﬁcation of the
training set (55 controls and 42 advanced adenoma; Fig. 5f–h,
Supplementary Data 1 and 5). On the test set (8 controls,
5 advanced adenoma and 46 carcinoma), all the advanced
adenoma samples were correctly classiﬁed, while performance on
the control and carcinoma samples were not as satisfactory
(carcinoma
considered
Supplementary Data 1). When age and BMI were included
along with the 126 MLGs, age was selected as a marker together
with the 10 MLGs (Fig. 5k–m), but performance on the test set
did not improve (Fig. 5n,o). Therefore, the faecal MLGs offer new
opportunities for non-invasive detection of colorectal adenoma as
well as carcinoma, but additional examinations would probably
be necessary for conﬁrming adenoma.
Diet-associated functional changes in the microbiome. Dietary
components such as red meat are known risk factors for
colorectal carcinoma3,14,15, but it is not known how diet makes a
footprint on gut microbes associated with or even causing
colorectal carcinoma. We assessed inﬂuence of a number of
clinical or lifestyle factors on gut microbial genes or MLGs,
and found that the control, adenoma or carcinoma state was
indeed among the strongest factors (Supplementary Fig. 7a,
Supplementary Data 6). Interestingly, the inﬂuence of fruit and
vegetable consumption pointed towards control-enriched MLGs
in canonical coordinate analysis (CCA), while C-reactive protein
(CRP) and meat consumption were associated with carcinomaenriched MLGs (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Spearman’s correlation
coefﬁcient of Z0.2 was observed between relative abundance of
the MLGs and the dietary or physiological parameters (Fig. 6,
Supplementary Figs 8 and 9). Carcinoma-enriched bacteria that
produce short chain fatty acids, the major energy source for
colonocytes, through amino acid fermentation, and/or bacteria
that metabolize bile acids24,25, for example, B. massiliensis, B.
dorei, B. vulgates, Parabacteroides merdae, A. ﬁnegoldii and B.
wadsworthia, showed a positive correlation with consumption of
red meat and/or a negative correlation with consumption of fruits
and vegetables (Fig. 6), suggesting a common pathway in
colorectal
tumourigenesis.
control-enriched
mutans and Clostridium sp., on the other hand, positively
correlated with vegetable intake. These weak correlations with
diet were supported by signiﬁcant differences in the MLGs
between high and low intake groups (Supplementary Fig. 7b–h).
Carcinoma-enriched bacteria such as B. massiliensis, P. merdae,
A. ﬁnegoldii and B. wadsworthia were less abundant in subjects
consuming more vegetable or fruits, in contrast to the control-
Bacteroides
Relative abundance
Faecalibacterium
Streptococcus
Ruminococcus
Eubacterium
Bifidobacterium
Actinomyces
Number of Dirichlet components
State versus enterotype
Enterotypes
Advanced adenoma
Figure 2 | Difference in community types. (a) Fitting to the DMM model20 indicates optimal classiﬁcation into two community types. (b) Plot for
non-metric dimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination of Jensen–Shannon divergence values between stool samples using DMM. Red, community type 1;
green, community type 2. (c) Relative abundances of the top 10 most abundant genera in the two community types. Box plot as in Fig. 1a. (d) Distribution of
the healthy control, advanced adenoma and carcinoma samples in the community types. The areas of the columns scale with sample size, that is, n ¼ 55,
42 and 41, respectively. P ¼ 0.00072, Fisher test; P ¼ 0.0014, w2-test.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Clostridium
(Supplementary
Fig. 7b,d). Carcinoma MLGs including mlg-84, mlg-850 and
mlg-1738 were more abundant in subjects consuming a greater
amount of total meat or red meat (Supplementary Fig. 7e,f).
Serum levels of ferritin, a protein responsible for intracellular
iron storage, negatively correlated with many of the carcinomaenriched MLGs (Fig. 6), highlighting iron as a key resource for
the growth of a number of pathogenic bacteria26, which feed on
iron from the host or dietary sources such as meat. Haemoglobin
(Hb) displayed negative correlation with the carcinoma-enriched
mlg-75, mlg-2985, mlg-88 and mlg-84.
Other known risk factors, such as current or ever smoking also
coincided with enrichment of MLGs (including B. dorei and
B. vulgatus; Supplementary Figs 8 and 9). Waist–hip ratio
negatively correlated with the control-enriched Clostridium
sp. and S. thermophilus, and positively correlated with the
carcinoma-enriched
Bacteroides
(Fig. 6). BMI, on the other hand, showed negative correlation
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control Advanced
Control versus advanced adenoma
Control versus carcinoma
Advanced adenoma versus carcinoma
Relative abundance
Relative abundance
Control versus advanced adenoma
Control versus carcinoma
Advanced adenoma versus carcinoma
Not mapped to KO
Unknown function
Amino acid metabolism
Biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites
Carbohydrate metabolism
Cell growth and death
Cell motility
Cellular processes and signaling
Digestive system
Endocrine system
Energy metabolism
Enzyme families
Excretory system
Folding, sorting and degradation
Genetic information processing
Glycan biosynthesis and metabolism
Immune system diseases
Infectious diseases
Lipid metabolism
Membrane transport
Metabolism
Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
Metabolism of other amino acids
Metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides
Nucleotide metabolism
Poorly characterized
Replication and repair
Signal transduction
Signaling molecules and interaction
Transcription
Translation
Transport and catabolism
Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism
% in genes
Figure 3 | Gene markers along the adenoma–carcinoma sequence. (a) All 130,715 differentially enriched genes (Benjamin–Hochberg q-valueo0.1) were
grouped according to their direction of enrichment in control versus adenoma, control versus carcinoma and adenoma versus carcinoma, where þ
indicates enrichment in latter,  indicates enrichment in former and 0 indicates no difference (pZ0.05, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Bonferroni correction to
control for multiple testing). The relative abundance of genes in each group is shown in violin plot, that is, interquartile ranges (IQRs; thick bars),
medians (open dots on the bars), the lowest and highest values within 1.5 times IQR from the ﬁrst and third quartiles (lines above and below the bars)
and density of values (width between curves). The number of genes in each group is shown in parenthesis and as coloured blocks on the central bar.
(b) Distribution in KEGG level 2 pathways of the gene markers in a.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Actinomycetaceae
Bifidobacteriaceae
Bacteroidaceae
Porphyromonadaceae
Prevotellaceae
Rikenellaceae
Acidaminococcaceae
Clostridiaceae
Lachnospiraceae
Streptococcaceae
Veillonellaceae
Burkholderiales
Desulfovibrionaceae
Sutterellaceae
Enterobacteriaceae
Actinobacteria
Bacteroidetes
Firmicutes
Proteobacteria
Unclassified MLGs
Unclassified MLGs
Carcinoma-enriched
Control-enriched
Control-enriched
Adenoma-enriched
Carcinoma-enriched
Adenoma-enriched
mlg-1697 mlg-359
mlg-1640 mlg-1679 mlg-1044
mlg-190mlg-34
mlg-331 mlg-2749
Bacteroides massiliensis
Paraprevotella clara
Bacteroides dorei
Bifidobacterium animalis
Streptococcus mutans
Bacteroides sp.
Bacteroides xylanisolvens
Bacteroides ovatus
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Parabacteroides merdae
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Bacteroides massiliensis
Parabacteroides distasonis
Bacteroides dorei
Bacteroides sp.
Bacteroides eggerthii
Bacteroides vulgatus
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Burkholderiales bacterium Acidaminococcus intestini
Bacteroides caccae
Alistipes finegoldii
Sutterella wadsworthensis
Paraprevotella clara
Escherichia coli
Veillonella atypica
Actinomyces viscosus
Streptococcus thermophilus
Clostridium sp.
Streptococcus mutans
Bifidobacterium animalis
Clostridium symbiosum
Bilophila wadsworthia
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Bacteroides ovatus
Bacteroides xylanisolvens
Clostridium symbiosum
Clostridium sp.
Bacteroides sp.
Parabacteroides merdae
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Bilophila wadsworthia
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Bacteroides sp.
Acidaminococcus intestini
Escherichia coli
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Burkholderiales bacterium
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Bacteroides massiliensis
Parabacteroides distasonis
Streptococcus thermophilus
Bifidobacterium animalis
Actinomyces viscosus
Sutterella wadsworthensis
Veillonella atypica
Bacteroides eggerthii
Alistipes finegoldii
Bacteroides caccae
Lachnospiraceae bacterium
Figure 4 | Gut MLGs in the controls, advanced adenoma or carcinoma samples. (a) Control versus advanced adenoma (n ¼ 55 and 42). (b) Advanced
adenoma versus carcinoma (n ¼ 42 and 41). (c) Control versus carcinoma (n ¼ 55 and 41). For all MLGs containing 4100 genes, the direction of
enrichment was determined by Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Po0.05, Supplementary Data 3). Size of the nodes scales with the number of genes (102B3613)
in the MLG. MLGs annotated to species or genera are coloured according to family. Edges between nodes indicate Spearman’s correlation 40.8 (green),
between 0.6 and 0.8 (light to dark blue) or o  0.6 (red), calculated according to the samples under comparison.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
with some carcinoma-enriched MLGs. These results are in
agreement with meta-analysis showing that central obesity is a
more reliable risk factor for CRC than general obesity27.
Consistent with a signiﬁcant role played by diet, KEGG
phosphotransferase
transporters for a number of different sugars, were overrepresented in healthy controls compared with adenoma samples
or in adenoma compared with carcinoma samples (Fig. 7,
Supplementary Data 7). Modules for transporting the amino acids
histidine, arginine and lysine were enriched in carcinoma
synthesizing
histidine, lysine, methionine, cysteine, leucine and tryptophan
were enriched in control compared with adenoma, or adenoma
compared with carcinoma samples. Besides increased capacity
for the utilization of dietary or host amino acids along the
adenoma–carcinoma sequence, increased capacity for metabolizing host glycans such as mucin and glycosaminoglycans was
suggested by the higher abundance of KO modules for the
degradation of dermatan sulphate, heparin sulphate and keratan
sulphate (Fig. 7). The sulfatases in these modules have been
characterized in Flavobacterium heparinum, B. thetaiotaomicron
and seen in other Bacteroides28–31. Sulfonate/nitrate/taurine
transport system was elevated in adenomas compared with
controls, suggesting changes in the metabolism of bile acids
(Fig. 7, Supplementary Data 7). Higher levels of methanogenesis
carcinomas
compared with healthy controls. Moreover, these differentially
enriched functions such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis,
keratan sulphate degradation and iron(III) transport system could
be found in the MLG markers in the classiﬁer for adenoma or
carcinoma, along with more house-keeping functions (Fig. 7,
Supplementary Data 8–10). Together, our results suggest venues
through which a diet low in fruits and vegetables relative to meats
select for outgrowth of putrefactive bacteria, which might help
promote colorectal carcinoma.
In addition to functions listed in the KEGG database, the gut
microbiota have been reported to control response to cancer
therapies6,32. Alistipes and Ruminococcus positively correlated
Number of variables
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Probability of carcinoma
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Number of variables
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Probability of carcinoma
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Number of variables
Probability of carcinoma
Probability of carcinoma
Probability of carcinoma
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Probability of carcinoma
Specificity (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Training set (n=96)
Training set (n=96)
Training set (n=96)
Test set (n=60)
Test set (n=60)
Training set (n=97)
Training set (n=97)
Training set (n=97)
Test set (n=59)
Test set (n=59)
Training set (n=97)
Training set (n=97)
Training set (n=97)
Test set (n=59)
Test set (n=59)
Figure 5 | Gut MLGs classify colorectal carcinoma and adenoma samples from healthy controls. (a) Distribution of 5 trials of 10-fold cross-validation
error in random forest classiﬁcation of carcinoma as the number of MLGs increases. The model was trained using relative abundance of the MLGs
(4100 genes) in the controls and carcinoma samples (n ¼ 55 and 41). The black curve indicates average of the ﬁve trials (grey lines). The pink line marks
the number of MLGs in the optimal set (Supplementary Data 5). The same MLGs were selected if age and BMI were included along with the MLGs.
(b) Box-and-whisker plot for the probability of carcinoma in the cross-validational training set according to the model in a. (c) Receiver operating
curve (ROC) for the training set. The area under receiver operating curve (AUC) is 98.34% and 95% conﬁdence interval (CI) is 96.29–100%.
(d) Classiﬁcation of the test set consisted of 8 controls (green), 47 advanced adenoma (blue) and 5 carcinoma (red), that is, 18 unused samples
and 42 adenoma samples used in analyses in Figs 1–4, 6 and 7. (e) ROC for the test set. The AUC is 96% and 95% CI is 87.88–100%. (f–j) Training and
testing the model that classiﬁes adenomas from controls, performed as in a–e. The AUC for the training set (n ¼ 55 controls, 42 adenomas) is 87.38%
and 95% CI is 80.21–94.55%; the AUC for the test set (8 controls, 5 advanced adenomas and 46 carcinomas) is 59.56% and 95% CI is 37.51–81.61%.
(k–o) Training and testing the model that classiﬁes adenomas from controls, performed as in (f–j) except that age and BMI were included along with
the MLGs. Age was selected by the model, making the optimal number of markers 11. The AUC for the training set is 89.74% and 95% CI is 83.32–96.16%;
the AUC for the test set is 59.56% and 95% CI is 37.64–81.48%.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Fasting glucose
HOMA index
Fasting insulin
Vegetables
White meat
Fiber intake
Total meat
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Bilophila wadsworthia
Lachnospiraceae bacterium(1081)
Bacteroides ovatus
Bacteroides xylanisolvens
Bacteroides massiliensis
Bacteroides dorei
Parabacteroides distasonis
Burkholderiales bacterium
Alistipes finegoldii
Clostridium symbiosum
Lachnospiraceae bacterium(1016)
Bacteroides eggerthii
Sutterella wadsworthensis
Veillonella atypica
Acidaminococcus intestini
Bacteroides sp.(1296)
Lachnospiraceae bacterium(2247)
Bacteroides caccae
Bacteroides vulgatus
Escherichia coli
Parabacteroides merdae(760)
Parabacteroides merdae(464)
Bacteroides sp.(269)
Streptococcus thermophilus
Clostridium sp.
Streptococcus mutans
Bifidobacterium animalis
Spearman’s correlation
Figure 6 | Numerical correlation between dietary or clinical indices and MLGs. Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient was calculated between the
relative abundance of each MLG (4100 genes) and the level of risk factors or clinical phenotypes indicated. Red, positive correlation; blue, negative
correlation. þ , Po0.05, FDR ¼ 0.4131; *, Po0.01, FDR ¼ 0.2635. The name of each MLG was coloured according to its direction of enrichment, that is,
green if higher in controls than in carcinomas, red if higher in carcinomas than in controls. Actinomyces viscosus, Alistipes putredinis, Paraprevotella clara,
mlg-703, mlg-711, mlg-798, mlg-1602 and mlg-7070 did not have signiﬁcant correlations with any of the 26 numerical phenotypes (P40.05, Spearman’s)
and are not shown. gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), body mass index (BMI), alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), triglyceride
(TG), haemoglobin (Hb), low density lipoprotein (LDL), C-reactive protein (CRP), waist–hip ratio (WHR), high density lipoprotein (HDL).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
with TNF production after anti-IL-10R/CpG oligonucleotide
immunotherapy in C57Bl/6 mice transplanted with MC38 colon
carcinoma6. We observed increase in A. ﬁnegoldii, mlg-482 (most
related to A. onderdonkii), A. putredinis in colorectal carcinoma
and decrease in mlg-6514 (most related to Ruminococcus sp.
5_1_39BFAA) whose abundance anti-correlated with a few
Lysine biosynthesis, aspartate => lysine
Glycolysis (Embden−Meyerhof pathway), glucose => pyruvate
Pentose phosphate pathway (Pentose phosphate cycle)
Citrate cycle, first carbon oxidation
Aminoacyl−tRNA biosynthesis, prokaryotes
Putative glutamine transport system
Branched−chain amino acid transport system
PRPP biosynthesis, ribose 5P => PRPP
Threonine biosynthesis, apartate => homoserine => threonine
Glycolysis, core module involving three−carbon compounds
RNA polymerase, bacteria
C5 isoprenoid biosynthesis, non−mevalonate pathway
Fatty acid biosynthesis, initiation
PTS system, glucitol/sorbitol−specific II component
Antibiotic transport system
Uncharacterized ABC transport system
NAD biosynthesis, aspartate => NAD
Cobalt transport system
Spermidine/putrescine transport system
Methyl−galactoside transport system
Pentose phosphate pathway, non−oxidative phase, fructose 6P => ribose 5P
Tryptophan biosynthesis, chorismate => tryptophan
Simple sugar transport system
PTS system, fructose−specific II component
PTS system, sucrose−specific II component
N−Acetylglucosamine transport system
Glutathione transport system
PTS system, cellobiose−specific II component
Teichoic acid transport system
sn−Glycerol 3−phosphate transport system
PTS system, arbutin−like II component
Cellobiose transport system
C1−unit interconversion, prokaryotes
PTS system, glucose−specific II component
Cysteine biosynthesis, homocysteine + serine => cysteine
C10−C20 isoprenoid biosynthesis, archaea
C5 isoprenoid biosynthesis, mevalonate pathway
PTS system, trehalose−specific II component
Inosine monophosphate biosynthesis, PRPP + glutamine => IMP
Reductive acetyl−CoA pathway (Wood−Ljungdahl pathway)
PTS system, beta−glucosides−specific II component
Sulfate transport system
Leucine biosynthesis, pyruvate => 2−oxoisovalerate => leucine
Phosphate transport system
Peptides/nickel transport system
Putative multiple sugar transport system
PTS system, D−glucosamine−specific II component
Ribose transport system
PTS system, mannose−specific II component
Lactose/L−arabinose transport system
Maltose/maltodextrin transport system
Putative sugar transport system
Multiple sugar transport system
Uridine monophosphate biosynthesis, glutamine (+ PRPP) => UMP
D−Methionine transport system
Methionine biosynthesis, apartate => homoserine => methionine
Putative ABC transport system
Proline biosynthesis, glutamate => proline
Glutamate transport system
Histidine biosynthesis, PRPP => histidine
Polar amino acid transport system
Ribosome, bacteria
Shikimate pathway, phosphoenolpyruvate + erythrose−4P => chorismate
ATP synthase
F−type ATPase, bacteria
V−type ATPase, prokaryotes
PTS system, N−acetylgalactosamine−specific II component
Formaldehyde assimilation, ribulose monophosphate pathway
Sulfonate/nitrate/taurine transport system
Ribosome, archaea
Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase
Methionine salvage pathway
Pantothenate biosynthesis, valine/L−aspartate => pantothenate
Complex I (NADH dehydrogenase), NADH dehydrogenase I
Methanogenesis, acetate => methane
Methanogenesis, methanol => methane
RNA polymerase, archaea
Methanogenesis, formate => methane
Putative spermidine/putrescine transport system
Glutathione biosynthesis, glutamate => glutathione
Octopine/nopaline transport system
Zinc/manganese transport system
Adhesin protein transport system
Glucuronate pathway (uronate pathway)
Lipooligosaccharide transport system
PTS system, N−acetylmuramic acid−specific II component
Arginine/ornithine transport system
Complex I (NADH dehydrogenase), NADH dehydrogenase I
Tyrosine degradation, tyrosine => homogentisate
N−glycan precursor biosynthesis
Dipeptide transport system
Nucleotide sugar biosynthesis, prokaryotes
N−glycan biosynthesis, high−mannose type
Type IV secretion system
Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, inner core => outer core => O−antigen
Type III secretion system
Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, KDO2−lipid A
CMP−KDO biosynthesis
Putative ABC transport system
Manganese/zinc/iron transport system
Menaquinone biosynthesis, chorismate => menaquinone
2−oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase
Citrate cycle, second carbon oxidation
Manganese/iron transport system
Capsular polysaccharide transport system
Riboflavin biosynthesis, GTP => riboflavin/FMN/FAD
Histidine degradation, histidine => N−formiminoglutamate => glutamate
2−oxoisovalerate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase
Iron(III) transport system
F420 biosynthesis
Archaeal proteasome
Coenzyme M biosynthesis
Reductive citric acid cycle (Arnon−Buchanan cycle)
Dicarboxylate−hydroxybutyrate cycle
Biotin biosynthesis, pimeloyl−CoA => biotin
ADP−L−glycero−D−manno−heptose biosynthesis
Keratan sulfate degradation
Lipopolysaccharide export system
alpha−Hemolysin/cyclolysin transport system
Type II general secretion system
Pyridoxal biosynthesis, erythrose−4P => pyridoxal−5P
Putative tungstate transport system
Cytochrome bd complex
Ethylmalonyl pathway
Glycine betaine/proline transport system
Type VI secretion system
Heparan sulfate degradation
RTX toxin transport system
GABA biosynthesis, prokaryotes, putrescine => GABA
Lysine/arginine/ornithine transport system
Arginine transport system
Histidine transport system
General L−amino acid transport system
Glutamate/aspartate transport system
Dermatan sulfate degradation
Lipoprotein−releasing system
D−Allose transport system
Control versus carcinoma
Advanced adenoma
versus carcinoma
Control versus
advanced adenoma
Reporter score
Figure 7 | KO modules overrepresented in healthy controls, colorectal adenoma or carcinoma samples. The relative abundances of KO modules
were compared between control and adenoma, adenoma and carcinoma, or control and carcinoma, and modules with a signiﬁcant difference in
reporter score (o  1.7, enriched in former; 41.7, enriched in latter) are shown. þ , reporter score 42.3 or o  2.3.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
carcinoma-enriched MLGs (Fig. 4b,c, Supplementary Data 5). All
these MLGs were present in close to 100% of the carcinoma
patients regardless of histology, stage or location of the tumour.
P. distasonis monoassociation had been shown to compromise
immunogenic chemotherapy by doxorubicin against established
MCA205 sarcomas in mice32. MLGs for P. distasonis and
P. merdae were more abundant in carcinoma than advanced
adenoma samples, and were detected in most carcinoma samples
(Fig. 4b,c, Supplementary Data 5). Collectively, these results
indicate that gut microbes present or overgrown in human
colorectal carcinoma might facilitate or abrogate immuno or
chemotherapies, and should be examined for optimal selection of
treatment plans for each patient.
Discussion
In summary, our metagenome-wide association study for the gut
microbiome
colorectal
carcinoma patients identiﬁed genes, strains (MLGs) and functions
associated with the tumours, and open new ways for early
detection and patient stratiﬁcation of colorectal adenoma and
carcinoma. It remains to be seen how our markers might help
improve non-invasive screening of the colorectal tumours in
larger cohorts around the world.
In colitis-associated CRC mouse models, enterotoxigenic
B. fragilis induces colitis and colonic tumours through a T helper
type 17 (Th17) inﬂammatory response, and adherent-invasive
E. coli also promotes cancer33–35. B. ovatus and B. vulgatus have
been reported to be higher in human cases of Crohn’s disease (six
discordant and four concordant twin pairs)36. We observed
signiﬁcant increase of B. dorei and B. massiliensis from healthy to
advanced adenoma, and signiﬁcant increase of B. massiliensis,
B. ovatus, B. vulgatus and E. coli from advanced adenoma to
carcinoma (Fig. 4). B. dorei, B. vulgatus and E. coli also correlated
with levels of CRP, a marker for acute inﬂammation (Fig. 6).
These results suggest analogous roles played by gut microbes in
colitis-associated and adenoma-linked CRC.
Akkermansia, a mucin-degrading bacterium in the phylum of
Verrucomicrobia, has been reported to correlate with CRC in
humans and in a mouse model37,38. We observed no difference in
the abundance of Akkermansia among healthy controls, advanced
adenoma and carcinoma samples (Supplementary Fig. 2). Two of the
three PAM-based enterotypes contained a relatively high level of
Akkermansia, which included more controls and carcinoma samples,
respectively (Supplementary Fig. 1). Future analyses taking into
account factors such as obesity, diet and meal time would help
resolve the possible role of this important bacterium in CRC.
Even though putrefactive bacteria such as Alistipes and
Bacteroides could produce short chain fatty acid from amino
acids, carbohydrate fermentation is still preferred24,39, which
might explain protective roles of fruits and vegetables. In some
Fusobacterium species, however, transport of sugar depends on
amino acid fermentation (Glu, Lys, His or Ser)40,41, suggesting
that they only thrive in the presence of an ample supply of amino
acids. Phenolic compounds are produced from fermentation of
the aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine39, which
might increase DNA damage in the colon. Bile acid metabolism
by Bacteroides species and B. wadsworthia would also affect
gut microbial composition and impact host physiology42,43.
B. wadsworthia, in particular, utilizes taurine-conjugated bile
acids in sulphite reduction, and promotes colitis in genetically
susceptible mice (Il10  / )44. Bile acids have also been shown to
cause DNA damage and promote hepatocellular carcinoma in
mice45,46. Future research would help elucidate how the known
risk factors like diet, obesity and smoking collectively act on the
gut microbiome in the development of colorectal carcinoma.
Among the control-enriched MLGs were the lactic acidproducing bacteria Biﬁdobacterium animalis, S. mutans and
S. thermophilus. The lactic acid produced might help lower the
pH and inhibit amino acid degradation in the colon24,39.
Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium have been found to stimulate
NADPH oxidase 1-dependent ROS generation and intestinal
stem cell proliferation47, and lactate was reported to accelerate
colon epithelial cell turnover in starvation-refed mice48. Thus,
advanced colorectal adenoma or carcinoma patients appear to be
acid-producing
commensals
Biﬁdobacterium that could promote daily renewal of the colon
epithelium and inhibit potential pathogens. Gut microbiotadependent dietary or lifestyle intervention against colorectal
carcinoma warrants further investigation.
Study cohort and patient information. The study was conducted both in participants of a health screening programme according to national screening recommendations for CRC49 as well as in patients with suspected CRC undergoing
colonoscopy as part of the clinical workup at the Department of Internal Medicine,
Oberndorf Hospital (Teaching Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg, Austria) between 2010 and 2012. The study was approved by the local
ethics committee and informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Data from 147 Caucasians aged between 45–86 years were included in the initial
analysis, including 57 healthy controls (24 females and 33 males), 44 advanced
adenoma (22 females and 22 males) and 46 carcinoma (18 females and 28 males)
(Supplementary Data 1). Nine additional samples taken for another manuscript
(six healthy controls and three advanced adenoma samples, Supplementary
Data 1) were also used in the test sets for the MLG-based adenoma or carcinoma
classiﬁer (Fig. 5). So far, no study has investigated the given topic in a comparable
manner; therefore no formal power analysis for sample size calculation could be
performed. However, judging from previous 16S- and metagenomic shotgunsequencing studies on the faecal microbiota in diseases, this is a reasonable sample
size. Subjects were stratiﬁed with respect to gender, age and BMI so that the three
groups (control, advanced adenoma and carcinoma) were comparable with respect
to these variables. In the advanced adenoma group, 14 were located to the right
colon (including caecum, ascending colon and transverse colon), 15 were located to
the left colon (ranging from the splenic ﬂexure to the sigmoid) and 15 to the
rectum. In the carcinoma group, 8 were located to the right colon, 11 to the left
colon and 27 to the rectum. Colorectal carcinoma was classiﬁed by the American
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM staging system22.
Metabolic syndrome was evaluated as deﬁned by the National Cholesterol
Education Program Adult Treatment Panel50.
Blood pressure was measured twice by a nurse after a 5-min rest in a sitting
position and the average was taken as the measurement of blood pressure. Waist
circumference was taken at the highest point of the iliac crest with subjects
standing in an upright position. The metabolic syndrome was diagnosed when
three of the following criteria were met: fasting blood glucose level Z6.1 mmol l  1,
waist circumference 4102 cm or 488 cm in males or females, respectively,
blood pressure Z130/85 mm Hg or current antihypertensive treatment, plasma
triglycerides Z1.7 mmol l  1, plasma HDL o1.0 mmol l  1 or o1.3 mmol l  1 in
males or females, respectively, or current statin therapy. BMI was calculated as
weight/squared body height (kg m  2).
Serum ferritin was measured by Architect CI 4100 Analyzer, using the ferritin
chemoluminiscent microparticle assay (ABBOTT Laboratories, Abbott Europe,
Delkenheim, Germany).
Laboratory assessment. Following an overnight fast, a venous blood sample was
obtained in all subjects and analyzed by standard laboratory methods. Blood was
centrifuged and plasma was analyzed for triglycerides, cholesterol, high density and
low density lipoprotein cholesterol and CRP. A standardized oral glucose tolerance
test was performed with 75 g of glucose in 300 ml of water. HbA1c was measured
by HPLC using Adamts H-8160 (Menarini, Florence, Italy). The homoeostasis
model assessment (HOMA-IR; fasting insulin (mU l  1)  fasting glucose
(mmol dl  1)/22.5) was used to assess insulin resistance. Type 2 diabetes was
classiﬁed as use of diabetes medication or Hba1C Z6.5% or oral glucose tolerance
test 411.1 mmol l  1 after 2 h or fasting glucose 47.0 mmol l  1.
Stool samples. Fresh stool samples were collected from all patients and subjects.
Samples were mechanically homogenized with a sterile spatula, then four aliquots
were taken, using the Sarstedt stool sampling system (Sarstedt, Nu¨mbrecht,
Germany). Each aliquot contained 1 g of stool in a sterile 12 ml cryovial. Faecal
aliquots were then stored at home freezers at  20 C and transported to the
laboratory within 48 h after collection in a freezer pack, where they were
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6528 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7528 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
immediately stored at  80 C. Patients and subjects did not receive probiotics or
antibiotics within the last 3 months.
Colonoscopy. The laxative Klean–Prep (containing macrogol 59.0 g, sodium
sulphate 5.68 g, sodium bicarbonate 1.68 g, NaCl 1.46 g and potassium chloride
0.74 g; Norgine, Marburg, Germany) was used for bowel preparation before
colonoscopy. Colonoscopic ﬁndings were classiﬁed as tubular adenoma, advanced
adenoma, that is, villous or tubulovillous features, size Z1 cm, or high-grade
dysplasia or carcinoma after a combined analysis of macroscopic and histological
results51,52. Lesions were classiﬁed by location (that is, right colon including
caecum, ascending colon and transverse colon, left colon ranging from the splenic
ﬂexure to the sigmoid and rectum alone).
Assessment of lifestyle and dietary habits. A detailed medical history, including
lifestyle and dietary questionnaires, was obtained. Smoking status was classiﬁed
into never smokers, former smokers and current smokers (including detailed
assessment of current and former smoked cigarettes per day; data reported in packs
per year). Physical activity was assessed using the international physical activities
questionnaire (IPAQ)53 and subjects were grouped into three groups: low,
moderate and high physical activity according to published scoring protocol.
Dietary habits were assessed using a detailed standardized questionnaire within
1 week of the faecal donation and the colonoscopy. The amount of one serving as
well as the ﬁbre content was calculated according to the recommendations of the
American Heart Association (www.heart.org). Meat consumption was asked in
detail for pork, beef, veal and venison (grouped as red meat); chicken and turkey
(white meat) and offal. Furthermore, the frequency and amount of the
consumption of vegetables, fruits and ﬁsh were assessed and total intake of ﬁbre
was calculated.
The study was approved by the local ethics committee and informed consent was
obtained from all participants.
Metagenomic sequencing and gene catalogue construction. Paired-end metagenomic sequencing was performed on the Illumina platform (insert size 350 bp,
read length 100 bp), and the sequencing reads were quality controlled and de novo
assembled into contigs using SOAPdenovo v2.04 (refs 16,54; default parameters
except for -K 51 –M 3 -F –u).
Gene prediction from the assembled contigs was performed using GeneMark
v2.7d. Redundant genes were removed using BLAT55 with the cutoff of 90%
overlap and 95% identity (no gaps allowed). Relative abundances of the genes were
determined by aligning high-quality sequencing reads to the gene catalogue using
the same procedure as in ref. 16.
Taxonomic assignment of the predicted genes was performed according to the
IMG database (v400) using an in-house pipeline16, with 80% overlap and 65%
identity top 10% scores (BLASTN v2.2.24, -e 0.01 -b 100 -K 1 -F T -m 8). The
cutoffs were 65% identity for assignment to phylum, 85% identity to genus, 95%
identity to species and Z50% consensus for the taxon under question, if multiple
hits remained.
Rarefaction curve. Rarefaction analysis was performed to assess the gene richness
in the healthy controls, advanced adenoma and carcinoma samples. For a given
number of samples, we performed random sampling 100 times in the cohort with
replacement and estimated the total number of genes that could be identiﬁed from
these samples by the Chao2 richness estimator56. To minimize erroneous
identiﬁcation, only the genes with Z1 pair of mapped reads were determined to be
present in a sample.
Quantiﬁcation of virulence factors. Putative amino acid sequences were aligned
against the proteins in the Virulence Factors of pathogenic bacteria Databases
(VFDB)18 using BLASTP (v2.2.24, default parameter except that -p blastp -a 2 -F F
-e 1e-3 -m 8). A protein was assigned to a virulence factor by the highest scoring
annotated hit containing an identity 435% and high-scoring segment pair scoring
460 bits. Differentially enriched virulence factors were identiﬁed by using
Kruskal–Wallis test.
Microbial community types (enterotypes). The community type of each faecal
metagenomic sample was analyzed by the PAM-based method using relative
abundances of genera16,19, and by the Dirichlet multinomial mixture model-based
method using counts of sequencing reads20 (Supplementary Methods).
Metagenome-wide association study (MGWAS). For comparison of the faecal
microbiome in healthy controls, advanced adenoma and carcinoma patients, genes
that showed signiﬁcant difference in relative abundance between any of the two
groups were identiﬁed (Benjamin–Hochberg q-valueo0.1, Kruskal–Wallis test).
These marker genes were then clustered into MLGs according to their abundance
variation across all three groups of samples16. Nine of the 147 samples contained
420% Escherichia (2 controls, 2 adenoma and 5 carcinoma samples), and were
only used subsequently in the test sets for the MLG-based adenoma or carcinoma
classiﬁers (Fig. 5). Nine additional samples taken for another manuscript (six
healthy controls and three advanced adenoma samples, Supplementary Data 1)
were also used in the test sets for the classiﬁers.
Taxonomic assignment and abundance proﬁling of the MLGs were performed
according to the taxonomy and the relative abundance of their constituent genes, as
previously described16. Brieﬂy, assignment to species requires 490% of genes in an
MLG to align with the species’ genome with 495% identity and 70% overlap of
query. Assigning an MLG to a genus requires 480% of its genes to align with a
genome with 85% identity in both DNA and protein sequences. When comparing
two groups, for example, controls and adenoma, MLGs were further clustered
according to Spearman’s correlation between their abundances in all control and
adenoma samples, and the co-occurrence network was visualized by Cytoscape
3.0.2. The direction of enrichment was determined by Wilcoxon rank-sum test
MLG-based classiﬁer. A 10-fold cross-validation was performed on a random
forest model (R 3.0.2, randomForest4.6-7 package) using the MLG abundance
proﬁle of the control, advanced adenoma or carcinoma samples (Supplementary
Methods). The cross-validational error curves (average of 10 test sets each) from 5
trials of the 10-fold cross-validation were averaged, and the minimum error in the
averaged curve plus the s.d. at that point was used as the cutoff. All sets (r 50) of
MLG markers with an error less than the cutoff were listed, and the set with the
smallest number of MLGs was chosen as the optimal set. The probability of adenoma or carcinoma was calculated using this set of MLGs and an ROC was drawn
(R 3.0.2, pROC3 package). The model was further tested on the testing set and the
prediction error was determined.
PERMANOVA on the inﬂuence of clinical and lifestyle factors. Permutational
multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA)57 was performed on the gene
abundance proﬁle of all samples to assess impact from each of the factors listed
(Supplementary Methods). We used Euclidean distance and 9,999 permutations in
R (3.0.2, vegan package58).
Canonical correspondence analysis. Canonical correspondence analysis was
performed on the MLG (4100 genes) abundance proﬁle of the control, adenoma
and carcinoma samples together to assess impact from each of the factors listed
(Supplementary Methods). The plot was generated by R (3.0.2, vegan package58).
KEGG analysis. Putative amino acid sequences were translated from the gene
catalogues and aligned against the proteins/domains in the KEGG databases
(release 59.0, with animal and plant genes removed) using BLASTP (v2.2.24,
default parameter except that -e 0.01 -b 100 -K 1 -F T -m 8). Each protein was
assigned to the KO group by the highest scoring annotated hit(s) containing at least
one HSP scoring 460 bits.
Differentially enriched KO modules were identiﬁed according to their reporter
score59 from the Z-scores of individual KOs. One-tail Wilcoxon rank-sum test was
performed on all the KOs that occurred in more than ﬁve samples and adjusted for
multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg procedure. The Z-score for each KO
could then be calculated:
ZKOi ¼ y  1 1  PKOi
where y  1 is the inverse normal cumulative distribution, PKOiis the adjusted P
value for that KO. The aggregated Z-score for a KEGG pathway (or module)
Zpathway ¼
where k is the number of KOs involved in the pathway (or module).
We corrected the background distribution of Zpathway by subtracting the mean
(mk) and dividing by the s.d. (sk) of the aggregated Z-scores of 1,000 sets of k KO,
chosen randomly from the whole metabolic KO network:
Zadjustedpathway ¼
Zpathway  mk
: The Zadjustedpathway was used as the ﬁnal reporter
score for evaluating the enrichment of speciﬁc pathways or modules. A reporter
score of Z1.6 (90% conﬁdence according to normal distribution) could be used as
a detection threshold for signiﬁcantly differentiating pathways.