Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular
Cortex Are Tuned to Pleasant Caressing Speeds
India Morrison,1,2 Malin Bjo¨rnsdotter,2 and Håkan Olausson1,2
1Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, S-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden and 2Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
University of Gothenburg, S-413 90 Gothenburg, Sweden
Background. Affective touch carries strong significance for social mammals, including humans. Gentle, dynamic touch of a kind that
occurs during social interactions is preferentially encoded by a distinct neural pathway involving tactile C (CT) afferents, a type of
unmyelinatedafferentnervefoundexclusivelyinhairyskin.CTafferentsincreasefiringwhentheskinisstrokedatapleasant,caress-like
speedof3cm/s,andtheirdischargefrequencycorrelateswiththesubjectivehedonicexperienceofthecaress.Inhumans,theposterior
insulaisacorticaltargetforCTafferents.Sincethepotentialsocialrelevanceofaffectivetouchextendstothetouchinteractionsofothers,
we postulated that information from CT afferents in posterior insular cortex provides a basis for encoding observed caresses.
Results. In two experiments, we exploited CT afferents’ functionally unique tuning curve for stroking speed, demonstrating that a speed
optimalforelicitingCTdischarge(3cm/s)alsogivesrisetohigherBOLDresponsesinposteriorinsulathananonoptimalspeed(30cm/s).
When participants viewed videos of others’ arms being stroked at CT-optimal versus -nonoptimal speeds, the posterior insula showed a
similar response as to directly felt touch. Further, this region’s response was specific for social interactions, showing no CT-related
modulation for nonsocial dynamic-touch videos.
Conclusions.ThesefindingsprovidedirectevidenceforafunctionalrelationshipbetweenCTsignalingandprocessinginposteriorinsular
cortex.SuchselectivetuningforCT-optimalsignalsininsulamayallowrecognitionofthehedonicrelevanceofamerelyobservedcaress.
Introduction
Touch can act as a conductor of emotion between people, sparking positive feelings that forge attachments and strengthen social
bonds. This important affective dimension is also present in the
social interactions that we observe around us, allowing us to thrill
to a touch between actors in a film just as we might react to an
emotionally significant touch on our own skin. Our perception of
a caress, whether felt or seen, may thus be constrained by specific,
affectively relevant features of touch.
What might those features be? One candidate is the speed at
which a touch travels over the skin: a typical caress involves light,
dynamic stroking that neither moves too slowly nor too quickly.
This is supported by the recent discovery that human CT (tactile
C) afferent fibers are sensitive to a caress-like range of stroking
speeds associated with positively hedonic subjective responses
 . CT afferents are slow-conducting, unmyelinated, low-threshold mechanoreceptive nerve fibers that carry
signals from the receptive fields in the epidermis of mammalian
hairy skin .
When forearm skin is gently stroked at speeds consistent with
a social caress (1–10 cm/s), the CT afferents of human volunteers
fire vigorously, decreasing when the skin is stroked at faster or
slower speeds. This velocity-sensitive CT response is tightly correlated with subjective ratings of how pleasant the touch feels
 . Human CT pathways ultimately target the
insular cortex , a region associated with emotion and homeostatic
balance .
Affective aspects of touch are especially relevant in the social
domain as forms of signaling and regulating emotion during interactions . This applies not only to interactions in which
we are directly involved, but also to those we observe around us.
The human brain may be attuned to “see” distinguishing features
of affective touch when watching others. Similar modulation across
tactile and visual domains, or vicarious responding, could facilitate
the detection and interpretation of these relevant features in interpersonal touch interactions. Such features could constrain an observer’s inferences about others’ relationships, helping to track likely
affiliations, status changes, or reconciliations of
thosewithwhomtheobserveralsointeracts.Therefore,wepredicted
not only that the posterior insular cortex would be responsive to the
dynamic properties of a caress, but that it would be similarly recruited during observation of others being caressed.
In the following two experiments, we stroked participants’
forearm skin at two different velocities: a speed that optimally
Received Jan. 24, 2011; revised April 5, 2011; accepted May 13, 2011.
Authorcontributions:I.M.designedresearch;I.M.performedresearch;M.B.contributedunpublishedreagents/
analytic tools; I.M. and M.B. analyzed data; I.M. and H.O. wrote the paper.
ThisworkwassupportedbyaSwedishResearchCouncilGrant2007-2635(toI.M.)andtheWallenbergFoundation. We thank Dr. Line Lo¨ken and Irene Perini for valuable assistance.
The authors declare no financial conflicts of interest.
Correspondence should be addressed to India Morrison, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Blåstråket 7,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, S-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0397-11.2011
Copyright © 2011 the authors
0270-6474/11/319554-09$15.00/0
9554 • The Journal of Neuroscience, June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562
activates CT afferents (3 cm/s) and a nonoptimal speed at which
CT afferent discharge frequency is significantly lower (30 cm/s).
If CT-borne stroking-speed information is critical to the posterior insula’s response to dynamic touch, this region should show
preferential responses to stroking at 3 compared with 30 cm/s,
even when the texture of the brush varies in perceived pleasantness. We also predicted that viewing videos of others’ forearms
being stroked would engage the insula with comparable CT-like
velocity sensitivity, but that such modulation would be specific to
interpersonal touch interactions.
Materials and Methods
Experiment 1
Participants. Fourteen healthy adult volunteers (mean age, 22 years; two
left-handed, six female) were recruited from the University of Gothenburg. Participants gave informed consent approved by the University of
Gothenburg and Sahlgrenska University Hospital, in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki. Participation was compensated at 200 Swedish
crowns (20€) per session. One participant’s data were discarded due to
excessive head motion.
Stimuli. Tactile stimuli consisted of brush strokes over 10 cm of left
forearm skin using a soft, 70-mm-wide, goathair artist’s brush. Brush
strokes were delivered in proximo-distal orientation (back and forth)
manually at two different velocities: 3 and 30 cm/s. The experimenter
(I.M.) was trained in the delivery of the stimuli, and during the experiment was guided by a visual meter with a moving stripe representing the
appropriate velocity and distance in each trial. Occluders were placed on
the head coil’s mirror to ensure that participants’ field of view was limited
to the screen and did not include the sight of the stimulated limb. During
each visual trial, subjects viewed a 15 s sequence of short videos depicting
a left arm, palm down on a black background, being stroked by a hand at
a rate of either 3 or 30 cm/s. The model’s arm appeared in either an
egocentric or allocentric perspective, which was randomized throughout
the experiment (pilot experiments showed no effect of perspective on
subjective ratings of the videos). Visual stimuli were projected onto a
screen positioned near the participants’ feet, visible through mirrors affixed to the head coil.
Design. The experimental design was a 2  2 factorial among the
factors modality (tactile, visual) and velocity (3 cm/s, 30 cm/s). Each of
the four runs was 5 min and 25 s long and consisted of 21 15 s segments.
Segments 1, 6, 11, 16, and 21 were a fixation-only baseline condition. The
remaining 16 segments consisted of presentations of the same condition
for 1500 ms. For 3 cm/s tactile trials, segments consisted of five 3 s strokes
to the forearm; for 30 cm/s tactile trials, segments consisted of 15 1 s
strokes to the forearm. For all 3 cm/s visual trials, segments consisted of
five different 3 s videos in pseudorandomized order; for all 30 cm/s visual
trials, segments consisted of 15 different 1 s videos in pseudorandomized
order, for a total of four presentations per condition per run. Tactile and
visual blocks were presented within the same runs. Segments were counterbalanced within runs using a Latin square. Two versions of the withinrun counterbalancing design were counterbalanced among participants.
To ensure maintenance of attention to the stimuli, participants performed a one-back task for all conditions, detecting repetitions of stroking direction in tactile trials, and repetitions of exactly identical videos in
visual trials by pressing a button (repetitions occurred at least once in
every segment). Button presses were made with the hand contralateral to
the stimulated arm to avoid potential confounds of sensory processing
with motor preparation.
Data acquisition. A 1.5-T Philips Intera magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scanner with a SENSE head coil was used. For functional imaging,
a single-shot echo-planar imaging sequence was used (T2*-weighted,
gradient echo sequence, repetition time  3000, echo time  50 ms, flip
angle  90°, field of view  120 mm). The scanned area included 15 axial
slices, 5-mm-thick, with no gap, at 64  64 voxel in-plane resolution,
angled to cover the whole insular cortex and primary and secondary
sensory cortex. Slice restriction and positioning was hypothesis-driven.
To minimize head movement, participants’ heads were stabilized with a
vacuum hood filled with polystyrene balls (Vacuform Hood; Cambridge
Research Systems). Responses to the one-back task were collected with a
scanner-safe fiber-optic response pad system.
Data analysis. Preprocessing and statistical analysis of MRI data were
performed using BrainVoyager QX (Brain Innovation). Three dummy
volumes were acquired before each scan to reduce possible effects of T1
saturation. Functional data were motion-corrected and low-frequency
drifts were removed with a temporal high-pass filter (0.006 Hz). Spatial
smoothing was applied with a 6 mm full width at half-maximum filter.
Functional data were manually coregistered with three-dimensional
(3D) anatomical T1 scans (1  1.58  1.58 mm resolution resampled to
1  1  1 mm) on the basis of anatomical landmarks for each individual.
The 3D anatomical scans were transformed into Talairach space and the parameters for this transformation
were subsequently applied to the coregistered functional data.
General linear models were created for each of the four runs. One
predictor (convolved with a standard model of the hemodynamic response function) modeled each of the four conditions (3 cm/s tactile, 30
cm/s tactile, 3 cm/s visual, and 30 cm/s visual). Voxel time series were
z-normalized for each run. The regressors were fitted to the MR time
series in each voxel. Whole-brain random-effects contrasts were thresholded at t  3.4 (p  0.001), balancing the risk of type I and type II errors
in this prerestricted brain volume targeting insular cortex. The cluster
size threshold was determined by BrainVoyager’s cluster threshold estimator plug-in, which uses a Monte Carlo simulation procedure (1000
iterations) to establish the critical cluster size threshold corresponding to
a family-wise alpha of 0.05 corrected for the whole brain volume.
Multivoxel pattern analysis. We used a linear support vector machine
(SVM) to assess the distinctness of distributed
activation patterns between velocities (3 and 30 cm/s) and between modalities (felt and seen). As opposed to general linear modeling based on
univariate mean responses, multivoxel analysis is sensitive to patterns of
signal changes across voxels: the more distinct the pattern, the more
accurate the classification. We predicted that 3 and 30 cm/s stimuli
should elicit relatively distinct distributed patterns, whereas if voxels
sensitive to tactile information are also engaged by the stroking videos,
the SVM classifier should be less accurate at distinguishing tactile and
visual patterns. For the subset of seven subjects showing a main effect of
3 cm/s in the insula at the individual level, volumes of interest were
created including all activated voxels for the contrast 3 versus 30 cm/s on
each individual’s unsmoothed data. Inclusion criteria for ROI definition
were that the peak voxel fell either anteriorly or posteriorly to the individual’s insular central sulcus at a threshold of p  0.001, and a cluster
size of 20 voxels. For the set of all 13 subjects, a single volume of interest
was created based on the group level ROI for the main effect of 3 cm/s.
Multivoxel pattern classification was performed using a linear SVM on t
values per voxel for two pairs of categories: 3 versus 30 cm/s (regardless of
modality) and felt versus seen (regardless of velocity), with a linear trend
predictor included in the trial estimation model [using the multivoxel
pattern analysis software included in Brainvoyager QX 2.1]. For each
category pair, a leave-one-out cross-validation was performed in which
all but one trial was used to train the SVM, and the remaining trial was
used to test the trained classifier.
Behavioral ratings. Before the experiment, participants were seated in
front of a laptop monitor showing a visual analog scale (VAS), with the
anchor points unpleasant (0) and pleasant (10) and the midpoint being
neutral. Participants rated the pleasantness of single 3 or 30 cm/s strokes
to the forearm (tactile trials) and videos depicting 3 or 30 cm/s strokes to
another person’s forearm (visual trials). In each trial, instructions appeared above the VAS, followed by a 4 s response interval. For tactile
trials, participants were instructed to “rate how pleasant the touch feels to
you.” Participants were wearing goggles flanked by occluders that ensured that their arm and the experimenter were out of view. Similarly, for
the visual trials, participants registered their ratings on the VAS after each
trial, with the instruction “rate how pleasant you think the touch feels to
the person in the video.” It was made clear to participants that the “person in the video” referred to the recipient of the stroking (the model)
rather than the person performing the stroking. There were three repetitions of each condition (felt 3 cm/s, seen 3 cm/s, felt 30 cm/s, and seen
30 cm/s), presented in pseudorandom order.
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562 • 9555
After the experiment, sample videos for each of three velocities (0.3, 3,
and 30 cm/s) were rated using a Likert scale (1–5) assessing each participant’s degree of agreement with statements about how the touch felt for
the person in the video. Questions were grouped into items relating to the
sensory, attentional, and affiliative aspects of the stimuli (respective examples: “the touch seemed tickly,” “the touch seemed sudden,” “the
touch seemed caring”).
Experiment 2
Participants. Eighteen healthy, right-handed adult volunteers were recruited from the University of Gothenburg (mean age, 24 years; nine
female). Participants gave informed consent approved by the University
of Gothenburg and Sahlgrenska University Hospital, in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki. Participation was compensated at 200 Swedish crowns per session (20€). One run from one participant was discarded due to a ghosting artifact.
Stimuli. In experiment 2, the stroking brush had either soft bristles or
less pleasant stiff (but pliant) bristles. If less pleasant brush textures elicited a lesser degree of velocity-sensitive response in posterior insula, or
none at all, it would imply that the posterior insula response is influenced
by small differences in texture that are not signaled by CT afferents.
However, we hypothesized that velocity as signaled by CT afferents is the
critical feature for posterior insula responses, predicting no effect of texture on velocity sensitivity.
The experimental setup, stimuli, and delivery of stimuli were as in
experiment 1, with the following differences: tactile stimuli consisted of
brush strokes over 20 cm of left forearm rather than 10 cm. The brush
moved down the arm in a proximal-to-distal direction in a single stroke
rather than a series of strokes. The single stroke was discontinuous in
that at the midpoint of the stroke (10 cm), the brush moved slightly
diagonally either toward or away from the participant’s body. The
task (to ensure participants maintained attention to the stimuli) was
to press the button if the brush traveled in a straight line rather than
diagonally. The tactile stimulation was either soft or stiff, using a soft
70-mm-wide goathair artist’s brush or a stiff 70-mm-wide horsehair
brush, respectively.
For observed touch, it is possible that the experiment 1 velocitysensitive responses reflected only the low-level frequency or periodicity
information in the stroking videos, regardless of the social nature of the
stimuli. To rule this out, the visual stimulation in experiment 2 depicted
social tactile events (the arm videos as in experiment 1) or nonsocial
transitive tactile events, with the fingertips of a hand moving over a
distance of 10 cm on the surface of a bowl of water at 3 or 30 cm/s. Like
the arm videos, bowl videos were filmed in an egocentric or allocentric
perspective, randomized throughout the experiment. We predicted that
posterior insula responses would be modulated by velocity only when the
observed touch was social, with human skin as the target of the touch.
Design. The experimental design was a 2  2  2 factorial with the
factors modality (tactile, visual), velocity (3 cm/s, 30 cm/s), and specificity (pleasant–social, neutral–nonsocial). Each tactile or visual trial was
preceded by 500 ms of fixation followed by a 6000 ms (3 cm/s) or 2000 ms
(30 cm/s) stimulation, and the intertrial interval was 2000 ms. All factors
were counterbalanced and trials were presented in a pseudorandomized
order within runs. There were four runs with six repetitions/condition
each. Tactile and visual stimuli were presented within the same runs.
Participants performed a task for all conditions, detecting nondeviations
of stroking direction in tactile trials and repetitions of identical videos in
visual trials (nondeviations and repetitions were distributed equally
among conditions in each run) by pressing a button with their right
Data acquisition and analysis. These were as in experiment 1, with the
addition of a predictor of no interest to model out head motion. Wholebrain random-effects contrasts were thresholded at t  3.71 (p  0.001)
with a cluster size threshold of 50 voxels.
Since velocity  distance/time, trial duration and skin area covered
cannot be controlled simultaneously. The purpose of delivering a single
stroke in experiment 2 was to keep the stroking distance constant to
balance experiment 1’s blocks being of equal length but containing different numbers of strokes for 3 and 30 cm/s stimuli. Results for experiment 2’s model containing intervals of mixed duration were verified by
modeling 1 s intervals from the midpoint of the single stroke for each
velocity, as well as by a separate analysis scaling the modeled time courses
by a factor of three to compensate for different stimulus durations. In
each analysis, the peak voxels were identical for each ROI as in the mixedduration model; clusters were generally reduced in extent but all remained 50 voxels.
Behavioral ratings. As in experiment 1, before scanning, participants
were seated in front of a laptop monitor showing a VAS, with the anchor
points unpleasant (0) and pleasant (10) and the midpoint being neutral.
They rated the pleasantness of single 3 or 30 cm/s strokes to the forearm
by a goathair brush (soft trials) and by a horsehair brush (stiff trials). In
each trial, instructions to “rate how pleasant the touch feels to you”
appeared above the VAS, followed by a 4 s response interval. Participants
were wearing goggles flanked by occluders that ensured that their arm
and the experimenter were out of view. There were three repetitions of
each condition (soft 3 cm/s, soft 3 cm/s, stiff 30 cm/s, and stiff 30 cm/s)
presented in pseudorandom order.
Experiment 1
For both felt and seen touch, 3 cm/s was rated as more pleasant
than 30 cm/s and as more affective than sensory
Before the functional (fMRI) scanning session, participants rated
felt and seen stroking at CT-optimal (3 cm/s) and -nonoptimal
(30 cm/s) velocities on a VAS with the anchors pleasant and
unpleasant and the midpoint being neutral (for details, see Materials and Methods, above). Stroking at 3 cm/s was rated as significantly more pleasant than 30 cm/s for both felt (p  0.009)
and seen (p  0.01) touch (Fig. 1C). A main effect of velocity
(F(1,12)  10.87, p  0.006), but not modality (p  0.05), indicates that the preference for 3 cm/s held across tactile and visual
modalities.Postscan,participantsalsoratedvideosofCT-optimal(3
cm/s) and -nonoptimal (30 and 0.3 cm/s) stroking velocities using a
questionnaire designed to discriminate the sensory, attentional, and
affiliative aspects of the stimuli (see Materials and Methods, above).
There was a significant interaction between aspect and velocity
(F(1,11)  22.41, p  0.001). When each velocity was considered
separately, post hoc t tests showed that the only significant difference
was within 3 cm/s, with affective items rated higher than sensory
items (p  0.0005).
For participants’ performance on the one-back task in the
scanner, mean errors did not exceed 3%.
Posterior insula, a putative cortical target for CT afferents, showed
velocity sensitivity
Consistent with our prediction, an area of the posterior insula
showed a preference for 3 cm/s compared with 30 cm/s stimuli
regardless of modality (felt or seen), demonstrating that this region exhibits CT-like velocity sensitivity. We contrasted the trials
in which 3 cm/s stimuli were presented with 30 cm/s trials (main
effect of 3). The resulting activation fell in the right (contralateral) insula’s posterior lobule, probably in the caudodorsal granular insula; peak voxel: x, y, z  33, 15, 5 (Fig. 1A). The main
effect of 30 revealed activations in right subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC; peak voxel: 1, 13, 2) and bilateral orbitofrontal cortex (21, 30, 5 and 16, 33, 5).
The region of the right posterior insula activated for 3 cm/s
stimulation across modalities showed the same velocity dependence within the tactile and visual modalities. Selective responses
for felt 3 versus 30 cm/s stimulation fell in right posterior insula
(31, 15, 5) (Fig. 1B) and superior parietal cortex (43, 70, 44).
Selective responses for seen 3 versus 30 cm/s stimulation fell in a
right posterior insula region adjacent to but not overlapping with
the tactile-related activation (31, 21, 10) (Fig. 1B), as well as
9556 • J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
bilateral anterior insula (29, 10, 8 and 31, 25, 11), postcentral
gyrus (55, 15, 29), and dorsal ACC/presupplementary motor
area (2, 6, 47). A complete list of activations is shown in Table 1.
Velocity sensitivity examined in insula regions-of-interest
ROIs in the posterior insula were defined by their peak voxel and
all surrounding voxels within a 50-voxel cluster that met the
statistical threshold of p  0.001. General linear model (GLM)
parameter estimates (betas) were extracted across voxels for each
of the three right posterior insula ROIs: main effect of 3 cm/s, felt
3 cm/s, and seen 3 cm/s. To investigate responses across levels of
velocity and modality factors, these values were then entered into
separate ANOVAs with the factors velocity (3 cm/s, 30 cm/s) and
modality (felt, seen). The ROI defined from the main effect of 3
versus 30 cm/s contrast showed no interaction between velocity
and modality (F(1,12)  0.24, p  0.63), but a main effect of
velocity (F(1,12)  20.1, p  0.0007), with higher signal changes
for 3 versus 30 cm/s for both felt (p  0.001) and seen (p  0.007)
touch (Fig. 1D). The felt-touch ROI likewise showed only a main
effect of velocity (F(1,12)  15.16, p  0.002), with higher signal
changes for 3 versus 30 cm/s for both felt (p  0.004) and seen
(p  0.006) touch. Similarly, the seen-touch ROI showed only a
main effect of velocity (F(1,12)  9.16, p  0.01), with higher
signal changes for 3 versus 30 cm/s for both felt (p  0.004) and
seen (p  0.006) touch. There was no significant correlation between pleasantness ratings for the difference of 3 and 30 cm/s
tactile stimulation and BOLD responses in the felt-touch ROI
(r  0.07, p  0.05) or between those for videos and responses
in the seen-touch ROI (r  0.11, p  0.05).
Multivoxel activation patterns were more distinct between
velocities than between modalities
To determine the extent to which the main effect of 3 versus 30
cm/s was present on the single-subject level, the contrast 3  30
cm/s was applied to unsmoothed data from each individual and
volumes of interest were created. Seven subjects showed activations within right insular cortex, with the peak voxel falling on
either side anteriorly or posteriorly to the individual’s insular
central sulcus, at a threshold of p  0.001 and a cluster size of 20
We also predicted that the distributed activation patterns
within these volumes would be more distinct between velocities
(3 vs 30 cm/s) than between modalities (felt vs seen) if voxels
sensitive to tactile information were also engaged by visual stimuli. Multivoxel pattern classification performed using a linear
SVM showed that mean decoding accuracy was significantly
greater for separating the categories 3 versus 30 cm/s than for felt
versus seen. Within the group-defined ROI, decoding accuracy
was likewise significantly greater between velocities (mean,
64.2%; SD, 4.1%) than between modalities (mean, 60.3%; SD,
3.5%). This was the case for nine of the 13 subjects (p  0.05).
Thus, as predicted, the multivoxel analysis suggests that CTspecific velocities modulate the distributed responses in the ROI
to a greater degree than does modality.
Experiment 2
The soft brush was rated as more pleasant than stiff, but 3 cm/s as
more pleasant than 30 cm/s for both textures
Before the scan, participants rated soft (goathair) and stiff (horsehair) brushstrokes, of 3 and 30 cm/s, on a VAS with the anchors
pleasant and unpleasant and the midpoint being neutral (see Materials and Methods, above) (Fig. 2C).
To determine which brush texture was perceived as most
pleasant and any effects of velocity, ratings were submitted to a
two-way ANOVA with factors texture (soft, stiff) and velocity (3
cm/s, 30 cm/s). There was no interaction between texture and
velocity (F(1,17)  0.16, p  0.68). There was a significant main
Resultsofexperiment1.Behavioralratingsofpleasantnessandbrainactivationsintherightposteriorinsulafor3cm/sskinstrokingspeedregardlessofwhetherthetouchwasdirectly
experienced(felt)orobservedinvideos(seen).Allactivationmapsthresholdedatp0.001uncorrected;k50voxels,corrected(foracompleteactivationlist,seeTable1).A,Insulaactivation
forexperiment1(n13,Talairachcoordinatesofpeakvoxel33,15,5).B,Insulaactivationforexperiment1(n13,Talairachcoordinatesofpeakvoxelforfelt31,15,5;andforseen
31,21,10).A,B,Imagesareshowninradiologicalconvention,withtherightsidecorrespondingtothelefthemisphere.C,Top,MeanVASpleasantnessratingsoffeltandseentouchinexperiment
1.Strokingat3cm/swasratedsignificantlymorepleasantthanstrokingat30cm/sforbothfelt(p0.009)andseen(p0.01)touch;therewasnosignificanteffectofmodality(feelingorseeing).
Scalerangedfrom0(unpleasant)to10(pleasant)with5aneutralmidpoint.D,Top,BOLDresponsesinfeltandseenROIsinrightposteriorinsulaforexperiment1.Responsesto3cm/sstrokingwere
highercomparedwith30cm/sforbothfelt(p0.004)andseen(p0.006)ROIs.C,D,Bottom,Brushstrokingintactiletrials(left)andavideostillfromvisualtrials(right).ErrorbarsdenoteSEM.
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562 • 9557
effect of texture (F(1,17)  19.79, p  0.0004) and of velocity
(F(1,17)  18.47, p  0.0005). The soft brush was rated as more
pleasant than the stiff brush for both 3 (p  0.008) and 30 (p 
0.0003) cm/s. Consistent with experiment 1, 3 cm/s was rated as
more pleasant than 30 cm/s stroking for both soft (p  0.01) and
stiff (p  0.0003) brushes.
Posterior insula’s velocity sensitivity confirmed
To find regions showing a velocity preference for 3 versus 30 cm/s
regardless of texture, modality, or social context, we contrasted 3
cm/s trials with 30 cm/s trials (main effect of 3). Consistent with
experiment 1, this contrast revealed activity in posterior insula
(peak voxel: 41, 7, 13) (Fig. 2A). Compared with the activation
in experiment 1, this activation extended over the insular central
sulcus into midinsula. The peak activations for the two experiments fell within 8 mm of each other in the x, y, and z directions.
The main effect of 30 revealed activations on the postcentral sulcus/gyrus (x, y, z  14, 59, 46 and 35, 43, 53), bilateral prefrontal cortex (46, 11, 26, 52 and 50, 1, 29, 98), and bilateral
thalamus (10, 8, 13 and 9, 4, 11).
As in experiment 1, we sought regions that responded preferentially to 3 cm/s stimulation within modalities. To this end, we
contrasted 3 and 30 cm/s for felt and seen trials. Consistent with
experiment 1’s results, selective responses for felt 3 cm/s stimulation fell in right posterior insula (41, 4, 13) (Fig. 2B), with an
additional activation in orbitofrontal cortex (28, 26, 3). As in
experiment 1, selective responses for seen 3 cm/s stimulation fell
in nearby right posterior insula (41, 9, 15) (Fig. 2B), as well as
left mid/posterior insula (40, 3, 10). Unlike the experiment 1
activations, here the felt and seen insula activations overlapped,
forming a cluster of 151 voxels with peak coordinates 41, 7, 13.
To find regions discriminating between the soft and stiff texture of the brushes, we contrasted the trials in which soft stimulation occurred with those in which the brush was stiff. The main
effect of soft brushing, regardless of velocity, revealed an activation on the postcentral gyrus (59, 9, 26); no activations were seen
for the main effect of stiff brushing. To find regions discriminating social from nonsocial touch events, we investigated the contrast between trials presenting the arm and bowl videos. An
activation for the main effect of seeing arm videos, regardless of
velocity, fell on the postcentral gyrus (58, 9, 25). No activations
were seen for the main effect of the bowl video. A complete list of
activations is shown in Table 2.
There was no significant correlation between pleasantness ratings for the difference between 3 and 30 cm/s tactile stimulation
and BOLD responses in the felt-touch ROI (r  0.27, p  0.05 for
soft brush; r  0.01, p  0.05 for stiff brush) or between those
for videos and responses in the seen-touch ROI (r  0.19, p 
0.05 for arm videos; r  0.009, p  0.05 for bowl videos).
Velocity-sensitivity in insula is not affected by brush texture, but
selective for observed social context
ROIs in the right posterior insular cortex were defined by their
peak voxel and all surrounding voxels within a 50-voxel cluster
that met the statistical threshold of p  0.001. GLM parameter
estimates (betas) were extracted across voxels for each of three
right posterior insula ROIs: felt 3 cm/s, seen 3 cms/, and the felt 3
cm/s–seen 3 cm/s overlap cluster. To investigate the selectivity of
the velocity dependence in felt and seen ROIs, beta values were
entered into separate ANOVAs with the factors velocity (3 cm/s,
30 cm/s) and specificity (soft or stiff for tactile conditions, arm or
bowl for visual conditions). The felt 3 cm/s ROI was modulated
by velocity but not texture, with no interaction between velocity
and texture (F(1,17)  0.59, p  0.44) but a significant main effect
of velocity (F(1,17)  18.57, p  0.004). Signal changes were
greater for 3 than 30 cm/s for both soft (p  0.007) and stiff (p 
0.03) brush stroking. In the seen 3 cm/s ROI, there was a significant interaction (F(1,17)  16.86, p  0.0006) and main effects of
both velocity (F(1,17)  27.67, p  0.00005) and specificity
(F(1,17)  9.38, p  0.006). Here, signal changes were greater for 3
cm/s compared with 30 cm/s for the arm condition (p  0.02).
However, as predicted, responses to bowl were not modulated in
the same direction, with 30  3 cm/s (p  0.00003), demonstrating that velocity-dependent modulation differed between observed social and nonsocial tactile events.
Signal changes in the overlap ROI were explored using a threeway ANOVA with factors modality (felt, seen), velocity (3 cm/s,
30 cm/s), and specificity (soft/social, stiff/nonsocial). Here all
factors interacted (F(1,17)  10.37, p  0.005). To investigate this
interaction further, ANOVAs were performed for the tactile and
visual conditions separately. Tactile conditions showed only a
main effect of velocity (F  17.5, p  0.006), with greater responses to 3 than 30 cm/s for both soft (p  0.01) and stiff (p 
0.02) brush stroking. In the visual conditions, velocity and specificity interacted (F(1,17)  15.41, p  0.001). Post hoc t tests
showed that this interaction was driven by a difference in the
bowl conditions, with responses to bowl videos not showing the
predicted 3 cm/s  30 cm/s velocity-dependent pattern (3 cm/
s  30 cm/s, p  0.00005), whereas arm conditions showed the
expected modulation of 3 cm/s  30 cm/s (p  0.03). The absolute differences in signal change between 3 and 30 cm/s did not
differ between soft and stiff (p  0.54), but differed between arm
and bowl (p  0.001) (Fig. 2D).
Discussion
Two key functional and anatomical properties of CT afferents
provided the basis of the present fMRI investigation: first, their
Table 1. Activations for 3 and 30 cm/s stroking velocity for experienced and
observed dynamic touch in experiment 1
Contrast/region
Peak coordinates
(Talairach x, y, z)
Cluster size
3 cm/s (3  30)
Posterior insula
33, 15, 5
30 cm/s (30  3)
Subgenual ACC
Orbitofrontal cortex
21, 30, 5
Orbitofrontal cortex
16, 33, 5
Touch (touch  vision)
Postcentral gyrus
6, 27, 59
PCC/precuneus
0, 38, 44
Vision (vision  touch)
Subgenual ACC
11, 19, 3
Inferior frontal gyrus
Parietal operculum
57, 30, 15
Inferior parietal cortex
60, 26, 29
Felt 3 cm/s (felt 3  felt 30)
Posterior insula
31, 15, 5
Superior parietal cortex
34, 70, 44
Postcentral gyrus
57, 17, 41
Seen 3 cm/s (seen 3  seen 30)
Posterior insula
31, 21, 10
Anterior insula
29, 10, 8
Anterior insula
31, 25, 11
Pre-SMA/SMA
Postcentral gyrus
55, 15, 29
Middle frontal cortex
31, 18, 47
All contrasts thresholded at p  0.001, k  50 voxels, cluster-size corrected at p  0.05. PCC, Posterior cingulate
cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.
9558 • J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
unique sensitivity profile to stroking velocity; and second, their
projection to posterior insular cortex. The present findings demonstrate that the posterior insula shows the same sensitivity to
stroking velocity as CT afferents, likely reflecting afferent input
from CT fibers. This velocity-sensitivity is similar for both experience and observation of a caress—but the latter only when a
body part is stroked—providing the first evidence that the posterior insula processes visual information about others’ touch
interactions.
Affective touch and CT afferent pathway
Gentle brush stroking over CT receptive fields is consistently
rated as pleasant by neurologically healthy subjects . Crucially, the
stroking speeds most effective in eliciting CT activation correlate
significantly with the highest pleasantness ratings . CT activation may even be necessary for a typical subjective experience of a caress: patients carrying a rare mutation
resulting in reduced C-afferent density perceive stroking as generally less pleasant compared with controls,
showing a significantly flatter response profile across velocities
 . Here, our choice of 3 versus 30 cm/s
stroking for CT-optimal and -nonoptimal stimuli, respectively,
was motivated by Lo¨ken et al.’s recordings from single
afferent nerves in the forearms of awake human volunteers. CT
units showed a unique preference for speeds of 1–10 cm/s, with
the biggest difference between 3 and 30 cm/s, the velocities used
in the present study.
The CT pathway associated with dynamic, affective touch differs
anatomically and functionally from that of myelinated A afferents
associated with rapid sensory-discriminative tactile processing . CT
receptorsarefoundinhairybutnotinglabrous(smooth,e.g.,palm)
skin or observed in videos (seen,
blue) skin stroking at 3 cm/s. All activation maps thresholded atp  0.001, uncorrected; k  50 voxels, corrected (for a complete activation list, see Table 2).A, Insula activation for experiment 2
(n18,Talairachcoordinatesofpeakvoxel41,7,13).B,Insulaactivationforexperiment2(n18,Talairachcoordinatesofpeakvoxelforfelt41,4,13;andforseen41,9,15).
Felt and seen activations overlapped to form a cluster with peak voxel  41, 7, 13. A, B, Images are shown in radiological convention, with the right side corresponding to the left hemisphere.
C,MeanVASpleasantnessratingsoftouchinexperiment2.Strokingat3cm/swasratedsignificantlymorepleasantthanstrokingat30cm/sforbothasoft-bristled(p0.01)andstiff-bristled(p0.0003)
brush,butthesoftbrushwasratedasmorepleasantthanthestiffforbothvelocities(maineffectoftexture,p0.0004).D,Top,BOLDresponsesinfeltandseenROIsinrightposteriorinsulaforexperiment2.
ResponsesintheoverlapROIweresignificantlymodulatedbyvelocity,with3cm/s30cm/sforfeltsoftbrush(p0.01)andstiffbrush(p0.02)stroking,andseenstrokingofamodel’sforearm(p0.03),
butnotfornonsocialtouch(ahandstrokingwaterinabowl).Bottom,Brushstrokingintactiletrials(lefttwo)andvideostillsfromvisualtrials(righttwo).C,D,ErrorbarsdenoteSEM.
Table 2. Activations for 3 and 30 cm/s stroking velocity for experienced and
observed dynamic touch in experiment 2
Contrast/region
Peak coordinates
(Talairach x, y, z)
Cluster size
3 cm/s (3  30)
Posterior insula
41, 7, 13
30 cm/s (30  3)
Postcentral gyrus
14, 59, 46
Postcentral gyrus
35, 43, 53
Prefrontal cortex
46, 11, 26
Prefrontal cortex
50, 1, 29
10, 8, 13
9, 4, 11
Touch (touch  vision)
Postcentral gyrus
59, 8, 32
Soft brush (soft  stiff)
Postcentral gyrus
Arm video (arm  bowl)
Postcentral gyrus
Felt 3 cm/s (seen 3  seen 30)
Posterior insula
41, 4, 13
Orbitofrontal cortex
28, 26, 3
Seen 3 cm/s (seen 3  seen 30)
Posterior insula
41, 9, 15
Mid-insula
40, 3, 10
Overlap felt and seen 3 cm/s
Posterior insula
41, 7, 13
All contrasts thresholded at p  0.001, k  50 voxels, cluster-size corrected at p  0.05.
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562 • 9559
Wessberg et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2007; Lo¨ken et al., 2009). Whereas
fast-conducting, myelinated A afferents follow a pathway to first
and second somatosensory cortex, CT afferents and other slowerconducting, thinly myelinated and unmyelinated fibers follow a distinct pathway to posterior insular cortex . Since
this pathway is similar to that of visceral afferents, CT afferents have
moreincommonwithinteroceptivesystemsconveyinginformation
aboutbodystateregulationthanwithclassicalexteroceptivesystems
conveyingdiscriminativeaspectsoftouch .
The CT afferent pathway projection to insular cortex in humans
is supported by neuroimaging studies of both patients and healthy
controls, demonstrating that brushing stimulation likely to elicit CT
discharge results in activation of contralateral mid- and posterior
insularcortex . In the present study, the felt and seen velocity-specific activations in experiments 1 and 2 fell in granular insular cortex on or near the long gyri and within the insular
central sulcus, sometimes extending onto the posterior short gyrus.
This region is activated by a broad range of visceral and somatosensory stimulation in humans , including human
touch ,andishighlyfunctionallyconnectedwith
sensorimotor cortices . It also
exhibits distinct somatotopic responses for stroking on the arm and
thighwithintherangeofCTafferents’preferredspeed . Functional and spatial specialization between visceral (interoceptive) and somatic stimulation is low in the insula
 , the weak separation implying that this region
plays an integrative role among somatosensory and interoceptive
Of course, many forms of tactile stimulation can be labeled
“pleasant” independently of dynamic features, CT activation, or insular processing. For example, soft velvet touching the palm skin is
associated with orbitofrontal cortex activation ,
and touch pleasantness here can be modulated by top-down factors
 . In our experiment 2, however, the insula
response was unaffected by brush texture, a source of tactile pleasantness independent of velocity (CT afferents would likewise respond to a similar extent to soft and stiff bristles). In contrast, a
somatosensory region on the postcentral gyrus discriminated between the textures, with higher activation for the soft brush. Although the subjects perceived soft brush stroking as more pleasant,
the insula’s velocity-sensitivity was not modulated by texture information, indicating that any relationship of velocity coding with subjective pleasantness is related to stroking speed. The lack of
correlation between pleasantness ratings and BOLD responses in
both experiments reinforces the conclusion that the posterior insula
activationisdrivenbycaressingspeedsthatparticipantsfoundpleasant, but not by pleasantness per se.
Social touch observation
In both experiments, adjacent and overlapping posterior insula
regions showed selective coding for 3 versus 30 cm/s during touch
observation, suggesting that the CT-like processing in this region
may serve as a platform for the evaluation of others’ touch interactions. The insula was modulated by velocity only when the
observed touch was of a social nature (a hand stroking skin),
whereas responses to a nonsocial transitive touch scenario (a
hand stroking water) were not modulated by stimulus speed in a
CT-like manner. Insular cortex integrates tactile information
with that from other modalities, including vision . Such integration of somatosensory with visual information pertaining to the body may account for the
posterior insula’s velocity-specific sensitivity to the video stimuli
in both experiments.
A region of ipsilateral posterior insula/parietal operculum,
slightly posterior and medial to the ipsilateral mid-insula activation in experiment 2, has correlated with the degree to which a
rubber arm is incorporated into one’s body representation during the rubber hand illusion . Further, pleasantness ratings of skin stroking can significantly predict illusion
strength . Since the rubber hand illusion is
induced by synchronous stroking of a visible rubber arm and
one’s own out-of-sight arm, it is possible that the posterior insula’s contribution to the illusion’s modulation of body representation involves an interaction of pleasantness with visual and
tactile processing of dynamic arm/hand stimulation.
The SVM classification in experiment 1 showed that the distributed response pattern in the posterior insula was more distinct between 3 and 30 cm/s than between experience and
observation. This difference suggests a coding economy in which
the insula is tuned to signals related to CT-optimal velocities,
regardless of whether the touch originates from one’s own skin
surface or is merely observed on another’s skin. This may contribute to our ability to recognize and interpret the often subtle
affective features of an observed touch interaction. It is consistent
with evidence that felt and seen sensory events such as pain or
touch activate similar or overlapping areas .
It also underscores the important idea that the location and
functional properties of these types of vicarious activations, like
their felt counterparts, are critically influenced by specific functional variables (in this case by velocity information). Thus, the
speed of a dynamic social touch provides a crucial constraint for
coding and interpreting its affective content, whether felt or seen.
Relative BOLD signal decrease in posterior insula while viewing
actors receiving different types of social touch in a recent study
 can be accounted for by the absence of a
controlled velocity variable in the experimental design, which
may have obscured any effect of the insula’s specificity for social
touch information.
A trivial explanation for the 3 versus 30 cm/s preference during seen trials in experiment 1 is that this region merely detects
differences in speed without parsing other relevant information
such as social context. However, when participants viewed a visually similar transitive, but nonsocial, dynamic touch in experiment 2, the insula’s response was not modulated by velocity in a
CT-like manner. In experiment 1, 3 cm/s videos were rated not
only as more pleasant but also corresponded more highly to affective judgments (for example, how tender the touch was) than
sensory judgments, which was not the case for faster or slower
speeds. Such selective attunement of the CT pathway to affective,
potentially socially relevant touch is consistent with evidence that
congenital reduction in CT afferent density affects the perception
of both experienced and observed caresses in a statistically similar
manner .
Individuals with mirror-touch synesthesia experience seen
touch in terms of tactile stimulation on their own body, and this
is associated with activations in sensory, motor, and premotor
regions . Unlike CT-mediated touch observation, though, mirror-touch synesthesia probably reflects the
sensory-discriminative aspect of touch rather than the affective,
with precise discriminative mapping accompanied by vivid subjective sensory experience that even influences actual touch per-
9560 • J. Neurosci., June 29, 2011 • 31(26):9554–9562
Morrison et al. • Vicarious Responses to Social Touch in Posterior Insular Cortex
ception . Both these and the present
findings suggest mechanisms that encode seen touch in similar
terms as felt touch, much as a mirror-neuron mechanism translates observed actions to potentially executed ones . However, the underlying neural populations
need not be identical; functionally similar coding for felt and seen
touch may occur in neighboring or mingling but spatially separable populations .
The anterior insular (experiment 1) and mid-insular (experiment2)corticeswerealsoactivatedduringobservationof3versus30
cm/s.Loveroetal. foundthatactivationinanteriorinsulawas
associated with anticipation of a touch, with anticipation- and
stimulus-related activations overlapping in posterior and midinsular regions. Paulus and Stein proposed a model in which
the anterior insula generates predictions of an expected body state
based in part on interoceptive information (which would include
input from posterior insula). We speculate that empathy and anticipation are closely related, the subjective feel of empathy being akin
to expectation of a similar impending stimulus with the attendant
bodily changes .