Adversarial Active Learning for Sequence Labeling and Generation
Yue Deng1, KaWai Chen2, Yilin Shen1, Hongxia Jin1
1 AI Center, Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA, USA
2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego
{y1.deng, yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com, 
We introduce an active learning framework for general sequence learning tasks including sequence labeling and generation. Most existing active learning algorithms mainly rely on an uncertainty measure derived from the probabilistic classiﬁer for
query sample selection. However, such approaches
suffer from two shortcomings in the context of sequence learning including 1) cold start problem and
2) label sampling dilemma.
To overcome these
shortcomings, we propose a deep-learning-based
active learning framework to directly identify query
samples from the perspective of adversarial learning. Our approach intends to offer labeling priorities for sequences whose information content are
least covered by existing labeled data.
We verify our sequence-based active learning approach
on two tasks including sequence labeling and sequence generation.
Introduction
Active learning (AL) is a traditional approach to solve supervised learning problems without sufﬁcient labels. While
there have been many existing AL works proposed for classiﬁcation problems [Settles, 2010; Scheffer et al., 2001;
Deng et al., 2013], active learning algorithms for sequences
are still not widely discussed. With the growing interests in
AI research, many newly emerged problems are exactly de-
ﬁned in the scope of sequence learning including image captioning [Vinyals et al., 2015], machine translation [Luong et
al., ] and natural language understanding [Dong and Lapata,
2016]. Compared with classiﬁcation tasks that only need one
label for a sample, sequence learning tasks require a series
of token-level labels for a whole sequence. Precise annotations for sequences are not only labor-consuming but may
also require very speciﬁc domain knowledge [Dong and Lapata, 2016] that are not easily accomplished by crowd-sourcing
workers. This apparent difﬁculty in sequence labeling exactly
motivates our explorations of more effective active learning
approaches for sequences.
Existing active learning strategies mainly rely on some uncertainty measures derived from a classiﬁer for query sample selection [Cohn et al., 1994; Settles, 2010]. These uncertainty measures can be deﬁned from various perspectives
including probabilistic conﬁdence [Culotta and McCallum,
2005], margin value [Scheffer et al., 2001], entropy [Deng et
al., 2016], ﬁsher information [Sutton and McCallum, 2006;
Bao et al., 2017] and a score voted by several base models [Seung et al., 1992; Deng et al., 2017b]. While these
active learning algorithms work well for data classiﬁcation
tasks, they are unfortunately not easily extended to solving
sequence learning problems due to the complexity of the label space. Consider a label sequence with p tokens and each
token can belong to k possible classes, then there are kp possible combinations of the label sequence. This complexity
can grow exponentially with the length of the output.
We consider two major challenges faced by existing active
learning approaches in handling sequence learning tasks: 1)
cold start problem and 2) label-sampling dilemma. The ﬁrst
cold-start challenge is mainly due to the complexity of the
learning system for structured prediction. Unlike classiﬁcation tasks that just need a simple probabilistic classiﬁer, the
predictor for sequences are conﬁgured within a complex recurrent structure, e.g. a LSTM. Training a structured predictor with very limited labeled sequence can easily lead to a biased estimation. If the predictor itself is seriously biased, how
can we trust the uncertain measure derived from it? This cold
start problem easily happens during the initial steps of active
learning when there are only insufﬁcient labeled samples in
hand. The second label sampling dilemma is ascribed to the
inability of the full enumeration of all possible sequence labels. In detail, when calculating an uncertainty score e.g.,
the entropy, for a sequence, all possible label combinations
should be taken into account (see Eq. 3) that can become
impossible when the output sequences are too long. Therefore, only approximated uncertainty measures can be used as
a surrogate for sequence-based active learning.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we propose
a new active learning framework for sequences inspired by
adversarial learning. Our approach alleviates the demands
on the structured predictor for query sample selection. The
proposed adversarial active learning framework incorporates
a neural network to explicitly assert each sample’s informativeness with regard to labeled data. The easily-induced active score avoids heavy computations in sampling the whole
label space and can improve the active learning efﬁciency by
more than 100 times on some large datasets.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Preliminaries
Active Learning for Sequences
In this part, we review some existing active learning approaches for sequence learning [Settles and Craven, 2008].
The ﬁrst widely used uncertainty measure deﬁned from the
probabilistic classiﬁer is the least conﬁdence (LC) score:
ψLC(xU) = 1 −P(y∗|xU),
where y∗is the most likely label sequence and xU is an unlabeled sample. While this measure is intuitive, the calculation
of the most likely label sequence is not easy. It requires the
dynamic programming to ﬁnd the Viterbi parse. Similarly,
the margin term can also be used to deﬁne the uncertainty for
an unknown sample:
ψM(xU) = P((y∗
2|xU)), −P = −
P(yp|xU) log P(yp|xU)
where yp ranges over all possible label sequences for input
xU. We have also noted that the number of possible labeling
grows exponentially with the desired output sequence length.
For the ease of computation, we follow previous work to employ an approximated N-best sequence entropy (NSE) [Kim
et al., 2006],
ψNSE(xU) = −
P(yp|xU) log P(yp|xU)
N = {(y1)p, ..., (yN)p} corresponds to N most likely parses.
These N most likely parses can obtained through beam search
[Koehn, 2004]. The labeling priority should be given to samples with high entropy (corresponding to low conﬁdence).
While the deﬁnition of these terms are different, they are all
closely related to the structured predictor. The calculations of
these uncertainty scores are also not trivial and may require
some algorithmic explorations such as the dynamic programming or the beam search. When the candidate samples’ quantity is large, the calculation of such complexity uncertainty
measures can take a quite long while in scoring all individual
samples from the data pool. These obvious shortcomings motivate us to design more efﬁcient and advanced active learning strategies for sequence learning. In this work, we propose
such a desired framework from adversarial learning [Deng et
al., 2017c]. The active learning strategy in our model is not
related to the structured output predictor and hence can conduct query samples scoring in light on very large dataset.
Encoder-decoder Framework
Before going to the details about our active learning model,
we will ﬁrst review the prevalent encoder-decoder framework
for sequence learning. This generic encoder-decoder model
serves as the basic building block of our active learning system. We denote (xL, yL) ∼(XL, Y L) as a pair of labeled
sample, where xL is the input data that can be of any type
including images, speeches and texts depending on different
learning tasks; and yL is the targeted output sequence composed of p tokens yL = {yL
p }. A feature encoder M()
is established to map the input xL to a latent representation
zL = M(xL). M() can be a convolution neural network for
image data or a recurrent neural network for speeches and
texts. Then, a decoder C() adopts zL as a conditional input
and sequentially predicts each token in yP :
P(yp = {yP
1|zL = M(xL))
The above generative probability can be well modeled by a
recurrent neural network, e.g., a LSTM [Deng et al., 2017a].
The encoded latent representation zL is used as the ‘starting key’ at step zero. Then, it sequentially outputs each token yt based on the tth step’s input and the memory vector
maintained by the recurrent neural network [Sutskever et al.,
2014]. The training loss of this sequence learning part is obtained by counting the differences between the predicted sequence yP and the ground truth labels yL:
Ls(XL, Y L) =
(xL,yL)∼(XL,Y L)
L(yL, yP )
We noted that both yL is the labeled sequence; and predicted
sequence yP is generated by a function of xL (see Eq.5) ; L
can be arbitrary losses deﬁned over two sequences such as the
prevalent cross-entropy. Here, we just brieﬂy introduced this
encoder-decoder framework and interested readers are refereed to [Sutskever et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015] for details.
Adversarial Active Learning for Sequences
ALISE Model
It is conceivable that sequence learning model requires a huge
amount of labeled data for robust training. We hence consider
developing an active learning algorithm to facilitate the whole
labeling process. In our approach, we consider deﬁning an active score based on the informativeness of an unlabeled sample xU with respect to all labeled samples XL:
s(xU) = sim(xU, XL)
where XL is the set containing all labeled samples and
sim(·, ·) deﬁnes a similarity score between a point xU and
a training set XL composed of labeled samples. The score in
Eq.7 helps to rank unlabeled samples based on their inherent
informativeness similarity to existing labeled data. A small
similarity score implies the certain unlabeled sample is not
related to any labeled samples in training set and vice versa.
The labeling priority is offered to samples with low similarity
We take image captioning as an intuitive instance to explain the rational behind our active scoring approach. In the
training set, most images and their corresponding descriptions are about human sports such as skating, running and
swimming. Then, we have access to two extra unlabeled images that are respectively related to “swimming” and “a plate
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Figure 1: An overview of Adversarial Active Learning for sequences
(ALISE). The black and blue arrows respectively indicate ﬂows for
labeled and unlabeled samples.
of food”. With those annotated images in hand, which unlabeled image should be labeled ﬁrst? There is no doubt that
the image about ‘food’ should be sent out for captioning by
human. This is because there are already some swimming
images in the existing training pool and adding another similar image may not offer too much ‘new’ knowledge to the
learning system. On the contrary, the image about food is
not covered in existing training set and its captions can bring
more valuable complementary information.
However, the problem still remains in how to quantitatively
evaluate the informativeness similarity between an unlabeled
sample with the labeled data pool. For sequence data, the similarity calculation itself is a difﬁcult problem due to the variations in sequence lengths. Existing approaches mainly play
kernel tricks to map the original sequences into a kernel space
with ﬁxed-length feature representations [Settles and Craven,
2008]. However, the selection of an appropriate kernel requires sophisticated domain knowledge and the best kernel
can vary from task to task. For instance, the best kernels for
Chinese and French sentences are obviously not the same.
In this work, we propose a new adversarial active learning
model for sequences (ALISE). In our ALISE, we consider designing a discriminator network D(·) to directly outputs the
informativeness similarity scores for unlabeled samples. In
Fig. 1, we pass both a labeled sample xL and an unlabeled
sample xu trough the same feature encoder M (shared parameters), then we get zL = M(xL) (latent representation
for labeled data) and zU = M(xU) (latent representation for
unlabeled data). These two latent representations are further
fed into the discriminator network (D), which is trained to
classify whether the certain data is sampled from labeled or
unlabeled data pool. The output of the D is a sigmoid function that indicates how likely the certain sample is from the
labeled pool.
The learning objectives of M and D are involved in an adversarial process. From the aspect of encoder M, it intends
to map all data to a latent space where both labeled and unlabeled data can follow very similar probabilistic distributions.
In the most ideal scenario that if zL and zU follow exactly the
same generative probability, then the decoder C trained with
zL should also seamlessly work on latent representations zU
obtained from unlabeled sample xU. Therefore, the encoder
M() intends to fool the discriminator to regard all latent representations (zL and zU) as already labeled. Mathematically,
it encourages the discriminator D to output a score 1 for both
zL and zU. The corresponding loss is modeled by the crossentropy in the ﬁrst two terms of the following equation:
min LM = −ExL∼XL[(log D(M(xL)]
−ExU∼XU [log D(M(xU))] + λLs(XL, Y L),
In addition to the cross-entropy loss deﬁned on the discriminator side, the above equation also takes the supervised loss
in Eq.6 into consideration, i.e., in the third term. In all, the
learning objectives of the feature encoder M are concluded
as two-fold: 1) fool the discriminator and 2) improve the ﬁtting quality on labeled data. These two learning objectives
are balanced by a hyper-parameter λ.
The learning objective of the discriminator D goes against
to the objective in Eq. 8. The discriminator is trained to correctly assign zL = M(xL) to labeled category (D(ZL) = 1)
and zU = M(xU) to unlabeled class (D(ZU) = 0). The
corresponding learning objective of D is also deﬁned by the
cross-entropy:
min LD = −ExL∼XL[(log D(M(xL)]
−ExU∼XU [log(1 −D(M(xU)))]
This adversarial discriminator D exactly serves the purpose of distribution comparisons between two set of samples. In GAN work [Deng et al., 2017c], it is indicated that
the adversarial discriminator implicitly compares the generative distributions between real data and fake data.
we borrowed the same adversarial learning idea to compare
the distributions between labeled and unlabeled samples. In
GAN (resp. our ALISE model), the discriminator outputs
low scores for those fake (resp. unlabeled) samples that are
mostly not similar to real images (resp. labeled data). Therefore, the score from this discriminator already serves as an
informativeness similarity score that could be directly used
for Eq.7. The feature encoder M, sequence decoder C and
adversarial discriminator D can all be trained in an alternative manner by iteratively optimizing the objectives in Eq.8
and Eq.9. We have detailed the learning steps in Algorithm 1.
Active Scoring
After well training, we can pass all unlabeled samples
through M and D to get their corresponding score by ALISE
framework, i.e.,
s(xU) = D(M(xU)) ∈(0, 1), ∀xU ∈XU
The score s = 1 (resp. s = 0) means the information content
of the certain unlabeled sample is most (resp. least) covered
by the existing labeled data. Apparently, those samples with
lowest scores should be sent out for labeling because they
carry most valuable information in complementary to the current labeled data.
It is noted that our ALISE approach does not rely on the
structured predictor (i.e. the decoder C) for uncertainty measure calculation. However, we can still consider incorporating existing predictor-dependent uncertainty scores into our
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Algorithm 1: ALISE Learning
: A data pool composed of labeled and unlabeled
data X = {XL, XU}; XL are paired with
sequence label Y L = {yL
Initialization: Initialize parameters in encoder network M and
decoder network C by training an
encoder-decoder framework with available
training samples (XL, Y L); Initialize
parameters in the discriminator network D
1 for epoch=1...K do
for all mini-batches (xL, yL) ∼(XL, Y L) and xU ∼XU
Minimize the loss LM in Eq.8 to update parameters in
the encoder network M and decoder network C
Minimize the loss LD in Eq.9 and update parameters
in discriminator network D
: The well trained M, C and D
framework. Because the ALISE framework has already been
built with a probabilistic decoder C(), then the calculations
of uncertainty measures from it is natural and convenient. In
such a combinational setting, we can ﬁrst select K top samples selected by the adversarial discriminator. Then, within
these K samples, we further calculate their sequence-based
uncertainty scores ψ(xU) (e.g. the sequence entropy) as introduced in Section 2.1.
The top k samples with highest
uncertainty scores are selected as query samples for labeling. These candidate query samples are mainly determined
by the adversarial discriminator and the probabilistic decoder
only provides auxiliary information for ﬁne-grained selection. Moreover, the complexity for sequence-based uncertainty measure computations have also been reduced. This is
because the uncertainty measure is only required to be computed on K candidate samples selected by ALISE rather than
the whole pool of unlabeled samples.
While there are some early works that also use the ‘buzzwords’ adversarial active learning, they are totally different
from our ALISE. First, the work in [Zhu and Bento, 2017]
used the GAN model to generate fake images and then labeling those fake images to augment training set. ALISE does
not generate any fake sample and just borrows the adversarial
learning objective for sample scoring. The work in [Miller
et al., 2014] is totally none related to adversarial learning. It
just uses traditional active learning approach to solve the adversarial attract problem in security domain.
Experiments
In this part, we investigate the performances of ALISE on
two sequence learning tasks including slot ﬁlling and image
captioning.
Slot Filling
Slot ﬁlling is a basic component of spoken language understanding. It can be viewed as a sequence labeling problem,
where both the input and output label sequences are of the
Figure 2: Slot ﬁlling F-score of different active learning approaches.
same length. This part of experiments were mainly conducted
on the ATIS (Airline Travel Information Systems) dataset
[Hemphill et al., 1990]. We obtained ATIS text corpus that
was used in [Liu and Lane, 2016] and [Deoras and Sarikaya,
2013] for active learning. For instance, an input sentence in
ATIS xL = {business, class, fare,from, SF, to, LA} can be
parsed as a label sequence yL = {B-class-type, I-class-type,
O, O, B-from-loc, B-to-loc}. This studied dataset contains
5138 utterances with annotated slot labels.
We follow the same implementation in [Liu and Lane,
2016] to use a bi-directional LSTM as the encoder network
M in Fig.1. This bidirectional LSTM read the input sentence
in both forward and backward directions and their hidden
states at each step were concatenated as the long vector. We
choose 128 for word embedding layer and 64 hidden states
for the encoder LSTM. To this end, we have obtained 128
dimensions for the latent representation z. The decoder C
in Fig.1 is implemented by either a standard LSTM decoder
[Sutskever et al., 2014] or a more advanced attention model
[Liu and Lane, 2016]. Both of them are widely used in existing literatures. The adversarial network D is conﬁgured by
three dense-connected layers with 128 (input layer), 64 (intermediate layer) and 1 (output layer) units, respectively. The
output layer is further connected with a sigmoid function for
probabilistic conversion. We use relu activation among all
other layers. Each token of the output sequence is coded as
a one-hot vector with the hot entry indicating the underlying cateogory of the token. The whole deep learning system
was trained by ADAM [Kingma and Ba, 2014]. Among all
labeled training samples, we further randomly select 10% of
them as validation samples. The whole training process is terminated when the loss on the validation set does not decrease
or when the optimization reaches 100 epochs.
We consider comparing our ALISE approach with existing
sequence-based active learning algorithms. The competitors
include random sampling, least conﬁdence score (see Eq.2),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
N-best sequence entropy (NSE, see Eq.4). Moreover, we further consider the combinational scoring approach as introduced in Section 3.2 that we combine both ALISE scores and
NSE scores for query sample selection. To make fair comparisons, the number of optimal decoding parses (N) is chosen as ﬁve for both NSE approach and our ALISE+NSE approach. In active sequence learning, we randomly select 2130
sequences as testing samples. The remaining 3000 sequences
are used for model training and active labeling.
In detail, among these 3000 data, p = 300 samples are
randomly chosen as initial labeled data. Then, we train the
ALISE model with these p = 300 samples and conduct active learning based on the remaining 3000 −p non-testing
samples. k = 300 top samples returned by different active
learning methods are selected for label query. After labeling,
these k samples will be merged with the existing p labeled
samples as the new labeled pool. The ALISE and other active learning models will be trained with this new labeled set
and the trained model will be used to select another k unlabeled samples for the next round. Such query sample selection, labeling approach and model retraining processes will
be iteratively conducted. We only report results until we have
get 2700 training samples because it is the limitation for active selection. When all 3000 points are used, there are no
distinctions among different active learning algorithms. The
active learning results with different training sample sizes are
reported in Fig.2, where both the LSTM and attention model
are respectively used as the decoder C for sequence label prediction. In the ﬁgure, we do the random splitting process for
ﬁve times and the average F-score with standard deviations
are reported. Here, we choose the F-score as the accuracy indicator because it is widely used in existing works [Liu and
Lane, 2016][Deoras and Sarikaya, 2013]
From the results, we have observed that our ALISE model
and its combinational extension (ALISE+NSE) both outperform existing sequence learning approaches. When the labeled number size is small, the improvements of two ALISE
models are more signiﬁcant. The ALISE+NSE model further improves the performances of ALISE. However, when
the number of sample sizes is relatively large, the differences
between ALISE and ALISE+NSE are minor. However, these
two ALISE methods are still better than other sequence learning approaches. Meanwhile, we have observed that using attention model as the sequence decoder is much better than the
LSTM model.
Image Captioning
We further apply ALISE model for the sequence generation
task of image captioning. In this task, the input data is an image and the corresponding label is a caption sentence describing the content of the input image. We follow the same con-
ﬁguration and parameter settings in the work [Xu et al., 2015]
to implement the encoder-decoder learning framework. The
structure of the adversarial discriminator in ALISE is kept
the same as in the slot ﬁlling experiment. This part of active learning experiments are mainly conducted on MSCOCO
dataset [Lin et al., 2014], which consists of 82,783 images
for training, 40,504 for validation, and 40,775 for testing. We
noted that each image in MSCOCO dataset is paired with 5
Figure 3: Image captioning results by active learning.
ground truth captions. In our active learning setting, the query
sample selection is mainly conducted at the image level. It
means that if one image has been selected for labeling, its corresponding ﬁve ground-truth captions are all accessible. We
follow Karpathy et al.[Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2015] to preporcess the sentences, where all the words are converted to
lower-case, and all non-alphanumeric characters are discards.
We discarded all words that appear less than twice in all captions.
We consider all 82,783 training set as the basic data pool
for active learning and query selection. We increase the labeled samples’ rate from 0.2 to 0.8 with 0.2 as an incremental step. Among the ﬁrst 0.2× 82,783 samples, half of them
are randomly chosen as the initial labeled set and the remaining are selected by different active learning algorithms. The
active selection and learning processes are iteratively conducted by adding k =0.2× 82,783 new labeled samples to
the labeled pool in each round. These extra k samples are
selected by different active learning algorithms. The performances of ALISE are compared with other active learning
approaches in Fig.3. For result evaluations, we follow existing works to report BLEU-4 and METEOR as the accuracy
indicator. These two accuracy measures can be easily calculated by the MSCOCO API. We repeat the aforementioned
active learning process for 5 times with average and standard
deviation reported in Fig.3. We have observed from quantitative evaluation that ALISE models (the original ALISE and
ALISE+NSE) beat all existing active learning models based
on these two scores. Meanwhile, the performance of ALISE
can be further enhanced by combining NSE score as auxiliary
indicator (ALISE+NSE).
To better understand differences among various active
learning approaches, we provide some captioning results as
intuitive instances in Fig.4. All these image captioning models are trained with 80% data points from the training set.
Nevertheless, these same amount of training samples are
selected by different active learning methods.
In the ﬁgure, we provide the captioning results by NSE, ALISE and
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Figure 4: Image captioning results in the active learning setting by ALISE, ALISE+NSE and NSE-based approaches. The novel plausible
descriptions are annotated with blue color while wrong descriptions are colored in red.
ALISE+NSE because these three algorithms outperform others in Fig.3. From these intuitive results, we have observed
that the two ALISE models tends to use more complex sentence structures for image descriptions. Moreover, these two
ALISE models can cover more details about the visual information. It is mainly because the ALISE approach can actively build up a training set covering diverse information.
However, there is still small chance that the ALISE model
over-explains the image with wrongly recognized objects.
As shown in the rightest sub-ﬁgure in Fig.4, ALISE+NSE
model mistakenly describes the red ﬁnishing line as a stop
sign. However, the captioning results of ALISE model are
still much better than the NSE approach in producing precise
captioning sentences in a more natural manner.
Computational Complexity
We also reported the computational costs of ALISE. We have
observed that the computational costs of ALISE are almost
the same as the original baseline model. In detail, we respectively report the training costs on the slot ﬁlling and image
captioning tasks for references. The ALISE training in slot
ﬁlling task (with 2700 samples) can be accomplished in just
74 seconds with 16 GPUs (Tesla K80) parallelized in optimization. The original Attention-based encoder-decoder slot-
ﬁlling model costs 53 seconds when trained with the same
amount of data [Liu and Lane, 2016]. For the image captioning task, the baseline attention model [Xu et al., 2015]
and ALISE respectively spends an average of 2.7 hours and
3.2 hours in total on 66,000 images. From these two tasks,
the training cost of ALISE is not that different than the corresponding baseline encoder-decoder model. This is because
ALISE has only introduced an auxiliary adversarial discriminator in the model and this discriminator neural network exhibits very simple structures (just a multi-layer neural network with a 64 nodes intermediate layer and a 1 node output
However, the active learning complexity of different methods can vary signiﬁcantly, especially when the candidate unlabeled pool size is large. We report the query sample selection costs on the aforementioned two datasets, that include
2,400 (i.e., the ﬁrst data point in Fig.2) and 66,000 ( i.e., the
ﬁrst data point in Fig.3) candidate samples on the slot ﬁlling
Slot Filling
Captioning
Table 1: The active selection costs for different algorithms
and image captioning datasets, respectively. The corresponding costs of different algorithms are reported in ??. Here, we
omit the complexity of random sampling because it can be
ﬁnished in real time.
We have found that ALISE methods are much faster than
existing sequence-based active learning approaches. This is
because the calculation of the LC and NSE scores require the
Viterbi parsing and beam search over the whole output space.
Therefore, their costs are signiﬁcant higher when the sample size is large (as in the image captioning dataset). However, the scoring mechanism in ALISE method just requires
passing all samples through a trained neural network (i.e. the
adversarial discriminator D in Fig.1). Therefore, the corresponding active scoring cost can be minor. The ALISE+NSE
can also be efﬁciently implemented because it just performs
N-best sequence entropy calculations on a selected number
of samples ﬁltered by ALISE model. Therefore, its computational costs are a bit higher than ALISE but are still far more
less than other approaches.
Discussions
We introduced a sequence-based active learning model
ALISE from the perspective of adversarial learning. It conducts query sample selections based on a well trained discriminator. Therefore, ALISE is much more efﬁcient than existing predictor-dependent active learning approaches. Moreover, our model accomplishes both the tasks of active learning and sequence learning into a joint framework that is endto-end trainable. Therefore, it is seamlessly applied to diverse learning tasks across different domains. Experimental
veriﬁcations show that ALISE can greatly improve the performances and speed of existing models in the early active
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
learning stages with insufﬁcient training samples.