Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1797–1807
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Don’t Give Me the Details, Just the Summary!
Topic-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme Summarization
Shashi Narayan
Shay B. Cohen
Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB
 , {scohen,mlap}@inf.ed.ac.uk
We introduce extreme summarization, a new
single-document summarization task which
does not favor extractive strategies and calls
for an abstractive modeling approach.
idea is to create a short, one-sentence news
summary answering the question “What is the
article about?”. We collect a real-world, large
scale dataset for this task by harvesting online
articles from the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). We propose a novel abstractive model which is conditioned on the article’s topics and based entirely on convolutional neural networks. We demonstrate experimentally that this architecture captures longrange dependencies in a document and recognizes pertinent content, outperforming an oracle extractive system and state-of-the-art abstractive approaches when evaluated automatically and by humans.1
Introduction
Automatic summarization is one of the central
problems in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
posing several challenges relating to understanding (i.e., identifying important content) and generation (i.e., aggregating and rewording the identi-
ﬁed content into a summary). Of the many summarization paradigms that have been identiﬁed
over the years ,
single-document summarization has consistently
attracted attention .
Neural approaches to NLP and their ability
to learn continuous features without recourse to
1Our dataset, code, and demo are available at: https:
//github.com/shashiongithub/XSum.
SUMMARY: A man and a child have been killed
after a light aircraft made an emergency landing
on a beach in Portugal.
DOCUMENT: Authorities said the incident took
place on Sao Joao beach in Caparica, south-west
of Lisbon.
The National Maritime Authority said a middleaged man and a young girl died after they were unable to avoid the plane.
[6 sentences with 139 words are abbreviated from
Other reports said the victims had been sunbathing
when the plane made its emergency landing.
[Another 4 sentences with 67 words are abbreviated
from here.]
Video footage from the scene carried by local
broadcasters showed a small recreational plane
parked on the sand, apparently intact and surrounded by beachgoers and emergency workers.
[Last 2 sentences with 19 words are abbreviated.]
Figure 1: An abridged example from our extreme summarization dataset showing the document and its oneline summary. Document content present in the summary is color-coded.
pre-processing tools or linguistic annotations have
driven the development of large-scale document
summarization datasets .
However, these datasets often favor extractive models
which create a summary by identifying (and subsequently concatenating) the most important sentences in a document . Abstractive approaches, despite being more faithful
to the actual summarization task, either lag behind
extractive ones or are mostly extractive, exhibiting
a small degree of abstraction .
In this paper we introduce extreme summariza-
tion, a new single-document summarization task
which is not amenable to extractive strategies and
requires an abstractive modeling approach. The
idea is to create a short, one-sentence news summary answering the question “What is the article
about?”. An example of a document and its extreme summary are shown in Figure 1. As can be
seen, the summary is very different from a headline whose aim is to encourage readers to read the
story; it draws on information interspersed in various parts of the document (not only the beginning)
and displays multiple levels of abstraction including paraphrasing, fusion, synthesis, and inference.
We build a dataset for the proposed task by harvesting online articles from the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) that often include a ﬁrstsentence summary.
We further propose a novel deep learning model
which we argue is well-suited to the extreme summarization task.
Unlike most existing abstractive approaches which rely
on an encoder-decoder architecture modeled by
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), we present a
topic-conditioned neural model which is based entirely on convolutional neural networks . Convolution layers capture longrange dependencies between words in the document more effectively compared to RNNs, allowing to perform document-level inference, abstraction, and paraphrasing. Our convolutional encoder
associates each word with a topic vector capturing
whether it is representative of the document’s content, while our convolutional decoder conditions
each word prediction on a document topic vector.
Experimental results show that when evaluated
automatically (in terms of ROUGE) our topicaware convolutional model outperforms an oracle
extractive system and state-of-the-art RNN-based
abstractive systems. We also conduct two human
evaluations in order to assess (a) which type of
summary participants prefer and (b) how much
key information from the document is preserved
in the summary. Both evaluations overwhelmingly
show that human subjects ﬁnd our summaries
more informative and complete. Our contributions
in this work are three-fold: a new single document summarization dataset that encourages the
development of abstractive systems; corroborated
by analysis and empirical results showing that
extractive approaches are not well-suited to the
extreme summarization task; and a novel topicaware convolutional sequence-to-sequence model
for abstractive summarization.
The XSum Dataset
Our extreme summarization dataset (which we
call XSum) consists of BBC articles and accompanying single sentence summaries. Specifically, each article is prefaced with an introductory sentence (aka summary) which is professionally written, typically by the author of the article. The summary bears the HTML class “storybody introduction,” and can be easily identiﬁed
and extracted from the main text body (see Figure 1 for an example summary-article pair).
We followed the methodology proposed in Hermann et al. to create a large-scale dataset
for extreme summarization. Speciﬁcally, we collected 226,711 Wayback archived BBC articles
ranging over almost a decade and
covering a wide variety of domains (e.g., News,
Politics, Sports, Weather, Business, Technology,
Science, Health, Family, Education, Entertainment and Arts). Each article comes with a unique
identiﬁer in its URL, which we used to randomly
split the dataset into training (90%, 204,045), validation (5%, 11,332), and test (5%, 11,334) set.
Table 1 compares XSum with the CNN, Daily-
Mail, and NY Times benchmarks. As can be seen,
XSum contains a substantial number of training
instances, similar to DailyMail; documents and
summaries in XSum are shorter in relation to other
datasets but the vocabulary size is sufﬁciently
large, comparable to CNN.
Table 2 provides empirical analysis supporting
our claim that XSum is less biased toward extractive methods compared to other summarization datasets. We report the percentage of novel
n-grams in the target gold summaries that do not
appear in their source documents. There are 36%
novel unigrams in the XSum reference summaries
compared to 17% in CNN, 17% in DailyMail, and
23% in NY Times.
This indicates that XSum
summaries are more abstractive. The proportion
of novel constructions grows for larger n-grams
across datasets, however, it is much steeper in
XSum whose summaries exhibit approximately
83% novel bigrams, 96% novel trigrams, and
98% novel 4-grams (comparison datasets display
# docs (train/val/test)
avg. document length
avg. summary length
vocabulary size
90,266/1,220/1,093
196,961/12,148/10,397
589,284/32,736/32,739
204,045/11,332/11,334
Table 1: Comparison of summarization datasets with respect to overall corpus size, size of training, validation, and
test set, average document (source) and summary (target) length (in terms of words and sentences), and vocabulary
size on both on source and target. For CNN and DailyMail, we used the original splits of Hermann et al. 
and followed Narayan et al. to preprocess them. For NY Times , we used the splits and
pre-processing steps of Paulus et al. . For the vocabulary, we lowercase tokens.
% of novel n-grams in gold summary
EXT-ORACLE
Table 2: Corpus bias towards extractive methods in the CNN, DailyMail, NY Times, and XSum datasets. We show
the proportion of novel n-grams in gold summaries. We also report ROUGE scores for the LEAD baseline and the
extractive oracle system EXT-ORACLE. Results are computed on the test set.
around 47–55% new bigrams, 58–72% new trigrams, and 63–80% novel 4-grams).
We further evaluated two extractive methods on
these datasets.
LEAD is often used as a strong
lower bound for news summarization and creates a summary by selecting the ﬁrst
few sentences or words in the document. We extracted the ﬁrst 3 sentences for CNN documents
and the ﬁrst 4 sentences for DailyMail .
Following previous work , we obtained
LEAD summaries based on the ﬁrst 100 words for
NY Times documents. For XSum, we selected the
ﬁrst sentence in the document (excluding the oneline summary) to generate the LEAD. Our second
method, EXT-ORACLE, can be viewed as an upper bound for extractive models . It creates an oracle summary by selecting the best possible set of
sentences in the document that gives the highest
ROUGE with respect to the
gold summary. For XSum, we simply selected the
single-best sentence in the document as summary.
Table 2 reports the performance of the two extractive methods using ROUGE-1 (R1), ROUGE-
2 (R2), and ROUGE-L (RL) with the gold summaries as reference. The LEAD baseline performs
extremely well on CNN, DailyMail and NY Times
conﬁrming that they are biased towards extractive methods.
EXT-ORACLE further shows that
improved sentence selection would bring further
performance gains to extractive approaches. Abstractive systems trained on these datasets often
have a hard time beating the LEAD, let alone EXT-
ORACLE, or display a low degree of novelty in
their summaries .
Interestingly,
LEAD and EXT-ORACLE perform poorly on XSum
underlying the fact that it is less biased towards
extractive methods.
In line with our ﬁndings, Grusky et al. 
have recently reported similar extractive biases in
existing datasets. They constructed a new dataset
called “Newsroom” which demonstrates a high diversity of summarization styles. XSum is not diverse, it focuses on a single news outlet (i.e., BBC)
and a unifrom summarization style (i.e., a single
sentence). However, it is sufﬁciently large for neural network training and we hope it will spur further research towards the development of abstractive summarization models.
Convolutional Sequence-to-Sequence
Learning for Summarization
Unlike tasks like machine translation and paraphrase generation where there is often a one-toone semantic correspondence between source and
target words, document summarization must distill the content of the document into a few important facts. This is even more challenging for
our task, where the compression ratio is extremely
Convolutions
Convolutions
Figure 2: Topic-conditioned convolutional model for
extreme summarization.
high, and pertinent content can be easily missed.
Recently, a convolutional alternative to sequence modeling has been proposed showing
promise for machine translation and story generation .
We believe that convolutional architectures are attractive for our summarization task for at least two
Firstly, contrary to recurrent networks
which view the input as a chain structure, convolutional networks can be stacked to represent large
context sizes. Secondly, hierarchical features can
be extracted over larger and larger contents, allowing to represent long-range dependencies efﬁciently through shorter paths.
Our model builds on the work of Gehring et al.
 who develop an encoder-decoder architecture for machine translation with an attention
mechanism based exclusively on deep convolutional networks. We adapt
this model to our summarization task by allowing it to recognize pertinent content (i.e., by foregrounding salient words in the document). In particular, we improve the convolutional encoder by
associating each word with a vector representing
topic salience, and the convolutional decoder by
conditioning each word prediction on the document topic vector.
Model Overview
At the core of our model is
a simple convolutional block structure that computes intermediate states based on a ﬁxed number of input elements. Our convolutional encoder
(shown at the top of Figure 2) applies this unit
across the document. We repeat these operations
in a stacked fashion to get a multi-layer hierarchical representation over the input document where
words at closer distances interact at lower layers while distant words interact at higher layers.
The interaction between words through hierarchical layers effectively captures long-range dependencies.
Analogously, our convolutional decoder (shown
at the bottom of Figure 2) uses the multi-layer
convolutional structure to build a hierarchical representation over what has been predicted so far.
Each layer on the decoder side determines useful source context by attending to the encoder
representation before it passes its output to the
next layer. This way the model remembers which
words it previously attended to and applies multihop attention (shown at the middle of Figure 2) per
time step. The output of the top layer is passed to
a softmax classiﬁer to predict a distribution over
the target vocabulary.
Our model assumes access to word and document topic distributions. These can be obtained by
any topic model, however we use Latent Dirichlet
Allocation in our experiments; we pass the distributions obtained from
LDA directly to the network as additional input.
This allows us to take advantage of topic modeling
without interfering with the computational advantages of the convolutional architecture. The idea
of capturing document-level semantic information
has been previously explored for recurrent neural
networks , however, we are not
aware of any existing convolutional models.
Topic Sensitive Embeddings
Let D denote a
document consisting of a sequence of words
(w1, . . . , wm); we embed D into a distributional
space x = (x1, . . . , xm) where xi ∈Rf is a column in embedding matrix M ∈RV ×f (where V is
the vocabulary size). We also embed the absolute
word positions in the document p = (p1, . . . , pm)
where pi ∈Rf is a column in position matrix
P ∈RN×f, and N is the maximum number of
positions. Position embeddings have proved useful for convolutional sequence modeling , because, in contrast to RNNs, they
do not observe the temporal positions of words
 . Let tD ∈Rf′ be the topic distribution of document D and t′ = (t′
1, . . . , t′
the topic distributions of words in the document
i ∈Rf′). During encoding, we represent
document D via e = (e1, . . . , em), where ei is:
ei = [(xi + pi); (t′
i ⊗tD)] ∈Rf+f′,
and ⊗denotes point-wise multiplication.
topic distribution t′
i of word wi essentially captures how topical the word is in itself (local context), whereas the topic distribution tD represents
the overall theme of the document (global context). The encoder essentially enriches the context
of the word with its topical relevance to the document.
For every output prediction, the decoder estimates representation g = (g1, . . . , gn) for previously predicted words (w′
1, . . . , w′
n) where gi is:
i); tD] ∈Rf+f′,
i are word and position embeddings of
previously predicted word w′
i, and tD is the topic
distribution of the input document. Note that the
decoder does not use the topic distribution of w′
computing it on the ﬂy would be expensive. However, every word prediction is conditioned on the
topic of the document, enforcing the summary to
have the same theme as the document.
Multi-layer
Convolutional
convolution block, parametrized by W ∈R2d×kd
and bw ∈R2d, takes as input X ∈Rk×d which
is the concatenation of k adjacent elements
embedded in a d dimensional space, applies one
dimensional convolution and returns an output
element Y ∈R2d. We apply Gated Linear Units
 to allow for deeper
hierarchical representation. We denote the output
of the ℓth layer as hℓ= (hℓ
1, . . . , hℓ
n) for the
decoder network, and zℓ= (zℓ
1, . . . , zℓ
m) for the
encoder network.
Multi-hop Attention
Our encoder and decoder
are tied to each other through a multi-hop attention
mechanism. For each decoder layer ℓ, we compute
the attention aℓ
ij of state i and source element j as:
t=1 exp , where the attention and weighted sum
are computed over zu only.
Our network uses multiple linear layers to
project between the embedding size (f + f′) and
the convolution output size 2d. They are applied
to e before feeding it to the encoder, to the ﬁnal
encoder output zu, to all decoder layers hℓfor the
attention score computation, and to the ﬁnal decoder output hL before the softmax. We pad the
input with k −1 zero vectors on both left and right
side to ensure that the output of the convolutional
layers matches the input length. During decoding,
we ensure that the decoder does not have access
to future information; we start with k zero vectors
and shift the covolutional block to the right after
every prediction. The ﬁnal decoder output hL is
used to compute the distribution over the target vocabulary T as:
p(yi+1|y1, . . . , yi, D, tD, t′) =
softmax(WohL
i + bo) ∈RT .
We use layer normalization and weight initialization to stabilize learning.
Our topic-enhanced model calibrates longrange dependencies with globally salient content.
As a result, it provides a better alternative to vanilla convolutional sequence models
 and RNN-based summarization models for capturing
cross-document inferences and paraphrasing. At
the same time it retains the computational advantages of convolutional models. Each convolution
block operates over a ﬁxed-size window of the input sequence, allowing for simultaneous encoding of the input, ease in learning due to the ﬁxed
number of non-linearities and transformations for
words in the input sequence.
Experimental Setup
In this section we present our experimental setup
for assessing the performance of our Topic-aware
Convolutional
which we call T-CONVS2S for short.
We discuss implementation details and present the systems used for comparison with our approach.
Comparison Systems
We report results with
various systems which were all trained on the
XSum dataset to generate a one-line summary
given an input news article.
We compared
T-CONVS2S against three extractive systems: a
baseline which randomly selects a sentence from
the input document (RANDOM), a baseline which
simply selects the leading sentence from the document (LEAD), and an oracle which selects a singlebest sentence in each document (EXT-ORACLE).
The latter is often used as an upper bound for extractive methods. We also compared our model
against the RNN-based abstractive systems introduced by See et al. . In particular, we experimented with an attention-based sequence to
sequence model (SEQ2SEQ), a pointer-generator
model which allows to copy words from the source
text (PTGEN), and a pointer-generator model with
a coverage mechanism to keep track of words that
have been summarized (PTGEN-COVG). Finally,
we compared our model against the vanilla convolution sequence to sequence model (CONVS2S) of
Gehring et al. .
Model Parameters and Optimization
not anonymize entities but worked on a lowercased version of the XSum dataset. During training and at test time the input document was truncated to 400 tokens and the length of the summary
limited to 90 tokens.
The LDA model was trained
on XSum documents (training portion). We therefore obtained for each word a probability distribu-
charge, court, murder, police, arrest, guilty, sentence, boy, bail, space, crown, trial
church, abuse, bishop, child, catholic, gay,
pope, school, christian, priest, cardinal
council, people, government, local, housing,
home, house, property, city, plan, authority
clinton, party, trump, climate, poll, vote, plaid,
election, debate, change, candidate, campaign
country, growth, report, business, export, fall,
bank, security, economy, rise, global, inﬂation
hospital, patient, trust, nhs, people, care, health,
service, staff, report, review, system, child
Table 3: Example topics learned by the LDA model on
XSum documents (training portion).
tion over topics which we used to estimate t′; the
topic distribution tD can be inferred for any new
document, at training and test time. We explored
several LDA conﬁgurations on held-out data, and
obtained best results with 512 topics.
shows some of the topics learned by the LDA
For SEQ2SEQ, PTGEN and PTGEN-COVG, we
used the best settings reported on the CNN and
DailyMail data .2 All three models had 256 dimensional hidden states and 128 dimensional word embeddings. They were trained
using Adagrad with learning
rate 0.15 and an initial accumulator value of 0.1.
We used gradient clipping with a maximum gradient norm of 2, but did not use any form of regularization. We used the loss on the validation set to
implement early stopping.
For CONVS2S3 and T-CONVS2S, we used 512
dimensional hidden states and 512 dimensional
word and position embeddings. We trained our
convolutional models with Nesterov’s accelerated
gradient method using a
momentum value of 0.99 and renormalized gradients if their norm exceeded 0.1 . We used a learning rate of 0.10 and once
the validation perplexity stopped improving, we
reduced the learning rate by an order of magnitude
after each epoch until it fell below 10−4. We also
applied a dropout of 0.2 to the embeddings, the
decoder outputs and the input of the convolutional
blocks. Gradients were normalized by the number
of non-padding tokens per mini-batch. We also
2We used the code available at 
com/abisee/pointer-generator.
3We used the code available at 
com/facebookresearch/fairseq-py.
used weight normalization for all layers except for
lookup tables.
All neural models, including ours and those
based on RNNs had a vocabulary of 50,000 words and were trained on a single Nvidia M40 GPU with a batch size of 32 sentences. Summaries at test time were obtained using beam search (with beam size 10).
Automatic Evaluation
We report results using automatic metrics in Table 4.
We evaluated summarization quality using F1 ROUGE . Unigram and bigram overlap
(ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2) are a proxy for assessing informativeness and the longest common subsequence (ROUGE-L) represents ﬂuency.4
On the XSum dataset, SEQ2SEQ outperforms
the LEAD and RANDOM baselines by a large
PTGEN, a SEQ2SEQ model with a
“copying” mechanism outperforms EXT-ORACLE,
a “perfect” extractive system on ROUGE-2 and
ROUGE-L. This is in sharp contrast to the performance of these models on CNN/DailyMail and Newsroom datasets , where they fail to outperform the LEAD.
The result provides further evidence that XSum
is a good testbed for abstractive summarization.
PTGEN-COVG, the best performing abstractive
system on the CNN/DailyMail datasets, does not
We believe that the coverage mechanism is more useful when generating multi-line
summaries and is basically redundant for extreme
summarization.
convolutional
signiﬁcantly
outperforms
RNN-based abstractive systems.
We hypothesize that its superior performance stems from
the ability to better represent document content
(i.e., by capturing long-range dependencies).
Table 4 shows several variants of T-CONVS2S
including an encoder network enriched with information about how topical a word is on its own
(enct′) or in the document (enc(t′,tD)). We also
experimented with various decoders by conditioning every prediction on the topic of the document,
basically encouraging the summary to be in the
same theme as the document (dectD) or letting
the decoder decide the theme of the summary.
4We used pyrouge to compute all ROUGE scores, with
parameters “-a -c 95 -m -n 4 -w 1.2.”
EXT-ORACLE
PTGEN-COVG
T-CONVS2S (enct′)
T-CONVS2S (enct′, dectD)
T-CONVS2S (enc(t′,tD))
T-CONVS2S (enc(t′,tD), dectD)
Table 4: ROUGE results on XSum test set. We report ROUGE-1 (R1), ROUGE-2 (R2), and ROUGE-L
(RL) F1 scores. Extractive systems are in the upper
block, RNN-based abstractive systems are in the middle block, and convolutional abstractive systems are in
the bottom block.
% of novel n-grams in generated summaries
EXT-ORACLE
Table 5: Proportion of novel n-grams in summaries
generated by various models on the XSum test set.
Interestingly, all four T-CONVS2S variants outperform CONVS2S. T-CONVS2S performs best
when both encoder and decoder are constrained
by the document topic (enc(t′,tD),dectD). In the
remainder of the paper, we refer to this variant as
T-CONVS2S.
We further assessed the extent to which various
models are able to perform rewriting by generating
genuinely abstractive summaries. Table 5 shows
the proportion of novel n-grams for LEAD, EXT-
ORACLE, PTGEN, CONVS2S, and T-CONVS2S.
As can be seen, the convolutional models exhibit
the highest proportion of novel n-grams.
should also point out that the summaries being
evaluated have on average comparable lengths;
the summaries generated by PTGEN contain 22.57
words, those generated by CONVS2S and T-
CONVS2S have 20.07 and 20.22 words, respectively, while GOLD summaries are the longest
with 23.26 words. Interestingly, PTGEN trained
on XSum only copies 4% of 4-grams in the source
document, 10% of trigrams, 27% of bigrams, and
73% of unigrams. This is in sharp contrast to PT-
EXT-ORACLE
Caroline Pidgeon is the Lib Dem candidate, Sian Berry will contest the election for
the Greens and UKIP has chosen its culture spokesman Peter Whittle.
[34.1, 20.5, 34.1]
UKIP leader Nigel Goldsmith has been elected as the new mayor of London to elect
a new conservative MP.
[45.7, 6.1, 28.6]
London mayoral candidate Zac Goldsmith has been elected as the new mayor of
[53.3, 21.4, 26.7]
Former London mayoral candidate Zac Goldsmith has been chosen to stand in the
London mayoral election.
[50.0, 26.7, 37.5]
Zac Goldsmith will contest the 2016 London mayoral election for the conservatives,
it has been announced.
(1) Who will contest for the conservatives? (Zac Goldsmith)
(2) For what election will he/she contest? (The London mayoral election)
EXT-ORACLE
North-east rivals Newcastle are the only team below them in the Premier League
[35.3, 18.8, 35.3]
Sunderland have appointed former Sunderland boss Dick Advocaat as manager at
the end of the season to sign a new deal.
[45.0, 10.5, 30.0]
Sunderland have sacked manager Dick Advocaat after less than three months in
[25.0, 6.7, 18.8]
Dick Advocaat has resigned as Sunderland manager until the end of the season.
[56.3, 33.3, 56.3]
Dick Advocaat has resigned as Sunderland boss, with the team yet to win in the
Premier League this season.
(1) Who has resigned? (Dick Advocaat)
(2) From what post has he/she resigned? (Sunderland boss)
EXT-ORACLE
The Greater Ardoyne residents collective (GARC) is protesting against an agreement aimed at resolving a long-running dispute in the area.
[26.7, 9.3, 22.2]
A residents’ group has been granted permission for GARC to hold a parade on the
outskirts of Crumlin, County Antrim.
[28.6, 5.0, 28.6]
A protest has been held in the Republic of Ireland calling for an end to parading
parading in North Belfast.
[42.9, 20.0, 33.3]
A protest has been held in North Belfast over a protest against the Orange Order in
North Belfast.
[45.0, 26.3, 45.0]
Church leaders have appealed to a nationalist residents’ group to call off a protest
against an Orange Order parade in North Belfast.
(1) Where is the protest supposed to happen? (North Belfast)
(2) What are they protesting against? (An Orange Order parade)
Table 6: Example output summaries on the XSum test set with [ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L] scores,
goldstandard reference, and corresponding questions. Words highlighted in blue are either the right answer or
constitute appropriate context for inferring it; words in red lead to the wrong answer.
GEN trained on CNN/DailyMail exhibiting mostly
extractive patterns; it copies more than 85% of 4grams in the source document, 90% of trigrams,
95% of bigrams, and 99% of unigrams . This result further strengthens our hypothesis that XSum is a good testbed for abstractive
Human Evaluation
In addition to automatic
evaluation using ROUGE which can be misleading when used as the only means to assess the informativeness of summaries , we
also evaluated system output by eliciting human
judgments in two ways.
In our ﬁrst experiment, participants were asked
to compare summaries produced from the EXT-
ORACLE baseline, PTGEN, the best performing
system of See et al. , CONVS2S, our
topic-aware model T-CONVS2S, and the humanauthored gold summary (GOLD). We did not include extracts from the LEAD as they were signiﬁcantly inferior to other models.
The study was conducted on the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform using Best-Worst Scaling
 , a less labor-intensive alternative to
paired comparisons that has been shown to produce more reliable results than rating scales .
Participants
were presented with a document and summaries
generated from two out of ﬁve systems and were
asked to decide which summary was better and
which one was worse in order of informativeness
(does the summary capture important information
in the document?) and ﬂuency (is the summary
written in well-formed English?).
Examples of
system summaries are shown in Table 6. We randomly selected 50 documents from the XSum test
set and compared all possible combinations of two
out of ﬁve systems for each document. We collected judgments from three different participants
for each comparison. The order of summaries was
EXT-ORACLE
Table 7: System ranking according to human judgments and QA-based evaluation.
randomized per document and the order of documents per participant.
The score of a system was computed as the
percentage of times it was chosen as best minus the percentage of times it was selected as
The scores range from -1 (worst) to 1
(best) and are shown in Table 7. Perhaps unsurprisingly human-authored summaries were considered best, whereas, T-CONVS2S was ranked
2nd followed by EXT-ORACLE and CONVS2S.
PTGEN was ranked worst with the lowest score
of −0.218.
We carried out pairwise comparisons between all models to assess whether system differences are statistically signiﬁcant. GOLD
is signiﬁcantly different from all other systems
and T-CONVS2S is signiﬁcantly different from
CONVS2S and PTGEN (using a one-way ANOVA
with posthoc Tukey HSD tests; p < 0.01). All
other differences are not statistically signiﬁcant.
For our second experiment we used a questionanswering (QA) paradigm to assess the degree
to which the models retain key information from
the document. We used the same 50 documents
as in our ﬁrst elicitation study.
We wrote two
fact-based questions per document, just by reading
the summary, under the assumption that it highlights the most important content of the news article. Questions were formulated so as not to reveal answers to subsequent questions.
We created 100 questions in total (see Table 6 for examples). Participants read the output summaries and
answered the questions as best they could without access to the document or the gold summary.
The more questions can be answered, the better the
corresponding system is at summarizing the document as a whole. Five participants answered questions for each summary.
We followed the scoring mechanism introduced
in Clarke and Lapata . A correct answer
was marked with a score of one, partially correct
answers with a score of 0.5, and zero otherwise.
The ﬁnal score for a system is the average of all
its question scores. Answers again were elicited
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing
platform. We uploaded the data in batches (one
system at a time) to ensure that the same participant does not evaluate summaries from different
systems on the same set of questions.
Table 7 shows the results of the QA evaluation.
Based on summaries generated by T-CONVS2S,
participants can answer 46.05% of the questions
correctly.
Summaries generated by CONVS2S,
PTGEN and EXT-ORACLE provide answers to
30.90%, 21.40%, and 15.70% of the questions, respectively. Pairwise differences between systems
are all statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01) with
the exception of PTGEN and EXT-ORACLE. EXT-
ORACLE performs poorly on both QA and rating
evaluations. The examples in Table 6 indicate that
EXT-ORACLE is often misled by selecting a sentence with the highest ROUGE (against the gold
summary), but ROUGE itself does not ensure that
the summary retains the most important information from the document. The QA evaluation further emphasizes that in order for the summary to
be felicitous, information needs to be embedded in
the appropriate context. For example, CONVS2S
and PTGEN will fail to answer the question “Who
has resigned?”
(see Table 6 second block) despite containing the correct answer “Dick Advocaat” due to the wrong context. T-CONVS2S is
able to extract important entities from the document with the right theme.
Conclusions
In this paper we introduced the task of “extreme
summarization” together with a large-scale dataset
which pushes the boundaries of abstractive methods. Experimental evaluation revealed that models which have abstractive capabilities do better on
this task and that high-level document knowledge
in terms of topics and long-range dependencies
is critical for recognizing pertinent content and
generating informative summaries. In the future,
we would like to create more linguistically-aware
encoders and decoders incorporating co-reference
and entity linking.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge
the support of the European Research Council
(Lapata; award number 681760), the European
Union under the Horizon 2020 SUMMA project
(Narayan, Cohen; grant agreement 688139), and
Huawei Technologies (Cohen).