A Comparative Study of Anomaly Detection Schemes in Network Intrusion Detection†
Aleksandar Lazarevic*, Levent Ertoz*, Aysel Ozgur*, Vipin Kumar*, Jaideep Srivastava*
Intrusion detection corresponds to a suite of techniques that
are used to identify attacks against computers and network
infrastructures. Anomaly detection is a key element of intrusion detection in which perturbations of normal behavior
suggest the presence of intentionally or unintentionally induced attacks, faults, defects, etc. This paper focuses on a
detailed comparative study of several anomaly detection
schemes for identifying different network intrusions. Several existing supervised and unsupervised anomaly detection schemes and their variations are evaluated on the
DARPA 1998 data set of network connections as well as
on real network data using existing standard evaluation
techniques as well as using several specific metrics that are
appropriate when detecting attacks that involve a large
number of connections. Our experimental results indicate
that some anomaly detection schemes appear very promising when detecting novel intrusions in both DARPA’98
data and real network data.*
1 Introduction
As the cost of the information processing and Internet accessibility falls, more and more organizations are becoming
vulnerable to a wide variety of cyber threats. According to a
recent survey by CERT/CC , the rate of cyber attacks has
been more than doubling every year in recent times. Therefore, it has become increasingly important to make our information systems, especially those used for critical
functions in the military and commercial sectors, resistant
to and tolerant of such attacks. The most widely deployed
methods for detecting cyber terrorist attacks and protecting
against cyber terrorism employ signature-based detection
techniques. Such methods can only detect previously
known attacks that have a corresponding signature, since
the signature database has to be manually revised for each
* Computer Science Department, University of Minnesota,
200 Union Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
† The authors are grateful to Richard Lippmann and Daniel
Barbara for providing data sets and their useful comments.
This work was partially supported by Army High Performance Computing Research Center contract number
DAAD19-01-2-0014. The content of the work does not
necessarily reflect the position or policy of the government
and no official endorsement should be inferred. Access to
computing facilities was provided by the AHPCRC and the
Minnesota Supercomputing Institute
new type of attack that is discovered. These limitations
have led to an increasing interest in intrusion detection
techniques based on data mining .
Data mining based intrusion detection techniques generally fall into one of two categories; misuse detection and
anomaly detection. In misuse detection, each instance in a
data set is labeled as ‘normal’ or ‘intrusive’ and a learning
algorithm is trained over the labeled data. These techniques
are able to automatically retrain intrusion detection models
on different input data that include new types of attacks, as
long as they have been labeled appropriately. Research in
misuse detection has focused mainly on classification of
network intrusions using various standard data mining algorithms , rare class predictive models, association
rules and cost sensitive modeling. Unlike signaturebased intrusion detection systems, models of misuse are
created automatically, and can be more sophisticated and
precise than manually created signatures. A key advantage
of misuse detection techniques is their high degree of accuracy in detecting known attacks and their variations. Their
obvious drawback is the inability to detect attacks whose
instances have not yet been observed.
Anomaly detection approaches, on the other hand, build
models of normal data and detect deviations from the normal model in observed data. Anomaly detection applied to
intrusion detection and computer security has been an active area of research since it was originally proposed by
Denning . Anomaly detection algorithms have the advantage that they can detect new types of intrusions as deviations from normal usage . In this problem, given a set
of normal data to train from, and given a new piece of test
data, the goal of the intrusion detection algorithm is to determine whether the test data belong to “normal” or to an
anomalous behavior. However, anomaly detection schemes
suffer from a high rate of false alarms. This occurs primarily because previously unseen (yet legitimate) system behaviors are also recognized as anomalies, and hence flagged
as potential intrusions.
This paper focuses on a detailed comparative study of
several anomaly detection schemes for identifying different
network intrusions. Several existing supervised and unsupervised anomaly detection schemes and their variations are
evaluated on the DARPA 1998 data set of network connections as well as on real network data using existing
standard evaluation techniques as well as using several specific metrics that are appropriate when detecting attacks that
involve a large number of connections. Our experimental
results indicate that some anomaly detection schemes ap-
pear very promising when detecting novel intrusions in both
DARPA’98 data and real network data.
2 Evaluation of Intrusion Detection Systems
As interest in intrusion detection has grown, the topic of
evaluation of intrusion detection systems (IDS) has also
received great attention . Evaluating intrusion
detection systems is a difficult task due to several reasons.
First, it is problematic to get high-quality data for performing the evaluation due to privacy and competitive issues,
since many organizations are not willing to share their data
with other institutions. Second, even if real life data were
available, labeling network connections as normal or intrusive requires enormous amount of time for many human
experts. Third, the constant change of the network traffic
can not only introduces new types of intrusions but can also
change the aspects of the “normal” behavior, thus making
construction of useful benchmarks even more difficult. Finally, when measuring the performance of an IDS, there is a
need to measure not only detection rate (i.e. how many attacks we detected correctly), but also the false alarm rate
(i.e. how many of normal connections we incorrectly detected as attacks) as well as the cost of misclassification.
The evaluation is further complicated by the fact that some
of the attacks (e.g. denial of service (DoS), probing) may
use hundreds of network packets or connections, while on
the other hand attacks like U2R (user to root) and R2L (remote to local) typically use only one or a few connections.
Standard metrics that were developed for evaluating
network intrusions usually correspond to detection rate as
well as false alarm rate (Table 1). Detection rate is computed as the ratio between the number of correctly detected
attacks and the total number of attacks, while false alarm
(false positive) rate is computed as the ratio between the
number of normal connections that are incorrectly misclassified as attacks (false alarms in Table 1) and the total number of normal connections.
Table 1. Standard metrics for evaluations of singleconnection intrusions (attacks)
Predicted connection label
Standard metrics
Intrusions (Attacks)
True Negative
False Alarm
connection
Intrusions
False Negative
Correctly detected attacks
There are generally two types of attacks in network intrusion detection: the attacks that involve single connections and the attacks that involve multiple connections
(bursts of connections). The standard metrics treat all types
of attacks similarly thus failing to provide sufficiently generic and systematic evaluation for the attacks that involve
many network connections (bursty attacks). In particular,
they do not capture information about the number of network connections associated with an attack that have been
correctly detected. Therefore, depending on the type of the
attack, two types of analysis may be applied; multiconnection attack analysis for bursty attacks and the singleconnection attack analysis for single connection attacks
(Figure 1). However, the first step for both analysis types
corresponds to computing the score value for each network
connection. The score value represents the likelihood that
particular network connection is associated with an intrusion (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Multi-step approach for evaluation intrusions in
the network traffic
Assume that for a given network traffic in some time interval, each connection is assigned a score value, represented as a vertical line (Figure 2). The dashed line in
Figure 2 represents the real attack curve that is zero for
non-intrusive (normal) network connections and one for
intrusive connections. The full line in Figure 2 corresponds
to the predicted attack curve, and for each connection it is
equal to its assigned score. These two curves allow us to
compute the error for every connection as the difference
between the real connection value (1 for connections associated with attacks and 0 for normal connections) and the
assigned score to the connection, and to further derive additional metrics.
Figure 2. Assigning scores in network intrusion detection
connection
network traffic
multiple or single
connection attack
multi-connection
attack analysis
single-connection
attack analysis
bursty attack
real attack
score value
False alarm
attack curve
The multi-step approach shown in Figure 1 utilizes computed errors for each connection in order to derive additional evaluation metrics. The first derived metric
corresponds to the surface areas between the real attack
curve and the predicted attack curve (surfaces denoted as \\\
in Figure 2). The smaller the surface between these two
attack curves, the better the intrusion detection algorithm.
However, the surface area itself is not sufficient to capture
many relevant aspects of intrusion detection algorithms
(e.g. how many connections are associated with the attack,
how fast the intrusion detection algorithm is, etc.). Therefore, additional metrics may be used in order to support the
basic metric of surface area under the attack curve. Assume
that the total number of network connections in considered
data set is N. The number N is equal to the sum of the total
number of normal network connections (Nn) and the total
number of network connections that are associated with the
intrusions (Ni). The number (nfa) corresponds to the number
of the non-intrusive (normal) network connections (nfa) that
have the score higher than prespecified threshold (dotted
line in Figure 3) and therefore misclassified as intrusive
ones. Now, the additional metrics may be defined as follows:
1. Burst detection rate (bdr) is defined for each burst and
it represents the ratio between the total number of intrusive network connections ndi that have the score
higher than prespecified threshold within the bursty attack (dotted line in Figure 3) and the total number of
intrusive network connections within attack intervals
(Nbi) (Figure 3). bdr = ndi / Nbi., where ∑
Similar metric was used in DARPA 1998 evaluation
Metric Definition
burst detection rate = ndi/Nbi
number of intrusive connections that have score
value higher than threshold
number of normal connections that follow attack and that are misclassified as intrusive
response time – time to reach the prespecified
Figure 3. The additional metrics relevant for IDS evaluation
2. Response time represents the time elapsed from the
beginning of the attack till the moment when the first
network connection has the score value higher than
prespecified threshold (tresponse in Figure 3). Similar
metric was used in DARPA 1999 evaluation 
where 60s time interval was allowed to detect the
bursty attack.
3. Anomaly Detection Techniques
3.1. Related Work. Most research in supervised anomaly
detection can be considered as performing generative modeling. These approaches attempt to build some kind of a
model over the normal data and then check to see how well
new data fits into that model. An approach for modeling
normal sequences using look ahead pairs and contiguous
sequences is presented in . A statistical method for
ranking each sequence by comparing how often the sequence is known to occur in normal traces with how often it
is expected to occur in intrusions is presented in . One
approach uses a prediction model obtained by training decision trees over normal data , while others use neural
networks to obtain the model or non-stationary models
 to detect novel attacks. Lane and Brodley performed anomaly detection on unlabeled data by looking at
user profiles and comparing the activity during an intrusion
to the activity during normal use. Similar approach of creating user profiles using semi-incremental techniques was
also used in . Barbara used pseudo-Bayes estimators to
enhance detection of novel attacks while reducing the false
alarm rate as much as possible . A technique developed
at SRI in the EMERALD system uses historical records
as its normal training data. It then compares distributions of
new data to the distributions obtained from those historical
records and differences between the distributions indicate
an intrusion. Recent works such as and estimate
parameters of a probabilistic model over the normal data
and compute how well new data fits into the model.
In this paper our focus is on several outlier detection algorithms as well as on unsupervised support vector machine
algorithms for detecting network intrusions.
3.2. Outlier Detection Schemes for Anomaly Detection.
Most anomaly detection algorithms require a set of purely
normal data to train the model, and they implicitly assume
that anomalies can be treated as patterns not observed before. Since an outlier may be defined as a data point which
is very different from the rest of the data, based on some
measure, we employ several outlier detection schemes in
order to see how efficiently these schemes may deal with
the problem of anomaly detection.
The statistics community has studied the concept of outliers quite extensively . In these techniques, the data
points are modeled using a stochastic distribution, and
points are determined to be outliers depending upon their
relationship with this model. However, with increasing ditresponse
mensionality, it becomes increasingly difficult and inaccurate to estimate the multidimensional distributions of the
data points . However, recent outlier detection algorithms that we utilize in this study are based on computing
the full dimensional distances of the points from one another as well as on computing the densities of local
neighborhoods .
3.2.1. Mining Outliers Using Distance to the k-th Nearest
Neighbor . This approach is based on computing the
Euclidean distance of the k-th nearest neighbor from the
point O. For a given k and a point O, Dk(O) denotes the
distance from the point O to its k-th nearest neighbor.
Therefore, the distance Dk(O) may be considered as a
measure of the outlierness of the example O. For instance,
points with larger values Dk(O) for have more sparse
neighborhoods and they typically represent stronger outliers
than points belonging to dense clusters that usually tend to
have lower values for Dk(O). Since generally user is interested in top n outliers, this approach defines an outlier as
follows: Given a k and n, a point O is an outlier if the distance to its k-th nearest neighbor is smaller than the corresponding value for no more than (n-1) other points. In other
words, the top n outliers with the maximum Dk(O) values
are considered as outliers.
3.2.2. Nearest Neighbor (NN) Approach. This method is a
slight modification of the outlier detection scheme presented in previous section 3.2.1., when k = 1. We specify an
“outlier threshold” that will serve to determine whether the
point is an outlier or not. The threshold is based only on the
training data and it is set to 2%. In order to compute the
threshold, for all data points from training data (e.g. “normal behavior” data) distances to their nearest neighbors are
computed and then sorted. All test data points that have
distances to their nearest neighbors greater than the threshold are detected as outliers.
3.2.3. Mahalanobis-distance Based Outlier Detection.
Since the training data corresponds to “normal behavior”, it
is straightforward to compute the mean and the standard
deviation of the “normal” data. The Mahalanobis distance
[ref] between the particular point p and the mean µ of the
normal data is computed as:
where the Σ is the covariance matrix of the “normal” data.
Similarly to the previous approach, the threshold is computed according to the most distant points from the mean of
the “normal” data and it is set to be 2% of total number of
points. All test data points that have distances to the mean
of the training “normal” data greater than the threshold are
detected as outliers.
Computing distances using standard Euclidean distance
metric is not always beneficial, especially when the data has
a distribution similar to that presented in Figure 4. It is obvious that examples p1 and p2 do not have the same distance
to the mean of the distribution when the distances are computed using standard Euclidean metric and Mahalanobis
metric. When using standard Euclidean metric, the distance
between p2 and its nearest neighbor is greater than the distance from p1 to its nearest neighbor. However, when using
the Mahalanobis distance metric, these two distances are
the same. It is apparent that in these scenarios, Mahalanobis
based approach is beneficial compared to the Euclidean
Figure 4. Advantage of Mahalanobis-distance based approach when computing distances.
3.2.4. Density Based Local Outliers (LOF approach). The
main idea of this method is to assign to each data example a degree of being outlier. This degree is called the
local outlier factor (LOF) of a data example. The algorithm
for computing the LOFs for all data examples has several
For each data example O compute k-distance (the
distance to the k-th nearest neighbor) and k-distance
neighborhood (all points in a k-distance sphere).
Compute reachability distance for each data example
reach-dist(O,p) = max{k-distance(p), d(O,p)}, where
d(O,p) is distance from data example O to data
example p.
Compute local reachability density of data example O as inverse of the average reachabaility distance
based on the MinPts (minimum number of data examples) nearest neighbors of data example O.
Compute LOF of data example O as average of the
ratios of the local reachability density of data example O
and local reachability density of O’s MinPts nearest
neighbors.
To illustrate advantages of the LOF approach, consider a
simple two-dimensional data set given in Figure 5. It is apparent that there is much larger number of examples in the
cluster C1 than in the cluster C2, and that the density of the
cluster C2 is significantly higher that the density of the cluster C1. Due to the low density of the cluster C1 it is apparent
that for every example q inside the cluster C1, the distance
between the example q and its nearest neighbor is greater
than the distance between the example p2 and the nearest
neighbor from the cluster C2, and the example p2 will not be
considered as outlier. Therefore, the simple nearest
neighbor approaches based on computing the distances fail
in these scenarios. However, the example p1 may be detected as outlier using only the distances to the nearest
neighbor. On the other side, LOF is able to capture both
outliers (p1 and p2) due to the fact that it considers the density around the points.
Figure 5. Advantages of the LOF approach
3.3. Unsupervised Support Vector Machines. Unlike
standard supervised support vector machines (SVMs) that
require labeled training data to create their classification
rule, in , the SVM algorithm was adapted into unsupervised learning algorithm. This unsupervised modification
does not require training data to be labeled to determine a
decision surface. Whereas the supervised SVM algorithm
tries to maximally separate two classes of data in feature
space by a hyperplane, the unsupervised algorithm attempts
to separate the entire set of training data from the origin, i.e.
to find a small region where most of the data lies and label
data points in this region as one class. Points in other regions are labeled as another class.
By using different values for SVM parameters (variance
parameter of radial basis functions (RBFs), expected outlier
rate), the models with different complexity may be built.
For RBF kernels with smaller variance, the number of support vectors is larger and the decision boundaries are more
complex, thus resulting in very high detection rate but very
high false alarm rate too. On the other hand, by considering
RBF kernels with larger variance, the number of support
vectors decreases while the boundary regions become more
general, which results in lower detection rate but lower
false alarm rate as well.
4. Experiments
We applied the proposed anomaly detection schemes to
1998 DARPA Intrusion Detection Evaluation Data as
well as to the real network data from the University of
Minnesota.
The DARPA’98 data contains two types: training data
and test data. The training data consists of 7 weeks of network-based attacks inserted in the normal background data.
Attacks in training data are labeled. The test data contained
2 weeks of network-based attacks and normal background
data. 7 weeks of data resulted in about 5 million connection
records. The data contains four main categories of attacks:
• DoS (Denial of Service), for example, ping-of-death,
teardrop, smurf, SYN flood, etc.,
• R2L, unauthorized access from a remote machine, for
example, guessing password,
• U2R, unauthorized access to local superuser privileges
by a local unprivileged user, for example, various
buffer overflow attacks,
• PROBING, surveillance and probing, for example,
port-scan, ping-sweep, etc.
Although DARPA’98 evaluation represents a significant
advance in the field of intrusion detection, there are many
unresolved issues associated with its design and execution.
In his critique of DARPA evaluation, McHugh questioned a number of their results, starting from usage of synthetic simulated data for the background (normal data) and
using attacks implemented via scripts and programs collected from a variety of sources. In addition, it is known
that the background data contains none of the background
noise (packet storms, strange fragments, …) that characterize real data. However, in the lack of better benchmarks,
vast amount of the research is based on the experiments
performed on this data.
The evaluation of any intrusion detection algorithm on
real network data is extremely difficult mainly due to the
high cost of obtaining proper labeling of network connections. However, in order to assess the performance of our
anomaly detection algorithms in a real setting, we also present the evaluation results of applying our techniques to real
network data from the University of Minnesota.
4.1. Feature construction. We used tcptrace utility software as the packet filtering tool in order to extract information about packets from TCP connections and to
construct new features. The DARPA98 training data includes “list files” that identify the time stamps (start time
and duration), service type, source IP address and source
port, destination IP address and destination port, as well as
the type of each attack. We used this information to map the
connection records from “list files” to the connections obtained using tcptrace utility software and to correctly label
each connection record with “normal” or an attack type.
The same technique was used to construct KDDCup’99
data set , but this data set did not keep the time information about the attacks. Therefore, we constructed our own
features that were similar in nature.
The main reason for this procedure is to associate new constructed features with the connection records from “list
files” and to create more informative data set for learning.
However, this procedure was applied only to TCP connection records, since tcptrace software utility was not able to
handle ICMP and UDP packets. For these connection re-
cords, in addition to the features provided by DARPA, we
used the features that represented the number of packets
that flowed from source to destination. The list of the features extracted from “raw tcpdump” data using tcptrace
software is shown in Table 2.
Table 2. The extracted “content based” features from raw
tcpdump data using tcptrace software
Feature Name
Feature description
num_packets_src_dst
The number of packets flowing
from source to destination
num_packets_dst_src
The number of packets flowing
from destination to source
num_acks_src_dst
The number of acknowledgement packets flowing from
source to destination
num_acks_dst_src
The number of acknowledgement packets flowing from destination to source
num_bytes_src_dst
The number of data bytes flowing from source to destination
num_bytes_dst_src
The number of data bytes flowing from destination to source
num_retransmit_src_dst
The number of retransmitted
packets flowing from source to
destination
num_retransmit_dst_src
The number of retransmitted
packets flowing from destination
num_pushed_src_dst
The number of pushed packets
flowing from source to destination
num_pushed_dst_src
The number of pushed packets
flowing from destination to
num_SYNs_src_dst
The number of SYN packets
flowing from source to destination
num_FINs_src_dst
The number of FIN packets flowing from source to destination
num_SYNs_dst_src
The number of SYN packets
flowing from destination to
num_FINs_dst_src
The number of FIN packets flowing from destination to source
connection_status
(discrete)
Status of the connection
(0 – Completed; 1 - Not completed; 2 – Reset)
Since majority of the DoS and probing attacks may use
hundreds of packets or connections, we have constructed
time-based features that attempt to capture previous recent
connections with similar characteristics. The similar approach was used for constructing features in KDDCup’99
data , but our own features examine only the connection
records in the past 5 seconds. Table 3 summarizes these
derived time-windows features.
Table 3. The extracted “time-based” features
Feature Name Feature description
Number of connections made by the same
source as the current record in the last 5
count_dest
Number of connections made to the same
destination as the current record in the
last 5 seconds
count_serv_src Number of different services from the
same source as the current record in the
last 5 seconds
count_serv_dest Number of different services to the same
destination as the current record in the
last 5 seconds
There are, however, several “slow” probing attacks that
scan the hosts (or ports) using a much larger interval than 5
seconds (e.g. one scan per minute or even one scan per
hour). As a consequence, these attacks cannot be detected
using derived “time based” features. In order to capture
these types of the attacks, we also derived “connection
based” features that capture similar characteristics of the
connection records in the last 100 connections from the
same source. These features are described in Table 4.
Although we have use all three groups of features for our
experiments, it is well known that constructed features from
the data content of the connections are more important
when detecting R2L and U2R attack types, while “timebased’ and “connection-based” features were more important for detection DoS and probing attack types .
Table 4. The extracted “connection-based” features
Feature Name Feature description
count_src1
Number of connections made by the same
source as the current record in the last 100
connections
count_dest1
Number of connections made to the same
destination as the current record in the last
100 connections
count_serv_src1
Number of connections with the same service made by the same source as the current record in the last 100 connections
count_serv_dst1
Number of connections with the same service made to the same destination as the
current record in the last 100 connections
4.2. Experimental Results on DARPA’98 Data. Since the
amount of available data is huge (e.g. some days have several million connection records), we sampled sequences of
normal connection records in order to create the normal
data set that had the same distribution as the original data
set of normal connections. We used this normal data set for
training our anomaly detection schemes, and then examined
how well the attacks may be detected using the proposed
We used the TCP connections from 5 weeks of training
data (499,467 connection records), where we sampled 5,000
data records that correspond to the normal connections, and
used them for the training phase. For testing purposes, we
used the connections associated with all the attacks from
the first 5 weeks of data in order to determine detection
rate. Also we considered a random sample of 1,000 connection records that correspond to normal data in order to determine the false alarm rate. It is important to note that this
sample used for testing purposes had the same distribution
as the original set of normal connections.
First, features from Table 2 are extracted using the
tcptrace software utility and then connection based and
time based features are constructed. The next step involved
standard normalization of obtained features and the final
step was to identify bursts of attacks in the data. The performance of anomaly detection schemes was tested separately for the attack bursts, mixed bursty attacks and nonbursty attacks.
Experiments were performed using the nearest neighbor
approach (section 3.2.2), the Mahalanobis-based approach
(section 3.2.3) the local outlier factor (LOF) scheme (section 3.2.4) as well as the unsupervised SVM approach (section 3.2.5).
In all the experiments, the percentage of the outliers in
the training data (allowed false alarm rate) is changed from
1% to 12%. It is interesting to note that the maximum specified false alarm (false positive) rate was also maintained
when detecting normal connections from test data.
4.2.1. Evaluation of Bursty Attacks. Our experiments were
first performed on the attack bursts, and the obtained burst
detection rates (bdr) for all four anomaly detection schemes
are reported in Table 5. We consider a burst to be detected
if the corresponding burst detection rate is greater than
50%. Since we have a total of 19 bursty attacks, overall
detection rate in Table 5 was computed using this rule. Experimental results from Table 5 show that the two most
successful outlier detection schemes were nearest neighbor
(NN) and LOF approaches, where the NN approach was
able to detect 14 attack bursts and the LOF approach was
able to detect 13 attack bursts. The unsupervised SVMs
were only slightly worse than the previous two approaches,
showing a great promise in detecting network intrusions.
The Mahalanobis-based approach was consistently inferior
to the NN approach and was able to detect only 11 multiple-connection attacks. This poor performance of Mahalanobis-based scheme was probably due to the fact that the
normal behavior may have several types and cannot be
characterized with a single distribution, that we have used
in our experiments. In order to alleviate this problem, there
is a need to partition the normal behavior into several more
similar distributions and identify the anomalies according to
the Mahalanobis distances to each of the distributions.
Table 5. Burst detection rates (bdr) for all the burst from 5 weeks of data are given in parentheses, while the number of
connections from the attack burst that are successfully associated with the attacks are given outside the parentheses.
Burst position
burst length (#
of connections)
Attack type
and category
LOF approach
NN approach
Mahalanobisbased approach
Unsupervised
SVM approach
Week1, burst1
neptune (DOS)
Week2, burst1
guest (U2R)
Week2, burst2
portsweep (probe)
31 (30.3%)
63 (61.7%)
25 (24.5%)
48 (47.1%)
Week2, burst3
ipsweep (probe)
158 (17.6%)
428 (47.7%)
369 (41.1%)
375 (41.8%)
Week2, burst4
back (DOS)
752 (75.2%)
825 (82.5%)
Week3, burst1
satan (probe)
Week3, burst2
portsweep (probe)
15 (10.9%)
118 (86.1%)
84 (61.3%)
115 (83.9%)
Week3, burst3
nmap (probe)
61 (58.1%)
105 (100%)
105 (100%)
97 (92.4%)
Week3, burst4
nmap (probe)
1060 (57%)
1071 (57.1%)
850 (45.4%)
Week3, burst5
imap (r2l)
Week3, burst6
warezmaster (u2r)
16 (94.1%)
15 (88.2%)
15 (88.2%)
16 (94.1%)
Week4, burst1
warezclient (u2r)
33 (38.4%)
38 (44.2%)
38 (44.2%)
42 (48.8%)
Week4, burst2
satan (probe)
5426 (89%)
5558 (91.1%)
5388 (88.3%)
5645 (92.5%)
Week4, burst3
957 (72.4%)
969 (73.3%)
680 (51.4%)
645 (48.8%)
Week4, burst4
portsweep (probe)
221 (74.4%)
259 (87.2%)
230 (77.4%)
271 (91.2%)
Week4, burst5
portsweep (probe)
1764 (76.6%)
1809 (79%)
1095 (47.5%)
1969 (85.5%)
Week5, burst1
satan (probe)
2986 (97.4%)
3022 (99%)
2983 (97%)
2981 (97.2%)
Week5, burst2
Week5, burst3
portsweep (probe)
942 (92.3%)
Detection rate
Table 6. The comparison of anomaly detection schemes when applied on all the attack bursts from 5 weeks of data (SA –
Surface Area between the real attack curve and the predicted (score) attack curve, tresponse – response time in the number of
connections)
LOF approach
NN approach Mahalanobis-based approach Unsupervised SVM
Burst position
(burst length)
Attack type
and category
Week1, burst1
neptune (DOS)
Week2, burst1
guest (u2r)
Week2, burst2
portsweep (probe)
Week2, burst3
ipsweep (probe)
Week2, burst4
back (DOS)
Week3, burst1
satan (probe)
Week3, burst2
portsweep (probe)
Week3, burst3
nmap (probe)
Week3, burst4
nmap (probe)
Week3, burst5
imap (r2l)
Week3, burst6
warezmaster (u2r)
Week4, burst1
warezclient (u2r)
Week4, burst2
satan (probe)
Week4, burst3
Week4, burst4
portsweep (probe)
Week4, burst5
portsweep (probe)
Week5, burst1
satan (probe)
Week5, burst2
Week5, burst3
portsweep (probe)
Total: 18424
Detection rate
14/19 (73.7%) 15/19 (78.9%)
10/19 (52.63%)
12/19 (84.2%)
Figure 6. ROC curves showing the performance of anomaly detection algorithms on bursty attacks.
For fair comparison of all outlier detection schemes,
ROC curves are computed for all proposed algorithms and
illustrated in Figure 6, which shows how the detection
rate and false alarm rate vary when different thresholds
are used. It is apparent form Figure 6 that the most consistent anomaly detection scheme is the LOF approach,
since it is only slightly worse than the NN approach for
low false alarm rates (1% and 2%), but significantly better
than all other techniques for higher false alarm rates
(greater than 2%).
Table 6 reports on additional metrics for evaluation of
bursty attacks, namely surface area and response time. As
defined in section 2.1, the smaller the surface area between the real and the predicted attack curve, the better
the intrusion detection algorithm. It is important to note
that surface area in Table 6 was normalized, such that the
total surface area was divided by the total number of connections from the corresponding attack burst. Since different bursty attacks involved different time intervals, we
decided to measure response time as the number of connections. Therefore, the response time represents the first
connection for which the score value is larger than the
prespecified threshold. When considering these additional
evaluation metrics, we also attempted to measure detection rate. In Table 6, we consider an attack burst detected
if the normalized surface area is less than 0.5. Again, the
two most successful intrusion detection algorithms were
NN and LOF approaches, with 15 and 14 detected bursts
respectively. When using the proposed additional metrics,
the Mahalobis-based approach was again inferior to the
NN approach, while on the other side the unsupervised
SVM approach achieved again slightly worse detection
rate that LOF and NN approaches.
It is interesting to note that the performance of both
NN and LOF approaches was slightly better when using
ROC Curves for different outlier detection techniques
False Alarm Rate
Detection Rate
Unsupervised SVM
LOF approach
Mahalanobis approach
NN approach
Number of connections
Connection score
LOF approach
NN aproach
Mahalanobis based approach
these additional metrics than the standard metrics. Since
both schemes are based on computing the distances, they
have similar performance on the bursty attacks because
the major contribution in distance computation comes
from the time-based and connection-based features.
Namely, due to the nature of bursty attacks there is very
large number of connections in a short amount of time
and/or that are coming from the same source, and therefore the time-based and connection-based features end up
with very high values that significantly influence the distance computation.
However, there are also scenarios when these two
schemes have different detecting behavior. For example,
the burst shaded gray in Table 5 (burst 2, week 2) corresponds to the attack that, when using the standard detection rate metric, was not detected with the LOF approach,
but it was detected with the NN approach. Figure 7 illustrates the detecting of this burst using NN and LOF. It is
apparent that the LOF approach has a smaller number of
connections that are above the threshold than the NN approach (smaller burst detection rate), but it also has a
slightly better response performance than the NN approach. It turns out that for specified threshold both
schemes have similar response time. In addition, both
schemes demonstrate some instability (low peaks) in the
same regions of the attack bursts that are probably due to
occasional “reset” value for the feature called “connection
status”. However, when detecting this bursty attack, the
NN approach was superior to other two approaches. The
dominance of the NN approach over the LOF approach
probably lies in the fact that the connections of this type
of attack (portsweep attack type, probe category) are located in the sparse regions of the normal data, and the
LOF approach is not able to detect them due to low density, while distances to their nearest neighbors are still
rather high and therefore the NN approach was able to
identify them as outliers. The dominance of the NN approach over the Mahalanobis-based approach can be
again explained by the multi-modal normal behavior. Finally, Figure 7 evidently shows that in spite of the limitations of the LOF approach mentioned above, it was still
able to detect the attack burst, but with higher instability
which is penalized by larger surface area.
When detecting the bursty attacks, very often there are
scenarios when the normal connections are mixed with
the connections from the attack bursts which makes the
task of detecting the attacks more complex. It turns out
that in these situations, the LOF approach is more suitable for detecting these attacks than the NN approach
simply due to the fact that the connections associated with
the attack are very close to dense regions of the normal
behavior and therefore the NN approach is not able to
detect them only according to the distance. For example,
the burst 4 from week 2 involves 1000 connections, but
within the attack time interval there are also 171 normal
connections (Figure 8). Table 5 shows that the LOF approach was able to detect 752 connections associated with
this attack, while the NN approach detected only 62 of
them. In such situations the presence of normal connections usually causes the low peaks in score values for
connections from attack bursts, thus reducing the burst
detection rate and increasing the surface area (Figure 8).
In addition, a large number of normal connections are
misclassified as connections associated with attacks, thus
increasing the false alarm rate.
Figure 7. The score values assigned to connections from
burst 2, week 2 (Figure is best viewed in color)
Table 7. The comparison of anomaly detection schemes applied on interleaved bursts of attacks. The first one was slow
probing attack, the second one was DoS attack within the slow probing attack, and the third one was low traffic U2R attack.
Burst position
(burst length)
Attack type
and category
LOF approach
NN approach
Mahalanobis based
Unsupervised
SVM approach
burst1 (999)
204 (20.4)
163 (16.3)
749 (74.9)
burst2 (866)
377 (43.5)
811 (93.7)
Burst 3 (5)
Detection rate
Table 8. Number of attacks detected and detection rate for detecting single-connection attacks
Number of attacks
Attack type
and category
LOF approach
NN approach
Mahalanobis based
Unsupervised
SVM approach
3 (63.7 %)
Detection rate
14 / 25 (56.0%)
9 / 25 (36.0%)
8/25 (28 %)
11 /25 (44 %)
4.2.2. Evaluation of Single Connection Attacks. The performance of anomaly detection schemes for detecting
single-connection attacks was measured by computing the
ROC curves for all the proposed algorithms. Figure 8
shows how detection rate changes when specified false
alarm rate ranges from 1% to 12%. Figure 8 shows that
the LOF approach was again superior to all other techniques and for all values of false alarm rate. All these
results indicate that the LOF scheme may be more suitable than other schemes for anomaly detection of single
connection attacks especially for R2L intrusions.
Table 8 reports the detection rate for all individual single-attack types when the false alarm was specified to 2%.
It is obvious that the LOF, NN and unsupervised SVM
approaches outperformed the Mahalanobis-based scheme
for all attack types. In this case, however, the LOF approach is distinctly better than the unsupervised SVM and
NN approaches especially for R2L attacks, where the LOF
approach was able to detect 7 out of 11 attacks, where the
unsupervised SVM and NN approaches were able to
pickup only three and one attacks respectively. Such superior performance of the LOF approach comparing to the
NN approach may be explained by the fact that majority
of single connection attacks are located close to the dense
regions of the normal data and thus not visible as outliers
by the NN approach.
Figure 8. ROC curves showing the performance of anomaly detection algorithms on single-connection attacks.
4.3. Results from Real Network Data. Due to various
limitations of DARPA’98 intrusion detection evaluation
data discussed above , we have repeated our experiments on live network traffic at the University of Minnesota. When reporting results on real network data, we
were not able to report the detection rate, false alarm rate
and other evaluation metrics reported for DARPA’98 intrusion data, mainly due to difficulty to obtain the proper
labeling of network connections.
Since a human analyst needs to manually evaluate
outliers, it was not practical to investigate all of the outlier
detection algorithms on the real network data. For this
purpose we have selected the LOF approach, since it
achieved the most successful results on publicly available
DARPA’98 data set and it is more robust than other
anomaly detection schemes that we used. The LOF technique also showed great promise in detecting novel intrusions on real network data. During the past few months it
has been successful in automatically detecting several
novel intrusions at the University of Minnesota that could
not be detected using state-of-the-art intrusion detection
systems such as SNORT . Many of these attacks have
been on the high-priority list of CERT/CC recently. Examples include:
On August 9th, 2002, CERT/CC issued an alert for
“widespread scanning and possible denial of service
activity targeted at the Microsoft-DS service on port
445/TCP” as a novel Denial of Service (DoS) attack.
In addition, CERT/CC also expressed “interest in receiving reports of this activity from sites with detailed logs and evidence of an attack.” This type of
attack was the top ranked outlier on August 13th,
2002, by our anomaly detection module in its regular
analysis of University of Minnesota traffic. The port
scan module of SNORT could not detect this attack,
since the port scanning was slow. Figure 9 shows the
number of incidents related to scanning of port
445/TCP reported to Internet Storm Center in
the last month all around the World.
On June 13th, 2002, CERT/CC sent an alert for an
attack that was “scanning for an Oracle server”. Our
anomaly detection module detected an instance of
this attack on August 13th from the University of
Minnesota network flow data by ranking connections
associated with this attack as the second highest
ranked block set of connections (the top ranked block
LOF approach
NN approach
Mahalanobis approach
Unsupervised SVM
ROC Curves for different outlier detection techniques
Detection Rate
False Alarm Rate
of connections belonged to the denial of service activity targeted at the Microsoft-DS service on port
445/TCP). This type of attack is difficult to detect using other techniques, since the Oracle scan was
embedded within much larger Web scan, and the
alerts generated by Web scan could potentially overwhelm the human analysts.
Figure 9. Number of scanning activities on Microsoft DS
service on port 445/TCP reported in the World in the last
month (Source www.incidents.org)
On August 8th and 10th, 2002, our anomaly detection
techniques detected a machine running a Microsoft
PPTP VPN server, and another one running a FTP
server, which are policy violations, on non-standard
ports. Both policy violations were the top ranked
outliers. Our anomaly detector module flagged these
servers as anomalous since they are not allowed, and
therefore very rare. Since SNORT is not designed to
look for rogue and unauthorized servers, it was not
able to detect these activities. In addition, for the
PPTP VPN server, the collected GRE traffic is part
of the normal traffic, and not analyzed by tools such
5. Conclusions and Future Work
Several anomaly detection schemes for detecting network
intrusions are proposed in this paper. To support applicability of anomaly detection schemes, a procedure for extracting useful statistical content based and temporal
features is also implemented. Experimental results performed on DARPA 98 data set indicate that the most successful anomaly detection techniques were able to achieve
the detection rate of 74% for attacks involving multiple
connections and detection rate of 56% for more complex
single connection attacks, while keeping the false alarm
rate at 2%. When the false alarm rate is increased to 4%,
the achieved detection rate reaches 89% for bursty attacks
and perfect 100% for single-connection attacks. Computed ROC curves indicate that the most promising technique for detecting intrusions in DARPA’98 data is the
LOF approach. In addition, when performing experiments
or real network data, the LOF approach was very successful in picking several very interesting novel attacks.
Considering the DARPA’98 data, performed experiments also demonstrate that for different types of attacks,
different anomaly detection schemes were more successful than others. For example, the unsupervised SVMs
were very promising in detecting new intrusions since
they had very high detection rate but very high false alarm
rate too. Therefore, future work is needed in order to keep
high detection rate while lowering the false alarm rate. In
addition, in the Mahalanobis based approach, we are currently investigating the idea of defining several types of
“normal” behavior and measuring the distance to each of
them in order to identify the anomalies. Since our experimental results exhibited very low detection rate for singleconnection attacks that are very similar to normal connections, we will also scrutinize whether these attacks demonstrate different densities than the normal connections.
Our long-term goal is to develop an overall framework
for defending against attacks and threats to computer systems. Although our developed techniques are promising
in detecting various types of intrusions they are still preliminary in nature. Data generated from network traffic
monitoring tends to have very high volume, dimensionality and heterogeneity, making the performance of serial
data mining algorithms unacceptable for on-line analysis.
Therefore, development of new anomaly detection algorithms that can take advantage of high performance computers is a key component of this project. According to
our preliminary results on real network data, there is a
significant non-overlap of our anomaly detection algorithms with the SNORT intrusion detection system, which
implies that they could be combined in order to increase