Multimodal Few-Shot Learning with
Frozen Language Models
Maria Tsimpoukelli∗
 
Jacob Menick∗
University College London
 
Serkan Cabi∗
 
S. M. Ali Eslami
 
Oriol Vinyals
 
Felix Hill
 
When trained at sufﬁcient scale, auto-regressive language models exhibit the
notable ability to learn a new language task after being prompted with just a few
examples. Here, we present a simple, yet effective, approach for transferring this
few-shot learning ability to a multimodal setting (vision and language). Using
aligned image and caption data, we train a vision encoder to represent each image
as a sequence of continuous embeddings, such that a pre-trained, frozen language
model prompted with this preﬁx generates the appropriate caption. The resulting
system is a multimodal few-shot learner, with the surprising ability to learn a variety
of new tasks when conditioned on examples, represented as a sequence of multiple
interleaved image and text embeddings. We demonstrate that it can rapidly learn
words for new objects and novel visual categories, do visual question-answering
with only a handful of examples, and make use of outside knowledge, by measuring
a single model on a variety of established and new benchmarks.
Introduction
Auto-regressive transformers have been shown to be very impressive models of natural language .
Large-scale language transformers exhibit several surprising abilities beyond that of standard text
generation . Perhaps most notably, they are few-shot learners; they can learn to perform a
new task from a few examples without any further gradient updates. Equipped with this ability, these
models have been shown to rapidly adapt to new tasks and styles of generation via prompting (e.g.
switching from formal to informal language) , to quickly retrieve relevant encyclopedic or general
knowledge when primed with a relevant context (e.g. answering questions such as ‘When did the
French Revolution begin?’) and to use new words in appropriate ways straight after being
taught what those words mean (sometimes referred to as ‘fast binding’) .
Despite these impressive capabilities, such large scale language models are ‘blind’ to modalities other
than text, preventing us from communicating visual tasks, questions or concepts to them. Indeed,
philosophers and linguists have questioned whether an un-grounded language model can ever achieve
true understanding of the language it processes . Here, we present Frozen, a method for giving a
pre-trained language model access to visual information in a way that extends its few-shot learning
capabilities to a multimodal setting, without changing its weights. Frozen consists of a neural network
trained to encode images into the word embedding space of a large pre-trained language model
such that the language model generates captions for those images. The weights of the language
model are kept frozen, but gradients are back-propagated through it to train the image encoder from
 
 
This person is
This person is
This person
Model Completion
This was invented
by Zacharias
This was invented by
Thomas Edison.
invented by
Model Completion
the Wright
brothers. <EOS>
With one of these I
can drive around a
track, overtaking
other cars and taking
corners at speed
With one of these I can
take off from a city and
fly across the sky to
somewhere on the other
side of the world
With one of
these I can
Model Completion
break into a secure
building, unlock the door
and walk right in <EOS>
Figure 1: Curated samples with about ﬁve seeds required to get past well-known language model
failure modes of either repeating text for the prompt or emitting text that does not pertain to the image.
These samples demonstrate the ability to generate open-ended outputs that adapt to both images and
text, and to make use of facts that it has learned during language-only pre-training.
scratch (Figure 2). Although Frozen is trained on single image-text pairs, once trained it can respond
effectively to ordered sets of multiple images and words. This allows users to e.g. ‘prompt’ it with
several examples of new multimodal tasks before evaluating its performance, or to ‘teach’ it the name
of a new visual category before immediately asking about that category.
Language Model
Text Embedder
Language Model
Self Attention Layers
Figure 2: Gradients through a frozen language model’s self attention layers are
used to train the vision encoder.
By exploiting its pre-trained language model, Frozen exhibits strong zero-shot performance on multimdodal tasks
that it was not trained on, such as visual question answering (VQA). More surprisingly, it gets better at these tasks
after seeing a handful of examples “in-context” as in ,
and also performs above chance on tests of fast category
learning such as miniImageNet . In each case, comparisons with ‘blind’ baselines show that the model is
adapting not only to the language distribution of these new
tasks, but also to the relationship between language and
images. Frozen is therefore a multimodal few-shot learner,
bringing the aforementioned language-only capabilities of
rapid task adaptation, encyclopedic knowledge and fast
concept binding to a multimodal setting.
Our goal in developing Frozen was not to maximise performance on any speciﬁc task, and in many
cases it is far from state-of-the-art. Nonetheless, it performs well above trivial baselines across a wide
range of tasks without ever seeing more than a handful of the training examples provided by these
benchmarks. Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 1, Frozen is a system for genuinely open-ended and
unconstrained linguistic interpretation of images that often produces compelling output.
Self Attention Layers
Steve Jobs
The Wright
Self Attention Layers
What colour
is the car?
(a) 0-shot VQA
(b) 1-shot outside-knowledge VQA
Self Attention Layers
(c) Few-shot image classiﬁcation
Figure 3: Inference-Time interface for Frozen. The ﬁgure demonstrates how we can support (a) visual
question answering, (b) outside-knowledge question answering and (c) few-shot image classiﬁcation
via in-context learning.
To summarise, our contributions are as follows: 1. We present Frozen, a modular, scalable and
efﬁcient approach to training vision front-ends for large language models. The resulting combined
model retains all of the capabilities of large language models, but can also process text and image
inputs in any arbitrary sequence. 2. We show that such models transfer their capacity for rapid task
adaptation, encyclopedic knowledge and fast concept binding from a language-only to a multimodal
setting, and verify that prompting them with both visual and language information can be strictly
more effective than doing so with language information alone. 3. We quantify these capabilities on a
range of existing and new benchmarks, paving the way for future analysis of these capabilities.
Related Work
The Frozen method is inspired by lots of recent work. show that the knowledge encoded in
transformer language models can be a valuable prior for tasks involving reasoning and memory across
discrete sequences, and even classiﬁcation of images presented as sequences of spatial regions. In that
approach, a small subset of the pre-trained language model weights are ﬁne-tuned to the various ﬁnal
applications. In contrast, applying Frozen to different tasks does not involve any weight updates to
the transformer whatsoever; the system adapts to and improves at multimodal (vision and language)
tasks as activations propagate through the model. The two studies thus reveal different ways in which
knowledge acquired from text can transfer to non-linguistic settings.
The effectiveness of preﬁx tuning or prompt tuning was another important motivation for
Frozen. Preﬁx tuning is a method for prompting a language model to produce output of a particular
style using gradient descent to learn a task-speciﬁc bias term which functions like the continuous
embedding of a text prompt. Using preﬁx tuning, language models can be adapted to different natural
language generation tasks like summarization. Frozen could also be considered a type of imageconditional preﬁx tuning, in which this continuous prompt is not a bias but an image-conditional
activation produced by an external neural network.
A large body of work has applied either text-speciﬁc or multimodal representation-learning approaches
like BERT to visual question answering (VQA) and captioning (see e.g. and many more).
In these approaches, models are ﬁrst trained with aligned data on task-agnostic cross-modal objectives
and then ﬁne-tuned to speciﬁc tasks. This approach can yield state-of-the-art performance on a range
of classiﬁcation tasks. Unlike Frozen, the resulting systems are highly specialized to one task, and
cannot learn new concepts or adapt to new tasks in a few shots.
By contrast, propose text generation as an objective for task-general multimodal models, yielding
a system that, like Frozen, produces unconstrained language output. Unlike Frozen, they do not use a
pre-trained model trained on text only, and do not consider zero or few-shot learning, instead updating
all weights of the system with training data for each task they consider – thus, again, specializing the
models to one task at a time. Similarly, and show that a large pre-trained language model as
decoder can improve a captioning performance when training data is limited. Unlike Frozen, they
use pre-trained frozen visual encoders or object extractors and ﬁne-tune the pre-trained weights in
the text decoder on the captioning data. Similarly, they do not consider zero or few-shot adaptation
across different multimodal tasks. Past work has also explored alternative approaches for post-hoc
combination of models for different modalities using latent variables .
Multimodal pre-training has recently been shown to enable strong zero-shot generalization in the
discriminative setting using large-scale contrastive learning . Also in a discriminative setting,
 has observed signs of emergent few-shot-learning from large-scale training. In contrast, our work
enables strong generalization to new multimodal tasks both zero-shot or few-shot with completely
open-ended generative text output.
The Frozen Method
Frozen is a method for grounding a large language model without changing its weights, closely related
to preﬁx tuning . Preﬁx tuning trains a task-speciﬁc continuous bias term to function like
the embedding of a constant, static text prompt used for all test-time examples. Frozen extends this
approach by making this preﬁx dynamic, in that it is not a constant bias but an input-conditional
activation emitted by a neural network.
Architecture
Pre-trained Autoregressive Language Models
Our method starts from a pre-trained deep autoregressive language model, based on the Transformer architecture , which parametrizes
a probability distribution over text y. Text is decomposed into a sequence of discrete tokens
y = y1, y2, ..., yL by the SentencePiece tokenizer . We use a vocabulary of size 32,000. The
language model makes use of an embedding function gθ which independently transforms each token
into a continuous embedding tl := gθ(yl), as well as a transformer neural network fθ whose output
is a vector of logits parameterizing a categorical distribution over the vocabulary. The distribution
pθ(y) is represented as follows:
log pθ(y) =
log pθ(yl|y1, y2, ..., yl−1) =
fθ(t1, t2, ..., tl−1)yl
The model we start from is pre-trained, i.e. θ has been optimised via the standard maximum-likelihood
objective on a large dataset of text from the internet. We use a 7 billion parameter transformer trained
on the public dataset C4 – previous work has shown that the multi-billion parameter scale is
sufﬁcient to exhibit the key capacities we are interested in studying .
Vision Encoder
Our vision encoder is based on NF-ResNet-50 . We deﬁne vφ as a function that
takes a raw image and emits a continuous sequence to be consumed by the transformer. We use the
ﬁnal output vector of the NF-Resnet after the global pooling layer.
Visual Preﬁx
One important requirement is to represent images in a form that the transformer
already understands: a sequence of continuous embeddings, each having the same dimensionality D
as a token embedding tl. We therefore form the visual preﬁx by linearly mapping the vision encoder’s
output to D ∗n channels, and then reshaping the result as a sequence of n embeddings, each with
dimensionality D. We call this sequence a visual preﬁx since it plays the same functional role in
the transformer architecture as (part of) an embedding sequence of preﬁx tokens. We experimented
using different number of tokens, speciﬁcally 1, 2 and 4 and found that 2 performs best, though
certainly this would be sensitive to other architectural details. See Appendix for more details on the
architecture.
During training, we update only the parameters φ of the vision encoder using paired image-caption
data from the Conceptual Captions dataset . Our experiments show that ﬁne-tuning θ hurts
generalization, as much less paired image-caption data is available than the amount of text-only data
used to pre-train θ. Training only the parameters φ makes our system modular – it can use an existing
language model off the shelf – and also quite simple: we only train a visual encoder and rely on the
capabilities of an existing language model.
Following standard captioning systems , we treat captioning as conditional generation of
caption text y given an image x. We represent x as vφ(x) = i1, i2, ..., in and train φ to maximise the
likelihood:
log pθ,φ(y|x) =
log pθ,φ(yl|x, y1, y2, ..., yl−1)
fθ(i1, i2, ..., in, t1, t2, ..., tl−1)yl
Whilst the parameters θ are frozen, each element ik of the visual preﬁx receives gradients
∇ikfθ(i1, i2, ..., in, t1, t2, ..., tl−1)yl, enabling the parameters of the visual encoder to be optimised with standard backpropagation and SGD (Figure 2).
As the notation fθ(i1, i2, ..., in, t1, t2, ..., tl−1) suggests, we present the visual preﬁx during training
as if it were a sequence of embeddings occurring earlier in time than the caption (token embeddings)
t1, t2, .... We use relative positional encoding , which enables the transformer to generalize to
prompt sequences where an image is not always in the ﬁrst absolute positions, and where more than
one image may be present. We leave improvements of this simple scheme for future work.
This is a dax.
This is a dax.
Q: What is this?
A: This is a
from ImageNet
2-inner-shots
Task Induction
Answer with dax
or blicket.
inner-shot 1
inner-shot 2
inner-shot 1
inner-shot 2
from ImageNet
This is a dax.
This is a dax.
Q: What is the
dax made of? A:
from VisualGenome
2-inner-shots
inner-shot 1
inner-shot 2
inner-shot 1
inner-shot 2
from ImageNet
blicket (vase)
dax (table)
(a) miniImageNet
(b) Fast VQA
Model Completion
Model Completion
Figure 4: Examples of (a) the Open-Ended miniImageNet evaluation (b) the Fast VQA evaluation.
Interface at Inference Time
At inference time, a vanilla language model, conditioned upon an arbitrary text prompt or ‘preﬁx’
y1, y2, ..., yp, generates text sequences yp+1, yp+2, ... autoregressively. In Frozen it is straightforward
to include images in a prompt by placing an image’s embedding i1, i2 next to a text embedding
subsequence t1, t2, ..., tp. Because the transformer fθ is modality-agnostic, we can interleave a
sub-sequence of text token embeddings with a sub-sequence of image embeddings in any arbitrary
order. In Figure 3, we show how this can support zero-shot visual question-answering (Figure 3a),
few-shot visual question-answering (Figure 3b), and few-shot image classiﬁcation (Figure 3c).
To evaluate these tasks, the model decodes output sequences greedily and these outputs are compared
against the ground truth answers of the task following the normalization technique used in . We
do not use short-lists of pre-canned answers to stress test the open-ended capabilities of Frozen, even
though in some tasks this may hurt its performance.
Few-Shot Learning Deﬁnitions
The ability of Frozen to be conditioned on a sequence of interleaved images and text allows it not only
to be able to perform at different multimodal tasks, but also gives rise to different ways of ‘inducing’
the task to the model in order to improve its performance. We brieﬂy deﬁne the terminology used
in our settings, common amongst all the different tasks. See Figure 5 in the appendix for a visual
illustration of these concepts.
• Task induction Explanatory text that precedes the sequence of images and text. It is
intended to describe the task to the model in natural language, for example ‘Please answer
the question.’
• Number of shots The number of distinct full examples of the task presented to the model
prior to the evaluated example. For example, in Visual Question-Answering, a shot is an
image along with the question and the answer.
For tasks involving fast concept binding (e.g., few-shot image classiﬁcation), we deﬁne further
speciﬁc terminology. See also Figure 4a and Figure 6 in the appendix.
• Number of ways The number of object classes in the task (e.g. dog vs cat).
• Number of inner-shots The number of distinct exemplars from each category that are
presented to the model (i.e. number of images of different dogs). In previous work with
MiniImagenet, these were known as shots, but we modify the term here to distinguish from
the more general usage of the term described above.
• Number of repeats The number of times each inner-shot is repeated in the context presented
to the model. We use this setting as an ablation to explore how the model integrates visual
information about a category.
n-shot Acc.
Frozen scratch
Frozen ﬁnetuned
Frozen train-blind
Frozen VQA
Frozen VQA-blind
Oscar 
Table 1: Transfer from Conceptual Captions to
VQAv2. The τ column indicates whether a model
uses training data from the VQAv2 training set.
The row denoted Frozen train-blind is the blind baseline described in subsection 4.1. Frozen VQA is a
baseline which mixes in VQAv2 training data.
n-shot Acc.
Frozen 400mLM
Frozen ﬁnetuned
Frozen train-blind
Frozen VQA
Frozen VQA-blind
MAVEx 
Table 2: Transfer from Conceptual Captions to
OKVQA. The τ column indicates if a model uses
training data from the OKVQA training set. Frozen
does not train on VQAv2 except in the baseline row,
and it never trains on OKVQA.
Experiments: A Multi-Modal Few-Shot Learner
Our experiments are designed to quantify three capacities that should be characteristic of a Multi-
Modal Few-Shot Learner: rapid adaptation to new tasks, fast access to general knowledge and fast
binding of visual and linguistic elements. We train Frozen on Conceptual Captions, a public dataset
that consists of around three million image-caption pairs . We do early stopping on the validation
set perplexity which usually reaches an optimum just after a single epoch with batch size 128. All
experiments used the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.95 and a constant learning rate of
3e-4 unless otherwise noted. We operate on 224×224 images at both train and test-time. Images
which are not square are ﬁrst padded with zeroes to square and then resized to 224×224.
Rapid Task Adaptation
We ﬁrst examine zero-shot and few-shot generalization from captioning to visual question-answering.
This is a type of rapid adaptation from captioning behaviour to question-answering behaviour with
either simple prompting alone or few-shot learning, analogous to transfer from language modelling
to open-domain question-answering in the vision plus language domain. We evaluate on the
VQAv2 validation set.
Zero-shot transfer from captioning to VQA
Captioning training can transfer moderately well to
visual question-answering in the zero-shot setting with no training or in-context examples at all. The
strength of the pre-trained language model is a double-edged sword. It powers the generalization
abilities of Frozen but also enables the model to perform surprisingly well without considering the
visual input at all. To guard against this possibility we also train blind baselines, in which the image
presented to the visual encoder is blacked out, but the convnet weights are still trained. This amounts
to preﬁx tuning . We outperform this blind baseline which also inherits the few-shot learning
abilities of the language model.
In these experiments we also include two additional and important baselines: Frozen ﬁnetuned in which
the language model is instead ﬁnetuned starting from the pretrained weights and Frozen scratch, wherein
the whole system is trained from scratch end-to-end. These baselines preferred a smaller learning rate
of 1e-5. Results in Table 1 show that keeping the language model frozen generalizes substantially
better to visual question-answering than ﬁnetuning. The model trained from scratch is not able to
transfer at all from captioning to VQA; we interpret this to suggest that the tremendous generalization
abilities of large language models are reliant upon large-scale training datasets in which the task
of predicting the next token mimics the test setting (here question-answering) with non-negligible
frequency.
Improving performance with few-shot learning
This zero-shot transfer to visual questionanswering via prompting improves by presenting examples to the model in-context. We repeat
the previous experiments with up to four examples of image-question-answer triples shown to the
model as conditioning information in the continuous prompt sequence (using the interface in Figure 3).
We present these few-shot results compared to mixing in data from the VQAv2 training set – for SGD
training – in Table 1. Of course, few-shot learning on four examples is outperformed by SGD on
tens of thousands of examples, but few-shot performance clearly improves with more examples and
goes a decent way toward closing the gap from zero-shot performance (29.5%) to full SGD training
performance (48.4%). With just four examples the gap is closed almost halfway at 38.2%.
There are two important takeaways from the results presented in this section. First, they show that
training a visual encoder through a pretrained and frozen language model results in a system capable
of strong out-of-distribution (zero-shot) generalization. Second, they conﬁrm that the ability to
rapidly adapt to new tasks given appropriate prompts is inherited from the pretrained language model
and transfers directly to multimodal tasks.
Encyclopedic Knowledge
Here we study the extent to which Frozen can leverage the encyclopedic knowledge in the language
model towards visual tasks. The Conceptual Captions dataset is hypernymed meaning that e.g. proper
names are replaced with a general word like person. This enables us to rigorously study the transfer of
factual knowledge because all knowledge of named entities comes from language model pretraining.
Consequently, when we show the model an image of an airplane and ask “who invented this?”
(Figure 1), the visual encoder has determined that the image contains an airplane, and the language
model has used this to retrieve the factual knowledge that airplanes were invented by the Wright
brothers, a fact which is referenced in the C4 training set through (text-only) articles about airplanes.
This is a fascinating chain of deduction. A detailed analysis of this behaviour with more examples is
included in the Appendix (e.g. Figure 9, Figure 10, Figure 11).
We bolster this ﬁnding quantitatively by evaluating performance on OKVQA , a visual questionanswering dataset designed to require outside knowledge in order to answer correctly. The pretrained
language model’s command of factual knowledge is of course dependent upon its scale, so we examine
the performance of Frozen using pretrained language models of varying sizes: the base model with
7 billion parameters, and a much smaller 400 million parameter language model pretrained on the
same dataset. Table 2 shows the results: task performance scales with model size. Again ﬁnetuning
performs worse than leaving the model frozen in terms of generalization performance. We stress that
Frozen is never trained on OKVQA.
Fast Concept Binding
In the multi-modal setting, fast-binding refers to a model’s ability to associate a word with a visual
category in a few shots and immediately use that word in an appropriate way.
Open-Ended miniImageNet and Real-Name miniImageNet
To quantify the fast-binding capacity of of Frozen, we evaluate it on the minImageNet meta-learning task . Note that there are
important differences with how we attempt miniImageNet and how it is approached in previous work.
First, unlike standard meta-learning, we do not train Frozen on the (meta) task. Second, we evaluate
Frozen in an open-ended fashion, where it must successfully generate a correct category name (and
then the EOS token) in order to be credited with a correct answer. Finally, although we use the same
image classes as the miniImageNet test set, they are at higher resolution (224×224) and with class
labels replaced with nonsense words (‘dax’, ‘blicket’ etc). This allows the system to express its
answers with word-like tokens. We refer to this task as Open-Ended miniImageNet, and it mimics
closely the standard miniImagenet setting used elsewhere. To assess how much difﬁculty is added by
binding visual categories to nonsense words versus simply adapting to an image recognition task per
se, we also consider a version – Real-Name miniImagenet – in which visual categories in both the
support set and the answer retain their original names. See Figure 4a for an illustration.
On both versions of this evaluation, we experiment by exposing the model to different numbers of
inner-shots, repeats and task induction. On two-way Open-Ended miniImagenet, we observe that
when Frozen is presented with a sequence of images and descriptions of new names for them, it is
able to learn new names for the objects presented and then use these new names immediately with
substantially above chance accuracy. Importantly, the ability of the model to use these new words
improves with with more examples of the corresponding category. Notably, this upward trend is more
pronounced when this supporting information involves different exemplars from the visual category
(inner-shots) rather than repetitions of a single exemplar (repeats). The fast-binding capacities of the
model can thus be improved with richer and more varied visual support or prompting.
On two-way Real-Name miniImagenet, we observe a similar trend but with higher absolute performance. This underlines the difﬁculty in Open-Ended miniImagenet introduced by having to assign
novel words to categories that may otherwise be already known to the model, and because the real
names may carry visual information leveraged from the captioning data the model was trained on.
In Table 4, we show that the observed effects on Open-Ended miniImagenet do not transfer to the
5-way setting, where Frozen is not signiﬁcantly above chance. This shows that learning to bind ﬁve
new names to ﬁve visual categories in a single forward pass is beyond the current capabilities of
Frozen. As before, however, we do observe an upward trend in the model’s capacity to return the
actual name for a visual category among the ﬁve possibilities as the number of inner-shots or repeats
increases. Further work is required and we look forward to progress in this more challenging setting.
Task Induction
Inner Shots
Frozen (Real-Name)
Frozen test-blind
Frozen test-blind (Real-Name)
ANIL Baseline 
Table 3: Performance of Frozen and baselines on Open-Ended miniImageNet 2-Way Tasks. Randomly
picking between the two class labels (then emitting the EOS token) would yield 50% accuracy. As
the model has to generate the answer, and is not counted correct if it paraphrases, this is not the best
blind baseline, which is why we include open-ended blind baselines that also generate.
Task Induction
Inner Shots
Frozen (Real-Name)
Frozen test-blind
Frozen test-blind (Real-Name)
ANIL Baseline 
Table 4: Performance of Frozen and baselines on Open-Ended miniImageNet 5-Way Tasks. Randomly
picking between the ﬁve class labels (then emitting the EOS token) would yield 20% accuracy.
Fast-VQA and Real-Fast-VQA
As transformers are trained to model text, their attention weights
learn to associate – or ‘bind’– pairs of words across sentences. The experiments with miniImageNet
show that this capacity can transfer directly to binding visual categories to their names, enabling the
system to generate the name on demand. This raises the question of whether Frozen can integrate a
newly-acquired visual category (and its names) more fully into the model’s language system, so that
it can, for instance, describe or answer questions about that category.
To test this capacity, we constructed a new task – Fast-VQA – out of two well-known datasets,
ImageNet and Visual Genome . For each question, the model is presented with nonsense
words (‘dax’ and ‘blicket’) and n images of the referents of those words (e.g. of a ‘cat’ or a ‘dog’)
taken from ImageNet. It is then asked a question containing at least one of those two words, about a
further image (taken from Visual Genome) in which both of the referents appear (see Figure 4b). As
with miniImagenet, the words ‘dax’ and ‘blicket’ (and how they refer) should be new to Frozen, but
the corresponding visual categories may be known from the Conceptual Captions training data, albeit
by different names.
To quantify how much harder the introduction of new words for known categories makes this task, we
also created a variant (Real-Fast-VQA) in which the original category names (‘cat’ or ‘dog’) are used
instead of ‘dax’ and ‘blicket’. Real-Fast-VQA is a special case of VQA involving questions from
Visual Genome, in which a model is reminded what the important entities in the question look like
prior to answering the question. Real-Fast-VQA does not require the same ability to bind categories
to new words, but it does measure how well a model can exploit task-relevant multimodal guidance
when attempting a new task in an otherwise zero-shot manner.
Fast-VQA and Real-Fast-VQA are very challenging tasks because they are attempted without taskspeciﬁc training, and because the underlying questions come from Visual Genome (VQAv2 images
do not come with the necessary meta-data to construct the task). Visual Genome questions are
particularly challenging because only a single answer exists for each question. When scoring models,
for simplicity we credit only an exact match with the output generated by the model, modulo the same
post-processing applied for VQAv2. Because of the inherent difﬁculty of the task, we use strong
baselines to verify strength of observed effects. The Fast-VQA and Real-Fast-VQA evaluation sets
will be provided with the camera ready version of this manuscript, as a resource to stimulate further
research on multimodal fast-binding, together with training data (not used in this work).
Real-Fast-VQA
Inner Shots
Frozen train-blind
Table 5: Performance of Frozen versus an equivalent blind model on Fast and Real-Fast VQA.
As shown in Table 5, the fact that the model improves with more shots in both Fast-VQA and Real-
Fast-VQA conﬁrms that Frozen has some capacity to integrate novel words into its general capacity to
process and generate natural language in a multimodal context. It is notable that a preﬁx-tuned model
with no access to images improves moderately at Real-Fast-VQA as more concepts are presented,
showing that additional linguistic cues (just being reminded of the words involved and the linguistic
form of the task) goes some way to preparing for the upcoming question. As exempliﬁed in Figure 4,
inspection of the model output conﬁrms that in many cases it is indeed the multimodal (and not just
linguistic) support that enables Frozen to improve performance as the number of shots increases.
Discussion
Limitations
We believe this work is an important proof-of-concept for a desired, much more powerful system
capable of open-ended multimodal few-shot learning. Frozen achieves the necessary capacities to
some degree, but a key limitation is that it achieves far from state-of-the-art performance on the
speciﬁc tasks that it learns in a few shots, compared to systems that use the full training set for those
tasks. As such, the main contribution of this work should be seen as a starting point or baseline for
this exciting area of research of multimodal few-shot learning.
Further improvement can make the impressive zero-shot and few-shot generalization we observed
more robust as reﬂected by higher accuracy and fewer seeds required to demonstrate our most
compelling samples. Finally, there are many technical questions that were not explored in this proofof-concept study, such as whether performance could be improved with more elaborate architectures
for mixing vision and language. We leave the exploration of these possibilities to future investigations. The Open-Ended miniImageNet, Real-Name miniImagenet, Fast-VQA and Real-Fast-VQA
benchmarks that we will provide with the camera ready version of this manuscript should facilitate
the evaluation and analysis of future systems of this type.
Conclusion
We have presented a method for transforming large language models into multimodal few-shot
learning systems by extending the soft-prompting philosophy of preﬁx tuning to ordered sets of
images and text while preserving text prompting abilities of the language model. Our experiments
conﬁrm that the resulting system, Frozen, is capable both of open-ended interpretation of images and
genuinely multimodal few-shot learning even though the system is only trained to do captioning. One
corollary of these results is that the knowledge required to quickly bind together or associate different
words in language is also pertinent to rapidly binding language to visual elements across an ordered
set of inputs. This ﬁnding extends the conclusion of – that knowledge in transformer language
models can transfer to non-linguistic tasks – to the speciﬁc case of knowledge about few-shot learning.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Sebastian Borgeaud and Jack Rae for preparing the pretraining text dataset and pretraining a selection of transformer language models, as well as Trevor
Cai for help with experiments and infrastructure. We also wish to thank Pauline Luc, Jeff Donahue,
Malcolm Reynolds, Andy Brock, Karen Simonyan, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Antoine Miech, Charlie
Nash, Aaron van den Oord, Marc Deisenroth, Aida Nematzadeh, Roman Ring, Francis Song, Eliza
Rutherford, Kirsty Anderson, Esme Sutherland, Daan Wierstra, and Nando de Freitas for insightful
discussions during the course of the project.