Machine Learning, 59, 161–205, 2005
2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Logistic Model Trees∗
NIELS LANDWEHR
 
Institute for Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
 
EIBE FRANK
 
Department of Computer Science, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Johannes F¨urnkranz
Tree induction methods and linear models are popular techniques for supervised learning tasks, both
for the prediction of nominal classes and numeric values. For predicting numeric quantities, there has been work
on combining these two schemes into ‘model trees’, i.e. trees that contain linear regression functions at the leaves.
In this paper, we present an algorithm that adapts this idea for classiﬁcation problems, using logistic regression
instead of linear regression. We use a stagewise ﬁtting process to construct the logistic regression models that
can select relevant attributes in the data in a natural way, and show how this approach can be used to build the
logistic regression models at the leaves by incrementally reﬁning those constructed at higher levels in the tree.
We compare the performance of our algorithm to several other state-of-the-art learning schemes on 36 benchmark
UCI datasets, and show that it produces accurate and compact classiﬁers.
model trees, logistic regression, classiﬁcation
Introduction
Two popular methods for classiﬁcation are linear logistic regression and tree induction,
which have somewhat complementary advantages and disadvantages. The former ﬁts a
simple (linear) model to the data, and the process of model ﬁtting is quite stable, resulting
in low variance but potentially high bias. The latter, on the other hand, exhibits low bias
but often high variance: it searches a less restricted space of models, allowing it to capture
nonlinear patterns in the data, but making it less stable and prone to overﬁtting. So it is not
surprising that neither of the two methods is superior in general—earlier studies have shown that their relative performance depends on the size
and the characteristics of the dataset (e.g., the signal-to-noise ratio).
It is a natural idea to try and combine these two methods into learners that rely on simple
regression models if only little and/or noisy data is available and add a more complex
tree structure if there is enough data to warrant such structure. For the case of predicting
a numeric variable, this has lead to ‘model trees’, which are decision trees with linear
regression models at the leaves. These have been shown to produce good results .
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
1992). Although it is possible to use model trees for classiﬁcation tasks by transforming
the classiﬁcation problem into a regression task by binarizing the class ,
this approach produces several trees (one per class) and thus makes the ﬁnal model harder
to interpret.
A more natural way to deal with classiﬁcation tasks is to use a combination of a tree
structure and logistic regression models resulting in a single tree. Another advantage of
using logistic regression is that explicit class probability estimates are produced rather than
just a classiﬁcation. In this paper, we present a method, called LMT (Logistic Model Trees),
that follows this idea. We discuss a new scheme for selecting the attributes to be included
in the logistic regression models, and introduce a way of building the logistic models at the
leaves by reﬁning logistic models that have been trained at higher levels in the tree, i.e. on
larger subsets of the training data.
We evaluate the performance of LMT on 36 datasets taken from the UCI repository
 . Included in the experiments are the standard decision tree learners
C4.5 and CART , linear logistic regression, and other
tree-based classiﬁers, such as boosted C4.5, model trees ﬁt to the class indicator variables
 , functional trees , naive Bayes trees , and
a different algorithm for building logistic model trees: Lotus . The
experiments show that LMT produces more accurate classiﬁers than C4.5, CART, logistic
regression, model trees, functional trees, naive Bayes trees and Lotus. It is competitive
with boosted decision trees, which are considered to be one of the best ‘off the shelf’
classiﬁcation systems, while producing models that are easier to interpret. We also present
empirical evidence that LMT smoothly adapts the tree size to the complexity of the data
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we brieﬂy discuss the two
learning methods that LMT is based on: tree induction and logistic regression. Section 3
discusses related work on tree-based learning. In Section 4 we present the LMT algorithm
for learning logistic model trees. Section 5 describes our experimental study, followed by
a discussion of results. Finally, we draw some conclusions in Section 6.
Tree induction and logistic regression
This section discusses the two basic approaches to learning that our method is based upon:
tree induction and logistic regression. We brieﬂy introduce the process of tree induction,
discuss the application of regression to classiﬁcation tasks, and then describe our implementation of logistic regression.
Tree induction
The goal of supervised learning is to ﬁnd a subdivision of the instance space into regions
labeled with one of the target classes. Top-down tree induction ﬁnds this subdivision by
recursively splitting the instance space, stopping when the regions of the subdivision are
reasonably ‘pure’ in the sense that they contain examples with mostly identical class labels.
The regions are labeled with the majority class of the examples in that region.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
The artiﬁcial ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset and the uncorrupted class boundary.
Subdivisions of increasing complexity for the ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset, generated by (from left to
right) a decision stump learner, C4.5 with the ‘minimum instances’ parameter set to 20, and C4.5 with standard
options. Colors (from light to dark) indicate class probability estimates in the different regions.
Important advantages of tree models (with axis-parallel splits) are that they can be constructed efﬁciently and are easy to interpret. A path in a decision tree basically corresponds
to a conjunction of boolean expression of the form ‘attribute = value’ (for nominal attributes) or ‘attribute ≤value’ (for numeric attributes), so a tree can be seen as a set of rules
that say how to classify instances.
The goal of tree induction is to ﬁnd a subdivision that is ﬁne enough to capture the
structure in the underlying domain but does not ﬁt random patterns in the training data.
As an example, Figure 1 shows a sample of 500 instances from an artiﬁcial domain,
namely the sign-boundary of the function
f (x1, x2) = x2
1 + x1 + x2 + e,
a polynomial of the two attributes x1, x2 that is corrupted by Gaussian noise e. The function
was uniformly sampled in [−1, 1]2. The original decision boundary of the polynomial
(without noise) is also given (black/white region). We refer to this dataset as the ‘polynomialnoise’ dataset, it will be used again later.
Figure 2 shows three subdivision of the R2 instance space for the ‘polynomial-noise’
dataset, generated by a decision stump learner (i.e. a one-level decision tree), C4.5 with the ‘minimum instances’ parameter set to 20, and C4.5 with standard options.
They are increasingly more complex; in this case, the center one would probably be
adequate, while the rightmost one clearly overﬁts the examples.
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
The usual approach to the problem of ﬁnding the best number of splits is to ﬁrst perform
many splits (build a large tree) and afterwards use a ‘pruning’ scheme to undo some of these
splits. Different pruning schemes have been proposed. For example, C4.5 uses a statistically
motivated estimate for the true error given the error on the training data, while the CART
 method cross-validates a ‘cost-complexity’ parameter that assigns a
penalty to large trees.
Classiﬁcation via regression
The term ‘regression’ sometimes refers to a particular kind of parametric model for estimating a numeric target variable, and sometimes to the process of estimating a numeric
target variable in general (as opposed to a discrete one). For the moment, we take the latter
meaning—we explain how to solve a classiﬁcation problem with a learner that can only
produce estimates for a numeric target variable.
Assume we have a class variable G that takes on values 1, . . . , J. The idea is to transform
this class variable into J numeric ‘indicator’ variables G1, . . . , G J to which the regression
learner can be ﬁt. The indicator variable G j for class j takes on value 1 whenever class
j is present and value 0 everywhere else. A separate model is then ﬁt to every indicator
variable G j using the regression learner. When classifying an unseen instance, predictions
u1, . . . , u J are obtained from the numeric estimators ﬁt to the class indicator variables, and
the predicted class is
j∗= argmax
We will use this transformation process several times, for example when using model
trees for classiﬁcation.
Transforming a classiﬁcation task into a regression problem in this fashion, we can use
standard linear regression model for classiﬁcation. Linear regression ﬁts a parameter vector
β to a numeric target variable to form a model
f (x) = βT x
where x is the vector of attribute values for the instance (we assume a constant component
in the input vector to accommodate the intercept). The model is ﬁt to minimize the squared
β∗= argmin
( f (xi) −yi)2,
where we have n training instances xi that have target values yi. However, this approach
has some disadvantages. Usually, the predictions given by the regression functions ﬁt to the
class indicator variables are not conﬁned to and can even become negative. Besides,
the approach is known to suffer from masking problems in the multiclass case: even if the
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
class regions of the instance space are linearly separable, two classes can ‘mask’ a third
one such that the learned model cannot separate it from the other two—see for example
 .
Logistic regression
A better way to use regression for classiﬁcation tasks is to use a logistic regression model
that models the posterior class probabilities Pr(G = j | X = x) for the J classes. Given
estimates for the class probabilities, we can classify unseen instances by
j∗= argmax
Pr(G = j | X = x).
Logistic regression models these probabilities using linear functions in x while at the same
time ensuring they sum to one and remain in . The model is speciﬁed in terms of J −1
log-odds that separate each class from the ‘base class’ J:
log Pr(G = j | X = x)
Pr(G = J | X = x) = βT
j = 1, . . . , J −1
or, equivalently,
Pr(G = j | X = x) =
j = 1, . . . , J −1
Pr(G = J | X = x) =
Note that this model still produces linear boundaries between the regions in the instance
space corresponding to the different classes. For example, the x lying on the boundary
between a class j and the class J are those for which Pr(G = j | X = x) = Pr(G = J |
X = x), which is equivalent to the log-odds being zero. Since the equation for the log-odds
is linear in x, this class boundary is effectively a hyperplane. The formulation of the logistic
model given here uses the last class as the base class in the odds-ratios; however, the choice
of the base class is arbitrary in that the estimates are equivariant under this choice.
Fitting a logistic regression model means estimating the parameter vectors β j. The
standard procedure in statistics is to look for the maximum likelihood estimate: choose
the parameters that maximize the probability of the observed data points. For the logistic
regression model, there are no closed-form solutions for these estimates. Instead, we have
to use numeric optimization algorithms that approach the maximum likelihood solution
iteratively and reach it in the limit.
In a recent paper that links boosting algorithms like AdaBoost to additive modeling
in statistics, Friedman et al. propose the LogitBoost algorithm for ﬁtting additive logistic
regression models by maximum likelihood . These
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
models are a generalization of the (linear) logistic regression models described above.
Generally, they have the form
Pr(G = j | X = x) =
k=1 eFk(x) ,
Fk(x) = 0,
where Fj(x) = M
m=1 fmj(x) and the fmj are (not necessarily linear) functions of the input
variables. Indeed, the authors show that if regression trees are used as the fmj, the resulting
algorithm has strong connections to boosting decision trees with algorithms like AdaBoost.
Figure 3 gives the pseudocode for the algorithm. The variables y∗
i j encode the observed
class membership probabilities for instance xi, i.e.
if yi = j,
if yi ̸= j
(recall that yi is the class label of example xi). The p j(x) are the estimates of the class
probabilities for an instance x given by the model ﬁt so far.
LogitBoost performs forward stagewise ﬁtting: in every iteration, it computes ‘response
variables’ zi j that encode the error of the currently ﬁt model on the training examples .
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
terms of probability estimates), and then tries to improve the model by adding a function
fmj to the committee Fj, ﬁt to the response by least-squared error. As shown in Friedman,
Hastie, and Tibshirani , this amounts to performing a quasi-Newton step in every
iteration, where the Hessian matrix is approximated by its diagonal.
Any class of functions fmj can be used as the ‘weak learner’ in the algorithm, as long as
they are ﬁt by a (weighted) least-squares regression. Depending on the class of functions,
we get a more expressive or more restricted overall model. In the special case that the
fmj(x) and so the Fj(x) are linear functions of the input variables, the additive logistic
regression model is equivalent to the linear logistic model introduced above. Assuming that
Fj(x) = αT
j x, the equivalence of the two models is established by setting α j = β j −βJ
for j = 1 . . . J −1 and αJ = βJ. Note that the condition J
k=1 Fk(x) = 0 is for stability
only, adding a constant to all Fk(x) does not change the model.
This means we can use the LogitBoost algorithm to learn linear logistic regression
models, by ﬁtting a standard least-squares regression function as the fmj in step 2(a)ii. of
the algorithm. In fact, in the two-class case this algorithm is equivalent to the standard
‘iterative reweighted least squares’ method used for ﬁtting linear logistic regression models
 .
2.3.1. Attribute selection.
Typical real-world data includes various attributes, only a few of
which are actually relevant to the true target concept. If non-relevant attributes are included
in, for example, a logistic regression model, they will usually allow the training data to be
ﬁtted with a smaller error, because there is by chance some correlation between the class
labels and the values of these attributes for the training data. They will not, however, increase
predictive power over unseen cases, and can sometimes even signiﬁcantly reduce accuracy.
Furthermore, including attributes that are not relevant will make it harder to understand
the structure of the domain by looking at the ﬁnal model, because it is ‘distorted’ by the
inﬂuence of these attributes. Therefore, it is important to ﬁnd some way to select the most
relevant attributes to include in the logistic regression models.
When we say that we ﬁt a linear regression function fmj by least squares regression in
a LogitBoost iteration, we may consider a multiple linear regression that makes use of all
the attributes. However, it is also possible to use even simpler functions for the fmj: simple
regression functions, that perform a regression on only one attribute present in the training
data. Fitting simple regression by least-squared error means ﬁtting a simple regression
function to each attribute in the data using least-squares as the error criterion, and then
selecting the attribute that gives the smallest squared error.
Because every multiple linear regression can be expressed as a sum of simple linear
regression functions, the general model does not change if we use simple instead of multiple
regression for the fmj. Furthermore, the ﬁnal model found by LogitBoost will be the same
because quasi-Newton stepping is guaranteed to actually ﬁnd the maximum likelihood
solution if the likelihood function is convex, which it is for linear logistic regression. Using
simple regression functions instead of multiple ones will basically slow down the learning
process, building gradually more complex models that include more and more attributes.
However, all this only holds provided the algorithm is run until convergence (i.e., until the
likelihood does not change anymore between two successive iterations). If it is stopped
before it converges to the maximum likelihood solution, using simple regression will result
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
in automatic attribute selection, because the model will only include the most relevant
attributes present in the data. The stopping criterion can be based on cross-validation: only
perform more iterations (and include more attributes) if this actually improves predictive
accuracy over unseen instances.
On the other hand, slowing down the model ﬁtting process can lead to higher computational costs. Although ﬁtting a simple regression is computationally more efﬁcient than
ﬁtting a multiple regression model, it could be necessary to consider the same attribute
multiple times if the overall model has changed because other attributes have been included. This means many iterations have to be performed before the algorithm converges
to a reasonable model. The computational complexity of a simple linear regression on one
attribute is O(n), so one iteration of LogitBoost would take O(n · a) because we have
to build a simple regression model on all attributes in order to ﬁnd out which one is the
best (where n denotes the number of training examples and a the number of attributes
present in the data). The computational complexity for performing a multiple regression is
O(n · a2 + a3).1 The relative speed of the two methods depends on how many LogitBoost
iterations are required when using simple regression functions, but it is reasonable to expect
that using multiple regression does converge faster.
We decided to use simple regression functions in our implementation because that
approach improved predictive accuracy and signiﬁcantly reduced the number of attributes
included in the ﬁnal model for some datasets (see Section 5.3 for an empirical comparison
of this method to building a ‘full’ logistic model on all attributes). Note that we used simple
regression in both the logistic model tree algorithm LMT that builds logistic regression
functions at the nodes of a decision tree (see Section 4) and the standalone logistic regression
learner we use as a benchmark in our experimental evaluation.
We determine the optimum number of LogitBoost iterations by a ﬁve fold crossvalidation: we split the data ﬁve times into training and test sets, run LogitBoost on every
training set up to a maximum number of iterations (500) and log the classiﬁcation error on
the respective test set. Afterwards, we run LogitBoost again on all data using the number
of iterations that gave the smallest error on the test set averaged over the ﬁve folds. We will
refer to this implementation as SimpleLogistic.
2.3.2. Handling nominal attributes and missing values.
In real-world domains important
information is often carried by nominal attributes whose values are not necessarily ordered
in any way and thus cannot be treated as numeric (for example, the make of a car in the
‘autos’ dataset from the UCI repository). However, the regression functions used in the
LogitBoost algorithm can only be ﬁt to numeric attributes, so we have to convert those
attributes to numeric ones. We followed the standard approach for doing this: a nominal
attribute with k values is converted into k numeric indicator attributes, where the l-th
indicator attribute takes on value 1 whenever the original attribute takes on its l-th value
and value 0 everywhere else. Note that a disadvantage of this approach is that it can lead
to a high number of attributes presented to the logistic regression if the original attributes
each have a high number of distinct values. It is well-known that a high dimensionality
of the input data (in relation to the number of training examples) increases the danger of
overﬁtting. On such datasets, attribute selection techniques like the one implemented in
SimpleLogistic will be particularly important.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Another problem with real-world datasets is that they often contain missing values, i.e.
instances for which not all attribute values are observed. For example, an instance could
describe a patient and attributes correspond to results of medical tests. For a particular
patient results might only be available for a subset of all tests. Missing values can occur
both during training and when predicting the class of an unseen instance. The regression
functions that have to be ﬁt in an iteration of LogitBoost cannot directly handle missing
values, so one has to ﬁll in the missing values for such instances.
We used a simple global scheme for this: at training time, we calculate the mean (for
numeric attributes) or the mode (for nominal attributes) of the values for each attribute and
use these to replace missing values in the training data. When classifying unseen instances
with missing values, the same mean/mode is used to ﬁll in the missing value.
Related tree-based learning schemes
Starting from simple decision trees, several advanced tree-based learning schemes have
been developed. In this section we will describe some of the methods related to logistic
model trees, to show what our work builds on and where we improve on previous solutions.
Some of the related methods will also be used as benchmarks in our experimental study,
described in Section 5.
Model trees
This section describes the ‘model tree’ algorithm developed by Quinlan, which combines
regression and tree induction for tasks where the target variable to be predicted is numeric
 . The logistic model trees developed in this paper are an analogue to model
trees for categorical target variables, so a description of model trees is a good starting point
for understanding our method.
Model trees, like ordinary regression trees, predict a numeric value for an instance that is
deﬁned over a ﬁxed set of numeric or nominal attributes. Unlike ordinary regression trees,
model trees construct a piecewise linear (instead of a piecewise constant) approximation to
the target function. The ﬁnal model tree consists of a tree with linear regression functions
at the leaves , and the prediction for an instance is obtained by sorting
it down to a leaf and using the prediction of the linear model associated with that leaf.
The M5’ model tree algorithm , which is a ‘rational reconstruction’ of Quinlan’s M5 algorithm , constructs trees as follows. First, after all
nominal attributes have been replaced by binary ones, an unpruned regression tree is grown,
using variance reduction as the splitting criterion. Then, linear regression models are placed
at every node of the tree, where the attributes considered in the regression are restricted to
those that occur in the subtree rooted at the corresponding node. Further attribute selection
in the linear models is performed by greedily dropping terms to minimize an error estimate
that introduces a penalty for every parameter used in the model. Once all linear models are
in place, subtrees are considered for replacement based on the ﬁnal error estimate for each
linear model.
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
At prediction time, the algorithm generates a ‘smoothed’ output by averaging the prediction of the linear model at a leaf node with the predictions obtained from the models on
the path from that leaf to the root. The smoothing heuristic effectively performs a linear
combination of linear models, which can be written as a linear model itself. Hence it is
possible to achieve the same effect by replacing the original unsmoothed model at each leaf
node with a smoothed version .
Model trees have been shown to produce good results for numeric prediction problems
 . They have also been successfully applied to classiﬁcation problems
using the transformation described in Section 2.2 . In our experimental
section, we will give results for this M5’ for classiﬁcation algorithm and compare it to our
Stepwise model tree induction
In this section, we will brieﬂy discuss a different algorithm for inducing (numeric) model
trees called ‘Stepwise Model Tree Induction’ or SMOTI that builds
on an earlier system called TSIR . Although we are more concerned
with classiﬁcation problems, SMOTI uses a scheme for constructing the linear regression
functions associated with the leaves of the model tree that is related to the way our method
builds the logistic regression functions at the leaves of a logistic model tree. The idea is to
construct the ﬁnal multiple regression function at a leaf from simple regression functions
that are ﬁt at different levels in the tree, from the root down to that particular leaf. This
means that the ﬁnal regression function takes into account ‘global’ effects of some of the
variables—effects that were not inferred from the examples at that leaf but from some
superset of examples found on the path to the root of the tree. An advantage of this
technique is that only simple linear regressions have to be ﬁtted at the nodes of the tree,
which is faster than ﬁtting a multiple regression every time (that has to estimate the global
inﬂuences again and again at the different nodes). The global effects should also smooth the
predictions because there will be less extreme discontinuities between the linear functions
at adjacent leaves if some of their coefﬁcients have been estimated from the same (super)set
of examples.
To implement these ideas, SMOTI trees consist of two types of nodes: split nodes and
regression nodes. Split nodes partition the sample space in the usual way, while regression
nodes perform simple linear regression on one attribute. A regression node ﬁts a simple
regression to the examples passed down to it from the parent node, and passes on a modiﬁed
version of the examples to its only child node, removing the linear effect of the attribute
used in the simple regression. This means the model at a leaf of the tree is constructed
incrementally, adding more and more variables to it at the different regression nodes on the
path to the leaf while the tree is grown. Our method uses a similar scheme for constructing
the logistic regression models at the leaves: the simple regression functions produced in the
iterations of the LogitBoost algorithm are ﬁt on the nested sequence of sets of examples
associated with the nodes on the path from the leaf to the root of the tree. Note, however,
that our method is not restricted to a single simple linear model at each node. We will give
a detailed description of this in Section 4.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Logistic regression trees with unbiased selection
Lotus is a logistic regression tree learner for two class problems
that has come from the statistics community. The algorithm constructs (binary) logistic
regression trees in a top-down fashion, emphasizes the importance of unbiased split variable
selection through the use of a modiﬁed chi-square test, and uses only numeric attributes for
constructing logistic models. Lotus can ﬁt either multiple or simple logistic regressions at
the nodes.
After the initial tree is grown, it is pruned back using a pruning method similar to
the one employed in the CART algorithm . The idea is to use a
‘cost-complexity measure’ that combines the error of the tree on the training data with a
penalty term for the model complexity, as measured by the number of terminal nodes. The
cost-complexity-measure in CART is based on the misclassiﬁcation error of a (sub)tree,
whereas in Lotus it is based on the deviance. The deviance of a set of instances M is deﬁned
deviance = −2 · log P(M | T )
where P(M | T ) denotes the probability of the data M as a function of the current model T
(which is the tree being constructed).
Functional trees
The LTree algorithm embodies a general framework for learning functional trees —that is, multivariate classiﬁcation or regression trees that can use combinations of
attributes at decision nodes, leaf nodes, or both.
The algorithm uses a standard top-down recursive partitioning strategy to construct a
decision tree. Splitting at each node is univariate, but considers both the original attributes
in the data and new attributes constructed using an attribute constructor function: multiple
linear regression in the regression setting and linear discriminants or multiple logistic
regression in the classiﬁcation setting. The value of each new attribute is the prediction of
the constructor function for each example that reaches the node. In the classiﬁcation case,
one new attribute is created for each class and the values are predicted probabilities. In
the regression case, a single new attribute is created. In this way the algorithm considers
oblique splits based on combinations of attributes in addition to standard axis-parallel splits
based on the original attributes. For split point selection, information gain is used in the
classiﬁcation case and variance reduction in the regression case.
Once a tree has been grown, it is pruned back using a bottom-up procedure. At each
non-leaf node three possibilities are considered: performing no pruning (i.e, leaving the
subtree rooted at the node in place), replacing the node with a leaf that predicts a constant,
or replacing it with a leaf that predicts the value of the constructor function that was learned
at the node during tree construction. C4.5’s error-based criterion is used to
make the decision.
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Predicting a test instance using a functional tree is accomplished by traversing the tree
from the root to a leaf. At each decision node the local constructor function is used to
extend the set of attributes and the decision test determines the path that the instance will
follow. Once a leaf is reached, the instance is classiﬁer using either the constant or the
constructor function at that leaf (depending on what was put in place during the pruning
procedure).
Naive bayes trees
NBTree is an algorithm that constructs decision trees with naive Bayes models at the
leaves . A tree is grown in a top-down fashion with univariate splits chosen
according to information gain. A pre-pruning strategy is employed during the construction
of the tree that considers, at each node, whether the data at that node should be split, or
a leaf created that contains a local naive Bayes model trained on the data at that node.
The pruning decision at each node is made by comparing the cross-validated accuracy
(computed using discretized data) of the local naive Bayes model at a node to the weighted
sum of the accuracy of the leaves resulting from splitting at the node. A split is considered
if there are at least 30 instances at a node and the relative reduction in error gained by
splitting is greater than ﬁve percent.
It has been shown that naive Bayes trees often improve performance over standard
decision trees or naive Bayes , although there are only a few cases where
they improve signiﬁcantly over both.
Boosting trees
A well-known technique to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy of tree-based classiﬁers is
the boosting procedure. The idea of boosting is to combine the prediction of many ‘weak’
classiﬁers to form a powerful ‘committee’. The weak classiﬁers are trained on reweighted
versions of the training data, such that training instances that have been misclassiﬁed by
the classiﬁers built so far receive a higher weight and the new classiﬁer can concentrate on
these ‘hard’ instances.
Although a variety of boosting algorithms have been developed, we will here concentrate
on the popular AdaBoost.M1 algorithm . The algorithm starts
with equal weights assigned to all instances in the training set. One weak classiﬁer (for,
example, a C4.5 decision tree) is built and the data is reweighted such that correctly
classiﬁed instances receive a lower weight: their weights are updated by
weight ←weight ·
where e is the weighted error of the classiﬁer on the current data. In a second step, the
weights are renormalized such that their sum remains unchanged. This is repeated until the
error e of a classiﬁer reaches zero or exceeds 0.5 (or some pre-deﬁned maximum for the
number of boosting iterations is reached).
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
This procedure yields a set of classiﬁers with corresponding error values, which are used
to predict the class of an unseen instance at classiﬁcation time by a weighted majority vote.
The vote of a classiﬁer with error e is weighted by
For all classes, the weights of the classiﬁers that vote for it are summed up and the class
with the largest sum of votes is chosen as the predicted class.
Boosting trees has received a lot of attention, and has been shown to outperform simple
classiﬁcation trees on many real-world domains. In fact, boosted decision trees are considered one of the best ‘off-the-shelf’ classiﬁers (learners that are not optimized with regard
to a particular domain). On the other hand, boosted trees have some disadvantages compared to simple classiﬁcation trees. One obvious disadvantage is the higher computational
complexity, because the basic tree induction algorithm has to be run several times. But
since basic tree induction is very fast, it is still feasible to build boosted models for most
datasets. A more serious disadvantage is the reduced interpretability of a committee of trees
as compared to a single tree. The interpretation of a tree as a set of rules does not translate
to a whole set of trees which produce a classiﬁcation by a weighted majority vote. However,
information contained in the individual trees can still be used to yield some insight into the
data, for example, the frequency of attributes occurring in the trees can tell us something
about the relevance of that attribute for the class variable .
Logistic model trees
In this section, we will present our Logistic Model Tree algorithm, or LMT for short. It
combines the logistic regression models described in Section 2 with tree induction, and
thus is an analogue of model trees for classiﬁcation problems.
A logistic model tree basically consists of a standard decision tree structure with logistic
regression functions at the leaves, much like a model tree is a regression tree with regression
functions at the leaves. As in ordinary decision trees, a test on one of the attributes is
associated with every inner node. For a nominal (enumerated) attribute with k values, the
node has k child nodes, and instances are sorted down one of the k branches depending on
their value of the attribute. For numeric attributes, the node has two child nodes and the
test consists of comparing the attribute value to a threshold: an instance is sorted down the
left branch if its value for that attribute is smaller than the threshold and sorted down the
right branch otherwise.
More formally, a logistic model tree consists of a tree structure that is made up of a set
of inner or non-terminal nodes N and a set of leaves or terminal nodes T. Let S denote the
whole instance space, spanned by all attributes that are present in the data. Then the tree
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
structure gives a disjoint subdivision of S into regions St, and every region is represented
by a leaf in the tree:
St ∩St′ = ∅
Unlike ordinary decision trees, the leaves t ∈T have an associated logistic regression
function ft instead of just a class label. The regression function ft takes into account a
subset Vt ⊆V of all attributes present in the data (where we assume that nominal attributes
have been binarized for the purpose of regression), and models the class membership
probabilities as
Pr(G = j | X = x) =
k=1 eFk(x)
Fj(x) = α j
or, equivalently,
Fj(x) = α j
vk = 0 for vk /∈Vt. The model represented by the whole logistic model tree is then
ft(x) · I(x ∈St)
where I(x ∈St) is 1 if x ∈St and 0 otherwise.
Note that both standalone logistic regression and ordinary decision trees are special cases
of logistic model trees, the ﬁrst is a logistic model tree pruned back to the root, the second
a tree in which Vt = ∅for all t ∈T .
Ideally, we want our algorithm to adapt to the dataset in question: for small datasets
where a simple linear model offers the best bias-variance tradeoff, the logistic model ‘tree’
should just consist of a single logistic regression model, i.e. be pruned back to the root. For
other datasets, a more elaborate tree structure is adequate.
The same reasoning also applies to the subsets of the original dataset that are encountered
while building the tree. Recall that tree induction works in a divide-and-conquer fashion:
a classiﬁer for a set of examples is build by performing a split and then building separate
classiﬁers for the two resulting subsets. There is strong evidence that building trees for very
small datasets is usually not a good idea, it is better to use simpler models (like logistic
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Class probability estimates from a C4.5 and a LMT model for the ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset. Colors
(from light to dark) indicate class probability estimates in the different regions.
regression) . Because the subsets encountered at lower
levels in the tree become smaller and smaller, it can be preferable at some point to build a
linear logistic model instead of calling the tree growing procedure recursively. This is one
motivation for the logistic model tree algorithm.
Figure 4 visualizes the class probability estimates of a logistic model tree and a C4.5
decision tree for the ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset introduced in Section 2.1. The logistic
model tree initially divides the instance space into 3 regions and uses logistic regression
functions to build the (sub)models within the regions, while the C4.5 tree partitions the
instance space into 12 regions. It is evident that the tree built by C4.5 overﬁts some patterns
in the training data, especially in the lower-right region of the instance space.
Figures 5 and 6 depict the corresponding models. At the leaves of the logistic model tree,
the functions F1, F2 determine the class membership probabilities by
Pr(G = 1 | X = x) =
eF1(x) + eF2(x) ,
Pr(G = 2 | X = x) =
eF1(x) + eF2(x) .
The entire left subtree of the root of the ‘original’ C4.5 tree has been replaced in the logistic
model tree by the linear model with
F1(x) = −0.39 + 5.84 · x1 + 4.88 · x2
F2(x) = 0.39 −5.84 · x1 −4.88 · x2 = −F1(x)
Note that this logistic regression function models a similar inﬂuence of the attributes x1, x2
on the class variable as the subtree it replaced, if we follow the respective paths in the tree
we will see it mostly predicts class one if x1 and x2 are both large. However, the linear
model is simpler than the tree structure, and so less likely to overﬁt.
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Decision tree constructed by the C4.5 algorithm for the ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset.
Building logistic model trees
In the following we present our new algorithm for learning logistic model trees. We discuss
how the initial tree is grown, the splitting and stopping criteria used, how the tree is pruned,
and the handling of missing values and nominal attributes.
4.2.1. Growing the initial tree.
There is a straightforward approach for growing logistic
model trees that follows the way trees are built by M5’. This involves ﬁrst building a standard
classiﬁcation tree, using, for example, the C4.5 algorithm, and afterwards building a logistic
regression model at every node trained on the set of examples at that node (note that we
need a logistic regression model at every node of the tree because every node is a ‘candidate
leaf’ during pruning). In this approach, the logistic regression models are built in isolation
on the local training examples at a node, not taking into account the surrounding tree
structure.
Instead, we chose a different approach for constructing the logistic regression functions,
namely by incrementally reﬁning logistic models already ﬁt at higher levels in the tree.
Assume we have split a node and want to build the logistic regression function at one of
the child nodes. Since we have already ﬁt a logistic regression at the parent node, it is
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Logistic model tree constructed by the LMT algorithm for the ‘polynomial-noise’ dataset.
reasonable to use it as a basis for ﬁtting the logistic regression at the child. We expect that
the parameters of the model at the parent node already encode ‘global’ inﬂuences of some
attributes on the class variable; at the child node, the model can be further reﬁned by taking
into account inﬂuences of attributes that are only valid locally, i.e. within the set of training
examples associated with the child node.
The LogitBoost algorithm (discussed in Section 2.3) provides a natural way to do just
that. Recall that it iteratively changes the linear class functions Fj(x) to improve the ﬁt to
the data by adding a simple linear regression function fmj to Fj, ﬁt to the response variable.
This means changing one of the coefﬁcients in the linear function Fj or introducing a
new variable/coefﬁcient pair. After splitting a node we can continue running LogitBoost
iterations, ﬁtting the fmj to the response variables of the training examples at the child node
As an example, consider a tree with a single split at the root and two successor nodes. The
root node n has training data Dn and one of its children t has a subset of the training data
Dt ⊂Dn. Fitting the logistic regression models in isolation means the model fn would be
built by iteratively ﬁtting simple regression functions to Dn and the model ft by iteratively
ﬁtting simple regression functions to Dt. In contrast, in the ‘iterative reﬁnement’ approach,
the tree is constructed as follows. We start by building a logistic model fn at n by running
LogitBoost on Dn, including more and more variables in the model by adding simple
regressions fmj to the Fn
j (the linear class function for each class j at node n). At some
point, adding more variables does not increase the accuracy of the model,2 but splitting
the instance space and reﬁning the logistic models locally in the two subdivisions created
by the split might give a better model. So we split the node n and build reﬁned logistic
models at the child nodes by proceeding with the LogitBoost algorithm on the smaller set
of examples Dt, adding more simple regression functions to the Fn
j to form the Ft
simple linear regressions are ﬁt to the response variables of the set of training examples Dt
given the (partial) logistic regression already ﬁt at the parent node. Figure 7 illustrates this
scheme for building the logistic regression models.
An additional advantage of this approach is that it is computationally more efﬁcient to
build the logistic models at lower levels of the tree by extending models already built at
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Building logistic models by incremental reﬁnement. The parameters a0, a1 are estimated from the
training examples at n, the parameters a2, a3 and a′
3 from the training examples at t and t′ respectively. Attribute
x1 has a global inﬂuence, x2, x3 have a local inﬂuence.
higher levels, rather than building the models at lower levels from scratch. Note that this
approach of iteratively reﬁning logistic regression models based on local structure in the
data is related to the way SMOTI (discussed in Section 3.2) constructs linear models. In
the terminology of the SMOTI system, our approach would amount to building a chain of
‘regression nodes’ as long as this improves the ﬁt (as determined by the cross-validation),
then a single ‘split node’ and again a chain of regression nodes.
These ideas lead to the following algorithm for building logistic model trees:
– Tree growing starts by building a logistic model at the root using the LogitBoost algorithm
to iteratively ﬁt simple linear regression functions, using ﬁve fold cross-validation to
determine the appropriate number of iterations (i.e. using the SimpleLogistic algorithm
described in Section 2.3).
– A split for the data at the root is constructed. Splits are either binary (for numeric
attributes) or multiway (for nominal ones), the splitting criterion will be discussed in
more detail below. Tree growing continues by sorting the appropriate subsets of data to
the child nodes and building the logistic models at the child nodes in the following way:
the LogitBoost algorithm is run on the subset associated with the child node, but starting
with the committee Fj(x), weights wi j and probability estimates pi j of the last iteration
performed at the parent node (it is ‘resumed’ at step 2.a of Figure 3). Again, the optimum
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pseudocode for the LMT algorithm.
number of iterations to perform (the number of f jm to add to Fj) is determined by a ﬁve
fold cross validation.
– Splitting of the child nodes continues in this fashion until some stopping criterion is met
(the stopping criterion is discussed in Section 4.2.2).
– Once the tree has been built it is pruned using CART-based pruning.
Figure 8 gives the pseudocode for this algorithm, which we call LMT. The method LMT
constructs the tree given the training data examples. It calls getCARTAlpha to crossvalidate the ‘cost-complexity-parameter’ for the CART pruning scheme implemented in
CARTPrune.3 The method buildTree grows the logistic model tree by recursively splitting the instance space. The argument initialLinearModels contains the simple linear
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
regression functions already ﬁt by LogitBoost at higher levels of the tree. The method
initLogitBoost initializes the probabilities/weights for the LogitBoost algorithm as if it
had already ﬁtted the regression functions initialLinearModels (resuming LogitBoost
at step 2.a). The method CV_Iterations determines the number of LogitBoost iterations
to perform, and logitBoostIteration performs a single iteration of the LogitBoost
algorithm (step 2), updating the probabilities/weights and adding a regression function to
linearModels.
Some points in this sketch of the algorithm for growing logistic model trees need to be
explained in more detail: how to select the attribute to split on, when to stop growing the
tree, how to prune, and how to deal with missing values and nominal attributes.
4.2.2. Splitting and stopping.
We implemented two different criteria to select the attribute
to split on. One is the C4.5 splitting criterion that tries to improve the purity of the class
variable. The other splitting criterion attempts to divide the training data according to the
current values of the working responses in the LogitBoost procedure in Figure 3.
In our experiments, we could not detect any signiﬁcant differences between either classiﬁcation accuracy or tree size between the two methods. A disadvantage of splitting on the
response is that the ﬁnal tree structure is less intelligible. Hence we made splitting on the
class variable (using the C4.5 splitting criterion) the default option in our algorithm, and
all experimental results reported for LMT in Section 5 refer to that version.
Tree growing stops for one of three reasons:
– A node is not split if it contains less than 15 examples. This number is somewhat larger
than for standard decision trees, however, the leaves in logistic model trees contain more
complex models, which need more examples for reliable model ﬁtting.
– A particular split is only considered if there are at least 2 subsets that contain 2 examples
each. Furthermore, a split is only considered if it achieves a minimum information gain.
This is a heuristic used by the C4.5 algorithm to avoid overly fragmented splits. When
no such split exists, we stop growing the tree.
– A logistic model is only built at a node if it contains at least 5 examples, because we
need 5 examples for the cross-validation to determine the best number of iterations for
the LogitBoost algorithm. Note that this can lead to ‘partially expanded’ nodes, where
for some branches no additional iterations of LogitBoost are performed and so the model
at the child is identical to the model of the parent.
We have found that the exact stopping criterion is not very important because the ﬁnal
tree (after pruning) is usually much smaller than the tree that is initially grown anyway.
4.2.3. Pruning the tree.
As for standard decision trees, pruning is an essential part of
the LMT algorithm. Standard decision trees are usually grown to minimize the training
error, which decreases monotonically as more and more splits are performed and the tree
becomes larger and larger. Large trees, however, are complex models with many degrees
of freedom, which means they can easily overﬁt random patterns in the training data that
are not representative of the true structure of the domain.
The complexity of trees can be measured by the number of splits they contain: every
new split further reﬁnes the subdivision of the instance space, and so makes the decision
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
function represented by the tree more complex. Furthermore, splits usually introduce new
parameters into the model (unless the same attribute has already been used in a different
split). Pruning methods for decision trees make use of this fact by trading off tree size
(which is roughly equivalent to the number of splits) versus training error.
For logistic model trees, the situation is slightly different compared to ordinary classiﬁcation trees, because the logistic regression functions at the leaves are so much more
complex than simple leaves (that just use the majority class in their set of examples for
predictions). For logistic model trees, sometimes a single leaf (a tree pruned back to the
root) leads to the best generalization performance, which is rarely the case for ordinary
decision trees (there it would mean that the best thing to do is to predict the majority class
for every unseen instance). So (correctly pruned) logistic model trees will usually be much
smaller than ordinary classiﬁcation trees, but the same principle still applies: every split and
subsequent local reﬁnement of the logistic regression models at the child nodes increases
the complexity of the model. This means that pruning algorithms for decision trees that
trade off tree size versus accuracy on the training set are still applicable. Note that if we had
decided to build isolated logistic models at every node, it would not have been clear that a
split really increases model complexity. Because the logistic models use variable selection,
it could happen that a split plus two simple logistic models is actually less complex than a
complex logistic model at the original node. This might lead to problems with a pruning
algorithm that penalizes splits.
We spent a lot of time experimenting with different pruning schemes. Since our work was
originally motivated by the model tree algorithm, we ﬁrst tried adapting the pruning scheme
used by this algorithm. However, we could not ﬁnd a way to compute reliable estimates for
the expected error rate (resulting in an unstable pruning algorithm), hence we abandoned that
approach. Instead, we employed the pruning method from the CART algorithm . Like M5’s method, the CART pruning method uses a combination of training
error and penalty term for model complexity to make pruning decisions. While estimating
this parameter by cross-validation (or, if enough data is available, by using an independent
test set) sacriﬁces some of the computational efﬁciency of M5’s method, it leads to much
more reliable pruning. The reader is referred to Breiman et al. for details of the
pruning procedure.
4.2.4. Handling of missing values and nominal attributes.
As explained in Section 2.3.2,
missing values must be ﬁlled in before ﬁtting the logistic regression models with the
LogitBoost algorithm. This is done globally before tree building commences, by replacing
the missing values with the means/modes of the respective attribute. This means that,
unlike the C4.5 algorithm, LMT does not do any ‘fractional splits’ for instances with
missing values . On the datasets we looked at, this simple approach seemed
to work reasonably well, however, more sophisticated techniques could be an interesting
area for future work.
Nominal attributes have to be converted to numeric ones in order to ﬁt the logistic
regression models. This is done locally at all nodes in our algorithm, i.e. the logistic model
is ﬁt to a local copy of the examples at a node where the nominal attributes have been
transformed into binary ones. The procedure for this is the same as the one described
in Section 2.3.2: a nominal attribute with k values is transformed into k binary indicator
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
attributes that are then treated as numeric. The reason why this is not done globally is that
splitting on nominal attributes (that often capture a speciﬁc characteristic of the domain)
can be better than splitting on the binary ones that are the result of the conversion, both in
terms of information gain and interpretability of the produced model.
Computational complexity
This section discusses the computational complexity of building logistic regression models
with SimpleLogistic and of building logistic model trees with LMT. It also describes two
heuristics used to speed up the LMT algorithm.
Generally speaking, the stagewise model ﬁtting approach used in SimpleLogistic means
that a potentially large number of LogitBoost iterations have to be performed, because it
might be necessary to ﬁt a simple linear function to the same variable many times. The
optimum number of iterations to be performed is selected by a ﬁve fold cross-validation.
We used a maximum number of 200 iterations for the logistic regression at the nodes of
the tree, as opposed to the 500 iterations used in stand-alone SimpleLogistic. The rationale
for this is that the logistic regression functions in the tree do not have to be as complex as
those for standalone logistic regression (because of the additional tree structure).
If the maximum number of iterations is taken as a constant, the asymptotic complexity of
building a single logistic regression model is of the order O(n·a) (recall that n is the number
of training examples and a the number of attributes). However, this ignores the constant
factor of the number of LogitBoost iterations and the cross-validation. It is reasonable to
expect that the maximum number of iterations should at least be linear in the number a of
attributes present in the data (after all, the number of attributes that can be included in the
ﬁnal model is bounded by the number of LogitBoost iterations that can be performed). It is
not clear whether our hard-coded limit is really enough for all datasets, though it seemed to
work ﬁne in our experiments. Therefore, a more realistic estimate of the asymptotic runtime
of SimpleLogistic is O(n · a2).
There is only a moderate increase in computational complexity from building logistic
regression models to building logistic model trees. Using the more realistic estimate for
the complexity of building the logistic models, the asymptotic complexity of the LMT
algorithm is O(d ·n ·logn +n ·a2 ·d +k2), where d is the depth of the initial unpruned tree
and k the number of nodes in the tree. The ﬁrst part of the sum derives from building an
unpruned decision tree, the second one from building the logistic regression models, and
the third one from the CART pruning scheme. In our experiments, the time for building the
logistic regression models accounted for most of the overall runtime. Note that the initial
depth d of the unpruned logistic model tree is usually smaller than the depth of an unpruned
standard classiﬁcation tree, because tree growing is stopped earlier. The cross-validation
performed by the CART pruning algorithm constitutes another constant multiplying factor
of about six if ﬁve-fold cross-validation is used.
The asymptotic complexity is not too high compared to other machine learning methods, although it is higher than for simple tree induction. However, the two nested crossvalidations—one for determining the optimum number of boosting iterations and one for
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
the pruning—increase the runtime by a large constant factor, which makes the algorithm
quite slow in practice.
4.3.1. Heuristics to speed up the algorithm.
In this section we discuss two simple heuristics to speed up the LMT algorithm. The ﬁrst one concerns the ‘inner’ cross-validation
that determines the number of LogitBoost iterations to perform at a particular node. In
order to avoid cross-validating this number at every node, we tried performing just one
cross-validation to determine the optimum number of iterations for LogitBoost in the beginning (at the root of the tree) and then used that number everywhere in the tree. Although
it is not very intuitive, this approach worked surprisingly well. It never produced results
that were signiﬁcantly worse than those of the original algorithm. It seems that the LMT
algorithm is not too sensitive to the number of LogitBoost iterations that are performed at
every node, as long as the number is roughly in the right range for the dataset. We also
tried using some ﬁxed number of iterations for every dataset, but that gave signiﬁcantly
worse results in some cases. It seems that the best number of iterations for LogitBoost
does depend on the domain, but that it does not change so much for different subsets of a
particular dataset (as encountered in lower levels in the tree).
As a second heuristic, we tried to stop performing LogitBoost iterations early in case
it is obvious that the optimum number of iterations is relatively small. Recall that we run
LogitBoost on the training set of a fold while monitoring the error on the test set, afterwards
summing up the errors over the different folds to ﬁnd the optimum number of iterations
to perform. Examining the error curve on the test set produced by LogitBoost shows that
the error usually decreases ﬁrst, then reaches a minimum and later starts to increase again
because the model is overﬁtting the training data. If the minimum is reached early, we
can stop performing more iterations after a while because we know the best number must
be relatively low. To account for spikes and irregularities in the error curve, we do not
stop performing iterations immediately if the error increases, but instead keep track of the
current minimum and stop if it has not changed for 50 iterations.
This second heuristic does not change the behavior of the algorithm signiﬁcantly, and
can give a considerable speed-up on datasets where the optimum number of LogitBoost
iterations is small. Note that it can be used together with the ﬁrst heuristic, by speeding
up the initial cross-validation that determines the best number of LogitBoost iterations. By
default, both heuristics are used in our implementation of LMT. All results shown for the
LMT algorithm in this paper refer to the default version that uses the heuristics.
Figure 9 plots the training time as a function of training set size (note the log scales) of
our implementations of LMT (including the heuristics) and C4.5 on the letter dataset from
the UCI repository . The graph shows that LMT is several orders of
magnitude slower than C4.5 in practice, although the shapes of their growth functions are
comparable.
Experiments
In order to evaluate the performance of our method and compare it against other state-ofthe-art learning schemes, we applied it to several real-world problems. More speciﬁcally,
we seek to answer the following questions in our experimental study:
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Training time as a function of the number of training instances for C4.5 and LMT on the letter dataset.
Note the logarithmic scale of the axes.
1. How does our version of logistic regression that uses parameter selection (SimpleLogistic) compare to a standard version of logistic regression that builds a full logistic model
on all attributes present in the data?
2. How does LMT compare to the two algorithms that form its basis, i.e., logistic regression
and C4.5? Ideally it should never perform worse than either of these algorithms.
3. How does LMT compare to other enhanced decision tree learners, i.e., those that make
oblique splits or include other learning algorithms in the tree structure?
4. How does LMT compare to methods that build multiple trees? We include results for
boosted C4.5 trees, where the ﬁnal model is a ‘voting committee’ of trees, and for the
M5’ algorithm, building one tree per class.
5. How big are the trees constructed by LMT? We expect them to be much smaller than
simple classiﬁcation trees because the leaves contain more information. We also expect
the trees to be pruned back to the root if a linear logistic model is the best solution for
the dataset.
Algorithms included in experiments
The following algorithms are used in our experiments:4
The C4.5 classiﬁcation tree inducer . C4.5 is run with the standard
options: The conﬁdence threshold for pruning is 0.25, the minimum number of instances
per leaf is 2. For pruning, both subtree replacement and subtree raising are considered.
The CART tree inducer . We used the implementation of CART
provided in the R statistical package .5 The cost-complexity
parameter for pruning is optimized using 10-fold cross-validation on the training data.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
The functional tree learning algorithm LTree . Linear discriminants or
logistic regression can be used at interior nodes of the tree to provide oblique splits and
at the leaves for prediction. We provide results for both types of discriminant functions.
We used version 5.1 of LTree.6
The naive Bayes tree learning algorithm . NBTree is run using the settings
recommended by Kohavi—a split is considered if there are at least 30 instances reaching
a node and accepted if the relative reduction in error (computed by ﬁve-fold crossvalidation) is greater than ﬁve percent.
The model tree learning algorithm M5’ . The classiﬁcation
problems are transformed into regression problems as described in Section 2.2. M5’
is run with the standard options: the minimum number of instances per leaf is four,
smoothing is enabled.
– AdaBoost.M1
The AdaBoost.M1 algorithm as described in Section 3.6. C4.5 with standard options is
used as the base learner, and the maximum number of iterations is set to 10 or 100.
– MultiLogistic
An implementation of logistic regression that ﬁnds a maximum-likelihood solution for a
full logistic model. See Section 5.3 for more details.
– SimpleLogistic
The standalone logistic regression with attribute selection as described in Section 2.3.
The Lotus algorithm for inducing logistic regression trees with unbiased splits .7 The algorithm can only handle two class datasets and can learn either simple
or multiple logistic regression models at the leaves of the tree. We provide results for
both cases. CART’s cost-complexity pruning method is used with “cost” being predicted
deviance estimated using 10-fold cross-validation on the training data. All other options
(aside from logistic model type) are those computed as default by the Lotus software.
We used version 1.03 of Lotus.
The LMT algorithm, using the heuristics discussed in Section 4.3.1.
All algorithms except where noted are part of the Weka machine learning workbench
 release 3.4.0.8
Datasets and methodology
For the experiments we used the 36 benchmark datasets from the UCI repository given in Table 1. Their size ranges from under one hundred to a few
thousand instances. They contain varying numbers of numeric and nominal attributes
and some contain missing values. Note that the original zoo and splice datasets had an
identiﬁer attribute (that takes on a different value for every instance) which was removed
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Datasets used for the experiments, sorted by size.
Missing values
attributes
attributes
attributes
Lymphography
Glass (G2)
Heart-statlog
Breast-cancer
Primary-tumor
Ionosphere
Horse-colic
Balance-scale
Australian
Pima-indians
Hypothyroid
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
for our experiments, because it leads to a sharp degradation in performance for M5’ for
classiﬁcation.
For every dataset and algorithm, we performed ten runs of ten-fold stratiﬁed crossvalidation (using the same splits into training/test set for every method). This gives a
hundred data points for each algorithm and dataset, from which the average classiﬁcation
accuracy and standard deviation are calculated. Furthermore, we used a corrected resampled
t-test instead of the standard t-test to identify if one method
signiﬁcantly outperforms another, at a 5 percent signiﬁcance level. This test corrects for the
dependencies in the estimates of the different data points, and is less prone to false-positive
signiﬁcance results. The statistic of the “corrected resampled t-test” is:
where N is the number of data points (a hundred in our case), x j is the difference in accuracy
between two learning algorithms on one of the one hundred folds, n1 is the number of
instances used for training (ninety percent of the data in a ten-fold cross-validation) and n2
is the number of test instances (ten percent of the data).
The impact of variable selection for logistic regression
This section explores the effectiveness of our parameter selection method for SimpleLogistic, comparing it to MultiLogistic. There are two motivations for doing variable selection
in logistic regression: one is the hope that controlling the number of parameters that enter
the model can decrease the risk of building overly complex models that overﬁt the training
data. This means that attribute selection should increase the classiﬁcation accuracy. The
other motivation is that models with many parameters are usually harder to interpret than
models with few parameters; in particular, parameters that have no real relation to the target
variable can be misleading when interpreting the ﬁnal model.
Table 2 gives the classiﬁcation accuracy for the two methods, and indicates signiﬁcant
wins/losses according to the modiﬁed t-test discussed above. The test reports four signiﬁcant
accuracy differences in favor of SimpleLogistic. Ignoring the signiﬁcance of the differences,
SimpleLogistic is better than MultiLogistic on 24 datasets and worse on 12 datasets.
According to a two-tailed sign test, SimpleLogistic is more accurate than MulitLogistic at
the 10 percent signiﬁcance level (p-value is 0.0652). Hence attribute selection leads to better
predictive performance for some datasets and never signiﬁcantly decreases performance.
Figure 10 gives the percentage of attributes (after converting nominal attributes to binary
ones) included in the ﬁnal model for SimpleLogistic. Although the fraction of attributes
that are discarded varies wildly (from more than 95 percent for the breast-cancer dataset
to none for balance-scale, vehicle, vowel, pendigits and letter), in most cases the number
of attributes included in the ﬁnal model is reduced substantially. On average, the biggest
reduction takes place for datasets with a high number of attributes that are not too large
(datasets are sorted by size from left to right).
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for SimpleLogistic and MultiLogistic.
SimpleLogistic
MultiLogistic
91.97 ± 10.54
94.07 ± 10.01
94.69 ± 6.59
94.85 ± 6.34
Lymphography
84.37 ± 9.97
77.58 ± 10.59
95.93 ± 4.82
97.07 ± 4.77
84.20 ± 8.20
83.89 ± 8.12
Glass (G2)
76.32 ± 8.89
69.56 ± 10.77
75.30 ± 9.97
69.99 ± 9.86
75.93 ± 8.51
72.47 ± 8.90
65.29 ± 8.03
63.12 ± 9.16
84.10 ± 7.35
79.71 ± 8.36
Heart-statlog
83.30 ± 6.48
83.67 ± 6.43
Breast-cancer
74.94 ± 6.25
67.77 ± 6.92 •
84.61 ± 6.03
84.23 ± 5.93
83.30 ± 6.35
83.70 ± 6.64
Primary-tumor
47.87 ± 6.04
41.56 ± 7.63 •
Ionosphere
87.78 ± 4.99
87.72 ± 5.57
Horse-colic
81.93 ± 5.80
80.87 ± 6.06
95.93 ± 2.58
95.65 ± 3.12
Balance-scale
88.74 ± 2.91
89.44 ± 3.29
93.43 ± 2.54
92.91 ± 2.67
Australian
85.04 ± 3.97
85.33 ± 3.85
96.21 ± 2.19
96.50 ± 2.18
Pima-indian
77.10 ± 4.65
77.47 ± 4.39
80.45 ± 3.37
79.81 ± 4.04
99.48 ± 0.70
99.24 ± 0.79
84.31 ± 3.78
82.71 ± 3.96
75.34 ± 3.50
75.24 ± 3.54
95.40 ± 1.50
95.60 ± 1.59
95.86 ± 1.17
90.57 ± 1.85 •
97.46 ± 0.79
97.56 ± 0.76
Hypothyroid
96.78 ± 0.73
96.69 ± 0.72
96.74 ± 0.71
96.79 ± 0.69
86.96 ± 1.58
86.73 ± 1.49
97.12 ± 0.68
93.89 ± 0.98 •
95.51 ± 0.64
95.50 ± 0.65
77.42 ± 0.80
77.40 ± 0.83
•, ◦Statistically signiﬁcant win or loss for SimpleLogistic.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Figure 10.
Percentage of attributes used by SimpleLogistic.
As an example for parameter selection, consider the breast-cancer dataset. After transforming the nominal attributes into binary ones, the dataset has 48 numeric attributes
(plus the class). SimpleLogistic builds a model including only two of the parameters.
The function determining the class probability membership (cf. Section 2.3) for class 1,
no-recurrence-events, is
F1(x) = 0.53 + [inv −nodes = 0 −2] · 1.07 −[deg −malig = 3] · 1.32.
The function F2 for the class membership probability of class 2 is F2(x) = −F1(x) because
there are only two classes. The binary attribute [inv-nodes = 0–2] has been generated from
the nominal attribute ‘inv-nodes’ that can take on values ‘0–2’, ‘3–5’, and so on. The
nominal attribute ‘deg-malig’ takes on values ‘1’, ‘2’ and ‘3’. The model is relatively
easy to interpret: it basically says that no recurrence events are expected if the number of
involved nodes is small and the degree of malignancy is not too high.
In contrast to that, the model built by MultiLogistic has sizeable coefﬁcients for 38 of the
48 attributes, which makes it a lot harder to interpret, and is at the same time less accurate
(see Table 2).
Empirical evaluation of LMT
This section discusses the performance of LMT compared to other learning schemes,
including logistic regression, C4.5, CART, LTree, Lotus, M5’ for classiﬁcation, and boosted
C4.5 trees.
5.4.1. Comparing LMT to logistic regression and tree induction.
Table 3 gives the average classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for LMT, SimpleLogistic, MultiLogistic,
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for LMT vs. SimpleLogistic, MultiLogistic, C4.5
SimpleLogistic
MultiLogistic
91.37 ± 11.01
91.97 ± 10.54
94.07 ± 10.01
78.60 ± 16.58 •
81.73 ± 17.54
94.89 ± 6.44
94.69 ± 6.59
94.85 ± 6.34
92.61 ± 7.33
91.81 ± 7.44
Lymphography
84.10 ± 10.00
84.37 ± 9.97
77.58 ± 10.59
75.84 ± 11.05
76.86 ± 9.87
95.80 ± 4.89
95.93 ± 4.82
97.07 ± 4.77
94.73 ± 5.30
96.00 ± 4.74
84.21 ± 8.21
84.20 ± 8.20
83.89 ± 8.12
79.22 ± 9.57
80.21 ± 7.57
Glass (G2)
77.28 ± 9.90
76.32 ± 8.89
69.56 ± 10.77 •
78.15 ± 8.50
80.21 ± 9.51
76.13 ± 8.84
75.30 ± 9.97
69.99 ± 9.86
81.77 ± 8.78
77.66 ± 10.20
76.32 ± 9.58
75.93 ± 8.51
72.47 ± 8.90
73.61 ± 9.34
74.77 ± 9.76
69.15 ± 8.99
65.29 ± 8.03
63.12 ± 9.16
67.63 ± 9.31
68.09 ± 10.49
84.19 ± 7.17
84.10 ± 7.35
79.71 ± 8.36
77.26 ± 7.47 •
77.01 ± 7.75 •
Heart-statlog
83.22 ± 6.50
83.30 ± 6.48
83.67 ± 6.43
78.15 ± 7.42 •
78.00 ± 8.25 •
Breast-cancer
74.91 ± 6.29
74.94 ± 6.25
67.77 ± 6.92 •
74.28 ± 6.05
69.40 ± 5.25 •
84.00 ± 6.33
84.61 ± 6.03
84.23 ± 5.93
80.22 ± 7.95
76.70 ± 6.80 •
83.51 ± 6.67
83.30 ± 6.35
83.70 ± 6.64
76.94 ± 6.59 •
78.88 ± 6.87 •
Primary-tumor
47.63 ± 5.84
47.87 ± 6.04
41.56 ± 7.63 •
41.39 ± 6.94 •
41.42 ± 7.38 •
Ionosphere
92.99 ± 4.13
87.78 ± 4.99 •
87.72 ± 5.57 •
89.74 ± 4.38 •
89.80 ± 4.78
Horse-colic
83.66 ± 6.13
81.93 ± 5.80
80.87 ± 6.06
85.16 ± 5.91
84.63 ± 5.56
95.90 ± 2.67
95.93 ± 2.58
95.65 ± 3.12
96.57 ± 2.56
95.15 ± 3.08
Balance-scale
89.71 ± 2.68
88.74 ± 2.91
89.44 ± 3.29
77.82 ± 3.42 •
78.09 ± 3.97 •
93.43 ± 2.59
93.43 ± 2.54
92.91 ± 2.67
91.78 ± 3.19
90.80 ± 3.15 •
Australian
85.04 ± 3.84
85.04 ± 3.97
85.33 ± 3.85
85.57 ± 3.96
84.55 ± 4.20
96.18 ± 2.20
96.21 ± 2.19
96.50 ± 2.18
95.01 ± 2.73
94.42 ± 2.70 •
Pima-indians
77.08 ± 4.65
77.10 ± 4.65
77.47 ± 4.39
74.49 ± 5.27
74.50 ± 4.70
83.04 ± 3.70
80.45 ± 3.37
79.81 ± 4.04 •
72.28 ± 4.32 •
72.37 ± 4.12 •
99.52 ± 0.73
99.48 ± 0.70
99.24 ± 0.79
98.57 ± 1.04 •
98.24 ± 1.18 •
93.94 ± 2.55
84.31 ± 3.78 •
82.71 ± 3.96 •
80.20 ± 4.36 •
81.54 ± 4.10 •
75.37 ± 3.53
75.34 ± 3.50
75.24 ± 3.54
71.25 ± 3.17 •
73.34 ± 3.66
96.28 ± 1.36
95.40 ± 1.50 •
95.60 ± 1.59
96.77 ± 1.29
96.54 ± 1.23
95.86 ± 1.17
95.86 ± 1.17
90.57 ± 1.85 •
94.17 ± 1.28 •
94.72 ± 1.34 •
99.64 ± 0.35
97.46 ± 0.79 •
97.56 ± 0.76 •
99.44 ± 0.37
99.41 ± 0.39
Hypothyroid
99.54 ± 0.39
96.78 ± 0.73 •
96.69 ± 0.72 •
99.54 ± 0.36
99.66 ± 0.30
98.95 ± 0.60
96.74 ± 0.71 •
96.79 ± 0.69 •
98.72 ± 0.55
98.89 ± 0.57
86.96 ± 1.58
86.96 ± 1.58
86.73 ± 1.49
75.25 ± 1.90 •
76.97 ± 1.56 •
97.28 ± 0.64
97.12 ± 0.68
93.89 ± 0.98 •
90.52 ± 1.20 •
90.78 ± 1.27 •
98.56 ± 0.32
95.51 ± 0.64 •
95.50 ± 0.65 •
96.54 ± 0.60 •
96.37 ± 0.62 •
92.13 ± 0.74
77.42 ± 0.80 •
77.40 ± 0.83 •
88.03 ± 0.71 •
87.62 ± 0.81 •
•, ◦Statistically signiﬁcant win or loss for LMT.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of classiﬁcation accuracy for LMT, SimpleLogistic, MultiLogistic, C4.5 and
CART: number indicates how often method in column (signiﬁcantly) outperforms method in row.
SimpleLogistic
MultiLogistic
SimpleLogistic
MultiLogistic
C4.5 and CART. Table 4 shows how the different methods compare with each other. Each
entry indicates the number of datasets for which the method associated with its column is
(signiﬁcantly) more accurate than the method associated with its row.
We observe that LMT indeed always reaches roughly the same classiﬁcation accuracy as
logistic regression and the other tree learners: there is no dataset where LMT is signiﬁcantly
outperformed by either SimpleLogistic, MultiLogistic, C4.5, or CART. It signiﬁcantly
outperforms SimpleLogistic on 8 datasets, MultiLogistic on 13 datasets, C4.5 on 16 datasets
and CART on 17 datasets. We can also conﬁrm the observation ) that logistic regression performs surprisingly well compared to tree
induction on most UCI datasets. This includes all small to medium-sized datasets except
ionosphere. Only on some larger datasets (kr-vs-kp, sick, hypothyroid, pendigits and letter)
is its performance not competitive with that of tree induction (and other methods, see
Ignoring the signiﬁcance of individual differences, a two-tailed sign test conﬁrms that
LMT outperforms the other methods. LMT has a win/loss-ratio of 23/12 against SimpleLogistic, 28/8 against MultiLogistic, 29/7 against C4.5 and 30/6 against CART. The ratio
against SimpleLogistic is signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level, while the others are signiﬁcant
at the one percent level (p-values of 0.0895, 0.0012, 0.0003 and <0.0001 respectively).
Table 5 gives the average tree size and standard deviation for LMT, C4.5 and CART.
Table 6 summarizes the results. As expected, the trees constructed by LMT are much
smaller than the standard classiﬁcation trees built by C4.5. LMT produces signiﬁcantly
smaller trees on all datasets. Of course, logistic model trees contain part of their ‘structure’
in the leaves in form of the logistic regression functions. Nevertheless, there are some
datasets where the difference in tree size is so large that one advantage of C4.5, namely that
the ﬁnal models are potentially easier to understand, disappears. For the waveform dataset,
for example, LMT builds a logistic regression model (no tree structure), while C4.5 builds
a tree with almost 300 terminal nodes. About half of the 40 attributes in waveform are used
in the logistic regression (see Table 10). It is probably easier to understand the inﬂuence of
the attributes on the class variable from a logistic model with 20 parameters than from a tree
with 300 terminal nodes. Looking at the results for CART, we can see that the smaller trees
produced by LMT are not just an artifact of the cost-complexity pruning. LMT produces
signiﬁcantly smaller trees than CART on all but four of the datasets. Although CART
generally produces smaller trees than C4.5 (due to its pruning mechanism), the difference
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean tree size (number of leaves) and standard deviation for LMT vs. C4.5 and CART.
1.05 ± 0.26
4.16 ± 1.44 •
3.96 ± 0.98 •
1.05 ± 0.26
8.35 ± 0.82 •
7.09 ± 0.40 •
Lymphography
1.18 ± 0.80
17.30 ± 2.88 •
9.84 ± 4.56 •
1.11 ± 0.53
4.64 ± 0.59 •
4.72 ± 0.81 •
1.05 ± 0.30
9.33 ± 2.37 •
5.30 ± 3.02 •
Glass (G2)
5.05 ± 3.24
12.53 ± 2.64 •
6.70 ± 2.86
2.89 ± 5.20
44.77 ± 6.09 •
19.31 ± 1.91 •
2.12 ± 1.51
14.45 ± 1.75 •
9.49 ± 3.09 •
7.46 ± 3.55
23.58 ± 2.29 •
19.29 ± 5.96 •
1.01 ± 0.10
29.90 ± 1.95 •
17.51 ± 3.67 •
Heart-statlog
1.04 ± 0.32
17.82 ± 2.86 •
8.97 ± 4.43 •
Breast-cancer
1.12 ± 1.20
9.75 ± 8.16 •
6.29 ± 4.83 •
1.00 ± 0.00
6.32 ± 3.73 •
8.22 ± 6.93 •
1.03 ± 0.17
25.70 ± 5.53 •
8.50 ± 4.03 •
Primary-tumor
1.03 ± 0.17
43.81 ± 5.16 •
19.51 ± 13.55 •
Ionosphere
4.40 ± 1.86
13.87 ± 1.95 •
6.34 ± 3.80
Horse-colic
2.78 ± 2.58
5.91 ± 1.99 •
4.06 ± 1.77
1.08 ± 0.44
5.83 ± 0.38 •
6.45 ± 2.51 •
Balance-scale
4.73 ± 2.61
41.60 ± 4.97 •
44.28 ± 12.51 •
2.44 ± 5.44
61.12 ± 6.01 •
40.76 ± 6.13 •
Australian
1.15 ± 0.59
22.49 ± 7.54 •
6.48 ± 5.33 •
1.24 ± 0.99
12.23 ± 2.77 •
11.17 ± 4.46 •
Pima-indians
1.03 ± 0.30
22.20 ± 6.55 •
14.92 ± 12.96 •
2.64 ± 1.97
69.50 ± 10.28 •
61.43 ± 20.93 •
1.11 ± 0.31
37.98 ± 5.39 •
12.59 ± 1.99 •
4.81 ± 1.23
123.28 ± 17.19 •
87.17 ± 4.27 •
1.00 ± 0.00
90.18 ± 15.67 •
16.58 ± 12.90 •
4.85 ± 2.05
41.20 ± 3.04 •
41.08 ± 4.30 •
1.00 ± 0.00
174.39 ± 12.21 •
25.82 ± 9.03 •
7.92 ± 0.56
29.29 ± 1.83 •
30.70 ± 3.41 •
Hypothyroid
5.61 ± 0.93
14.44 ± 1.06 •
6.16 ± 0.42
13.56 ± 3.12
27.44 ± 3.88 •
20.63 ± 3.45 •
1.00 ± 0.00
296.49 ± 12.16 •
87.88 ± 29.68 •
3.45 ± 1.66
205.69 ± 7.26 •
165.92 ± 17.10 •
11.30 ± 2.78
188.20 ± 5.45 •
182.65 ± 13.12 •
41.73 ± 8.68
1160.92 ± 16.79 •
1125.86 ± 19.20 •
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcantly smaller or larger trees for LMT.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of tree size (number of leaves) for LMT, C4.5 and CART: number indicates how
often method in column has (signiﬁcantly) larger tree size than method in row.
in size is still dramatic on many of the datasets. For instance, on the the letter dataset LMT
builds a tree with 41 leaves, while CART (and C4.5) produces a tree with over a thousand
There are several datasets for which the trees constructed by LMT are pruned back to
the root. Let us a call a tree “pruned back to the root” if the average tree size is less than
1.5, meaning that more than half of the data points correspond to ‘trees’ that were just a
logistic regression function. It can be seen from Table 5 that this happens on exactly half
of the 36 datasets. If the pruning process worked correctly, we would expect that for the 18
datasets where the tree is pruned back to the root the classiﬁcation accuracy is better than
that of the C4.5 algorithm—indicating that a linear logistic regression model is preferable
to a tree structure—and for the other 18 datasets the result for LMT is better than that of
SimpleLogistic. The ﬁrst claim is true for all but two datasets (vote and australian, where
there is a small win for C4.5). The second claim is true for 17 out of the 18 datasets where a
tree structure is built; on the single exception (‘soybean’) the result for LMT is equal to that
of SimpleLogistic. Allowing for small random effects, we can conclude that the adapted
pruning method—the CART algorithm from —reliably makes the
right choice between building a linear logistic model and a more elaborate tree structure.
To illustrate how the LMT algorithm scales model complexity depending on the information available for training, we ran it on increasingly larger training datasets sampled
from an artiﬁcial domain and compared its result to the results for SimpleLogistic (‘logistic
model tree of size one’) and C4.5 (standard classiﬁcation tree). Consider the polynomial
f : R4 →R,
f (x) = 2 · x2
1 + x2 + x3 + x4
and the binary function
g : R4 →{1, −1},
g(x) = sign( f (x)).
The function g(x) gives rise to a two-class classiﬁcation problem over the four numeric
attributes x1, . . . , x4. The attributes x2, x3, x4 have a linear inﬂuence on the target variable
while the inﬂuence of x1 is nonlinear. We sampled training datasets of size 25, 50, 100,
200, 400, 800, 1600, 3200, 6400 and 12800 instances from this domain, then used LMT,
SimpleLogistic and C4.5 to build a model on the training set and evaluated its performance
on a separate test set. More speciﬁcally, we generated 100 datasets of each size, sampling
g(x) uniformly in [−1, 1]4. This gives a-priori probabilities for the two classes of about
0.7 for class 1 and 0.3 for class -1. Samples are stratiﬁed, meaning that the distribution of
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Figure 11.
Accuracy (top) and tree size (bottom) as a function of the number of training instances. Note the log
scale on the x axis.
the classes in the sample is the same as their a-priori probability (as far as possible), which
helps getting stable estimates for small training set sizes. The accuracy achieved by each
method was measured using a ﬁxed test set of 10000 instances. From the 100 data points
measured for each algorithm and training set size, we calculated the average accuracy on
the test set for every method and the average tree size for LMT and C4.5.
Figure 11 shows the accuracy on the test set and the tree size (where applicable) for
LMT, C4.5 and SimpleLogistic as a function of the training set size (note the log scale). It
can be seen that the accuracy on the test set increases monotonically with the number of
training examples for every method. The learning curves of SimpleLogistic and C4.5 cross
at around 200 training examples. For small training sets, a bias towards simple models pays
off because it allows more stable estimates and does not overﬁt, while the less biased model
space of tree induction allows nonlinear patterns to be captured if enough data is available.
More speciﬁcally, the learning curve for logistic regression levels off at a training set size
of about 100 instances because the method cannot ﬁt the nonlinear part of the underlying
distribution, while tree induction continues to improve its estimate with more data.
Looking at LMT, we see that the accuracy is almost identical to that of SimpleLogistic
for 25, 50 and 100 instances, but continues to increase for larger datasets. The models
built by LMT are more accurate than those of C4.5 even for large training sets. LMT
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Figure 12.
Gain/loss in accuracy of LMT and C4.5 over SimpleLogistic. Datasets are ordered (left to right) by
increasing size of LMT tree.
reaches the same accuracy as C4.5 at about half the number of training instances. The
graph visualizing the tree sizes shows that the LMT algorithm starts to build a sizeable
tree structure around the point the learning curves of SimpleLogistic and C4.5 cross, which
indicates that the pruning method correctly detects at what point a tree structure is superior
to a linear logistic model. Finally, we note that both tree induction methods build larger and
larger trees asymptotically to ﬁt the nonlinear distribution (note the data is noise-free), but
the trees built by LMT are signiﬁcantly smaller than the standard classiﬁcation trees.
Figure 12 shows a similar study using the UCI datasets. We sorted the datasets according
to the size of the trees produced by LMT and then plotted the difference in accuracy of
LMT over SimpleLogistic and C4.5 over SimpleLogistic. Although the curves are not as
smooth as for the artiﬁcial problem, it is clear that LMT is adjusting its tree structure to
match the complexity of the different domains. On the left-hand side of the graph, where
LMT’s models are the smallest, accuracy is equal to SimpleLogistic and generally better
than C4.5. The domains on the right-hand side of the graph require more complex models
to capture their structure. In all these cases LMT outperforms SimpleLogistic, and in most
cases C4.5 as well.
These examples illustrates how the LMT algorithm smoothly scales model complexity
from a simple linear model as produced by logistic regression to a more complex combination of tree structure and logistic regression models.
5.4.2. Comparing LMT to other enhanced tree learners.
This section compares LMT to
several other enhanced decision tree learning algorithms. In particular, we present results
for NBTree, LTree (using linear discriminants for splitting and at the leaves) and two
logistic tree algorithms: LTree (using logistic regression for splitting and at the leaves) and
Lotus. When building logistic model trees, Lotus can build the logistic regression functions
using either all the numeric attributes present in the data, or by just selecting one of the
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for LMT vs. NBTree, LTree with linear discriminants and LTree with logistic regression.
91.37 ± 11.01
91.70 ± 12.32
84.57 ± 14.78
86.47 ± 17.76
94.89 ± 6.44
94.95 ± 6.24
93.79 ± 6.67
94.87 ± 6.79
Lymphography
84.10 ± 10.00
80.89 ± 8.77
80.30 ± 8.98
76.90 ± 10.07 •
95.80 ± 4.89
93.53 ± 5.64
98.00 ± 3.35
97.13 ± 4.57
84.21 ± 8.21
81.36 ± 10.80
84.24 ± 8.85
83.43 ± 9.72
Glass (G2)
77.28 ± 9.90
80.75 ± 9.40
72.39 ± 10.30
72.85 ± 10.42
76.13 ± 8.84
77.18 ± 9.71
57.74 ± 10.40 •
60.34 ± 10.69 •
76.32 ± 9.58
77.16 ± 10.46
73.50 ± 9.07
74.25 ± 9.04
69.15 ± 8.99
70.16 ± 9.67
65.27 ± 10.42
64.77 ± 9.90
84.19 ± 7.17
76.82 ± 7.38 •
75.01 ± 7.89 •
75.01 ± 7.89 •
Heart-statlog
83.22 ± 6.50
80.59 ± 7.12
83.52 ± 6.28
83.00 ± 6.83
Breast-cancer
74.91 ± 6.29
70.99 ± 7.94
70.58 ± 6.90
70.45 ± 6.78 •
84.00 ± 6.33
81.33 ± 6.66
80.10 ± 7.51
82.46 ± 6.54
83.51 ± 6.67
80.60 ± 6.29
80.70 ± 7.80
80.66 ± 7.59
Primary-tumor
47.63 ± 5.84
47.50 ± 6.49
45.29 ± 6.33
45.29 ± 6.33
Ionosphere
92.99 ± 4.13
89.49 ± 5.12
88.95 ± 5.10 •
88.18 ± 5.06 •
Horse-colic
83.66 ± 6.13
81.88 ± 6.31
82.11 ± 6.23
81.68 ± 6.50
95.90 ± 2.67
95.03 ± 3.29
95.72 ± 2.97
95.51 ± 3.20
Balance-scale
89.71 ± 2.68
75.83 ± 5.32 •
92.86 ± 3.22 ◦
92.78 ± 3.49 ◦
93.43 ± 2.59
92.87 ± 3.07
90.73 ± 3.04 •
91.16 ± 3.09 •
Australian
85.04 ± 3.84
85.07 ± 4.03
84.99 ± 3.91
84.64 ± 4.09
96.18 ± 2.20
96.60 ± 2.04
96.88 ± 1.99
96.75 ± 2.04
Pima-indians
77.08 ± 4.65
75.18 ± 5.05
76.73 ± 4.83
76.64 ± 4.69
83.04 ± 3.70
71.03 ± 4.55 •
79.52 ± 3.81 •
79.32 ± 3.72 •
99.52 ± 0.73
98.53 ± 1.23 •
95.88 ± 2.36 •
96.56 ± 1.70 •
93.94 ± 2.55
92.33 ± 3.05
79.70 ± 4.09 •
78.72 ± 4.53 •
75.37 ± 3.53
74.07 ± 4.10
74.90 ± 3.47
74.94 ± 3.41
96.28 ± 1.36
95.22 ± 1.44
96.70 ± 1.27
96.71 ± 1.21
95.86 ± 1.17
95.43 ± 1.14
92.39 ± 1.63 •
92.85 ± 1.53 •
99.64 ± 0.35
97.81 ± 2.05 •
98.15 ± 0.90 •
98.08 ± 0.93 •
Hypothyroid
99.54 ± 0.39
99.58 ± 0.38
98.98 ± 0.52 •
99.25 ± 0.40 •
98.95 ± 0.60
97.82 ± 0.74 •
98.40 ± 0.62 •
98.37 ± 0.65 •
86.96 ± 1.58
80.12 ± 2.17 •
83.96 ± 1.81 •
84.55 ± 1.67 •
97.28 ± 0.64
89.27 ± 1.38 •
96.47 ± 0.75 •
95.94 ± 0.82 •
98.56 ± 0.32
95.26 ± 0.69 •
97.09 ± 0.49 •
97.43 ± 0.44 •
92.13 ± 0.74
86.69 ± 0.66 •
88.18 ± 0.68 •
88.07 ± 0.74 •
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcant win or loss for LMT.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of classiﬁcation accuracy for LMT, NBTree, LTree with linear discriminants and
LTree with logistic regression: number indicates how often method in column (signiﬁcantly) outperforms method
attributes. These two modes often gave very different results in our experiments. Lotus
can only be applied to two class problems. Furthermore, a logistic model tree can only be
ﬁt if the data contains at least one numeric attribute. On the heart-h dataset Lotus did not
give a reasonable result initially—this was due to an attribute with 99 percent of its values
missing. We removed this attribute from the dataset before running Lotus on it. On the
labour and horse-colic datasets we were unable to get a result from Lotus using multiple
logistic regression at all.
Table 7 shows the average classiﬁcation accuracy of LMT compared to NBTree, LTree
using linear discriminants (LTreeLin) and LTree using logistic regression (LTreeLog).
Apart from the dataset balance-scale, LMT performs as well or better than the other methods. Compared to NBTree, LMT is signiﬁcantly more accurate on 10 datasets, with most
of those wins applying to the larger datasets. Compared to LTree using linear discriminants, LMT is signiﬁcantly more accurate on 15 datasets and signiﬁcantly less accurate
on one (the aforementioned balance-scale). When logistic regression is used with LTree,
LMT is signiﬁcantly more accurate on 17 datasets and less accurate on balance-scale. As
was the case with NBTree, LMT’s superiority occurs more often than not on the larger
If the signiﬁcance of the individual differences is not taken into account, Table 8 shows
that the win/loss ratio for LMT compared to NBTree is 27/9. This difference is statistically
signiﬁcant according to a two-tailed sign test: the corresponding p-value is 0.004. Compared
to LTree using linear discriminants and LTree using logistic regression, the win/loss ratio is
30/6 and 32/4 respectively. According to a two-tailed sign test there is very strong evidence
that LMT is superior to both of these methods (p-values < 0.0001).
Table 9 compares the size of the trees produced by LMT with those produced by NBTree
and LTree (using both linear discriminants and logistic regression). We can see that LMT
never produces signiﬁcantly larger trees than LTree or NBTree. Compared to NBTree,
LMT produces smaller trees on all but ﬁve datasets (G2, glass, breast-w, german and
splice); compared to LTree with linear discriminants, LMT produces smaller trees in all
cases except for horse-colic; and compared with LTree with logistic regression, LMT
produces smaller trees on all but ﬁve datasets (sonar, ionosphere, horse-colic, breast-w and
pima-indians).
Looking at the summary of wins and losses in Table 10, and ignoring the signiﬁcance of
the individual differences, we can see that the ratio of wins (smaller trees) to losses (larger
trees) for LMT to NBTree is 34/2. Against LTree using linear discriminants it is 35/1 and
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean tree size (number of leaves) and standard deviation for LMT vs. NBtree, LTree with linear
discriminants and LTree with logistic regression.
1.05 ± 0.26
2.81 ± 0.60 •
2.51 ± 0.73 •
2.00 ± 0.00 •
1.05 ± 0.26
4.82 ± 0.96 •
7.13 ± 0.34 •
7.45 ± 0.50 •
Lymphography
1.18 ± 0.80
6.44 ± 2.11 •
2.26 ± 0.48 •
2.66 ± 1.24 •
1.11 ± 0.53
2.60 ± 1.42 •
3.00 ± 0.00 •
3.00 ± 0.00 •
1.05 ± 0.30
6.04 ± 1.81 •
2.17 ± 0.64 •
2.31 ± 0.87 •
Glass (G2)
5.05 ± 3.24
2.94 ± 2.18
10.70 ± 2.72 •
10.04 ± 2.64 •
2.89 ± 5.20
18.67 ± 5.33 •
12.57 ± 5.53 •
11.81 ± 4.79 •
2.12 ± 1.51
7.52 ± 1.23 •
7.02 ± 2.23 •
2.11 ± 0.49
7.46 ± 3.55
5.12 ± 4.01
21.67 ± 3.01 •
20.83 ± 2.54 •
1.01 ± 0.10
13.50 ± 3.43 •
26.05 ± 2.19 •
26.05 ± 2.19 •
Heart-statlog
1.04 ± 0.32
5.16 ± 2.17 •
3.76 ± 3.07 •
2.69 ± 2.14 •
Breast-cancer
1.12 ± 1.20
9.17 ± 9.76 •
3.24 ± 1.27 •
3.26 ± 1.49 •
1.00 ± 0.00
7.13 ± 4.69 •
2.91 ± 2.37 •
3.34 ± 2.95 •
1.03 ± 0.17
9.42 ± 4.16 •
9.51 ± 4.98 •
10.03 ± 5.19 •
Primary-tumor
1.03 ± 0.17
5.15 ± 5.87 •
29.37 ± 6.27 •
29.37 ± 6.27 •
Ionosphere
4.40 ± 1.86
8.50 ± 1.71 •
8.73 ± 2.39 •
5.91 ± 2.96
Horse-colic
2.78 ± 2.58
15.92 ± 7.28 •
2.24 ± 1.04
2.16 ± 0.94
1.08 ± 0.44
9.88 ± 3.05 •
2.27 ± 0.71 •
2.00 ± 0.00 •
Balance-scale
4.73 ± 2.61
8.90 ± 5.37 •
14.35 ± 3.39 •
14.03 ± 3.42 •
2.44 ± 5.44
21.27 ± 11.71 •
32.78 ± 2.21 •
32.48 ± 1.69 •
Australian
1.15 ± 0.59
10.88 ± 9.33 •
4.69 ± 4.36 •
4.20 ± 3.99 •
1.24 ± 0.99
3.14 ± 2.73
2.04 ± 0.28 •
2.12 ± 0.86
Pima-indians
1.03 ± 0.30
3.04 ± 2.38 •
4.59 ± 4.79 •
3.80 ± 4.45
2.64 ± 1.97
28.40 ± 5.92 •
29.88 ± 8.75 •
25.52 ± 9.37 •
1.11 ± 0.31
30.00 ± 8.73 •
8.57 ± 2.63 •
15.38 ± 2.73 •
4.81 ± 1.23
42.02 ± 1.78 •
66.00 ± 5.91 •
60.90 ± 5.18 •
1.00 ± 0.00
11.21 ± 15.74
8.64 ± 6.82 •
9.34 ± 7.96 •
4.85 ± 2.05
43.34 ± 6.08 •
28.12 ± 3.10 •
29.74 ± 2.44 •
1.00 ± 0.00
2.39 ± 7.29
38.49 ± 9.18 •
20.99 ± 8.98 •
7.92 ± 0.56
24.59 ± 11.19 •
24.74 ± 3.95 •
24.17 ± 5.63 •
Hypothyroid
5.61 ± 0.93
26.58 ± 8.23 •
17.49 ± 2.52 •
14.17 ± 1.81 •
13.56 ± 3.12
52.44 ± 11.25 •
26.30 ± 3.10 •
22.02 ± 3.85 •
1.00 ± 0.00
47.74 ± 18.34 •
104.74 ± 22.84 •
77.56 ± 27.53 •
3.45 ± 1.66
174.70 ± 14.37 •
39.22 ± 4.60 •
49.33 ± 6.38 •
11.30 ± 2.78
222.93 ± 20.09 •
119.90 ± 5.67 •
96.36 ± 9.29 •
41.73 ± 8.68
724.17 ± 23.50 •
836.16 ± 17.44 •
784.25 ± 31.49 •
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcant smaller or larger trees for LMT.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of tree size (number of leaves) for LMT, NBTree, LTree with linear discriminants
and LTree with logistic regression: number indicates how often method in column has (signiﬁcantly) larger tree
size than method in row.
Mean classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for LMT vs Lotus using simple logistic regression
(LotusS) and Lotus using multiple logistic regression (LotusM).
91.37 ± 11.01
74.07 ± 18.18 •
84.21 ± 8.21
79.74 ± 9.18
82.08 ± 6.74
Glass (G2)
77.28 ± 9.90
75.77 ± 9.97
69.99 ± 10.49
76.32 ± 9.58
72.38 ± 9.13
72.27 ± 7.92
Heart-statlog
83.22 ± 6.50
77.63 ± 7.16 •
83.67 ± 6.43
84.00 ± 6.33
80.25 ± 6.42
78.24 ± 6.75 •
83.51 ± 6.67
76.63 ± 6.72 •
77.49 ± 7.49 •
Ionosphere
92.99 ± 4.13
89.04 ± 4.57 •
87.72 ± 5.57 •
Horse-colic
83.66 ± 6.13
83.86 ± 5.67
Australian
85.04 ± 3.84
84.35 ± 4.18
85.14 ± 4.03
96.18 ± 2.20
94.61 ± 2.66 •
96.44 ± 2.13
Pima-indians
77.08 ± 4.65
75.08 ± 5.14
77.47 ± 4.39
75.37 ± 3.53
72.69 ± 3.11
72.55 ± 3.36 •
98.95 ± 0.60
97.84 ± 0.66 •
96.94 ± 1.00 •
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcant win or loss for LMT.
against LTree using logistic regression it is 34/2. All of these ratios are strongly signiﬁcant
according to a two-tailed sign test (p-values < 0.0001).
Table 11 compares LMT with Lotus using simple logistic regression (LotusS) and Lotus
using multiple logistic regression (LotusM) on the two-class datasets. Table 12 summarizes
the results. We can see that LMT is never signiﬁcantly less accurate than either mode
of Lotus and is signiﬁcantly more accurate than LotusS on six datasets and signiﬁcantly
more accurate than LotusM on ﬁve datasets. Ignoring the signiﬁcance of the individual
differences, LMT is more accurate than LotusS on 13 datasets and less accurate on one.
This ratio is signiﬁcant at the one percent level according to a two-tailed sign test (p-value
of 0.0018). Against LotusM, the ratio of wins to losses is 8/4 in favour of LMT. The p-value
from the sign test in this case is 0.388. Consequently, there is only very weak evidence that
LMT is superiour to LotusM.
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Pairwise comparison of classiﬁcation accuracy for LMT, Lotus using simple logistic regression
(LotusS) and Lotus using multiple logistic regression (LotusM): number indicates how often method in column
(signiﬁcantly) outperforms method in row.
Mean tree size (number of leaves) and standard deviation for LMT vs. Lotus using simple logistic
regression (LotusS) and Lotus using multiple logistic regression (LotusM).
1.05 ± 0.26
1.41 ± 0.51
1.05 ± 0.30
1.21 ± 0.76
1.00 ± 0.00
Glass (G2)
5.05 ± 3.24
2.87 ± 1.40
1.14 ± 0.35 ◦
2.12 ± 1.51
1.65 ± 0.95
1.00 ± 0.00 ◦
Heart-statlog
1.04 ± 0.32
3.57 ± 1.86 •
1.00 ± 0.00
1.00 ± 0.00
3.33 ± 1.80 •
1.99 ± 0.98 •
1.03 ± 0.17
3.66 ± 1.77 •
1.47 ± 0.63
Ionosphere
4.40 ± 1.86
3.59 ± 0.85
1.00 ± 0.00 ◦
Horse-colic
2.78 ± 2.58
3.90 ± 2.30
Australian
1.15 ± 0.59
2.58 ± 0.75 •
2.03 ± 0.30 •
1.24 ± 0.99
4.51 ± 1.89 •
1.02 ± 0.14
Pima-indians
1.03 ± 0.30
2.86 ± 0.97 •
1.00 ± 0.00
1.00 ± 0.00
2.37 ± 0.65 •
2.11 ± 0.40 •
13.56 ± 3.12
8.33 ± 2.73 ◦
2.70 ± 1.19 ◦
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcantly smaller or larger trees for LMT.
Table 13 gives the average tree size and standard deviation for LMT, LotusS and LotusM.
Table 14 summarizes the results. LMT builds signiﬁcantly smaller trees than LotusS on
seven out of the 14 datasets and signiﬁcantly larger trees on one. On this single dataset (sick)
LMT is more accurate than LotusS, so the extra structure is justiﬁed. Against LotusM, LMT
produces signiﬁcantly smaller trees on three of the datasets and signiﬁcantly larger trees
on four. In all of the cases where LMT builds larger trees it is more accurate than LotusM
(signiﬁcantly so on two of the four datasets: ionosphere and sick). Ignoring the signiﬁcance
of the individual differences, LMT builds smaller trees than LotusS on 10 datasets and
larger trees on four. Against LotusM the ratio of wins to losses is 4/8 in favour of LotusM.
In both these cases there is only weak evidence of the superiority of one method over the
other according to a two-tailed sign test (p-values of 0.18 and 0.388 respectively).
5.4.3. Comparing LMT to multiple-tree models.
This section compares LMT to methods
that build models consisting of a set of trees: M5’ for classiﬁcation and boosted C4.5. In
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of tree size (number of leaves) for LMT, Lotus using simple logistic regression
(LotusS) and Lotus using multiple logistic regression (LotusM): number indicates how often method in column
has (signiﬁcantly) larger tree size than method in row.
order to solve classiﬁcation problems with M5’—a learner that estimates numeric target
variables—we convert the classiﬁcation problem into a regression problem as described in
Section 2.2. The ﬁnal model consists of a set of model trees, one for every class. When
boosting trees using AdaBoost.M1, multiple C4.5 trees are built on reweighted versions
of the training data, as explained in Section 3.6. For boosting, it is not clear a priori how
many boosting iterations should be performed. AdaBoost.M1 was run with a maximum of
10 and 100 boosting iterations (though boosting can be stopped sooner, if the error of one
of the classiﬁers built on the reweighted training data reaches zero or exceeds 0.5).
Table 15 gives the classiﬁcation accuracy of LMT, M5’ for classiﬁcation, and boosted
C4.5 trees using AdaBoost.M1 with 10 and 100 boosting iterations. Table 16 summarizes
the wins and losses. LMT outperforms M5’ for classiﬁcation: it is signiﬁcantly more
accurate on 11 datasets and signiﬁcantly less accurate on only one. If the signiﬁcance of
the differences is not taken into account, LMT has a win/loss ratio of 31/5 against M5’.
According to a two-tailed sign test there is very strong evidence that LMT is superior to M5’
for classiﬁcation (p-value < 0.0001). Comparing LMT with boosted C4.5 trees, it can be
seen that performing 100 boosting iterations is superior to performing only 10. We conclude
that performing 10 boosting iterations is not enough and concentrate on AdaBoost(100).
Looking at the number of signiﬁcant wins and losses, we can see that LMT is comparable
to AdaBoost(100) (with seven wins and nine losses). However, the relative performance
of the two schemes really depends on the datasets. Interestingly, there are several datasets
where boosting achieves a similar gain in accuracy compared to simple tree induction as
LMT, i.e. there was a win for LMT against C4.5 and there is neither a loss nor a win
of LMT against AdaBoost(100). This is the case for seven datasets. On the nine datasets
where boosted trees outperform LMT, they achieve a higher accuracy than any other
scheme, and the gain is quite impressive (up to seven percentage points higher than the
next-best classiﬁer). It is clear that the extra structure induced by boosting is justiﬁed on
these datasets.
The seven datasets for which AdaBoost(100) is signiﬁcantly less accurate than LMT can
be split into two groups. For two datasets (breast-cancer, heart-h), boosting seems to have
failed: there was no win of LMT over C4.5, but there is one over AdaBoost(100). It is
reasonable to expect that using a more advanced boosting scheme (for example, controlling
the number of boosting iterations by cross-validation) would make these losses disappear.
For the other ﬁve datasets, boosting seems to have no impact on performance (balance-scale,
primary-tumor) or increases performance compared to C4.5, but not as much as building
logistic model trees (waveform, vehicle, splice).
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
Mean classiﬁcation accuracy and standard deviation for LMT vs. M5’ for classiﬁcation and boosted
AdaBoost(10)
AdaBoost(100)
91.37 ± 11.01
85.13 ± 16.33
87.17 ± 14.28
88.73 ± 14.27
94.89 ± 6.44
94.48 ± 6.43
96.15 ± 6.11
96.35 ± 6.07
Lymphography
84.10 ± 10.00
80.35 ± 9.32
80.87 ± 8.63
84.72 ± 8.41
95.80 ± 4.89
94.93 ± 5.62
94.33 ± 5.22
94.53 ± 5.05
84.21 ± 8.21
82.38 ± 8.79
82.38 ± 8.01
84.93 ± 7.79
Glass (G2)
77.28 ± 9.90
81.08 ± 8.73
85.17 ± 7.75 ◦
88.72 ± 6.42 ◦
76.13 ± 8.84
76.03 ± 10.00
85.46 ± 7.23 ◦
86.77 ± 6.81 ◦
76.32 ± 9.58
78.37 ± 8.82
79.22 ± 8.70
85.14 ± 7.84 ◦
69.15 ± 8.99
71.30 ± 9.08
75.15 ± 7.59 ◦
78.78 ± 7.80 ◦
84.19 ± 7.17
76.83 ± 8.62 •
84.84 ± 7.46
84.70 ± 7.57
Heart-statlog
83.22 ± 6.50
82.15 ± 6.77
78.59 ± 7.15
80.44 ± 7.08
Breast-cancer
74.91 ± 6.29
70.40 ± 6.84 •
66.75 ± 7.61 •
66.36 ± 8.18 •
84.00 ± 6.33
82.44 ± 6.39
78.68 ± 7.43
78.42 ± 7.20 •
83.51 ± 6.67
82.14 ± 6.65
78.76 ± 7.09 •
80.00 ± 6.55
Primary-tumor
47.63 ± 5.84
45.26 ± 6.22
41.65 ± 6.55 •
41.65 ± 6.55 •
Ionosphere
92.99 ± 4.13
89.92 ± 4.18 •
93.05 ± 3.92
94.02 ± 3.83
Horse-colic
83.66 ± 6.13
83.23 ± 5.40
81.63 ± 6.19
81.85 ± 5.70
95.90 ± 2.67
95.61 ± 2.77
95.51 ± 3.05
95.26 ± 3.13
Balance-scale
89.71 ± 2.68
87.76 ± 2.23
78.35 ± 3.78 •
76.11 ± 4.09 •
93.43 ± 2.59
92.90 ± 2.61
92.83 ± 2.85
93.32 ± 2.81
Australian
85.04 ± 3.84
85.39 ± 3.87
84.01 ± 4.36
86.43 ± 3.98
96.18 ± 2.20
95.85 ± 2.15
96.08 ± 2.16
96.70 ± 2.18
Pima-indians
77.08 ± 4.65
76.56 ± 4.71
71.81 ± 4.85 •
73.89 ± 4.75
83.04 ± 3.70
78.66 ± 4.38 •
75.59 ± 3.99 •
77.87 ± 3.58 •
99.52 ± 0.73
98.64 ± 1.13
99.59 ± 0.70
99.63 ± 0.65
93.94 ± 2.55
80.93 ± 4.68 •
92.89 ± 2.82
96.81 ± 1.93 ◦
75.37 ± 3.53
74.99 ± 3.31
70.91 ± 3.60 •
74.53 ± 3.26
96.28 ± 1.36
97.31 ± 1.05 ◦
98.12 ± 0.92 ◦
98.61 ± 0.69 ◦
95.86 ± 1.17
95.40 ± 1.17
94.58 ± 1.16 •
94.95 ± 1.25 •
99.64 ± 0.35
99.21 ± 0.50 •
99.59 ± 0.31
99.62 ± 0.30
Hypothyroid
99.54 ± 0.39
99.44 ± 0.38
99.65 ± 0.31
99.69 ± 0.31
98.95 ± 0.60
98.41 ± 0.62 •
98.99 ± 0.50
99.05 ± 0.50
86.96 ± 1.58
82.51 ± 1.60 •
81.32 ± 1.90 •
85.06 ± 1.71 •
97.28 ± 0.64
95.43 ± 0.93 •
97.38 ± 0.62
98.51 ± 0.47 ◦
98.56 ± 0.32
97.87 ± 0.47 •
98.99 ± 0.31 ◦
99.41 ± 0.26 ◦
92.13 ± 0.74
91.05 ± 0.62 •
95.53 ± 0.43 ◦
97.25 ± 0.37 ◦
•, ◦statistically signiﬁcant win or loss for LMT.
LOGISTIC MODEL TREES
Pairwise comparison of classiﬁcation accuracy for LMT, M5’ for classiﬁcation and boosted C4.5:
number indicates how often method in column (signiﬁcantly) outperforms method in row.
AdaBoost(10)
AdaBoost(100)
AdaBoost(10)
AdaBoost(100)
Applying a two-tailed sign test to the win/loss ratios (ignoring the signiﬁcance of individual differences) for LMT against AdaBoost(10) and AdaBoost(100) shows that there
is only weak evidence to suggest the superiority of one method over the other. Against
AdaBoost(10) the win/loss ratio is 22/14 (p-value of 0.243) and against AdaBoost(100) the
win/loss ratio is 17/19 (p-value of 0.868).
Conclusions
In this work we have introduced a new method for learning logistic model trees, called LMT,
that builds on earlier work on model trees. This method employs the LogitBoost algorithm
 for building the logistic regression functions at the
nodes of a tree and uses the well-known CART algorithm for pruning. We have shown how
LogitBoost can be used to select the most relevant attributes in the data when performing
logistic regression by performing a simple regression in each iteration and stopping before convergence to the maximum likelihood solution. The optimal number of iterations
is determined by cross-validation. Our experiments show that, when used as a standalone
learning algorithm, this method yields ﬁnal models that contain signiﬁcantly fewer parameters than the ones generated by standard maximum likelihood logistic regression while
never signiﬁcantly decreasing accuracy and sometimes signiﬁcantly increasing it. Another
beneﬁt obtained from using LogitBoost for building the logistic regression functions in a
model tree is that a separate smoothing process is not required. This is because they can
be constructed by incrementally reﬁning logistic regression functions ﬁt at higher levels in
Our experiments demonstrate that LMT produces models that are often more accurate
than those produced by C4.5, CART and standalone logistic regression on real-world
datasets. LMT also outperforms well-known enhanced decision tree learners such as LTree
and NBTree and the logistic model tree algorithm Lotus. More surprisingly, LMT appears
to be competitive with boosted C4.5 trees.
LMT produces a single tree containing binary splits on numeric attributes, multiway
splits on nominal ones, and logistic regression models at the leaves, and the algorithm
ensures that only relevant attributes are included in the latter. The result is not quite as
easy to interpret as a standard decision tree, but much more intelligible than a committee
of multiple trees or more opaque classiﬁers like kernel-based estimators. Like other tree
N. LANDWEHR, M. HALL AND E. FRANK
induction methods, LMT can be used ‘off the shelf’—it does not require any tuning of
parameters by the user.
Future work
There are several issues that provide directions for future work. Probably the most important
drawback of logistic model tree induction is the high computational complexity compared to
simple tree induction. Although the asymptotic complexity of LMT is acceptable compared
to other methods (see Section 4.3), the algorithm is quite slow in practice. Most of the time
is spent ﬁtting the logistic regression models at the nodes with the LogitBoost algorithm. It
would be worthwhile looking for a faster way of ﬁtting the logistic models that achieves the
same performance (including variable selection). The heuristic discussed in Section 4.3.1
signiﬁcantly speeds up the algorithm without decreasing prediction accuracy, but it is
admittedly ad-hoc and not very intuitive. Further research might yield a more principled
way of determining the optimum number of LogitBoost iterations to be performed at a node
without an additional cross-validation.
A further issue is the handling of missing values. At present, LMT uses a simple global
imputation scheme for ﬁlling in missing values. Although our experiments do not suggest a
particular weakness of the algorithm on datasets with missing values, a more sophisticated
scheme for handling them might improve accuracy for domains where missing values occur
frequently.
1. We take the number of classes J as a constant here, otherwise there is another factor of J.
2. This has to be determined using cross-validation or an independent test set, of course, because the training
error will continue to decrease.
3. Note that this involves growing multiple ‘auxiliary’ logistic model trees.
4. In the conference version of this paper we also compared against the PLUS
algorithm for inducing logistic model trees. We do not report results for PLUS here as the software is no longer
available at time of writing and there is no publication describing it.
5. R can be obtained from 
6. Available from 
7. Lotus can be obtained from 
8. Weka is available from