Pre-Trained Image Processing Transformer
Hanting Chen1,2, Yunhe Wang2*, Tianyu Guo1,2, Chang Xu3, Yiping Deng4,
Zhenhua Liu2,5,6, Siwei Ma5,6, Chunjing Xu2, Chao Xu1, Wen Gao5,6
1 Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University. 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney. 4 Central Software Institution, Huawei Technologies.
5 Institute of Digital Media, School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University. 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
 , 
As the computing power of modern hardware is increasing strongly, pre-trained deep learning models (e.g.,
BERT, GPT-3) learned on large-scale datasets have shown
their effectiveness over conventional methods.
progress is mainly contributed to the representation ability of transformer and its variant architectures.
paper, we study the low-level computer vision task (e.g.,
denoising, super-resolution and deraining) and develop a
new pre-trained model, namely, image processing transformer (IPT). To maximally excavate the capability of transformer, we present to utilize the well-known ImageNet
benchmark for generating a large amount of corrupted
image pairs.
The IPT model is trained on these images
with multi-heads and multi-tails.
In addition, the contrastive learning is introduced for well adapting to different image processing tasks.
The pre-trained model can
therefore efﬁciently employed on desired task after ﬁnetuning. With only one pre-trained model, IPT outperforms
the current state-of-the-art methods on various low-level
benchmarks. Code is available at 
com/huawei-noah/Pretrained-IPT and https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/mindspore/tree/
master/model_zoo/research/cv/IPT
1. Introduction
Image processing is one component of the low-level part
of a more global image analysis or computer vision system.
Results from the image processing can largely inﬂuence the
subsequent high-level part to perform recognition and understanding of the image data. Recently, deep learning has
been widely applied to solve low-level vision tasks, such as
image super-resolution, inpainting, deraining and colorization. As many image processing tasks are related, it is nat-
*Corresponding author
 
 
Denoising (30)
Denoising (50)
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Comparison on the performance of the proposed IPT and
the state-of-the-art image processing models on different tasks.
ural to expect a model pre-trained on one dataset can be
helpful for another. But few studies have generalized pretraining across image processing tasks.
Pre-training has the potential to provide an attractive solution to image processing tasks by addressing the following two challenges: First, task-speciﬁc data can be limited.
This problem is exacerbated in image processing task that
involves the paid-for data or data privacy, such as medical
images and satellite images . Various inconsistent
factors (e.g. camera parameter, illumination and weather)
can further perturb the distribution of the captured data for
training. Second, it is unknown which type of image processing job will be requested until the test image is presented. We therefore have to prepare a series of image processing modules at hand. They have distinct aims, but some
underlying operations could be shared.
It is now common to have pre-training in natural language processing and computer vision . For example,
the backbones of object detection models are often pre-trained on ImageNet classiﬁcation . A numarXiv:2012.00364v4 [cs.CV] 8 Nov 2021
ber of well-trained networks can now be easily obtained
from the Internet, including AlexNet , VGGNet 
and ResNet .
The seminal work Transformers 
have been widely used in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as translation and questionanswering .
The secret of its success is to pre-train
transformer-based models on a large text corpus and ﬁnetune them on the task-speciﬁc dataset. Variants of Transformers, like BERT and GPT-3 , further enriched
the training data and improved the pre-training skills. There
have been interesting attempts on extending the success of
Transformers to the computer vision ﬁeld. For example,
Wang et al. and Fu et al. applied the self-attention
based models to capture global information on images. Carion et al. proposed DERT to use transformer architectures for an end-to-end object detection.
Most recently,
Dosovitskiy et al. introduced Vision Transformer (ViT)
to treat input images as 16×16 words and attained excellent
results on image recognition.
The aforementioned pre-training in computer vision and
natural language mostly investigate a pretest classiﬁcation
task, but both the input and the output in an image processing task are images. A straightforward application of
these existing pre-training strategies might not be feasible.
Further, how to effectively address different target image
processing tasks in the pre-training stage remains a hard
challenge. It is also instructive to note that the pre-training
of image processing models enjoys a convenience of selfgenerating training instances based on the original real images. The synthetically manipulated images are taken for
training, while the original image itself is the ground-truth
to be reconstructed.
In this paper, we develop a pre-trained model for image processing using the transformer architecture, namely,
Image Processing Transformer (IPT). As the pre-trained
model needs to be compatible with different image processing tasks, including super-resolution, denoising, and deraining, the entire network is composed of multiple pairs of
head and tail corresponding to different tasks and a single shared body. Since the potential of transformer needs
to be excavated using large-scale dataset, we should prepair a great number of images with considerable diversity
for training the IPT model. To this end, we select the ImageNet benchmark which contains various high-resolution
with 1,000 categories. For each image in the ImageNet,
we generate multiple corrupted counterparts using several
carefully designed operations to serve different tasks. For
example, training samples for the super-resolution task are
generated by downsampling original images. The entired
dataset we used for training IPT contains about over 10 millions of images.
Then, the transformer architecture is trained on the huge
dataset as follows. The training images are input to the
speciﬁc head, and the generated features are cropped into
patches (i.e., “words”) and ﬂattened to sequences subsequently. The transformer body is employed to process the
ﬂattened features in which position and task embedding are
utilized for encoder and decoder, respectively. In addition,
tails are forced to predict the original images with different output sizes according to the speciﬁc task. Moreover,
a contrastive loss on the relationship between patches of
different inputs is introduced for well adopting to different image processing tasks. The proposed image processing
transformer is learned in an end-to-end manner. Experimental results conducted on several benchmarks show that the
pre-trained IPT model can surpass most of existing methods on their own tasks by a signiﬁcant enhancement after
ﬁne-tuning.
2. Related Works
2.1. Image Processing
Image processing consists of the manipulation of images, including super-resolution, denoising, dehazing, deraining, debluring, etc. There are a variety of deep-learningbased methods proposed to conduct on one or many kinds of
image processing tasks. For the super-resolution, Dong et
al. propose SRCNN which are considered as pioneering works introducing end-to-end models that reconstructs HR images from their LR counterparts.
al. further explore the capacity of deep neural network
with a more deeper convolutional network. Ahn et al. 
and Lim et al. propose introduce residual block into
SR task. Zhang et al. and Anwar and Barnes utilize
the power of attention to enhance the performance on SR
task. A various excellent works are also proposed for the
other tasks, such as denoising , dehazing , deraining , and
debluring . Different from above methods,
we dig the capacity of both big models and huge volume
of data. Then a pre-training model handling several image
processing tasks is introduced.
2.2. Transformer
Transformer and its variants have proven its success being powerful unsupervised or self-supervised pretraining frameworks in various natural language processing
tasks. For example, GPTs are pre-trained in a
autoregressive way that predicting next word in huge text
datasets. BERT learns from data without explicit supervision and predicts a masking word based on context.
Colin et al. proposes a universal pre-training framework for several downstream tasks. Yinhan et al. proposes a robust variant for original BERT.
Due to the success of Transformer-based models in the
NLP ﬁeld, there are many attempts to explore the beneﬁts
Transformer Encoder
Multi-head
Multi-tail
Flatten features
Task embedding
Transformer Decoder
Figure 2. The diagram of the proposed image processing transformer (IPT). The IPT model consists of multi-head and multi-tail for
different tasks and a shared transformer body including encoder and decoder. The input images are ﬁrst converted to visual features and
then divided into patches as visual words for subsequent processing. The resulting images with high visual quality are reconstructed by
ensembling output patches.
of Transformer in computer vision tasks. These attempts
can be roughly divided into two types. The ﬁrst is to introduce self-attention into the traditional convolutional neural
network. Yuan et al. introduce spatial attention for image segmentation. Fu et al. proposes DANET utilizing the context information by combining spatial and channel attention. Wang et al. , Chen et al. , Jiang et
al. and Zhang et al. also augment features by selfattention to enhance model performance on several highlevel vision tasks. The other type is to replace convolutional neural network with self-attention block.
For instance, Kolesnikov et al. and Dosovitskiy conduct image classiﬁcation with transformer block. Carion et
al. and Zhu et al. implement transformer-based
models in detection. Chen et al. proposes a pre-trained
GPT model for generative and classiﬁcation tasks. Wu et
al. and Zhao et al. propose pre-training methods
for teansformer-based models for image recognition task.
Jiang et al. propose the TransGAN to generate images
using Transformer. However, few related works focus on
low-level vision tasks. In this paper, we explore a universal
pre-training approach for image processing tasks.
3. Image Processing Transformer
To excavate the potential use of transformer on image processing tasks for achieving better results, here we
present the image processing transformer by pre-training on
large-scale dataset.
3.1. IPT architecture
The overall architecture of our IPT consists of four components: heads for extracting features from the input corrupted images (e.g., images with noise and low-resolution
images), an encoder-decoder transformer is established for
recovering the missing information in input data, and tails
are used formapping the features into restored images. Here
we brieﬂy introduce our architecture, details can be found
in the supplementary material.
Heads. To adjust different image processing task, we use
a multi-head architecture to deal with each task separately,
where each head consists of three convolutional layers. Denote the input image as x ∈R3×H×W (3 means R, G, and
B), the head generates a feature map fH ∈RC×H×W with
C channels and same height and width (typical we use C =
64). The calculation can be formulated as fH = Hi(x),
where Hi (i = {1, . . . , Nt}) denote the head for the ith
task and Nt denotes the number of tasks.
Transformer encoder. Before input features into the
transformer body, we split the given features into patches
and each patch is regarded as a ”word”. Speciﬁcally, the
features fH ∈RC×H×W are reshaped into a sequence
of patches, i.e., fpi ∈RP 2×C, i = {1, . . . , N}, where
P 2 is the number of patches (i.e., the length of sequence) and P is patch size. To maintain the position information of each patch, we add learnable position encodings Epi ∈RP 2×C for each patch of feature fpi following , and Epi + fpi will be directly input into the
transformer encoder. The architecture of encoder layer is
following the original structure in , which has a multihead self-attention module and a feed forward network. The
output of encoder fEi ∈RP 2×C for each patch has the
same size to that of the input patch fpi. The calculation can
be formulated as
y0 = [Ep1 + fp1, Ep2 + fp2, . . . , EpN + fpN ] ,
qi = ki = vi = LN(yi−1),
i = MSA(qi, ki, vi) + yi−1,
yi = FFN(LN(y′
i = 1, . . . , l
[fE1, fE2, . . . , fEN ] = yl,
where l denotes the number of layers in the encoder, MSA
denotes the multi-head self-attention module in the conventional transformer model , LN denotes the layer normalization and FFN denotes the feed forward network,
which contains two fully connected layers.
Transformer decoder.
The decoder also follows the
same architecture and takes the output of decoder as input
in the transformer body, which consists of two multi-head
self-attention (MSA) layers and one feed forward network
(FFN). The difference to that of the original transformer
here is that we utilize a task-speciﬁc embedding as an additional input of the decoder. These task-speciﬁc embeddings
t ∈RP 2×C, i = {1, . . . , Nt} are learned to decode features for different tasks. The calculation of decoder can be
formulated as:
z0 = [fE1, fE2, . . . , fEN ] ,
qi = ki = LN(zi−1) + Et, vi = LN(zi−1),
i = MSA(qi, ki, vi) + zi−1,
i) + Et, k′
i = LN(z0),
i = MSA(q′
zi = FFN(LN(z′′
i )) + z′′
i = 1, . . . , l
[fD1, fD2, . . . , fDN ] = yl,
where fDi ∈RP 2×C denotes the outputs of decoder. The
decoded N patched features with size P 2 × C are then reshaped into the features fD with size C × H × W.
Tails. The properties of tails are same as those of heads,
we use multi tails to deal with different tasks. The calculation can be formulated as fT = T i(fD), where T i
(i = {1, . . . , Nt}) denote the head for the ith task and Nt
denotes the number of tasks. The output fT is the resulted
images size of 3 × H′ × W ′ which is determined by the
speciﬁc task. For example, H′ = 2H, W = 2W for a 2×
super-resolution task.
3.2. Pre-training on ImageNet
Besides the architecture of transformer itself, one of
the key factors for successfully training an excellent transformer is that the well use of large-scale datasets. Compared
with image classiﬁcation, the number of available data used
for image processing task is relatively small , we propose to utilize the well-known ImageNet as
the baseline dataset for pre-training our IPT model, then
we generate the entire dataset for several tasks (e.g., superresolution and denosing) as follows.
As the images in the ImageNet benchmark are of high
diversity, which contains over 1 million of natural images
from 1,000 different categories. These images have abundant texture and color information.
We ﬁrst remove the
semantic label and manually synthesize a variety of corrupted images from these unlabeled images with a variety
of degradation models for different tasks. Note that synthesized dataset is also usually used in these image processing
tasks and we use the same degeneration methods as suggested in . For example, super-resolution tasks often
take bicubic degradation to generate low-resolution images,
denoising tasks add Gaussian noise in clean images with
different noise level to generate the noisy images. These
synthesized images can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of learned deep networks including both CNN and
transformer architectures, which will be shown in the experiment part. Basically, the corrupted images are synthesized
Icorrupted = f(Iclean),
where f denotes the degradation transformation, which is
depended on the speciﬁc task: for the super-resolution task,
f sr is exactly the bicubic interpolation; for image denoising, f noise(I) = I + η, where η is the additive Gaussian
noise; for deraining, f rain(I) = I +r in which r is a handcrafted rain streak. The loss function for learning our IPT
in the supervised fashion can be formulated as:
Lsupervised =
corrupted), Iclean),
where L1 denote the conventional L1 loss for reconstructing
desired images and Ii
corrupted denote the corrupted image
for task i, respectively. In addition, Eq. 4 implies that the
proposed framework is trained with multiple image process
tasks simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, for each batch, we randomly select one task from Nt supervised tasks for training and each task will be processed using the corresponding head, tail and task embedding, simultaneously. After
the pre-training the IPT model, it will capture the intrinsic features and transformations for a large variety of image
processing tasks thus can be further ﬁne-tuned to apply on
the desired task using the new provided dataset. Moreover,
other heads and tails will be dropped for saving the computation costs and parameters in the remained head, tail and
body will be updated according to the back-propagation.
However, due to the variety of degradation models, we
cannot synthesize images for all image processing tasks.
For example, there is a wide range of possible noise levels in practice.
Therefore, the generalization ability of
the resulting IPT should be further enhanced. Similar to
the pre-training natural language processing models, the
relationship between patches of images is also informative. The patch in image scenario can be considered as a
word in natural language processing. For example, patches
cropped from the same feature map are more likely to appear together, which should be embedded into similar positions. Therefore, we introduce contrastive learning 
for learning universal features so that the pre-trained IPT
model can be utilized to unseen tasks. In practice, denote
the output patched features generated by IPT decoder for
the given input xj as f j
Di ∈RP 2×C, i = {1, . . . , N},
where xj is selected from a batch of training images X =
{x1, x2, . . . , xB}. We aims to minimize the distance between patched features from the same images while maximize the distance between patches from different images.
The loss function for contrastive learning is formulated as:
Di2) = −log
k=1 Ik̸=jexp(d(f j
Lconstrastive =
where d(a, b)
∥a∥∥b∥denotes the cosine similarity.
Moreover, to make fully usage of both supervised and selfsupervised information, we reformulate the loss function as:
LIP T = λ · Lcontrastive + Lsupervised.
Wherein, we combine the λ-balanced contrastive loss with
the supervised loss as the ﬁnal objective function of IPT.
Thus, the proposed transformer network trained using Eq. 6
can be effectively exploited on various existing image processing tasks.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed IPT on various image processing tasks including
super-resolution and image denoising. We show that the
pre-trained IPT model can achieve state-of-the-art performance on these tasks. Moreover, extensive experiments for
ablation study show that the transformer-based models perform better than convolutional neural networks when using the large-scale dataset for solving the image processing
Datasets. To obtain better pre-trained results of the IPT
model, we use the well-known ImageNet dataset, which
consists of over 1M color images of high diversity. The
training images are cropped into 48 × 48 patches with 3
channels for training, i.e., there are over 10M patches for
training the IPT model. We then generate the corrupted images with 6 types of degradation: 2×, 3×, 4× bicubic interpolation, 30, 50 noise level Gaussian noise and adding rainstreaks, respectively. For the rain-streak generation, we follow the method described in . During the test, we crop
the images in the test set into 48 × 48 patches with a 10
pixels overlap. Note that the same testing strategy is also
adopted for CNN based models for a fair comparison, and
the resulting PSNR values of CNN models are the same as
that of their baselines.
Training & Fine-tuning. We use 32 Nvidia NVIDIA
Tesla V100 cards to train our IPT model using the conventional Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 for 300
epochs on the modiﬁed ImageNet dataset. The initial learning rate is set as 5e−5 and decayed to 2e−5 in 200 epoch
with 256 batch size. Since the training set consists of different tasks, we cannot input all of them in a single batch
due to the expensive memory cost. Therefore, we stack a
batch of images from a randomly selected task in each iteration. After pre-training on the entire synthesized dataset,
we ﬁne-tune the IPT model on the desired task (e.g., ×3
single image super-resolution) for 30 epochs with a learning rate of 2e−5. Note that SRCNN also found that
using ImageNet training can bring up the performance of
the super-resolution task, while we propose a model ﬁtting
general low-level vision tasks.
4.1. Super-resolution
We compare our model with several state-of-the-art
CNN-based SR methods. As shown in Table 1, our pretrained IPT outperforms all the other methods and achieves
the best performance in ×2, ×3, ×4 scale on all datasets.
It is worth to highlight that our model achieves 33.76dB
PSNR on the ×2 scale Urban100 dataset, which surpasses
other methods with more than ∼0.4dB, while previous
SOTA methods can only achieve a <0.2dB improvement
compared with others, which indicates the superiority of the
proposed model by utilizing large scale pre-training.
We further present the visualization results on our model
in 4× scale on Urban100 dataset. As shown in Figure 3,
it is difﬁcult for recover the original high resolution images
since lots of information are lost due to the high scaling
factor. Previous methods generated blurry images, while the
super-resolution images produced by our model can well
recover the details from the low-resolution images.
4.2. Denoising
Since our pre-trained model can be well adapt to many
tasks, we then evaluate the performance of our model on
image denoising task. The training and testing data is generated by adding Gaussian noise with σ = 30, 50 to the
clean images.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method,
Urban100 (×4): img 004
IPT (ours)
Urban100 (4×):img 012
IPT (ours)
Urban100 (4×): img 044
IPT (ours)
Figure 3. Visual results with bicubic downsampling (×4) from Urban100. The proposed method recovers more details. Compared images
are derived from .
BSD68: 163085
Noisy (σ=50)
CBM3D 
DnCNN 
MemNet 
IRCNN 
FFDNet 
IPT (ours)
Figure 4. Color image denoising results with noise level σ = 50. Compared images are derived from .
we compare our results with various state-of-the-art models.
Table 2 reported the color image denoising results
on BSD68 and Urban100 dataset.
As a result, our IPT
achieves the best results among all denoising methods on
different Gaussian noise level. Moreover, we surprisingly
found that our model improve the state-of-the-art performance by ∼0.3dB on the Urban100 dataset, which demonstrate the effectiveness of pre-training and the superiority of
our transformer-based model.
Figure 4 shows the visualization of the resulted images.
As shown in the ﬁgure, noisy images are hard to be recognized and it is difﬁcult to recover the clean images. Therefore, existing methods fail to reconstruct enough details and
generate abnormal pixels. As a result, our pre-trained model
can well recover several details in the hair of this cat and our
visual quality beats all the previous models obviously.
4.3. Deraining
For the image deraining task, we evaluate our model on
the synthesized Rain100L dataset , which consists of
100 rainy images. Quantitative results can be viewed in
Table 3. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, we
achieve the best performance (41.62dB) with an 1.62dB improvement.
Figure 5 shows the visualization results. Previous methods are failed to reconstruct the original clean images since
they lack of image prior. As a result, our IPT model can
present exactly the same image as the ground-truth and sur-
Input / Groundtruth
27.37 / 0.8154
29.34 / 0.8479
32.38 / 0.9306
31.45 / 0.9151
31.59 / 0.9380
41.26 / 0.9887
37.27 / 0.9793
35.67 / 0.9700
41.11 / 0.9894
36.99 / 0.9692
42.15 / 0.9912
IPT (ours)
43.91 / 0.9922
Figure 5. Image deraining results on the Rain100L dataset. Compared images are derived from .
Table 1. Quantitative results on image super-resolution. Best and
second best results are highlighted and underlined.
OISR-RK3 
IPT (ours)
OISR-RK3 
IPT (ours)
OISR-RK3 
IPT (ours)
passes all the previous algorithms in visual quality. This
result substantiates the generality of the proposed model.
Table 2. Quantitative results on color image denoising. Best and
second best results are highlighted and underlined.
CBM3D 
DnCNN 
MemNet 
IRCNN 
FFDNet 
SADNet 
IPT (ours)
4.4. Generalization Ability
Although we can generate various corrupted images, natural images are of high complexity and we cannot synthesize all possible images for pre-training the transformer
model. However, a good pre-trained model should have the
capacity for well adapting other tasks as those in the ﬁeld of
NLP. To this end, we then conduct several experiments to
verify the generalization ability of our model. In practice,
we test corrupted images that did not include in our synthesized ImageNet dataset, i.e., image denoising with noisy
level 10 and 70, respectively. We use the heads and tails for
image denoising tasks as the pre-trained model.
The detailed results are shown in Table 4, we compare
the performance of using the pre-trained IPT model and the
state-of-the-art methods for image denoising. Obviously,
IPT model outperforms other conventional methods, which
Table 3. Quantitative results of image deraining on the Rain100L dataset. Best and second best results are highlighted and underlined.
Clear 
RESCAN 
PReNet 
JORDER E 
SPANet 
RCDNet 
IPT (ours)
Table 4. Generation ability of our IPT model on color image denoising with different noise levels. Best and second best results
are highlighted and underlined.
CBM3D 
DnCNN 
MemNet 
IRCNN 
FFDNet 
IPT (ours)
Percentage of Usage of ImageNet (1.1M Images)
Figure 6. The performance of CNN and IPT models using different
percentages of data.
demonstrates that the pre-trained model can capture more
useful information and features from the large-scale dataset.
4.5. Ablation Study
Impact of data percentage. To evaluate the effectiveness of the transformer architecture, we conduct experiments to analyse the improvement of pre-training on CNNbased model and transformer-based model. We use 20%,
40%, 60%, 80% and 100% percentages of the synthesized
ImageNet dataset to analyse the impact on the number of
used data for resulting performance. Figure 6 shows the
results of different pre-trained models. When the models
are not pre-trained or pre-trained with small amount (<
60%) of the entire dataset, the CNN models achieve better performance. In contrast, when using large-scale data,
the transformer-based models overwhelming CNN models,
which demonstrates that the effectiveness of our IPT model
for pre-training.
Table 5. Impact of λ for contrastive learning.
Impact of contrastive learning. As discussed above, to
improve the representation ability of our pre-trained model,
we embed the contrastive learning loss (Eq. 6) into the training procedure. We then evaluate its effectiveness on the ×2
scale super-resolution task using the Set4 dataset. Table 5
shows the impact of the hyper-parameter λ for balancing
the two terms in Eq. 6. When λ=0, the IPT model is trained
using only a supervised learning approach, the resulting
PSNR value is 38.27dB. When employing the contrastive
loss for self-supervised learning, the model can achieve a
38.37dB PSNR value (λ = 0.1), which is about 0.1dB higher
than that of the model trained with λ = 0. These results further demonstrate the effectiveness of the contrastive learning for learning better pre-trained IPT model.
5. Conclusions and Discussions
This paper aims to address the image processing problems using a pre-trained transformer model (IPT). The IPT
model is designed with multi-heads,multi-tails a shared
transformer body for serving different image processing
task such as image super-resolution and denoising. To maximally excavate the performance of the transformer architecture on various tasks, we explore a synthesized ImageNet
datesets. Wherein, each original image will be degraded to
a series of counterparts as paired training data. The IPT
model is then trained using supervised and self-supervised
approaches which shows strong ability for capturing intrinsic features for low-level image processing. Experimental
results demonstrate that our IPT can outperform the stateof-the-art methods using only one pre-trained model after a
quickly ﬁne-tuning. In the future work, we will extend our
IPT model to more tasks such as inpainting, dehazing, etc.
Acknowledgment This work is supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.
61876007, and Australian Research Council under Project
DE180101438 and DP210101859.
A. Results on Deblurring
We further evaluate the performance of our model on image deblurring task. We use the GoPro dataset to ﬁnetune and test our model. We modify the patch size as 256,
patch dim as 8 and number of features as 9 to achieve a
higher receptive ﬁeld. Table 6 reported deblurring results,
where + denotes applying self-ensemble technique. As a result, our IPT achieves the best results among all deblurring
methods. Figure 8 shows the visualization of the resulted
images. As shown in the ﬁgure, our pre-trained model can
well achieve the best visual quality among all the previous
models obviously.
B. Architecture of IPT
In the main paper, we propose the image processing
transformer (IPT). Here we show the detailed architecture
of IPT, which consists of heads, body and tails. Each head
has one convolutional layer (with 3 × 3 kernel size, 3 input channels and 64 output channels) and two ResBlock.
Each ResBlock consists of two convolutional layers (with
5×5 kernel size, 64 input channels and 64 output channels)
which involved by a single shortcut. The body has 12 encoder layers and 12 decoder layers. The tail of denoising or
deraining is a convolutional layer with 3 × 3 kernel size, 64
input channels and 3 output channels. For super-resolution,
the tail consists of one pixelshufﬂe layer with upsampling
scale 2 and 3 for ×2 and ×3 SR, two pixelshufﬂe layer with
upsampling scale 2 for ×4 SR.
The whole IPT has 114M parameters and 33G FLOPs,
which have more parameters while fewer FLOPs compared
with traditional CNN models (e.g., EDSR has 43M parameters and 99G FLOPs).
C. Impact of Multi-task Training
We train IPT following a multi-task manner and then
ﬁne-tune it on 6 different tasks including ×2, ×3, ×4 superresolution, denoising with noise level 30,50 and deraining.
We ﬁnd that this training strategy would not harm the performance on these tasks which have been pre-trained on
large scale dataset (ImageNet). In other words, the performance of multi-task training and single-task training remains almost the same. However, when transferring to other
tasks (e.g., Section 4.4 in the main paper), the pre-trained
model using multi-task training is better than that of singletask training for about 0.3dB, which suggests the multi-task
training would learn universal representation of image processing tasks.
D. Visualization of Embeddings
We visualize the learned embeddings of IPT. Figure 7
shows the visualization results of position embeddings. We
Figure 7. Visualization of cosine similarity of position embeddings.
ﬁnd that patches with similar columns or rows have similar
embeddings, which indicate that they learn useful information for discovering the position on image processing. We
also test to use ﬁxed embeddings or do not use embeddings,
whose performance are lower than that of using learnable
position embeddings (vary from 0.2dB to 0.3dB for different tasks).
Moreover, we visualize the task embeddings in ﬁgure 9.
We can ﬁnd that for ×2 super-resolution task, the similarity between the embeddings on each position and their
neighbours are higher than ×3 super-resolution, while that
of ×4 super-resolution is the smallest. This results indicates that each patches in ×2 super-resolution can focus
on other patches with farther distance than ×3 and ×4,
since their downsampling scale are smaller and the relationship between different patches are closer. The similarity of task embedding for deraining in ﬁgure 9 (d) shows
that the patches pay more attention on the vertical direction than horizontal direction, which is reasonable as the
rain is dropped vertically. The similarity of task embedding
for denoising is similar with Gaussian noise, and ﬁgure 9
(f) with higher (50) noise level shows higher similarity between neighbours than ﬁgure 9 (e) with 30 noise level. The
visualization results suggests that our task embeddings can
indeed learn some information for different tasks. We also
test to not use task embeddings, which results in signiﬁcant accuracy drop (vary from 0.1dB to 0.5dB for different
Figure 8. Image deblurring results on the GoPro dataset. Compared images are derived from .
Table 6. Quantitative results on image deblurring. Best and second best results are highlighted and underlined.
MSCNN 
DeblurGANv2 
DMPHN 
LEBMD 
DBGAN 
MTRNN 
SAPHN 
BANET 
IPT (Ours)
IPT+ (Ours)