Random Walks on Complex Networks
Jae Dong Noh
Department of Physics, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea
Heiko Rieger
Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at des Saarlandes, 66041 Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
 
We investigate random walks on complex networks and derive an exact expression for the mean
ﬁrst passage time (MFPT) between two nodes.
We introduce for each node the random walk
centrality C, which is the ratio between its coordination number and a characteristic relaxation
time, and show that it determines essentially the MFPT. The centrality of a node determines the
relative speed by which a node can receive and spread information over the network in a random
process. Numerical simulations of an ensemble of random walkers moving on paradigmatic network
models conﬁrm this analytical prediction.
PACS numbers: 05.40.Fb, 05.60.Cd, 89.75.Hc
From biology over computer science to sociology the
world is abundant in networks. Watts and Strogatz 
demonstrated that many of these real-world networks
pose characteristic features like the small world and clustering property. Since classical network models do not
display these features, new models have been developed
to understand the structure underlying real-world networks . The important ﬁnding is that there exists
a scale-free (SF) network characterized by a power-law
degree distribution , that is also a characteristic for
the World-Wide-Web (WWW) , and for many other
networks in various disciplines .
The SF network has a heterogeneous structure. For
instance, the WWW analyzed in Ref. includes nodes
with degrees ranging from O(1) to O(103).
The heterogeneity leads to intriguing properties of SF networks.
In the context of percolation, SF networks are stable
against random removal of nodes while they are fragile
under intentional attacks targeting on nodes with high
degree . Statistical mechanical systems on SF networks also display interesting phase transitions .
In a transport process, each node in SF networks does not
contribute equally likely. The importance of each node in
such a process is measured with the betweenness centrality , which has a broad power-law distribution .
In this paper, we study a random walk on general networks with a particular attention to SF networks. The
random walk is a fundamental dynamic process . It
is theoretically interesting to study how the structural
heterogeneity aﬀects the nature of the diﬀusive and relaxation dynamics of the random walk . Those issues
will be studied further elsewhere . The random walk
is also interesting since it could be a mechanism of transport and search on networks . Those processes
would be optimal if one follows the shortest path between two nodes under considerations. Among all paths
connecting two nodes, the shortest path is given by the
one with the smallest number of links . However the
shortest path can be found only after global connectivity
is known at each node, which is improbable in practice.
The random walk becomes important in the extreme opposite case where only local connectivity is known at each
node. We also suggest that the random walk is a useful
tool in studying the structure of networks.
In the context of transport and search, the mean ﬁrst
passage time (MFPT) is an important characteristic of
the random walk. We will derive an exact formula for
the MFPT of a random walker from one node i to another node j, which will be denoted by ⟨Tij⟩, in arbitrary
networks. In the optimal process it is just given by the
number of links in the shortest path between two nodes,
and both motions to one direction and to the other direction are symmetric. However, a random walk motion
from i to j is not symmetric with the motion in the opposite direction. The asymmetry is characterized with the
diﬀerence in the MFPT’s. It is revealed that the diﬀerence is determined by a potential-like quantity which will
be called the random walk centrality (RWC). The RWC
links the structural heterogeneity to the asymmetry in
dynamics. It also describes centralization of information
wandering over networks.
We consider an arbitrary ﬁnite network (or graph)
which consists of nodes i = 1, . . . , N and links connecting them. We assume that the network is connected (i.e.
there is a path between each pair of nodes (i, j)), otherwise we simply consider each component separately.
The connectivity is represented by the adjacency matrix A whose element Aij = 1 (0) if there is a link
from i to j (we set Aii = 0 conventionally).
present work, we restrict ourselves to an undirected network, namely Aij = Aji.
The degree, the number of
connected neighbors, of a node i is denoted by Ki and
given by Ki = P
The stochastic process in discrete time that we study
is a random walk on this network described by a master
equation. The transition probabilities are deﬁned by the
following rule: A walker at node i and time t selects one
of its Ki neighbors with equal probability to which it hops
at time t + 1, thus the transition probability from node
i to node j is Aij/Ki . Suppose the walker starts at
node i at time t = 0, then the master equation for the
probability Pij to ﬁnd the walker at node j at time t is
Pij(t + 1) =
The largest eigenvalue of the corresponding time evolution operator is 1 corresponding to the stationary distribution P ∞
= limt→∞Pij(t), i.e. the inﬁnite time
limit . An explicit expression for the transition probability Pij(t) to go from node i to node j in t steps follows
by iterating Eq. (1)
j1,...,jt−1
· · · Ajt−1j
Comparing the expressions for Pij and Pji one sees immediately that
KiPij(t) = KjPji(t) .
This is a direct consequence of the undirectedness of the
network. For the stationary solution, Eq. (3) implies that
i , and therefore one obtains
with N = P
i Ki. Note that the stationary distribution
is, up to normalization, equal to the degree of the node
i — the more links a node has to other nodes in the
network, the more often it will be visited by a random
How fast is the random walk motion? To answer to this
question, we study the MFPT. The ﬁrst-passage probability Fij(t) from i to j after t steps satisﬁes the relation
Pij(t) = δt0δij +
Pjj(t −t′)Fij(t′) .
The Kronecker delta symbol insures the initial condition Pij(0) = δij (Fij(0) is set to zero).
Introducing
the Laplace transform ˜f(s) ≡P∞
t=0 e−stf(t), Eq. (5) becomes ePij(s) = δij + eFij(s) ePjj(s), and one has
eFij(s) = ( ePij(s) −δij)/ ePjj(s) .
In ﬁnite networks the random walk is recurrent , so
the MFPT is given by ⟨Tij⟩= P∞
t=0 tFij(t) = −eF ′
Since all moments R(n)
t=0 tn {Pij(t) −P ∞
the exponentially decaying relaxation part of Pij(t) are
ﬁnite, one can expand ePij as a series in s as
N(1 −e−s) +
Inserting this series into Eq. (6) and expanding it as a
power series in s, we obtain that
for j ̸= i
A similar expression is derived in Ref. for the MFPT
of the random walk in periodic lattices.
It is very interesting to note that the average return
time ⟨Tii⟩does not depend on the details of the global
structure of the network. It is determined only by the
total number of links and the degree of the node. Since
it is inversely proportional to the degree, the heterogeneity in connectivity is well reﬂected in this quantity. In
a SF network with degree distribution P(K) ∼K−γ,
the MFPT to the origin To also follows a power-law distribution P(To) ∼T −(2−γ)
The MFPT to the origin
distributes uniformly in the special case with γ = 2.
Random walk motions between two nodes are asymmetric. The diﬀerence between ⟨Tij⟩and ⟨Tji⟩for i ̸= j
can be written as (using Eq. (8))
⟨Tij⟩−⟨Tji⟩= N
where the last term vanishes due to Eq. (3). Therefore
⟨Tij⟩−⟨Tji⟩= C−1
where Ci is deﬁned as
= Ki/N and the characteristic relaxation
time τi of the node i is given by
{Pii(t) −P ∞
We call Ci the random walk centrality since it quantiﬁes
how central a node i is located regarding its potential
to receive informations randomly diﬀusing over the network. To be more precise: Consider two nodes i and j
with Ci > Cj.
Assume that each of them launches a
signal simultaneously, which is wandering over the network. Based on Eq. (9), one expects that the node with
larger RWC will receive the signal emitted by its partner
earlier. Hence, the RWC can be regarded as a measure
for eﬀectiveness in communication between nodes. In a
homogeneous network with translational symmetry, all
nodes have the same value of the RWC. On the other
hand, in a heterogeneous network the RWC has a distribution, which leads to the asymmetry in the random
dynamic process.
FIG. 1: (a) τ vs.
K and (b) C vs.
K calculated in the
Barab´asi-Albert network with N = 10000 and m = 2. The
straight line in (b) has the slope 1.
The RWC is determined by the degree K and τ. The
order of magnitude of the characteristic relaxation time
τ is related to the second largest eigenvalue (nota bene
 ) of the time evolution operator in (1):
λ, where a(λ) and b(λ) are the left
and right eigenvectors, respectively, of the time evolution operator belonging to the eigenvalue Λλ. If we order
the eigenvalues according to the modulus (|Λ2| ≥|Λ3| ≥
. . . ≥|ΛN|) the asymptotic behavior is Pii(t) −P ∞
2 and τi ≈a(2)
i /| ln |Λ2||.
Thus the relaxation time τi has a node dependence only through the
weight factor, which is presumably weak. On the other
hand, the degree dependence is explicit.
We examined the distribution of the RWC in the
Barab´asi-Albert (BA) network . This is a model for
a growing SF network; at each time step, a new node is
added creating m links with other nodes which are selected with the probability proportional to their degree.
We grew the network, solved the master equation numerically with the initial condition Pi(t = 0) = δik, and
calculated the relaxation time τk for each k. Figure 1 (a)
shows the plot of τ vs. K in the BA network of N = 104
nodes grown with the parameter m = 2. The degree is
distributed broadly over the range 2 ≤K <∼400. On
the other hand, the relaxation time turns out to be distributed very narrowly within the range 1 <∼τ <∼2. We
also studied BA networks of diﬀerent sizes, but did not
ﬁnd any signiﬁcant broadening of the distribution of τ.
So the RWC distribution is mainly determined by the
degree distribution. In Fig. 1 (b) we show the plot of C
vs. K in the same BA network. It shows that the RWC
is roughly proportional to the degree. Note however that
the RWC is not increasing monotonically with the degree
due to the ﬂuctuation of τ as seen in Fig. 1 (a).
The RWC is useful when one compares the random
walk motions between two nodes, e.g., i and j with Ci >
FIG. 2: (Color online) Time evolution of the fraction of walkers n that pass through a node as a function of (from top
to bottom) the node index i, the node degree K and the
RWC C of the BA network (left column) and the hierarchical network (right column). The value of n at each time t is
represented in the gray scale/color code depicted at the right
border of each plot.
Cj. On average a random walker starting at j arrives at
i before another walker starting at i arrives at j. Now
consider an intermediate node k, which may be visited by
both random walkers. Since ⟨Tij⟩> ⟨Tji⟩, it is likely that
a random walker starting at node k will arrive at node
i earlier than at node j. Although this argument is not
exact since we neglected the time spent on the journey to
the intermediate node, it indicates that nodes with larger
RWC may be typically visited earlier than nodes with
smaller RWC by the random walker. If we interpret the
random walker as an information messenger, nodes with
larger RWC are more eﬃcient in receiving information
than nodes with smaller RWC.
We performed numerical simulations to study the relation between the RWC and this eﬃciency. To quantify
it, we consider a situation where initially all nodes in a
network are occupied by diﬀerent random walkers. They
start to move at time t = 0, and we measure ni, the
fraction of walkers which have passed through the node
i, as a function of time t. It is assumed that the walkers
do not interact with each other. They may be regarded
as a messenger delivering an information to each node it
visits. Then, with the information distribution uniformly
initially, ni is proportional to the amount of information
acquired by each node. The argument in the previous
paragraph suggests that typically nodes with larger values of RWC have larger value of ni at any given time.
The BA network and the hierarchical network of
Ravasz and Barab´asi were considered in the simulations. The hierarchical network is a deterministic network growing via iteration; at each iteration the network is multiplied by a factor M.
The emergent network is scale-free when M ≥3.
Since it is a deterministic network, several structural properties are known
exactly . We measured ni in the BA network with
m = 2 and N = 512 nodes and in the hierarchical network with M = 5 and N = 54 nodes for 0 ≤t ≤2048,
which are presented in the left and the right column of
Fig. 2, respectively. The value of ni is color-coded according to the reference shown in Fig. 2.
The time evolution of ni is presented in three diﬀerent ways.
In the ﬁrst row, the nodes are arranged in
ascending order of the node index i. In the BA network,
the node index corresponds to the time step at which
the node is added to the network. The indexing scheme
for the hierarchical network is explained in Ref. . In
the second row, the nodes are arranged in descending
order of the degree K and in the third row they are arranged in descending order of the RWC C. At a given
time t, the plot in the ﬁrst row shows that n is nonmonotonous and very irregular as a function of the node
index. As a function of the degree it becomes smooth,
but still non-monotonic tendencies remain. However, as
a function of the RWC, it becomes much smoother and
almost monotonous. We calculated for each node i the
i at which ni becomes greater than 1/2. In the BA
network, among all node pairs (i, j) satisfying τ ′
only 3% violate the relation Ci > Cj, whereas the number of pairs that violate the relation Ki > Kj is ﬁve times
In summary, we studied the random walk processes in
complex networks. We derive an exact expression for the
mean ﬁrst passage time (see Eq. (8)). The MFPT’s between two nodes diﬀer for the two directions in general
heterogeneous networks. We have shown that this diﬀerence is determined by the random walk centrality C de-
ﬁned in Eq. (10). Among random walk motions between
two nodes, the walk to the node with larger value of C
is faster than the other. Furthermore, it is argued that
in a given time interval nodes with larger values of C are
visited by more random walkers which were distributed
uniformly initially. We conﬁrmed this by numerical simulations on the BA and the hierarchical network. One
may regard the random walkers as informations diﬀusing through the network. Our results imply that information does not distribute uniformly in heterogeneous
networks; the information is centralized to nodes with
larger values of C. The nodes with high values of C have
the advantage of being aware of new information earlier
than other nodes.
On the other hand, it also implies
that such nodes are heavily loaded within an information distribution or transport process.
If the network
has a ﬁnite capacity, the heavily loaded nodes may cause
congestions . Therefore much care should be taken of
the nodes with high C values in network management. In
the current work, we consider the random walks on undirected networks. The generalization to directed networks
would be interesting. And in order to study congestion,
the random walk motions with many interacting random
walkers would also be interesting. We leave such generalizations to a future work.
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and by the European Community’s Human Potential Programme under contract HPRN-CT-2002-00307, DYGLAGEMEM.
 D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature (London) 393, 440
 R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47
 S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Adv. Phys. 51,
1079 .
 R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature (London) 401, 130 .
 R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature (London) 406, 378 .
 R. Cohen, K. Erez, D. ben-Avraham, and S. Havlin,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4626 .
 R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 3200 .
 S.N. Dorogovtsev, A.V. Goltsev, and J.F.F. Mendes,
Phys. Rev. E 66, 016104 .
 F. Igl´oi and L. Turban, Phys. Rev. E 66, 036140 .
 M.E.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 64 016131 ; ibid.,
016132 .
 K.-I. Goh, B. Kahng, and D. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
278701 ; K.-I. Goh, E.S. Oh, H. Jeong, B. Kahng,
and D. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 12583
 R.D. Hughes, Random Walks and Random Environments, VOLUME. 1: RANDOM WALKS, .
 S. Jespersen, I.M. Sokolov, and A. Blumen, Phys. Rev.
E 62, 4405 ; B. Tadi´c, Eur. Phys. J. B 23, 221
 ; H. Zhou, preprint cond-mat/0302030 .
 J.D. Noh and H. Rieger, unpublished.
 L.A. Adamic, R.M. Lukose, A.R. Puniyani, and B.A. Huberman, Phys. Rev. E 64, 046135 .
 R. Guimer´a, A. D´iaz-Guilera, F. Vega-Redondo, A.
Cabrales, A. Arenas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 248701 .
 P. Holme, preprint cond-mat/0301013 .
 In this deﬁnition, all links are assumed to be equivalent.
Evolution of the shortest path in weighted networks is
discussed in Ref. .
 J.D. Noh and H. Rieger, Phys. Rev. E 66, 066127 .
 In weighted networks, the hopping probability may be
written as e
Ki where e
Aij = wijAij and e
with a weight wij > 0. All results in this paper remain
valid as long as the weight is symmetric, i.e., e
 The limit exists if and only if the network contains an
odd loop. Then all other eigenvalues of the time evolu-
tion operator satisfy |Λ| < 1, otherwise there exists an
eigenvalue Λ = −1, for which the inﬁnite time limit does
not exist. In such cases, one may redeﬁne the RW model
setting Aii = 1 to make the limit exist.
 A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 .
 E. Ravasz, A.L. Somera, D.A. Mongru, Z.N. Oltvai, and
A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 297, 1551 ; E. Ravasz and
A.-L. Barab´asi, Phys. Rev. E 67, 026112 .
 J.D. Noh, Phys. Rev. E 67, 045103(R) .