METHODOLOGY ARTICLE
Open Access
Predicting drug side-effect profiles: a chemical
fragment-based approach
Edouard Pauwels1,2,3, Véronique Stoven1,2,3 and Yoshihiro Yamanishi1,2,3*
Background: Drug side-effects, or adverse drug reactions, have become a major public health concern. It is one of
the main causes of failure in the process of drug development, and of drug withdrawal once they have reached
the market. Therefore, in silico prediction of potential side-effects early in the drug discovery process, before
reaching the clinical stages, is of great interest to improve this long and expensive process and to provide new
efficient and safe therapies for patients.
Results: In the present work, we propose a new method to predict potential side-effects of drug candidate
molecules based on their chemical structures, applicable on large molecular databanks. A unique feature of the
proposed method is its ability to extract correlated sets of chemical substructures (or chemical fragments) and
side-effects. This is made possible using sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA). In the results, we show the
usefulness of the proposed method by predicting 1385 side-effects in the SIDER database from the chemical
structures of 888 approved drugs. These predictions are performed with simultaneous extraction of correlated
ensembles formed by a set of chemical substructures shared by drugs that are likely to have a set of side-effects.
We also conduct a comprehensive side-effect prediction for many uncharacterized drug molecules stored in
DrugBank, and were able to confirm interesting predictions using independent source of information.
Conclusions: The proposed method is expected to be useful in various stages of the drug development process.
Background
Drug side-effects, or adverse drug reactions, have
become a major public health concern. It is one of the
main causes of failure in the process of drug development, and of drug withdrawal once they have reached
the market. As an illustration of the extent of this problem, serious drug side-effects are estimated to be the
fourth largest cause of death in the United States, resulting in 100,000 deaths per year . In order to reduce
these risks, many efforts have been devoted to relate
severe side-effects to some specific genetic biomarkers.
This so-called pharmacogenomics strategy is a rapidly
developing field, especially in oncology . The aim is
to prescribe a drug to patients who will benefit from it,
while avoiding life threatening side-effects .
From the viewpoint of systems biology, drugs can be
regarded as molecules that induce perturbations to
biological systems consisting of various molecular interactions such as protein-protein interactions, metabolic
pathways and signal transduction pathways, leading to
the observed side-effects . Actually, the body’s
response to a drug reflects not only the expected favorable effects due to the interaction with its target, but
also integrates the overall impact of off-target interactions. Indeed, even if a drug has a strong affinity for its
target, it also often binds to other protein pockets with
varying affinities, leading to potential side-effects. This
concept has been illustrated by comparing pathways
affected by toxic compounds and those affected by nontoxic compounds, establishing links between drug sideeffects and biological pathways .
Although preclinical in vitro safety profiling can be
used to predict side-effects by testing compounds with
biochemical and cellular assays, experimental detection
of drug side-effects remains very challenging in terms of
cost and efficiency . Therefore, in silico prediction of
potential side-effects early in the drug discovery process,
before reaching the clinical stages, is of great interest to
* Correspondence: 
1Mines ParisTech, Centre for Computational Biology, 35 rue Saint-Honoré, F-
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
© 2011 Pauwels et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
improve this long and expensive process and to provide
new efficient and safe therapies for patients. Expert systems based on the knowledge of human experts have
been developed to predict the toxicity of molecules
based on the presence or absence of toxic moieties in
their chemical structure. For example, they predict
potential toxicity such as mutagenicity, but they do not
provide prediction for numerous potential side-effects in
human . Recently, several computational methods for
predicting side-effects have been proposed, and the
methods can be categorized into pathway-based
approaches and chemical structure-based approaches,
which are respectively reviewed below.
The principle of pathway-based approaches is to relate
drug side-effects to perturbed biological pathways or
sub-pathways because these pathways involve proteins
targeted by the drug. In a pioneer work to illustrate this
concept, it has been shown that drugs with similar sideeffects tend to share similar profiles of protein targets
 . The authors further exploited this characteristic to
predict missing drug targets for known drugs using
side-effect similarity. Fukuzaki et al has proposed a
method for relating side-effects to cooperative pathways
defined as sub-pathways sharing correlated modifications of gene expression profiles in presence of the drug
of interest . However, this method requires gene
expression data observed under chemical perturbation
of the drug. Xie et al developed a method to identify
off-targets for a drug by docking this drug into proteins
binding pocket similar to that of its primary target has
been proposed . The drug-protein interactions with
the best docking scores are incorporated to known biological pathways, which allows us to identify potential
off-target binding networks for this drug. However, the
performance of this method depends heavily on the
availability of protein 3D structures and known biological pathways, which limits its large-scale applicability.
The principle of chemical structure-based approaches
is to relate drug side-effects to their chemical structures.
Scheiber et al developed a method that identifies chemical substructures associated to side-effects . However, this method does not provide an integrated
framework to predict side-effects for any drug molecule.
Yamanishi et al proposed a method to predict pharmacological and side-effect information using chemical
structures, which is then used to infer drug-target interactions . However, the method cannot be applied to
predict high-dimensional side-effect profiles.
In the present work, we develop a new method to predict potential side-effect profiles of drug candidate
molecules based on their chemical structures, which is
applicable on large molecular databanks. A unique feature of the proposed method is its ability to extract correlated sets of chemical substructures (or chemical
fragments) and side-effects. This is made possible using
sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA). To our
knowledge, no other computational method has been
reported for both predicting drug side-effects and associating these side-effects with the presence of identified
chemical substructures. In the results section, we show
the usefulness of the proposed method on the prediction
of 1385 side-effects in the SIDER database from the chemical structures of 888 approved drugs. These predictions are performed with simultaneous extraction of
correlated ensembles formed by a set of chemical substructures shared by drugs that are likely to have a set of
side-effects. We also conduct a comprehensive side-effect
prediction for many uncharacterized drug molecules
stored in DrugBank, and were able to confirm interesting
predictions using independent source of information.
Data representation
Side-effect keywords were obtained from the SIDER
database which contains information about marketed
medicines and their recorded adverse drug reactions
 . This led to build a dataset containing 888 drugs
and 1385 side-effect keywords. Each drug was represented by a 1385 dimensional binary profile y whose elements encode for the presence or absence of each of the
side-effect keywords by 1 or 0, respectively. The left
panel in Figure 1 shows the index-plot of the number of
associated drugs for each side-effect, and the right panel
in Figure 1 shows the histogram of the number of associated drugs for each side-effect. There are 61,102 associations between drugs and side-effect terms in the
dataset, and each drug has 68.8 side-effects on average.
This dataset is used to evaluate the performance of the
proposed methods in this study.
To encode the drug chemical structure, we used a fingerprint corresponding to the 881 chemical substructures
defined in the PubChem database . Each drug was
represented by an 881 dimensional binary profile x whose
elements encode for the presence or absence of each Pub-
Chem substructure by 1 or 0, respectively. A description
of the 881 chemical substructures can be found at the
website of PubChem . There are 107,292 associations
between drugs and chemical substructures in the dataset,
and each drug has 120.8 substructures on average.
The other drug information (e.g., ATC code, drug
category, protein target) was obtained from DrugBank
 . This information is used to ease biological interpretation in the side-effect prediction for uncharacterized drugs.
Performance evaluation
We applied nearest neighbor (NN), support vector
machine (SVM), ordinary canonical correlation analysis
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
(OCCA), and sparse canonical correlation analysis
(SCCA) to predict drug side-effect profiles. We also
applied random assignment procedure (Random) as a
baseline method. For the details of the algorithm of
each method, see the Methods section. First we tested
five methods: Random, NN, SVM, OCCA and SCCA for
their abilities to predict known side-effects profiles by
the following 5-fold cross-validation. Drugs in the sideeffect data were split into 5 subsets of roughly equal
size, each subset was then taken in turn as a test set,
and we performed the training on the remaining 4 sets.
For accurate comparison, we kept the same experimental conditions, where the same training drugs and test
drugs are used across the different methods in each
cross-validation fold. We evaluated the performance of
each method by the ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve , which is a graphical plot of the sensitivity, or true positive rate, against false positive rate (1specificity or 1-true negative rate). The ROC curve can
be represented by plotting the fraction of true positives
out of the positives (true positive rate) vs. the fraction of
false positives out of the negatives (false positive rate),
where true positives are correctly predicted side-effects
and false positives are incorrectly predicted side-effects
based on the prediction score for various threshold
values above which the output is predicted as positive
and negative otherwise.
Figure 2 shows the ROC curves for the five different
methods based on the cross-validation experiment,
where the prediction scores for all side-effects were
merged and a global ROC curve was drawn for each
method. Parameters in each method were chosen by
using the AUC (area under the ROC curve) score as an
objective function. The best result for NN was obtained
by the number of neighbors k = 50. The best result for
SVM was obtained by Gaussian RBF kernel with width
parameter s = 0.2 and regularization parameter C = 1.
False positive rate
True positive rate
False positive rate
True positive rate
False positive rate
True positive rate
False positive rate
True positive rate
False positive rate
True positive rate
Figure 2 ROC curves in the 5-fold cross-validation. Comparison
of the performance between nearest neighbor (NN), support vector
machine (SVM), ordinary canonical correlation analysis (OCCA) and
sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA).


Figure 1 Characteristics of side-effect data. The left panel shows the index-plot of the number of associated drugs for each side-effect, and
the right panel shows the histogram of the number of associated drugs for each side-effect.
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
The best result for OCCA was obtained by m = 20. The
best result for SCCA was obtained by the following
parameters: c1 = c2 = 0.05 and m = 20. The resulting
AUC scores for Random, NN, SVM, OCCA and SCCA
are 0.6088, 0.8917, 0.8930, 0.8651 and 0.8932, respectively. It seems that the proposed SCCA method outperforms OCCA and its performance is at a competitive
level with NN and SVM. This result demonstrates the
high-performance prediction power of the proposed
method on side-effect prediction in practical applications. Next we evaluated the prediction accuracy of predicted side-effects for each drug, which is the ratio of
correctly predicted side-effects against the number of
predicted side-effects with high prediction scores. Figure
3 shows the boxplots for the prediction accuracies of
top 10 ranked predictions (top panels) and top 100
ranked predictions (bottom panels). In the case of top
10 predictions SVM seems to work as well as NN and
SCCA, while in the case of top 100 predictions SVM
seems to work worse than other methods. This result
suggests that SVM-based prediction is useful only for
highly ranked predictions.
We also examined the prediction accuracy for individual side-effects. We draw the ROC curve for each sideeffect, and computed the AUC score for each side-effect.
Figure 4 shows the boxplot representing the distribution
of the resulting AUC scores for 1385 side-effects in each
method. Parameters in each method were chosen by
using the mean of AUC scores as an objective function.
The best result for NN was obtained by the number of
neighbors k = 10. The best result for SVM was obtained
by Gaussian RBF kernel with width parameter s = 0.1
and regularization parameter C = 1. The best result for
OCCA was obtained by m = 150. The best result for
SCCA was obtained by the following parameters: c1 = c2
= 0.2 and m = 500. In terms of the mean of the AUC
scores, SVM seems to work the best, followed by SCCA,
OCCA, and NN, but the AUC scores of SVM is more
diverse than those of other methods. Compared with
other methods, the difference between good accuracy
and bad accuracy is extremely large, which suggests that
the prediction success of SVM is not robust and
depends on a given side-effect term.
We are also interested in biological interpretability of
the outputs of the proposed method to understand the
relationship between chemical substructures and sideeffects. We focused on OCCA and SCCA, because they
are the only methods which can correlate two heterogeneous high-dimentional data sets. We examined the
weight vectors for drug chemical substructures and drug
side-effects in OCCA and SCCA. Figure 5 shows the
index-plot of weight vectors in OCCA, and Figure 6
Accuracy of top 10 predictions
Accuracy of top 10 predictions
Accuracy of top 10 predictions
Accuracy of top 10 predictions
Accuracy of top 10 predictions
Accuracy of top 100 predictions
Accuracy of top 100 predictions
Accuracy of top 100 predictions
Accuracy of top 100 predictions
Accuracy of top 100 predictions
Figure 3 Boxplot of the prediction accuracy of predicted side-effects for each drug. Prediction accuract of top 10 ranked predictions (top
panels) and top 100 ranked predictions (bottom panels). Comparison of the performance between nearest neighbor (NN), support vector
machine (SVM), ordinary canonical correlation analysis (OCCA) and sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA).
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
shows the index-plot of weight vectors in SCCA, where
the first eight canonical components are shown. It
seems that almost all elements in the weight vectors in
OCCA are non-zero and highly variable, while most of
the elements in the weight vectors in SCCA are zero in
each component, implying that SCCA can select a small
number of features as informative drug substructures
and side-effects. In practice, we found that it is very difficult to interpret the results when there are too many
non-zero weight elements like with OCCA. This result
suggests that the proposed SCCA method provides us
with more selective and informative correlation between
drug substructures and side-effects without loosing performance. This highlights the significant performance of
the proposed method in terms of easier interpretation.
In addition, it should be pointed out that the other
methods NN and SVM do not provide any clue for biological interpretation.
Finally, we investigated the computational cost for each
method. All methods were implemented using R software
on a Linux with 2.16 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo processor
and 8 GB RAM. The total execution times of the crossvalidation experiment for NN, SVM, OCCA, and SCCA
are 2, 5885, 58, and 76 seconds, respectively. Figure 7
shows the total execution times of the cross-validation
experiment between the four different methods in the
scale of base10 logarithm. It seems that NN is the fastest,
followed by OCCA, SCCA, and SVM. As expected, SVM
is extremely slower than the other methods, because it
requires individual classifiers for all side-effect keywords
(1385 SVM classifiers are required in this study).
Extracted sets of drug substructures and side-effects
From biological viewpoints, we examined the extracted
sets of drug substructures and drug side-effects in each
canonical component extracted using SCCA. Note that
the other methods (NN, SVM, and OCCA) do not enable
us to interpret the biological features. Each component
consists of only a small number of substructures and a
small number of side-effects that are correlated with each
other according to SCCA. For each component, two lists
of drugs are provided: one containing drugs with a high
score for the associated substructures, and one containing drugs with a high score for the associated side-effects.
We examined the results when we used the best parameters which provided the highest AUC for all side-effect
terms. Because of space limitation, the results for a few
canonical components will be discussed in this paper.
The results for all canonical components can be obtained
from Additional file 1 in the Supplemental materials or
from the web supplement.
A canonical correlation coefficient is computed to
evaluate the importance of each component. The pvalues for the canonical correlation coefficients of top
Figure 4 Boxplot of the AUC (under the ROC curve) scores for individual side-effects. Comparison of the performance between nearest
neighbor (NN), support vector machine (SVM), ordinary canonical correlation analysis (OCCA) and sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA).
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
20 components considered in the paper are almost
zeros. The components with high canonical correlation
tend to contain rare substructures present only in very
few drugs, which are associated to rare side-effects
mainly observed for these drugs. These components
contain quite specific substructure/side-effect canonical
correlations whose interpretation is straightforward. For
example, component 6 associates the presence of a
boron atom, only found in the bortezomid molecule in
the SIDER database, to a short list of neurological sideeffects observed only for this drug. Similarly, component
20 essentially clusters a substructure defined by a carbon atom bearing both a bromide atom and a nitrogen
atom. This substructure is found only in the bromocriptine molecule of the SIDER database, with two sideeffects observed only for this drug (namely, pregnancy
induced hypertension and toxemia of pregnancy).
In the general case of components containing more
frequent substructures, drugs that contain these substructures tend to present side-effects associated to this
component, but this correspondence is not strict.
Reciprocally, most drugs that have high scores for the
side-effects contain the chemical substructures of this
component, but not all. Analysis of component 18 can
illustrate these points. Component 18 has a high canonical correlation of 0.739 (the p-value is almost zero). It
contains two substructures, the major one being the
presence of “four or more saturated or aromatic nitrogen-containing rings of size 5”, associated to four sideeffects. This substructure is present in five drugs of the
SIDER database: verteporfin, porfimer, goserelin, buserelin, and leuprolide. Verteporfin and porfimer contain a
porphyrin group displaying four nitrogen-containing
rings of size 5, as shown in Figure 8(A). Goserelin,
buserelin, and leuprolide are synthetic 9-residue peptide
analogues of the gonadotropin releasing hormone. Their
sequences contain amino-acids whose chemical structures present nitrogen-containing rings of size 5, found
in side chains of proline, histidine or tryptophane residues, as shown in Figure 8(B), (C) and Figure 8(D).
Overall, four or more nitrogen-containing rings of size
5 are indeed present in their structures. Note however
 
Figure 5 Index-plot of weight vectors for drug substructures and side-effects in OCCA. Index-plot of weight vectors for drug substructures
(left) and side-effects (right) extracted by ordinary canonical correlation analysis (OCCA).
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
that these rings are different from those of the porphyrin group. Although goserelin, buserelin and leuprolide on the one hand, and verteporfin and porfimer on
the other hand, belong to totally unrelated families of
molecules, they share common substructures, at least
according to their definition in the present study. All
drugs from these two families, but verteporfirin, have
high scores for side-effects of this component. This
result indicates that side-effects of a drug is usually
associated to the presence of given substructures,
although it may be modulated by the overall molecular
structure, as in the case of verteporfirin. This property
is also well known in the context of drug structureactivity relationship, which usually depends on given
molecular scaffolds, but which is modulated by the presence of additional chemical groups.
Reciprocally, all drugs that have high scores for sideeffects of component 18 contain the chemical substructures of this component, but risperidone, as shown in
Figure 9. Its structure is very different from those of
porphyrins or gonadotropin analogues. It is an antagonist of the dopamine and of the serotonine receptors. It
belongs to the class of antipsychotic agents (see Drug-
Bank), and its high score for side-effects of component
18 cannot be explained in a straightforward manner.
However, in some cases, we were able to relate such
unexpected results to the targets of these drugs, as illustrated by component 13. This component has a
 
Figure 6 Index-plot of weight vectors for drug substructures and side-effects in SCCA. Index-plot of weight vectors for drug substructures
(left) and side-effects (right) extracted by sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA).
Execution time
Second (log10 scale)
Figure 7 Computational cost. Total execution time of the crossvalidation experiment for the four methods (log10 scale).
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
canonical correlation of 0.716 (the p-value is almost
zero), and contains substructures that are essentially
present in proton pump inhibitors used as anti-ulcer
agents like omeprazole. It is also present in a small
number of drugs from other families like pramipexole
(an antiparkinson agent) or riluzone (a neuroprotective
agent). As expected, these anti-ulcer agents are found in
the high scoring drugs for side-effects in component 13,
together with pramipexole and riluzone, although with
lower scores. As for component 18, other drugs that do
not contain the high scoring substructures of component 13 are however found among high scoring drugs
for side-effects in this component. This is the case of
ropinirole. Interestingly, ropinirole is an antiparkinson
agent that targets the same protein as pramipexole,
namely dopamine receptor.
This result suggests that drugs sharing some protein
targets may also share some side-effects. It is also consistent with the idea that the global biological effect of a
molecule (both beneficial effects and adverse sideeffects) is related to its overall profile of protein targets.
Taken together, our results indicate that the side-effects
of a drug are modulated both by its substructures and
by its targets. Note that these two factors are connected
since similar molecules tend to share similar protein targets, but this property was not exploited in the present
Comprehensive side-effect prediction for uncharacterized
We then evaluated the interest of the proposed method
for prediction of side-effects for uncharacterized drugs.
We predicted potential side-effects for drugs in
Figure 9 Chemical structure of risperidone. Two dimensional
graph structure of risperidone.
Figure 8 Nitrogen-containing rings of size 5. (A) Porphyrin
group, (B) Proline residue, (C) Histidine residue, (D) Tryptophane
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
DrugBank for which side-effect information was not
available in the SIDER database. We focused on 2883
drugs which are labeled as “small molecules” in Drug-
Bank. We first make general comments on the results
and then present more details for a few well-known specific examples. All the prediction results can be obtained
from Additional file 2 in the Supplemental materials or
from the web supplement.
Very frequent side-effects, such as “headache” or “nausea” are found in SIDER, and they occur with many
drugs. These side-effects are not specific, and they do
not appear for a well defined drug category. They are
the most frequently predicted side-effects, but they
hardly appear with the highest prediction scores for a
given drug, which is consistent with the fact that they
are common reactions. However, we also find more specific side-effects which are related to special types of
drugs. For example, steroids may lead to “striae”, or “linear atrophy”, which results in local dermal structure
atrophy and skin depigmentation . Indeed, this keyword is mainly found for steroid molecules in SIDER.
The top 30 drugs predicted to have this side-effect are
also steroids, which is consistent with literature and
training data. Moreover, “global amnesia”, a very specific
keyword in SIDER, is one of the most striking syndromes in clinical neurology whose underlying causes
are not well known . 14 drugs catch a high prediction score for this keyword. Among them, one is anticholesteremic, three are antipsychotics, and the others
are experimental molecules whose categories are not
known. Therefore, three out of four drugs with known
indications are related to cognitive functions, which is
consistent with the predicted side-effect nature.
Although the accuracy of all the predictions was not discussed here, the results are consistent with the available
biological and medical information.
We also checked famous examples of withdrawn
drugs. Rimonabant (DB06155 in DrugBank) is an antiobesity agent. It was rejected for approval in the United
States, but it was accepted in Europe in 2006. In october
2008, the European Medicines Agency recommended
suspension of its marketing authorization because of
serious psychic side-effects, mainly severe depression.
Indeed, this drug is active in the central nervous system,
which may trigger very broad and complex psychic
mechanisms. Consistent with this, in our prediction profile, the “borderline personality disorder” and “posttraumatic stress disorder” keywords are found in the ten top
ranking keywords for this drug. In other words, our
method would have foreseen potential psychoactivity for
rimonabant. Furthermore, the method provides a potential
rationale for appearance of these psychotic effets. Rimonabant contains the substructure shown in Figure 10. This
substructure is also found in the alprazolam molecule
used in the treatment of psychic disorders (a molecule in
SIDER). Interestingly, among the 165 molecules of Pub-
Chem that also share this substructure and for which
pharmacological annotation is available, 40 are classified
as “anti-anxiety agents”. A reasonable hypothesis to
explain rimonabant’s severe side-effects may be the presence of this substructure, together with the nature of its
protein target (namely, the cannabinoid receptor). Terfenadine (DB00342 in DrugBank) is an anti-allergic agent
which was withdrawn by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1997 because of toxic effects on heart rhythm.
The “Aortic stenosis” and “aortic valve incompetence” keywords rank 9-th and 11-th among the predicted sideeffects for this drug. These related side-effects are known
to often lead to arrhythmias , as observed for this
drug. In this case again, our method would have foreseen
potential severe cardiac side-effects.
Discussion
In this paper we showed the usefulness of the proposed
SCCA method in the analysis of chemical structures and
side-effects, but there are several limitations on SCCA.
One main difficulty of using SCCA is to choose appropriate sparsity parameters and appropriate number of
components. High sparsity promoting parameters would
lead to an over-sparse model in all the cases, which
might be misleading in the interpretation if the degree
of sparsity was not tuned carefully. The optimal parameters value depends highly on the definition of the
objective function to be investigated in the cross validation. We evaluated both global prediction accuracy,
involving all possible drug-sideeffect associations, and
local accuracy considering each sideeffect keyword independantly. Those two evaluation procedures did not
lead to the same optimal parameter values (it varies
between 0 and 1). The definition of an appropriate
objective function in the cross-validation is an important
issue. There remains much room to develop a more
appropriate way to choose the parameters, depending
Figure 10 Rimonabant substructure selected by the proposed
method to be a clue of psychoacticity. The substructure of
Rimonabant is selected to be a clue of psychoacticity.
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
on the goal of the analysis. When the goal is the global
accuracy (accuracy for all side-effects for each drug), the
sparsity parameter producing the best results tends to
be very low, which produces canonical components
associated with very few substructures and side-effects
as shown in the results section. On the other hand, the
goal is the local accuracy (accuracy for individual sideeffects), the sparsity parameter producing the best
results tends to be relatively high, which produces canonical components associated with a larger number of
substructures and side-effects. The extracted features
based on SCCA is also influenced by the procedure of
data normalization. In this study we normalized two
data sets by centering and scaling with unit variance. In
our experience, when the scaling is performed on data
sets, SCCA tends to extract less frequent features (both
side-effects and chemical substructures). On the other
hand, when the scaling is not performed on data sets,
SCCA tends to extract more frequent features (both
side-effects and chemical substructures). Therefore, an
appropriate data normalization procedure is supposed to
be performed taking into account the objective in practical applications. For example, if the user wants to
extract rare features, the scaling is encouraged, but
otherwise, the scaling is not necessary.
Another possible statistical method with high interpretability would be a decision tree learner or a rule learner.
However, these methods can be applied to only one
response variable (one side-effect term in this study). For
example, if the decision tree method is applied to
the problem addressed in this paper, it requires learning
for all side-effects separately. We then need to interpret
1385 resulting trees, so it is quite difficult to make a global interpretation. Note that we have two heterogeneous
high-dimensional data sets: drug chemical substructures
and drug side-effects, and we are interested in joint
extraction of a subset of chemical substructures and a
subset of side-effects which are suspected to be correlated with each other. It would be interesting to extend
the decision tree framework to analyze the correlation
between two heterogeneous high-dimensional data, but it
is out of scope in this paper.
The proposed methods depend highly on the pre-definition of chemical substructures, and the terminology of
side-effect keywords. Future development could evaluate
the performance of using other fingerprints. For example, commercial softwares such as Daylight or Dragon
provide drug structure descriptors, and commercial
databases such as PharmaPendium provide other sideeffect terms. Another interesting research direction is to
extract informative chemical sub-structures directly
from the raw structured data (e.g., 2D or 3D graph
structures for drugs) without using pre-defined feature
representation. Recently, a data mining technique has
been proposed in order to extract complex graph features, which do not require the pre-definition of feature
vectors representing each molecule . A promising
future work would be an extension of such graph
mining techniques in the context side-effect prediction.
Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a novel method to predict
potential side-effect profiles of drug candidate molecules
based on their chemical structures using sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA). The method is computationally efficient and is applicable on large datasets.
The originality of the proposed method lies in the integration of chemical space and pharmacological space in
a unified framework, in the extraction of correlated sets
of chemical substructures and side-effects, and in the
prediction of a large number of potential side-effects at
a time. To our knowledge, no previous work gathers all
these features.
The proposed method is expected to be useful in various ways and at various stages of the drug development
process. At early stages, among several active drug candidates, the method could help to choose the molecules
that should further continue the process and those that
should be dropped. It could also help to find new indications for known drugs, a process named drug repurposing. Indeed, side-effects of drugs used in a given
pathology can be viewed as a beneficial effect in another
pathology. Sildenafil is a famous example of such drug
repositioning. The method could help to identify chemical substructures of known drugs that might participate
in the appearance of a given side-effect. These substructures could be used as building blocks in fragmentbased drug discovery approaches for pathologies in
which this side-effect could be positively exploited.
We propose five possible methods to predict drug sideeffect profiles from the chemical structures.
Random assignment (Random)
To evaluate how difficult the problem considered in this
paper is, we apply a random assignment procedure, that
is, we use the 0/1 ratio to assign a binary label to each
test drug randomly. For example, if the ratio in given
training data is 90%, we can assign zero for 90% of
examples in test; otherwise 1. This method is used as a
baseline method in this study.
Nearest neighbor (NN)
The most straightforward approach is to apply the nearest neighbor (NN), which predicts a given drug x to
have the same side-effects as those of the drug (in a
training set) whose chemical substructure profile is the
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
most similar. For each query drug, we look for k nearest
neighbors, and if k’ of k have a side-effect, we assign the
prediction score of k’/k to the query drug. We repeat
this procedure for q side-effects.
Support vector machine (SVM)
A more sophisticated approach would be to apply a
supervised binary classification method for predicting
whether a given drug x has a side-effect or not, and
repeat this process for all q side-effects. The support
vector machine (SVM) is a well-known binary classifier,
and it has become a popular classification method in
bioinformatics and chemoinformatics because
of its high-performance prediction ability . We test
several kernel functions such as linear kernel, Gaussian
RBF kernel with various width parameters, and polynomial kernel with various degree parameters. Note that
this strategy needs to construct q individual SVM classifiers for q side-effects, so it will require considerable
computational burden, because q is quite huge in practical applications (q is 1385 in this study).
Ordinary canonical correlation analysis (OCCA)
Suppose that we have a set of n drugs with p substructure features and q side-effect features. Each drug is
represented by a chemical substructure feature vector x
= (x1 , ..., xp )T , and by a side-effect feature vector y =
(y1 , ..., yq )T .
Consider two linear combinations for chemical substructures and side-effects as ui = aT xi and vi = bT yi (i
= 1, 2, ..., n), where a = (a1, ..., ap)T and b = (b1 , ..., bq
)T are weight vectors. The goal of ordinary CCA is to
find weight vectors a and b which maximize the following canonical correlation coefficient:
ρ = corr(u, v) =
i=1 αTxi · βTyi
i=1 (αTxi)2
i=1 (βTyi)2
i=1 ui = 0 (resp. n
i=1 vi = 0) is assumed and
u (resp. v) is called canonical component for x (resp. y)
Let × denote the n × p matrix defined as X = [x1 , ...,
xn]T , and let Y denote the n × q matrix defined as Y =
[y1 , ..., yn ]T . The columns of X and Y are assumed to
be centered and scaled. Then the maximization problem
can be written as follows:
max{αTXTYβ}
subject to
αTXTXα = 1,
βTYTYβ = 1,
In other high-dimensional problems, it is known that
good results can be obtained by treating the covariance
matrix as a diagonal matrix , as suggested in .
Therefore, we substitute identity matrices for XT X and
YT Y , and consider the following optimization problem:
max{αTXTYβ}
subject to
Sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA)
In the OCCA, the weight vectors a and b are not
unique if p or q exceeds n. In addition, it is difficult to
interpret the results when there are many non-zero elements in the weight vectors a and b. In practical applications, especially when p and q are large, we want to
find a linear combination of the weights for x and y that
has large correlation, but that is also sparse for easier
interpretation.
To impose the sparsity on a and b, we propose to
consider the following optimization problem with some
additional L1 penalty terms:
max{αTXTYβ}
subject to
||α||1 ≤c1
||β||1 ≤c2
where || · ||1 is L1 norm (the sum of all absolute
values in the vector), c1 and c2 are parameters to control
the sparsity and restricted to range 0 <c1 ≤1 and 0 <c2
≤1. For simplicity, we use the same value for c1 and c2
in this study. The sparse version of CCA is referred to
as sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA).
The optimization problem in SCCA can be regarded
as the problem of penalized matrix decomposition of
the matrix Z = XTY. Recently, a useful algorithm for solving the penalized matrix decomposition (PMD) problem has been proposed and applied to this kind of
analysis .
The optimisation problem formulated in (4) can be
used for finding one canonical component. To extract
multiple canonical components, we use a deflation
manipulation iteratively as follows:
Z(k+1) ←Z(k) −dkαkβT
where Z (k) is the input of step k (Z (1) = XTY ), dk is
the highest singular value, and ak and bk are the weight
vectors estimated in the k-th step (k = 1, 2, ..., m).
Finally, we obtain m pairs of weight vectors a1, ..., am
and b1, ..., bm. For easier interpretation, the sign of the
weight vectors is adjusted such that the weight element
with the highest absolute value is positive in each component. High scoring substructures and side-effects in
the weight vectors are extracted as correlated sets.
If the extracted sets of chemical substructures and
side-effects are biologically meaningful, potential sideeffects for a new drug candidate molecule should be
predicted by looking for the extracted chemical substructures in its chemical structure. Suppose that we are
Pauwels et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:169
 
 
given the chemical structure profile x of a new drug
candidate molecule, and we want to predict its potential
side-effect profile y based on the extracted sets of chemical substructures and side-effects encoded in {αk}m
The x and y are assumed to have their canonical components u = AT x and v = BT y, respectively, where A =
[a1, ..., am], B = [b1 , ..., bm]. Since y is unknown, we
need to estimate y such that v is close to u as much as
possible. This estimation can be done by minimizing
2 = ||ATx −BTy||2
2, which leads to the following
ˆy = B−TATx,
where B-T is the peudo-inverse matrix of BT . Note
that all data features are normalized in the CCA analysis, each element in the estimate is de-normalized with
the standard deviation and the average calculated in the
training set. If the j-th element in ˆy has a high score,
the new molecule x is predicted to have the j-th sideeffect (j = 1, 2, ..., q).
We also consider another prediction score. Based on
the weighted sum of canonical components, we propose
the following prediction score for a given molecule x:
k x = BATx,
where Λ is the diagonal matrix whose elements are
canonical correlation coefficients. Note that s(x) is the
q-dimensional vector whose j-th element represents a
prediction score for the j-th side-effect. If the j-th element in s(x) has a high score, the new molecule x is
predicted to have the j-th side-effect (j = 1, 2, ..., q).
In our experience, eq. (7) works similarly as or slightly
better than eq. (6), so we use eq. (7) as the prediction
score in the result section.
Availability
Project name: Side-effect analysis project; Project home
page: 
Operating system(s): Platform independent; Programming language: R; Other requirements: “PMA” library in
R; Any restrictions to use by non-academics: licence
Additional material
Additional file 1: Extracted features by the proposed method. All
the results for drug chemical substructures and drug side-effects
extracted by Sparse CCA are summarized in this file.
Additional file 2: Predicted side-effects for unchatecterized drugs in
DrugBank. All the results for uncharacterized drugs in DrugBank are
summarized in this file, where the 1st column is Drug ID, the 2nd
column is Pubchem compound ID, the 3rd column is the predicted sideeffect, and the 4th column is prediction score.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jean-Philippe Vert for useful discussions.
Author details
1Mines ParisTech, Centre for Computational Biology, 35 rue Saint-Honoré, F-
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex, France. 2Institut Curie, F-75248, Paris, France.
3INSERM U900, F-75248, Paris, France.
Authors’ contributions
EP - has made substantial contributions to the preparation of the datasets
and implementation of the methods, and has also been responsible for
drafting the manuscript. VS - has made substantial contributions to the
biological interpretations, and has been responsible for drafting some parts
of the manuscript. YY - has directed the work, and has been responsible for
drafting some parts of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Received: 1 August 2010 Accepted: 18 May 2011
Published: 18 May 2011