Transmission of Ebola Virus Disease: An
Suresh Rewar, MPharm, and Dashrath Mirdha, BAMS
Ebola is a viral illness of which the initial symptoms can include a sudden fever, intense weakness, muscle pain and a sore throat,
according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Airborne transmission of Ebola virus has been hypothesized but not
demonstrated in humans. Ebola is not spread through the air or by water, or in general, by food. However, in Africa, Ebola may
be spread as a result of handling bushmeat (wild animals hunted for food) and contact with infected bats. The disease infects
humans through close contact with infected animals, including chimpanzees, fruit bats, and forest antelope. Ebola virus can be
transmitted by direct contact with blood, bodily fluids, or skin of patients with or who died of Ebola virus disease. As of late
October 2014, the World Health Organization reported 13,567 suspected cases and 4922 deaths, although the agency believes
that this substantially understates the magnitude of the outbreak. Experimental vaccines and treatments for Ebola are under
development, but they have not yet been fully tested for safety or effectiveness.
Key Words: EVD (Ebola virus disease), etiology, clinical features, control measures, transmission
 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( Annals of Global Health 2014;80:444-451
INTRODUCTION
The largest Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak to date is
ongoing in West Africa, particularly in Guinea, Sierra
Leone, and Liberia, with 7178 reported cases including
3338 deaths as of October 1, 2014.1 Twenty EVD cases
(19 laboratory confirmed, 1 probable) have been reported in Nigeria, with no new cases reported since early
September 2014. All 20 cases stemmed from a single
importation from a traveler returning from Liberia in July
Ebola virus causes severe viral hemorrhagic fever
with a high fatality rate. Five Ebola virus species within
the genus Ebola virus are known, including four that
cause EVD in humans (a fifth species has only caused
disease in nonhuman primates [NHPs]).3 The 2014
outbreak of EVD in West Africa, caused by Ebola virus
(Zaire ebolavirus species), is the largest outbreak of EVD
in history.4
Ebola virus can be transmitted by direct contact with
blood, bodily fluids, or skin of EVD patients or individuals who have died of the disease.5 As of October
23, 2014, 450 health care personnel are known to have
become infected with Ebola. Of these, 244 have died.4,6
Several US health care personnel working in West
Africa also became infected with EVD and returned to
the United States for evaluation and treatment.7 Additionally, people in several US states who recently traveled
to West Africa and have fever and other symptoms have
been evaluated at US hospitals for possible EVD. As of
late October 2014, there were two imported cases,
including one death, and two locally acquired cases in
health care workers reported in the United States. Ebola
hemorrhagic fever (EHF) is an acute viral syndrome that
presents with fever and an ensuing bleeding diathesis
that is marked by high mortality in human and NHPs. It
is caused by Ebola virus, a lipid-enveloped, negatively
stranded RNA virus that belongs to the viral family
Filoviridae.8
Infections with Ebola viruses originating from Africa
cause a severe disease in humans called Ebola virus disease. There are five species of the genus Ebola virus
(Filoviridae family): Zaire ebolavirus (ZEBOV), Sudan
ebolavirus (SEBOV), Cote d’Ivoire ebolavirus (CEBOV),
Bundibugyo ebolavirus (BEBOV), and Reston ebolavirus
(REBOV). CEBOV has been associated with only one
human case.9-11 REBOV has only caused disease in NHPs
and was found in swine suffering from porcine reproductive and respiratory disease syndrome.12 ZEBOV,
2214-9996/ª 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( 
From the Department of Pharmaceutics, Rajasthan University of Health
Sciences, Jaipur (SR), Dr. Sarvepali Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved
University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan (DM). Address correspondence to S.R.;
e-mail: 
The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
 
SEBOV, and BEBOV are responsible for most of the EHF
outbreaks13,14 but ZEBOV constitutes a particularly
serious threat to both human and NHPs in sub-Saharan
Africa. EHF has been associated with large human outbreaks, with case fatality rates (CFRs) for ZEBOV as high
as 90%. The CFR of EBOV in NHP is unknown but some
ecological data suggest that EBOV has contributed to declines of up to 98% of local great ape populations in
Gabon and the Republic of Congo.15
In 1976, the first reported cases of Ebola fever
surfaced during two simultaneous outbreaks in southern
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC;
formerly Zaire). Fatality rates reached 53% and 88%,
respectively.16,17 From then until January 2003, 10 significant Ebola fever outbreaks occurred in Africa
involving more than 1600 cases of infection and 1100
fatalities. Additionally, there have been a small number
of subclinical infections in the United States and the
Philippines from the Reston strain of the virus, which is
harmless to humans but lethal for monkeys.18
Despite concerted investigative efforts, the natural
reservoir of the virus is unknown. As a result, little is
understood about how Ebola virus is transmitted or how
it replicates in its host. However, based on evidence from
similar viruses, it is theorized that the virus is zoonotic
and therefore is maintained by an unidentified animal
host.18-20 The fact that outbreaks of EHF have coincided
with the end of the African rainy season may provide a
clue as to the natural ecology of Ebola virus and to the
host, which may be influenced by this weather cycle.21
Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever in Sudan
The epicenter of this small outbreak of 17 cases and 7
deaths (CFR 41.2%) was the town of Yambio, near to the
two previous Ebola sites (Nzara and Maridi).22 During
the 2008 Ebola outbreak, Kaluamba was affected again,
with 37 cases and 16 deaths (CFR 43.8%). The index
case was believed to be an 18-year-old girl who died from
a post-abortion hemorrhage. However, the source of her
exposure remains unknown. This outbreak was reported
to the national and provincial health authorities 21 days
after disease onset, compared with a period of 4 months
in the 2007 epidemic.
Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever in the DRC
 
A further outbreak of EHF occurred in 2007, in the Mweka
health zone, West Kasai Province, involving 264 cases and
187 deaths with a CFR of 71%. Kampungu city was
the epicenter of the outbreak with 47% of cases, followed
by the city of Kaluamba (42% of cases). The index case was
the chief of the village and a hunter. The outbreak was
apparently associated with a massive fruit bat migration
through this region.23 During this outbreak, there were
fewer fatalities among health care workers. However, several
human-to-human transmissions occurred in churches
where patients had been taken for prayers and nursing.
Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever in Uganda
 
An outbreak of SEBOV occurred in Gulu in 2000 and
spread to the cities of Mbarara and Masindi, with 425
cases and 224 deaths (CFR 52%).24 This was the largest
epidemic caused by SEBOV. The outbreak was recognized from a cluster of human cases and was amplified
by nosocomial transmission. Uganda was again affected
in 2007 when BEBOV killed 30 people out of 116 cases
(CFR 26%).14 An isolated case of EHF caused by
SEBOV was reported from Uganda in 2011.25
EPIDEMIOLOGIC UPDATE
Situation in West Africa
Since December 2013 and as of late October 2014, the
Organization
13,567 suspected cases and 4,922 deaths.26
The distribution of EVD cases by affected countries
(Fig. 1) is as follows:27
 Guinea: 1472 cases and 843 deaths as of October 12,
 Liberia: 4249 cases and 2458 deaths as of October 11,
 Sierra Leone: 3252 cases and 1183 deaths as of
October 12, 2014;
 Nigeria: 20 cases and 8 deaths, with last confirmed
case in Lagos on September 5, 2014 and in Rivers State on September
1, 2014 (41 days as of October 12);
 Senegal: 1 case, no deaths, confirmed on August 28,
2014 . All contacts
have completed 21 days of follow-up (Fig. 2).
Ebola virus belongs to the family Filoviridae, in the order
Mononegavirales, which includes Rhabdoviridae and Paramyxoviridae. Structurally, filovirus virions (complete viral
particles) may appear in several shapes, biologic features
called pleomorphism (Fig. 3). These shapes include long,
sometimes branched filaments, as well as shorter filaments shaped like a “6,” a “U,” or a circle. Viral filaments may measure up to 14,000 nm in length, have a
uniform diameter of 80 nm, and are enveloped in a lipid
(fatty) membrane. Each virion contains one molecule of
single-stranded, negative-sense RNA. New viral particles
are created by budding from the surface of their hosts’
cells; however, filovirus replication strategies are not
completely understood.
The virus was first recognized in 1976 when two
unrelated EHF outbreaks occurred 800 km apart in
northern Zaire (Yambuku) and southern Sudan (Nzara
Annals of Global Health
or Maridi).28,29 It was given the name “Ebola” after the
small river near the catholic mission of Yambuku, the
epicenter of the 1976 EHF outbreak. Ebola virus is not
restricted to Africa. A new species, REBOV, was
described in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis)
imported from the Philippines (Manila) to a quarantine
facility in Reston, Virginia in 1989. Subsequently,
REBOV has been reisolated from cynomolgus monkeys
and domestic pigs in the Philippines.12
PATHOGENESIS AND TRANSMISSION
Ebola viruses are biosafety level-4 pathogens and require
special containment measures and barrier protection,
particularly for health care workers. The viruses can
survive in liquid or dried material for many days.30 They
are inactivated by gamma irradiation, heating for 60
minutes at 60C or boiling for 5 minutes, and are sensitive to sodium hypochlorite (bleach) and other disinfectants.31,32 Freezing or refrigeration will not inactivate
Ebola viruses.33
The incubation period (the period between infection
and first symptoms) is usually 4 to 10 days but can be as
short as 2 days and as long as 21 days. The CFR for
ZEBOV infections is estimated to be between 44% and
90%.34 Ebola viruses are highly transmissible by direct
contact with infected blood, secretions, tissues, organs,
and other bodily fluids from dead or living infected
persons.35 Transmission via inanimate objects contaminated with infected bodily fluids (fomites) is possible.36
The principal mode of transmission in human outbreaks is person-to-person transmission through direct
contact with a symptomatic or dead EVD case (Table 1).
Airborne transmission has not been documented.37
Due to its lethal nature, this filovirus is classified as a
biologic class-4 pathogen. Three subtypes of the virus
have been identified as pathogenic for humans: Ebola
Zaire, Ebola Sudan, and Ebola (Cote d’Ivoire) Tai.8 The
infection generally involves necrosis of the liver, spleen,
kidney, lymph nodes, testes, and ovaries due to viral
replication within parenchymal cells.16,38-41 More significant effects are microvascular damage, changes in vascular
permeability, and activation of the clotting cascade.13,42
Damage to platelets and endothelial cells results in the
disruption of fluid balance and homeostasis.16,39,41,43
Additionally, the virus is believed to compromise and
suppress immunologic function.13,38,40,42,44-47
Although the natural reservoir host of Ebola viruses
has not yet been identified, the way in which the virus
first appears in a human at the start of an outbreak is
unknown. However, scientists believe that the first patient becomes infected through contact with an infected
animal, such as a fruit bat or primate (apes and monkeys), which is called a spillover event. Person-to-person
transmission follows and can lead to large numbers of
affected people. In some past Ebola outbreaks, primates
were also affected by Ebola and multiple spillover events
occurred when people touched or ate infected primates.
When an infection does occur in humans, the virus can
be spread in several ways. Ebola is spread through direct
contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes in,
e.g., the eyes, nose, or mouth) by the following:
 Blood or bodily fluids (including but not limited to
urine, saliva, sweat, feces, vomit, breast milk, and
semen) of a person who is sick with Ebola;
 Objects (like needles and syringes) that have been
contaminated with the virus; or
 Infected fruit bats or primates (apes and monkeys).
Ebola is not spread through the air or by water, or in
general, by food. However, in Africa, Ebola may be spread
as a result of handling bushmeat (wild animals hunted for
food) and contact with infected bats. There is no evidence
that mosquitos or other insects can transmit Ebola virus.
Only a few species of mammals (e.g., humans, bats,
monkeys, and apes) have shown the ability to become
infected with and spread Ebola virus.5,8,18,42,47-49 The
main routes of infection are through mucous membranes,
the conjunctiva, and small skin breaks.19,50 Case reports
of hospital personnel acquiring the disease that are not
attributable to the percutaneous route suggest that rubbing
one’s eye after caring for a patient with acute illness
transmits enough inoculum to produce clinical infection.
Aerosol dissemination of Ebola virus has not been established as a mode of transmission in humans. However, in
NHPs, this mode of transmission has been associated with
disease.8,18,19,49,50
There is no evidence of communicability during the
viral incubation period with nonfebrile, asymptomatic individuals.8 Isolated cases of transmission between individuals convalescing from EHF and close household
Table 1. Levels of Risk for Transmission of Ebola Viruses
Level of Risk
Type of Contact
Casual contact with a feverish but
ambulant and self-caring patient
(e.g., sharing a seating area or public
transportation; receptionist tasks).
Direct contact with any material soiled
by bodily ﬂuids from a probable or
conﬁrmed case.
Percutaneous injury (e.g., with needle)
or mucosal exposure to bodily ﬂuids,
tissues, or laboratory specimens of a
probable or conﬁrmed case.
Participation in funeral rites with direct
exposure to human remains in or from an
affected area without appropriate personal
protective equipment.
Direct contact with bushmeat or bats,
rodents, primates, living or dead in or
from affected areas.
Transmission of EVD
contacts have been found and are primarily attributed to
sexual contact. A cohort prospective study described a case
involving a male convalescent who had Ebola viral antigen
stillpresentin seminalfluid almost3 months after the initial
diagnosis.47 Transmission risk does increase significantly
with direct patient contact during the acute disease phase.5
Amorerecentexperimentthatwasspecificallydesigned
to further evaluate the possibility of naturally occurring
airborne transmission of Ebola virus among NHPs showed
no transmission of Ebola virus from infected to control
primates placed 0.3 m apart in separate open-barred cages
and ambient air conditions, but with a plexiglass divider that
prevented direct contact between the animals.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The onset of the disease is abrupt after an incubation
period of 2 to 21 days. The clinical features can be
divided into four main phases as follows:
Phase 1: Influenza-like syndrome: The onset is abrupt
with nonspecific symptoms or signs such as high fever,
headache, arthralgia, nausea, sore throat, and myalgia.
Phase 2: Acute (days 1-6): Persistent fever not
responding to antimalarial drugs or to antibiotics,
headache and intense fatigue followed by diarrhea
and abdominal pain and vomiting.
Phase 3: Pseudo-remission (days 7-8): During this
phase the patient feels better and seeks food. The
health situation presents with some improvement.
Some patients may recover during this phase and
survive from the disease.
Phase 4: Aggravation (day 9): In many if not most
cases, the health status gets worse. The following
symptoms may be observed:
 Skin manifestations: petaechiae (not so obvious
on black skin), purpura (morbiliform skin rash)
 Respiratory disorders: dyspnea, cough, hiccups,
throat and chest pain,
 Cardiovascular distress and hypovolemic shock.
Based on these clinical manifestations, it is obvious
that at the start of EHF, the disease can mimic many
other tropical diseases such as malaria or typhoid fever.
In most outbreaks, recognition of EHF is delayed
because physicians are not accustomed to seeing this
illness and its symptoms are generally nonspecific.20
Early laboratory confirmation of suspected clinical hemorrhagic fever cases is essential to implement appropriate
control measures. Definitive diagnosis of suspected cases
of EHF is usually made by polymerase chain reaction
detection and virus isolation on Vero cells. As a class-4
pathogen, Ebola virus culture requires a maximum
containment facility.
Additional
laboratory
diagnostic
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) for the
Distribution of cases of EVD by week of reporting in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria, and Senegal, weeks 48/2013 to
42/2014* (N ¼ 8994). EBV, Ebola virus disease. *The bar for week 42/2014 does not represent a complete week. The solid green line
represents the trends based on a 5-week moving average plotted on the ﬁfth week of the moving average window. The ﬁgure includes
one imported case from Senegal.
Annals of Global Health
detection of Ebola immunoglobulin ,
Kenya (KEMRI), and Gabon (CIRMF) have already
developed capacities to diagnose EHF by ELISA and
reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. South Africa is the
only African country with a maximum-containment,
enclosed-suit
laboratory
Ebola virus.
Distribution of cases of Ebola virus disease by week of reporting in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Nigeria .
No proven Ebola virusespecific treatment presently exists; however, there are measures that can be taken that
will improve a patient’s chances of survival. Ebola
symptoms may begin as early as 2 days or as long as 21
days after exposure to the virus. Symptoms usually begin
with a sudden flulike stage characterized by fatigue, fever,
and muscle and joint pain. No specific treatments or
vaccines are presently available for EVD. However, early
supportive treatment can improve the chances of recovery.51 Potential new Ebola therapies and vaccines were
reviewed during two WHO meetings in September 2014
and further assessed by scientific review.52,53 Several of
these potential drugs recently have been used in experimental treatment of individual EVD cases.
During the first WHO consultation meeting, there
was consensus that the use of whole-blood therapies and
convalescent blood serums needs to be considered as a
matter of priority.52
ZMapp is a combination of monoclonal antibodies.
The limited supply of the drug has been used to treat
seven individuals infected with the Ebola virus.54
Although some of them have recovered, the outcome is
not considered to be statistically significant.55 ZMapp has
proved highly effective in a trial involving rhesus macaque monkeys.56
Symptoms of Ebola are treated as they appear. The
following basic interventions, when used early, can
significantly improve chances of survival:
 Provide intravenous fluids and balancing electrolytes
(body salts).
 Maintain oxygen status and blood pressure levels.
 Treat other infections if they occur.
Experimental vaccines and treatments for Ebola are
under development, but have not yet been fully tested for
safety or effectiveness. Managing Ebola patients in the
African setting is a major challenge because there is no
specific vaccine available. Only supportive care can be
administered to sustain cardiac and renal functions with
prudent use of perfusion. Oral rehydration is recommended but sometimes not realistic because of throat
pain and vomiting. The main objective is to provide
optimal care to the patient with maximum protection of
the medical and nursing staff.
In a clinical experiment conducted late during the
1995 Ebola outbreak in Kikwit, human convalescent
blood was used for passive immunization to treat patients who had been infected naturally with ZEBOV;
seven of the eight patients who received blood transfusion from convalescent Ebola patients survived.57
Additionally, although monoclonal antibodies to the
glycoprotein of Ebola virus showed protective and therapeutic properties in mice, they failed to protect
NHPs.58,59
As Ebola virus is generally considered a potential
biologic weapon, it is urgent to develop effective antiviral
drugs and vaccines. The ideal is to develop a candidate
vaccine able to confer interspecies cross-protection
against SEBOV, BEBOV, ZEBOV, and other as-yetunknown Ebola virus species.
CONTROL MEASURES
The cornerstone for controlling an outbreak of EHF is to
interrupt the viral transmission chain. Reducing transmission requires several strict public health measures to
be implemented as quickly as possible, including isolation of patients, barrier precautions, and identification
and tracking of all contacts. Most of the time, outbreaks
are managed by the WHO’s International Committee
on Scientific and Technical Coordination. This committee is in charge of implementing control measure
activities on a daily basis and has the following working
subgroups:
 The patient management team is involved in the
isolation of clinical cases in a quarantine ward,
training medical and relief personnel on the proper
use of personal protective equipment (gloves, gowns,
masks, etc.), and providing medical care based on
symptomatic therapy to maintain vital respiratory,
cardiovascular, and renal functions.
 The coordination committee is responsible for all
epidemic response activities, chairs daily meetings, and
writes reports for public health authorities and health
 The epidemiologic surveillance team is in charge of
active and passive case finding, contact tracing, and
rumor verification of suspect cases or deaths in the
community.
Table 2. Diagnostic Tests
Time Line of Infection
Diagnostic Tests Available
Within a few days after
symptoms begin
 Antigen-capture ELISA testing
 IgM ELISA
 Virus isolation
Later in disease course
or after recovery
 IgM and IgG antibodies
Retrospectively in
deceased patients
 Immunohistochemistry testing
 Virus solation
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; IG, immunoglobulin, PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Annals of Global Health
 The hygiene and sanitation team is in charge of
disinfection and burial of all Ebola and non-Ebola
dead bodies under safe conditions. Local Red Cross
volunteers usually perform these activities.
 The laboratory and research team is in charge of collecting, storing, and shipping clinical samples for
diagnostic confirmation.
 The logistic support team is in charge of providing any
administrative, logistic, and technical support to the
other teams, such as coordination of secretariat,
transport, and communication.
CONCLUSION
EHF epidemics constitute a significant public health
concern in Africa and an effective vaccine is needed urgently. Such a vaccine would primarily benefit doctors,
nurses, and field epidemiologists working in endemic
countries. The second target group would be the scientists
working with Ebola virus as well as veterinarians and
those involved in wildlife conservation in endemic areas.
Since its discovery in 1976, much is known about Ebola
virology, physiopathology, clinical features, and epidemiology, but the missing link certainly remains the virus
reservoir in nature. The current research focused on bats
as putative ZEBOV reservoirs has to be reinforced and
extended to the reservoirs of other Ebola species. The
early detection and isolation of a patient with EVD decreases the risk for transmission in the community.