A Dual-Stage Two-Phase Model of Selective Attention
Ronald Hubner, Marco Steinhauser, and Carola Lehle
Universitat Konstanz
The dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model is introduced as a formal and general model of selective
attention that includes both an early and a late stage of stimulus selection. Whereas at the early stage
information is selected by perceptual filters whose selectivity is relatively limited, at the late stage stimuli
are selectcd more efficiently on a categorical basis. Consequently, selectivity is first low but then abruptly
increases during the course of stimulus processing. Although intended as a general model of selective
attention, in the present study the DSTP model was applied to account for the distributional data of 3
flanker task experiments. The fit of the model to the data was not only rather good but also superior to
those of alternative single-stage models with a continuously increasing selectivity. All together, the
model provides a comprehensive account of how early and late stages of attention interact in the control
of performance.
Keywords: selective attention, early selection, late selection, flanker task, diffusion process
A characteristic of human behavior is that it is controlled by
internal as well as external factors and that these factors interact in
complex ways. For instance, it is well known that stimuli in the
environment can automatically control behavior by activating associated responses . Although such an external
control can be highly efficient, it might be inappropriate in situations where externally activated responses are not in accord with
the current goal. Therefore, in addition to external control mechanisms, internal control mechanisms are also needed to ensure that
goal-relevant stimuli determine the behavior, particularly in situations with ambiguous stimuli .
One important internal control mechanism for this objective is
selective attention. Accordingly, numerous theories have been
proposed to account for the ability to process stimuli selectively.
Originally, there was a dispute about whether selection takes place
early or late in the course of stimulus processing . Early selection accounts assumed that stimulus
selection occurs early and is based on elementary stimulus features
that are available at preidentification stages . According to this view,
only one object at a time is selected for identification and further
processing. In contrast, late selection accounts assumed that several stimuli can be identified in parallel, and a target stimulus is
Ronald HUbner, Marco Steinhauser, and Carola Lehle, Department of
Psychology, Universitat Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
This research was supported by a grant (Hu 432/8) to Ronald HUbner
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). We thank Gordon
Logan and Kyle Cave for their helpful suggestions and comments on
earlier versions of this article. We also thank Melanie Renner and Jan
Schlosser for collecting the data.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ronald
HUbner, Universitiit Konstanz, Fachbereich Psychologic, Fach D29,
D-78457 Konstanz, Germany. E-mail: 
then selected for further processing at a later stage based on
identity or other semantic features .
However, there are also theories assuming that early and late
selection represent two modes of attention, which are applied
depending on their costs and benefits . Recent evidence supports these theories by showing that
modes of selective attention can be chosen strategically or are induced by current task demands . Despite these ideas, though, many questions remain open.
For instance, it is still unclear whether early and late selection
mechanisms operate simultaneously or serially and how exactly
these mechanisms interact to enable flexible and coherent behavior.
One source of information that has been used to investigate
these questions is patterns of interference effects in distributional
data from conflict paradigms such as the flanker task or the Stroop task . These
patterns clearly indicate an increase in selectivity during the course
of processing. Whereas some researchers interpreted these patterns
as evidence for a less selective early stage of processing followed
by a more selective late stage , current formal models account for these results by assuming
a continuously increasing selectivity of a single selection process
 .
In the present article we present a formal model that sticks to the
idea of an early and a late selection stage by assuming a discrete
transition from a less selective to a more selective stage. The core
assumption of our dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model is that
competition between early and late selection processes results in
two consecuti ve phases of response selection and that these phases
differ with respect to their susceptibility to interference. Although
early and late selection operate simultaneously, they contribute
First publ. in: Psychological Review 117 , 3, pp. 759-784
doi: 10.1037/a0019471
Konstanzer Online-Publikations-System (KOPS)
URN: 
URL: 
differentially to performance, depending on the relative efficiency
of each process.
Although our model is sufficiently abstract to potentially serve
as a framework for interpreting distributional effects in a large
range of conflict paradigms, in this article we use the DSTP model
to account for the performance in the flanker task, a spatial
selection task that has become a standard paradigm for investigating selective attention. A great advantage of the flanker task is that
the difficulty of stimulus selection can systematically and easily be
manipulated. We show that the DSTP model can not only account
for the observed pattern of interference in distributional data but
also that it is superior to models assuming a continuously increasing selectivity. However, before we report our experiments and
model fits, we first consider results and concepts in the area of
spatial visual attention that provide further motivation for the
DSTP model and then introduce our model in more detail.
Spatial Visual Attention
An essential mechanism for early selection in the visual domain
is spatial filtering. Several metaphors have been used to describe
the way it operates. The attentional spotlight metaphor assumes
that visual attention can be allocated to a certain location in the
visual field and that items at that location are processed more
intensively than items at other locations . The attentional zoom-lens metaphor
generalizes this idea of a spotlight by assuming that not only is the
position of the attentional filter variable but also, at least within
certain limits, that its size and form are . Furthermore, it has been
assumed that changes of the distribution of spatial attention can
occur abruptly rather than continuously .
Important properties of spatial attention have been revealed by
the flanker task . In this task
participants have to identify a target stimulus as fast and as
accurately as possible, while ignoring irrelevant flanker stimuli.
The flankers are usually congruent, that is, associated with the
same response as the target, or incongruent, that is, associated with
the opposite response. The extent to which the flankers can be
ignored is assessed by the difference between the performance for
congruent and incongruent stimuli, which is called the flanker
congruency effect. Usually, responses to congruent stimuli are
faster and more reliable than responses to incongruent flankers,
and the size of differences in response time (RT) and error rate are
considered measures of the efficiency of selective attention.
The flanker task and its variants have been used to examine the
possible forms of the spatial filter and whether its area is contiguous . LaBerge and Brown , for instance, proposed attentional gradients to account for gradual changes of
attentional resources across the visual field . These results suggest
that the distribution of spatial attention in the visual field is rather
flexible. Indeed, Fazl, Grossberg, and Mingolla recently
introduced the concept of attentional shrouds that can even fit to an object's form in order to
guide object recognition.
Spatial selection is also part of some formal models of visual
attention. The theory of visual attention ,
for instance, has been applied to numerous empirical phenomena
 . It consists of a perceptual
filtering mechanism that differentially weights spatial locations to
allow spatial selection in multi-item displays. Additionally, TVA
has a categorical biasing mechanism, which is called pigeonholing,
and which is thought to bias the selected items with respect to the
semantic categories that are relevant for the task. Filtering and
pigeonholing loosely correspond to early and late selection mechanisms, respectively. However, the crucial difference to traditional
views is that they are considered two aspects of the same process
rather than two different stages of processing . Because perceptual biasing and
categorical biasing affect processing at the same time, TV A can be
considered a single-stage model.
Although TV A can account for various phenomena such as
spatial cuing effects , it cannot explain attentional selection in conflict paradigms. With respect to the flanker
task, for instance, it correctly predicts a congruency effect in the
error rates but fails to predict such an effect in RT. Therefore,
Logan extended TV A and added a contour detection system
 for representing space and objects more
explicitly. With these extensions the model could not only account
for the general congruency effects in the flanker task but also for
effects of the distance between target and flankers .
Phenomena like the congruency effect show that although perceptual filtering is an important early selection mechanism, it is not
perfect. This raises the question of what happens if early selection
fails or cannot be applied. Evidence suggests that late selection
mechanisms come into play in this case. This is in accord with
variable-stage models, which assume that relevant stimuli can be
selected at a variable stage of processing, depending on the task
demands .
Although assuming more than one stage of selection seems plausible, variable-stage models are difficult to validate, especially if
one takes only mean RTs and mean error rates into account.
One way to obtain more detailed information about the dynamics and flexibility of stimulus selection is to consider distributional
data. For instance, if one compares the RT distributions for correct
responses between congruent and incongruent flanker stimuli, then
one does not only find that the distribution for incongruent stimuli
is shifted toward slower responses but also that the congruency
effect increases with RT , that is, that it
gets larger for slower responses . In our experiments reported
below, we see further examples of this phenomenon. If one analyzes accuracy, though, then one usually finds that the congruency
effect decreases with RT. A method that has been used to demonstrate the latter effect is to show so-called conditional accuracy
functions. Empirically, these functions are constructed by calculating the accuracy for different RT bins or quantiles.
Gratton, Coles, Sirevaag, Eriksen, and Donchin examined conditional accuracy functions for the performance in the
flanker task and observed for congruent stimuli (except for very
fast responses which were presumably due to fast guesses) that
accuracy was already high for fast responses. In contrast, the
accuracy for incongruent stimuli was rather low for fast responses
but then improved quickly with RT up to the accuracy level of the
congruent stimuli. Because conditional accuracy functions are
completely determined by the RT distributions of correct and
incorrect responses and the corresponding response probabilities
 , their characteristics can also be interpreted in
terms of distributional properties. Flat conditional accuracy functions, for instance, are the result of similar RT distributions for
correct and incorrect responses. In contrast, increasing conditional
accuracy functions indicate that error responses tend to be faster
than correct responses. Indeed, the typical observation from the
flanker task that incongruent stimuli but not congruent ones produce an increasing conditional accuracy function results from the
fact that, whereas correct responses are slower for incongruent
stimuli than for congruent stimuli, error responses are similarly
fast for both stimulus types or even faster for incongruent stimuli.
The observation that the congruency effect differs in size between different parts of RT distributions led to the idea that fast
responses are produced by different processes than slow responses.
Gratton and his colleagues , for instance, proposed that an early and unselective phase of
analysis is followed by a selective phase . Responses that occur during
the first phase show a strong congruency effect because all stimuli
in the display activate their associated response during this phase.
In contrast, nearly no congruency effect is obtained for responses
that occur during the second phase because spatial attention is
focused on the target during this phase. Obviously, the proposed
two phases are similar to the parallel phase and serial phase in
visual-search models revealed that it is
necessary to assume that already initial stimulus processing must
be selective to some extent. As we see later in this article, our
investigation supports this conjecture. Moreover, all subsequent
formal models abandoned the idea of discrete phases and assumed
that selectivity increases continuously within a single stage . In contrast, our DSTP model is the first formal model
that accounts for the distributional data by assuming discrete
phases. As we show, discrete phases can better account for the data
than a single stage with an increasing selectivity.
Another class of models that can potentially account for the
flanker task data are dual-route models , which were originally developed to
describe automatic versus controlled processing .
These models assume that stimulus information can affect response selection via a fast automatic route and via a slow controlled route. Through the automatic route both task-relevant and
task-irrelevant stimulus information directly activate the involved
response units according to learned stimulus-response associations. By the controlled route, in contrast, stimulus information is
deliberately transformed into response activation according to the
stimulus-response mapping defined for the current task. Dualroute models can explain the low accuracy for fast responses to
incongruent flanker stimuli by assuming that flankers activate their
associated response units via the fast automatic route. If one
further assumes that the slower responses are produced mainly by
the controlled route, which allows only the target to activate its
response unit, then this accounts for the low error rate for slow
responses.
Obviously, the considered results in the area of spatial visual
attention suggest that even performing simple tasks involves at
least two stages, routes, or phases of stimulus processing, whose
output is differentially reflected by fast and slow responses. Current formal models, though, which assume only a single stage, or
additionally a continuously increasing selectivity, cannot appropriately account for these results, as is shown in some detail below.
Therefore, to provide a better alternative, we developed our DSTP
model, which is introduced in the next section. It extends and
integrates valuable ideas from previous variable-stage, dual-phase,
and dual-route models.
The DSTP Model
The main characteristics of the DSTP model are two discrete
stages of stimulus selection, an early stage and a late stage. The
early stage selects stimuli by perceptual filtering and is not strictly
selective in the sense that information from irrelevant stimuli (e.g.,
flankers) might also be selected to a certain degree. This stage
provides information for response selection during a first phase. At
the late stage information is selected from only one stimulus (e.g.,
the target) based on its identity, which is highly selective. The
selected stimulus then drives response selection during a second
phase of response selection (see Figure I). We further assume that
selective attention serves in the first place for the selection of
task-related responses. Therefore, a central part of our model is a
response selection mechanism.
As we are concerned with both the selection of stimuli and the
selection of responses, it is important not to confuse the different
terms. Thus, for clarity, we use the terms early and late exclusively in
connection with stimulus selection. For the phases of response
selection we use the attributes first and second or the terms
Phase 1 and Phase 2. We now describe these mechanisms and
concepts in more detail and how we formalized our model.
In the DSTP model, response selection proceeds by a diffusion
process ,
which accumulates evidence in favor of the one or the other
response. The evidence results from a sequence of noisy samples
extracted from the presented stimuli. These samples are accumulated over time and the corresponding evidence is represented by
the state X(t), t 2:: 0 of a stochastic process. It is assumed that the
samples are normally distributed with mean fL, which is called the
rate or drift of the process, and variance 0'2, which is called
the diffusion coefficient of the process. In our case, the drift
depends on the stimulus conditions and on the characteristics of
the observer (e.g., on its attentional capacity).
In order to obtain a response, decision boundaries A and -Bare
defined, which represent the two possible Responses A and B,
respectively. If the diffusion process, after starting from state X(O),
hits one of the boundaries, the corresponding response is selected
a) First phase of response selection
Nontargets
Early stage of
stimulus selection
b) Second phase of response selection
Non- -+targets
Late stage of
Stimulus selection
Flow diagrams for the two phases of the dual-stage two-phase
(DSTP) model. Panel a: During the first phase, stimulus information
passing the perceptual filter not only serves for stimulus identification but
also affects the response selection process. Because perceptual filtering is
imperfect, nontargets (gray arrows) also have some effect. Panel b: In the
second phase, that is, after stimulus identification and selection, response
selection is driven exclusively by the selected stimulus (ideally the target).
(and also executed). Because we are concerned only with symmetric boundaries, we also use the term criterion, which simply
represents the distance from zero to each boundary and in this case
can be represented by A alone. The time from the start of the
process until it hits a boundary is a random variable T and called
first passage time. It usually reflects the time used for response
selection or the decision time, which is an important component of
the overall RT.
In the DSTP model, we distinguish two phases of response
selection, whose processes are denoted by RSI and RS2. In the first
phase RSI is driven by the output of an early stage of stimulus
selection, where basic stimulus information is selected by perceptual filters (see Figure la). As we are concerned with multiple-item
displays, we assume that the information provided by each item in
the display is summed up . Perceptual filtering (see the boxes on
the far left in Figures la and Ib) is taken into account by assuming
that the individual components of the overall rate are already the
product of the evidence provided by the corresponding item and an
attentional weight . For the
flanker task, for instance, we assume component rates fLra and fLj7
for target and flankers, respectively. Because each item provides
the same perceptual evidence for its category membership (or
response), irrespective of whether it functions as target or as
flanker, it can be represented mathematically by a constant with
the same value for each possible item on each position. With this
assumption, the component rates are products of attentional
weights and the same constant. Consequently, observed variations
in fL can be interpreted directly as variation in attentional weight.
If a response is already selected by RSI, it is executed and the
trial is finished. However, because the efficiency of the perceptual
filter is limited, some information from irrelevant items (e.g.,
flankers) usually also contributes to the overall rate (as indicated in
Figure Ib by the long thin gray line), which increases the probability of an error. Thus, to obtain a higher accuracy, a late stimulus
selection process SS, which is also implemented as a diffusion process, runs in parallel with RSI . In the flowchart of our model (see Figure I) the late stimulus
selection process for both the first and second phases is represented by
the box in the middle. The late stimulus selection process selects the
Target C or the Nontarget D when it hits the boundaries C and -D,
respectively. If this occurs before a response is selected, then, from
that point onward, response selection enters Phase 2 (see Figure I b), where response selection proceeds by RS2, which is driven
exclusively by the selected item. Thus, although SS starts with
stimulus onset, because its output is discrete and occurs at a
relatively late point in time, it is justified to characterize the
corresponding selection stage as being late.
In Figure I the input into the late stimulus selection stage also
passed through the perceptual filter. Although this is plausible, in
the formal version of our model we do not assume such a dependency. Rather, the input into SS is represented by the specific value
of the rate parameter fLss.
Together, our model's processing of the flanker task can be categorized into six possible situations, which are shown in Figure 2. The
processes are arranged vertically, which illustrates more clearly
the way that stimulus selection affects response selection. There
are the two cases where a response is already selected before a
stimulus is selected. In one case, RSI selects Response A (see
Panel a), and in the other case, it selects Response B (see Panel b).
In the other four cases stimulus selection is finished before a
response is selected, that is, SS wins the race and either selects the
Target C (see Panels c and d) or a Nontarget D (see Panels e and
f). When SS wins the race against RSI by selecting a stimulus at
time t" then RSI will be in a certain state X(t) somewhere between
its boundaries of A and -B. RS2 continues from this state. Because
the selected item determines the rate of RS2, the rate can be
different in Phase 2, compared to Phase 1. In Figure 2 this is
indicated by changes in the gray level for the corresponding
pathways of RS2. Here, we simply assume that the rate of RS2 is
fLRS2' when the target or a congruent nontarget has been selected,
and - fLRS2' when an incongruent nontarget has been selected.
Finally, RS2 selects either Response A or B. As can also be seen
in Figure 2, each response is possible irrespective of the chosen
item. However, they occur with different probabilities. By combining the characteristics of the different events, the overall performance of the model can be computed (for the mathematical
details of our model see Appendix A).
One strength of the DSTP model is its late selection mechanism
that should account for the relatively reliable performance even in
situations where early selection is poor. To see whether this is
indeed the case, we conducted three flanker task experiments
(reported in the next three sections) in which we manipulated the
efficiency of early selection. In the first experiment we did this by
varying the spacing between target and flankers, in the second
experiment we manipulated the spatial uncertainty and eccentricity
of the stimuli, and in the third experiment we varied the proportion
of congruent and incongruent stimuli. For each experiment, we
Response selection
-BIC I----------l
Response selection
-O~~ ______
First phase Second phase
Response selection
(corr~!L ___ _
Response selection
-0 ~==:;::=====::::: :============:
Stimulus selection
(non-target)
The possible situations that can occur during processing in our
dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model are shown. The upper curve in each
panel shows an example path of the response selection process. Response
A or B is selected when the state of the process hits boundary A or - B,
respectively. The lower curve in each panel shows a sample path of the
stimulus selection process. Target C or Nontarget D is selected when the
state of the process hits boundary Cor -D, respectively. Panels a and b
represent examples where a response is already selected before stimulus
selection ends. The other four panels show situations when there are two
phases of response selection. Panel c, for instance, represents the situation
where a target is selected, which changes the rate of the corresponding
response selection process. The two phases of response selection are
indicated by two different gray levels.
analyzed parameters of the DSTP model after fitting the model to
the distributional data of each condition. We expected that late
selection should be involved more strongly under difficult selection conditions and that this should be reflected by the corresponding parameter values of our model. After describing data and
model fits for the three experiments, we compare the performance
of the DSTP model with several alternative models.
Experiment 1: Spacing Between Target and Flankers
In our first experiment we tried to manipulate the relative
contributions of early and late stimulus selection to performance
by varying the spacing between target and flankers. It has been
shown that the narrower the spacing, the larger the flanker congruency effect .
Besides the hypothesis that the minimal diameter of the attentional
zoom lens is limited , one possible reason for this phenomenon is that the
spatial selection of single items from the display competes with the
tendency of the visual system to construct larger perceptual units
according to Gestalt principles . Thus, if the
flankers are close to the target, all items are strongly grouped by
proximity , which makes
target selection difficult. Over the years it has been shown that
other Gestalt principles, such as grouping by similarity or grouping by common fate , produce a similar limitation on target selection.
These results demonstrate that spatial filtering is not very efficient if flankers are located close to the target. Therefore, it can be
assumed that, compared to a wider spacing, late selection is
involved more strongly in this case. For instance, target selection
could rely more on categorical information than on metric spatial
information . To see how early and late selection vary with spacing, we
conducted a flanker task experiment where the participants had to
categorize numerals as odd or even. Each target numeral was
flanked by two copies of a numeral that had either the same parity
as the target (congruent condition) or the opposite parity (incongruent condition). In a narrow spacing condition the flankers were
presented close to the target, whereas in a wide spacing condition
the flankers occurred farther apart (details of the method are given
in Appendix B). The mean results (see Appendix B) show that, as
expected, the flanker congruency effect in RT and in the error rates
was significantly larger in the narrow condition than in the wide
condition.
To analyze and model the details of the data, we also considered
the RT distributions. Following Ratcliff and his colleagues , we represented the distributions for each
participant by five quantiles (.I, .3, .5, .7, and .9). This was done
for correct responses and error responses to congruent and incongruent stimuli, respectively. These quantiles were then averaged
across participants to obtain group distributions.
Because response probabilities (Le., accuracy) are also highly
informative for the present objective, we depict our data by using
so-called defective cumulative distributions , which refer to cumulative distributions weighted by the relative proportion of correct and incorrect
responses. Accordingly, the distributions sum up to the rate of
correct and incorrect responses rather than to I. Figure 3 shows the
graphs for the present experiment. If we consider the distributions
for congruent stimuli in the wide condition, for instance, then we
see that the 90% quantile for correct responses is graphed at a
probability of .83, whereas that for incorrect responses is graphed
at a probability of .07. This means that 90% of the 92% (i.e., 83%)
correct responses were faster than 576 ms, whereas 90% of the 8%
(Le., 7%) incorrect responses were faster than 526 ms.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the narrow condition showed a
generally increased flanker congruency effect in RTs as well as in
accuracy. However, more important for our further considerations
is the question of how these effects develop as a function of RT.
On the one hand, the flanker congruency effect in RTs for correct
responses is increasing with RT. This can be seen by considering
the horizontal distance between corresponding data points for the
congruent and incongruent conditions. This distance increases with
the height of the quantile. On the other hand, the flanker congruency effect in accuracy is largest for lower and intermediate
quantiles. This can be seen by considering the slopes of the
distributions for incorrect responses. For lower and intermediate quantiles, the slope is greater for the incongruent than for the
congruent condition, indicating that more fast errors occurred for
incongruent stimuli. For this reason, the distribution of incorrect
responses to incongruent stimuli is compressed so that higher
quantiles have faster RTs for incongruent stimuli than for congru-
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
The two panels show defective cumulative response time (RT) distributions (quantile averaged)
separately for congruent and incongruent trials of the two spacing conditions (wide vs. narrow) in our first
experiment. The two upper distributions in each panel refer to correct responses, whereas the two lower
distributions in each panel refer to error responses. Symbols represent experimental data and lines represent fit
values of the dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model.
ent stimuli. This is also reflected by the observation that the mean
error RT was shorter for incongruent than for congruent stimuli
(416 ms vs. 438 ms).
All together, these effects amount to the known phenomenon
that the flanker congruency effect in RT is larger for slow than for
fast responses, whereas the effect in the error rates is mainly
present for fast responses. As mentioned, this difference, which is
particularly large under high flanker interference, can be interpreted as an indication that two stimulus selection processes are
involved. The fast but unreliable early selection process is responsible for the congruency effect in the error rates, whereas the slow
but reliable late selection process produces the effect in RT. To see
whether this interpretation is also reflected by the corresponding
parameter values of the DSTP model, we fit the model to the
distributional data.
As mentioned, we assumed that the overall rate fL of the response selection process (RSI) in the first phase is the sum of the
contribution fL,,, of the target and the contribution fLj1 of all flankers. The different congruency conditions in the flanker task were
realized by assuming that I-Lf7 is positive for congruent flankers but
negative for incongruent flankers. Under ideal conditions more
attentional weight is presumably given to the target position than
to the flanker positions. However, the exact distribution of the
attentional weights depends on various factors . In any case, in contrast to Gratton et al. , but
in accord with Cohen et al. , we assume that some spatial
filtering is already possible at stimulus onset.
Thus, in the present form, the DSTP model has seven free
parameters: four rate parameters, two criteria, and a nondecisional
parameter. The four rates are the component rates fLra and fLj1 for
the target and flanker, respectively, the rate fLss for the late
stimulus selection process (SS), and the rate fLRS2 for the response
selection process (RS2) in Phase 2. Because we assumed symmetric boundaries, criterion A represents the boundaries for the response selection process, whereas criterion C represents the
boundaries for the late stimulus selection process. We also needed
a nondecisional parameter fer that represents the time used for
stimulus encoding, response execution, and so forth. Finally, the
diffusion coefficients for the processes also had to be specified.
Because they are scaling parameters which are not identifiable,
they were set to 0.0 I.
To evaluate the perfonnance of our model, we wanted to fit not
only the DSTP model to our data but also several alternative
models. For the DSTP model an analytic version was available
(see Appendix A), but this was not the case for most of the other
models. Therefore, the perfonnance of these models had to be
simulated. Because the perfonnance of models that have been fit to
data by different procedures is difficult to compare, we decided to
simulate all models. l They were programmed in C+ + and fit with
the PRAXIS algorithm to the
quantiles of the cumulative distributions of correct responses and
error responses. The alternative models and their performances are
considered in a later section. In this and the next two main sections
we merely consider the fits of the DSTP model to the data.
Following Ratcliff and Smith , we estimated parameter
values by minimizing the Wilks likelihood ratio chi-square, G2 ,
which approximates the chi-square statistics as sample sizes become large. With this goodness-of-fit measure both the distribution
shapes and the response probabilities are taken into account simultaneously. Because for each spacing condition the distributions for
congruent and incongruent stimuli were fit with one parameter set,
we had seven free parameters for the DSTP model to fit 20 data
I A running program of the simulation version of the DSTP model can
be found at 
kognitive-psychologie/research/projects/dstp-modell
points. This resulted in a total of 15 degrees of freedom (two
distribution pairs, each with I I degrees of freedom, minus seven
free parameters of the model). However, like Ratcliff and Smith,
we have used the G2 statistic as a relative rather than an absolute
measure of fit.
We simulated 8 X 105 trials per condition for each iteration. To
prevent the obtained parameter estimates from representing a local
minimum, we repeated the fit procedure several times with different sets of initial parameter values. In addition, we also fit the
analytic version of our model to the data with the same fit algorithm as for the model simulations. This allowed us to assess the
precision of our simulations. The goodness-of-fit measures for the
two versions of the DSTP model are provided later in Table 7 (that
for the analytic version is shown in parentheses). As can be seen,
both measures are rather similar. Because this also holds for the
estimated parameters, we report only the performance and the
parameters obtained by the simulations.
For the standard diffusion model Ratcliff and colleagues have
shown that the parameter estimates obtained by fitting the model to
quantile-averaged data are similar to the averages of parameter
estimates obtained by fitting the model to individual participant
data . Because we did not know whether this result
could be generalized to the DSTP model, we also compared the
two estimation procedures. As can be seen in Table I, the two sets
of parameter values are rather similar. The values obtained for the
averaged data are within half a standard deviation of the parameters obtained by averaging the values estimated for the individual
participants. Therefore, in the following, we consider only the fit
to the quantile-averaged data.
The performance of the DSTP model is represented by the lines
in Figure 3. As can be seen, the fit is rather good. If we consider
the parameter values, then we see that, as expected, the partial rate
ILJl for the flankers is substantially increased for the narrow condition, whereas the partial rate ILia for the target is similar between
the spacing conditions (see Table I). As a consequence, the overall
rate for RSI is even negative for incongruent stimuli in the narrow
condition. The criterion is only slightly increased in the narrow
condition. Concerning the late stimulus selection process, the rates
are similar for the two spacing conditions. However, the criterion
is increased under the narrow spacing. Moreover, the rate of the
response selection process in Phase 2 was considerably higher for
the narrow condition. This indicates a strong effect of late stimulus
selection on response selection, especially for the narrow spacing.
Thus, overall, the parameter differences between the two spacing
conditions are as expected.
In Table 2 the empirical and theoretical mean RTs and response
probabilities are provided. As can be seen, the mean values are
rather similar. Because our model allows one to calculate the
relative contributions of RSI and RS2 to performance, Table 2 also
shows the probabilities PRs,(A) and PRs,(B) that a correct or
incorrect response is already selected by RSI, respectively. As can
be seen, for congruent stimuli RSI selects more correct responses
in the narrow condition than in the wide condition, whereas the
opposite holds for incongruent stimuli. This results from the increased contribution of the flankers in the narrow condition. If we
consider the error responses, then we see that almost all are
produced by RSl. In the narrow condition, for instance, incongruent stimuli produced about 15.5% errors, of which 15.4% can be
attributed to RSI.
All together, our model fit and analyses revealed that the DSTP
model accounts rather well for the various aspects of the present
data. The next experiment provides another example, where the
efficiency of early spatial filtering was manipulated by varying
spatial uncertainty and eccentricity.
Experiment 2: Spatial Uncertainty and Eccentricity
of the Stimulus
In our second experiment we tried to manipulate the relative
contributions of early and late stimulus selection in the flanker task
by varying spatial uncertainty and eccentricity. For an effective
spatial filtering it is important that the filter can be positioned
optimally at the target location. Accordingly, spatial uncertainty
about the exact location of target and flankers usually leads to an
impaired performance . Thus, it is
reasonable to assume that under spatial uncertainty a reliable
performance can be achieved only if response selection is strongly
supported by a late stimulus selection stage, where selection is
based, for instance, on categorical spatial information such as "the
middle letter."
To investigate whether late selection is indeed strongly involved
under spatial uncertainty, we conducted an experiment in which the
entire pattern of the target and the two flankers could occur at different
positions on the screen. In one blocked condition (I-position-central)
Parameter Values of the DSTP Model for the Stimulus Spacing Conditions in Experiment 1
Early selection
Late selection
.0404 (.0394)
:':.0162 (:':.0224)
.0681 (.0694)
.3657 (.3635)
.0706 (.0726)
:': 1.149 (:': 1.261)
.2155 (.2176)
.0449 (.0372)
:':.0651 (:':.0663)
.0699 (.0717)
.3680 (.3717)
.0863 (.0874)
:': 1.575 (:': 1.524)
.2248 (.2255)
The values in parentheses are the averages of the parameter estimates obtained by fitting the model to the individual data sets of the participants.
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase; ft = rate or drift of a given diffusion process and condition; ta = target; j1 = flanker; A = criterion for response selection;
SS = stimulus selection process; C = criterion for stimulus selection; RS2 = response selection process in Phase 2; fa = nondecisional parameter that
represents time used for stimulus encoding, response execution, and so forth.
Empirical Mean Data in Experiment 1 and Corresponding Values Produced by the DSTP Model
Incongruent
The columns labeled with PRs,(A) contain the probabilities that a correct response is already selected in Phase I of response selection. The columns
labeled with PRs,(B) provide the probabilities that an incorrect response is selected in Phase I of response selection. RT = response time, in milliseconds;
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase.
there was no spatial uncertainty, because the stimuli always appeared
at the center of the display. In another blocked condition (2-positionslateral) the stimulus pattern could occur at either a left or at a right
position. Although there was some spatial uncertainty, the two positions were chosen in such a way that the innermost flanker always
appeared at the center of the display. Consequently, the five positions
that could be occupied by items were uniquely linked to the target or
to the flankers. Finally, there was a blocked condition (three positions)
where the stimulus pattern either appeared at the center (3-positionscentral) or at one of the two lateral positions (3-positions-lateral). This
not only increased spatial uncertainty, but the middle three item
positions were also no longer uniquely linked to the target or to
flankers. With these features, the 3-positions condition had the largest
spatial uncertainty. Thus, to assess the effect of uncertainty, we
compared performance in the l-position-central and 2-positionslateral conditions with that in the 3-positions-central and 3-positionslateral conditions, respectively. The details of the method and mean
results can be found in Appendix B.
Obviously, the different conditions differed not only with respect to spatial uncertainty but also with respect to eccentricity,
which should also affect stimulus selection. For a laterally presented stimulus pattern it can be expected that target selection is
more difficult than for a pattern that appears at the center. Accordingly, the effects of eccentricity were assessed by comparing the
performance between the central and lateral conditions.
The analysis of the mean performance supported our hypotheses
that spatial uncertainty as well as eccentricity increased the difficulty of target selection (see Appendix B). As expected, the
congruency effect in RT was significantly larger in the 3-positions
conditions compared to the l-position-central and 2-positionslateral conditions. Moreover, the congruency effect was also larger
for lateral than for central stimuli.
If we consider the distributions of the different conditions (see
Figure 4), then it is obvious that the overall pattern of each condition
is similar to that of the narrow condition in our first experiment.
Additionally, the effects of eccentricity and uncertainty can be seen.
With respect to eccentricity, the distributions of the correct RTs are
generally shallower for the lateral positions than for the central position. Moreover, the functions for congruent and incongruent stimuli
are further separated, which reflects the larger congruency effects. In
the distributions of incorrect RTs the increased congruency effect for
the lateral positions is reflected by an increased proportion of errors
for incongruent stimuli. The increased congruency effects caused by
spatial uncertainty can be seen by the larger separation between the
corresponding distributions in the 3-positions-central condition, compared to the l-position-central condition. In the lateral conditions, this
effect is relatively small. All together, though, our manipulations of
selection difficulty had the intended effects. To see whether they are
also reflected by the model parameters, the model was fit to our data.
The DSTP model was fit to the quantile-averaged distributions with
the same procedure as before. The question was to what extent spatial
uncertainty and eccentricity reduced the efficiency of early selection
and whether this deficit was compensated for by an increased involvement of late selection. As can be seen in Figure 4, the model fit the
data quite well. If we consider the obtained parameters for the
l-position-central condition (see Table 3), then we see that the partial
rate for the flankers is smaller than that for the target. This is different
from the comparable narrow condition in the previous experiment and
indicates that in the present experimental context the participants
allocated a larger portion of their attention to the target position than
to the flanker positions. Accordingly, the rate for Phase 2 could also
be smaller, compared to our first experiment.
This is also rather different from the situation where the stimulus pattern appeared at one of the lateral positions. As expected,
in this case the attentional weight was relatively low for the target
but high for the flankers. As a result, the overall rate for RSI is
negative for incongruent stimuli. This led to an increase of the
response criterion and to a high rate for RS2. The same relation
holds between the 3-positions-central and the 3-positions-lateral
conditions. If we compare the l-position-central condition with the
same stimulus condition under spatial uncertainty (3-positionscentral), then it is obvious that the distribution of attention was
slightly changed in favor of the flankers, which caused the larger
congruency effect. Obviously, for the lateral condition, spatial
uncertainty had only a small effect (2-positions-lateral vs.
3-positions-lateral). Although the parameters indicate a stronger
involvement of late selection in the 3-positions-lateral condition,
the parameters for early selection are rather similar.
Thus, concerning the relative contributions of RSI and RS2 to
the overall performance, we have a similar picture as before (see
Table 4). Under difficult selection conditions the overall rate for
RSI is rather small or even negative. Accordingly, only a few
correct responses to incongruent stimuli are triggered by this
1-position-central
9" Correct
~responses
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
2-positions-lateral
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
3-positions-central
~-r~~~~'-~~~
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
3-positions-lateral
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
The panels show defective cumulative response time (RT) distributions (quantile averaged) separately for congruent and incongruent trials of the four conditions in our second experiment. The two upper
distributions in each panel refer to correct responses, whereas the two lower distributions in each panel refer to
error responses. Symbols represent experimental data and lines represent fit values of the dual-stage two-phase
(DSTP) model.
process. In the 2-positions-Iateral condition, for instance, only 9%
of the correct responses were selected by RSI. In contrast, almost
all incorrect responses are due to RSI. If we again consider the
2-positions-Iateral condition, then of the 21 % errors, 20.2% were
caused by RSI. Thus, the small rate of RSI reduces the probability
that a correct response is already selected in Phase I, but, at the
same time, it also increases the probability that RS2 comes into
play. Because response selection in Phase 2 is slow but reliable,
this explains why the accuracy improves considerably with RT in
this difficult condition, even though at some costs in RT.
All together, the results of the present experiment show that spatial
uncertainty and eccentricity can have a substantial negative effect on
performance. By fitting our DSTP model to the distributional data
(see Figure 4) we were able to decipher how the attentional selection
mechanisms adapt to the different stimulus conditions. It seems that,
if a target always uniquely appears at a central location, then spatial
attention can be effectively restricted to that location. This largely
prevents the processing of the flankers. As a consequence, a response
can often be selected by the information provided by this early
filtering process, even when the flankers are incongruent. However, if
the target position is variable and shared with the flankers, and/or the
target is presented at a lateral position, then spatial filtering is less
efficient. For incongruent stimuli this leads to a reduced or even
negative overall rate. Fortunately, the impaired spatial filtering can
partly be compensated for by a strengthened late stimulus selection
process, which keeps the performance at an acceptable level, at least
for slow responses.
Experiment 3: Proportion of Congruent and
Incongruent Stimuli
By analyzing and modeling the data of the last two experiments
we have demonstrated that late selection can compensate deficits
of early selection. It turned out that in conditions where early
selection was not very selective, late selection was strengthened.
Does this mean that any reduction of early selectivity always leads
Parameter Estimates Obtained by Fitting the DSTP Model to Quantile-Averaged Data for the Different Conditions in Experiment 2
Early selection
Late selection
I-position-central
2-positions-Iateral
3-positions-central
3-positions-lateral
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase; fL = rate or drift of a given diffusion process and condition; ta = target; fl = flanker; A = criterion for response
selection; SS = stimulus selection process; C = criterion for stimulus selection; RS2 = response selection process in Phase 2; t", = nondecisional parameter
that represents time used for stimulus encoding, response execution, and so forth.
to an enhanced late selection? Or are there also situations in which
both selection mechanisms are adjusted in the same direction? As
we have seen in the last experiments, the compensation of an early
selection deficit is actually necessary only if the flankers carry
incongruent information. With congruent flankers, low early selectivity even has an advantage, because it increases the overall
rate of the response selection process. In this case a strong late
selection process is of little help. Thus, in a situation where mainly
congruent stimuli occur, we would expect a low early selectivity
and, at the same time, only a low to moderate involvement of late
selection. In contrast, when incongruent stimuli are frequent, then
early selectivity should generally be high, and, if this is not
sufficient for a reliable performance, late selection should be
strong as well. These predictions were tested in the present experiment. While keeping the basic stimulus conditions constant, we
tried to manipulate the selection strategy by varying the proportion
of congruent trials.
For several conflict paradigms it has been shown that the proportion of congruent trials systematically affects performance
 . These and
related effects have been interpreted in the way that attention is
generally less selective when stimuli are congruent in the majority
of trials . Although
this attentional control account has also been questioned , several studies strongly
support it . Thus, for our present objective we assumed that
selectivity is determined by an attentional control strategy.
In our experiment we had one condition with 80% congruent
trials and another condition with 20% congruent trials. The stimuli
and basic procedure were similar to the 2-positions-lateral condition in the previous experiment (see Appendix B). We expected
that the participants would use a specific selection strategy for
each condition. If the stimuli are congruent on most of the trials,
then stimulus processing should be less selective than when the
stimuli are mostly incongruent. This strategic difference should be
reflected by the flanker congruency effects. Indeed, in the 80%congruent condition the flanker congruency effect in RT was
significantly larger than in the 20%-congruent condition (see Appendix B). If we consider the RT distributions in Figure 5, then it
is obvious that the congruency effect again increased with RT in
Empirical Mean Data in Experiment 2 and Corresponding Values Produced by the DSTP Model
Incongruent
I-position-central
2-positions-Iateral
3-positions-central
3-positions-Iateral
The columns labeled with PRS' (A) contain the probabilities that a correct response is already selected in Phase 1 of response selection. The columns
labeled with PRs,(B) provide the probabilities that an incorrect response is selected in Phase 1 of response selection. RT
response time, in milliseconds;
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase.
20% congruent trials
9' Correct
Q-0- - - - - j) responses
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
80% congruent trials
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
The two panels show defective cumulative response time (RT) distributions (quantile averaged)
separately for congruent and incongruent trials of the two conditions in our third experiment. The two upper
distributions in each panel refer to correct responses, whereas the two lower distributions in each panel refer to
error responses. Symbols represent experimental data and lines represent fit values of the dual-stage two-phase
(DSTP) model.
both conditions, but to a larger extent in the 80%-congruent
condition. The congruency effect also differed substantially for
error responses between the conditions, as can be seen by considering the corresponding distributions (see Figure 5).
The reduced selectivity in the 80%-congruent condition sped up
responding, relative to the 20%-congruent condition. However, if we
consider the distributions in Figure 5, then we see that in the 80%congruency condition many of the fast responses to incongruent
stimuli were errors. Thus, whereas the applied attentional strategy is
reflected in the error rates by costs for fast responses, in RT it is
mainly reflected by costs for slow responses. The interesting question
was whether the reduced early selectivity in the 80%-congruent condition was this time not compensated for by a strengthened late
selection process, compared to the 20%-congruent condition. To see
whether this was the case, we fit the DSTP model to the data.
In Table 5 the parameter values estimated by the same procedure as before are shown. As expected, the values indicate that the
selectivity of the spatial filter is relatively low for the 80%-
congruent condition (see Table 5), which leads to a negative
overall rate for incongruent stimuli. Because the criterion for the
response selection process is also relatively low, a large proportion
(42.8%; see Table 6) of the correct responses to congruent stimuli
are already selected by RSI. This explains the good performances
for congruent stimuli in the 80%-congruent condition. However, as
already mentioned, this strategy produces costs for incongruent
stimuli. The negative overall rate combined with the relatively low
criterion, produces many fast errors, as reflected by the corresponding distribution. In case no response is selected in Phase 1,
RS2 starts relatively late. Because most of the correct responses to
incongruent stimuli are selected by RS2, the congruency effect in
RT is increased for slow responses.
If we consider the parameter values for the 20%-congruent
condition, then we see that the selectivity of the spatial filter is
increased (see Table 5) relative to that in the 80%-congruent
condition. As a consequence, the overall rate for incongruent
stimuli is small, but positive. Furthermore, the criterion for the
response selection process is slightly increased. Although these
parameter values are helpful for attaining an acceptable perfor-
Parameter Estimates Obtained by Fitting the DSTP Model to Quantile-Averaged DataJor the Different Conditions in Experiment 3
Early selection
Late selection
20% congruent
80% congruent
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase; I-' = rate or drift of a given diffusion process and condition; fa = target; fl = flanker; A = criterion for response
selection; SS = stimulus selection process; C = criterion for stimulus selection; RS2
response selection process in Phase 2; ler = nondecisional parameter
that represents time used for stimulus encoding, response execution, and so forth.
Empirical Mean Data in Experiment 3 and Corresponding Values Produced by the DSTP Model
Incongment
20% congment
80% congment
The columns labeled with PR." (A) contain the probabilities that a correct response is already selected in Phase I of response selection. The columns
labeled with PRs,(B) provide the probabilities that an incorrect response is selected in Phase 1 of response selection. RT = response time, in milliseconds;
DSTP = dual-stage two-phase.
mance on incongruent trials, which make up the majority, the
achieved early selectivity is obviously not sufficient to meet the
demands in such experimental conditions. Therefore, late selection
is strengthened as well by increasing the rate for the stimulus
selection process (and for RS2), by increasing the rate of the
stimulus selection process, and by slightly increasing the criterion
(C). Consequently, RSl selects a correct response on relatively few
congruent trials (31.2%), which is also responsible for the increased mean RT. For incongruent stimuli, RSI even selects a
correct response on only 13.8% of the trials. Thus, by strengthening both early and late stimulus selection, the selection of a
response by RSl is largely avoided, which guarantees relatively
high accuracy.
All together, the estimated parameter values for the DSTP
model for the different ratio conditions show that late selection is
not automatically strengthened when early selectivity is reduced.
Under certain conditions, for example, when flanker coprocessing
is advantageous and the risk of committing an error is low, both
early selection and late selection are reduced. On the other hand, if
the conditions for achieving a reliable performance are relatively
difficult, both selection mechanisms are strengthened, if possible.
Comparison With Alternative Models
The application of our DSTP model to empirical data demonstrates that it can account weIl for the details of various attentional
effects. However, because it has a relatively complex structure that
includes several mechanisms of attentional selection, one might
ask whether this complexity is really necessary. Perhaps an advanced single-stage selection model could also account for the
considered distributional data. And even if this is not the case,
there might be alternative models of similar complexity as the
DSTP model that could explain the distributional data. Although
these questions cannot exhaustively be answered in this article, we
provide at least partial answers. First we examine the performance
of a single-stage model. Then we examine models with a continuously increasing drift. FinaIly, we consider two variants of the
DSTP model.
Comparing different models is not an easy task, because they
usuaIly differ in various aspects, especiaIly if they are expressed in
different formal frameworks. Therefore, to make the comparison
easier, we implemented all considered models in the framework of
diffusion processes and fit them to our distributional data in the
same way as the DSTP model. The performance of the models was
assessed by means of the Bayesian information criterion (BIC)
model-selection statistic , which takes the
number of free model parameters into account. There are also other
statistics , which, however, would lead to the
same conclusions in the present case. We preferred the BIC because it can be derived from the G2 statistic that we used for data fitting. The G2 and BIC statistics for
all models and fits are listed in Table 7. The best model is the one
with the smallest BIC.
Single-Stage Model
That single-stage models can account for the mean effects of
flanker congruency has already been shown .
Here, we examine to what extent such models can also account for
distributional data. It can be expected that single-stage models
have problems obtaining an acceptable mean accuracy for incongruent stimuli in difficult selection conditions and producing a
large error rate for fast responses at the same time. To see how a
single-stage model performs, we combined our early selection
mechanism with a stationary diffusion process for response selection. However, a simple diffusion process can principally not
account for faster error responses than correct responses, because
the corresponding distribution functions are identical. Therefore,
we assumed a random starting value for the diffusion process,
which, on average, leads to faster errors than correct responses . More specificaIly, we assumed that X(O) is a
uniformly distributed random variable with mean zero and range
s,. Thus, all together we had five free model parameters: the
component rates for target and flankers, the response criterion, the
range of the starting value, and the nondecisional time.
Fitting the single-stage model to the distributional data of all
experimental conditions revealed that, as expected, its performance was relatively poor (see Table 7). To show an example, we
plotted the performance of this model for the narrow condition in
our first experiment (see Figure 6). As can be seen, the model
substantially overestimates the accuracy for responses to incongruent stimuli. Also, the fits to the distributions of the correct
responses deviate systematically. The proportion of fast correct
responses is overestimated, whereas that for slow correct responses
is underestimated. If we consider the obtained parameter estimates
(narrow condition: fL", = .2455, fL(1 = .0344, A = .0526, sz =
Fit Statistics of the Considered Models for the Different
Experimental Conditions
Condition and model
12.4 (12.3)
59.9 (59.7)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
15.7 (15.8)
63.2 (63.2)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
I-position-central
7.86 (7.33)
50.3 (49.7)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
2-positions-Iateral
10.0 (10.3)
52.5 (52.7)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
3-positions-central
8.18 (7.74)
47.7 (47.3)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
3-positions-Iateral
17.7 (16.8)
62.2 (61.3)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
20%-congruent
12.6(12.1)
61.6 (61.0)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
80%-congruent
25.3 (24.8)
74.3 (73.9)
No priming
Nonlinear increase
Linear increase
Single stage
The G2 and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) values are based
on the performance obtained by computer simulations of the models. The
values in parentheses for the dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model represent
the corresponding values obtained with the analytic version (see Appendix
A) of the model.
.0566, ter = .2848; wide condition: fJ..la = .3049, fJ..jl = :t.0l05,
A = .0539, sz = .0594, ter = .274548), then we see that the
component rates and the criteria vary in the expected direction
between the two spacing conditions, but only moderately. For
instance, even for the narrow condition the overall rate for incongruent stimuli differs by only a relatively small amount from that
for congruent stimuli. This explains the overestimated accuracy for
the former condition. Thus, the single-stage model cannot account
for results whcre performance is poor for fast responses but good
for slow responses.
For comparison, we also fit the Ratcliff diffusion model to the
data, that is, a diffusion model where not only the starting value
but also the rate and ter vary randomly across trials. It turned out
that these additional parameters did not improve the performance.
Thus, it seems that a standard single-stage model is not appropriate
for explaining our data.
Continuously Increasing Drift Model
The poor performance of the single-stage model indicates that at
least for conflict paradigms it is necessary to assume some form of
increase in selectivity during stimulus processing. In the DSTP
model selectivity improves abruptly in one step at some point in
time. Because this point was interpreted as the time when the
output of a categorical late selection mechanism is available, the
success of our model can be considered support for the idea that
selection can occur either at an early or at a late stage. This idea is
also in accord with Gratton et al.'s dual-phase idea, that is,
with the assumption that there are two phases of different selectivity. If we consider the various formal approaches to account for
Gratton et a!.' s distributional data, though, then we see that
all of them assume a gradually increasing selectivity. One reason
for this characteristic might be that neural networks were mostly
used for modeling. Cohen et a!. , for instance, used such a framework. Although the performance of their model was qualitatively
in accord with the data, there were relatively large and systematic
quantitative deviations. For instance, the accuracy for the congruent condition was systematically overestimated. Some points of the
fit even deviate by more than 10% . Furthermore, the details of this approach remain unclear,
for example, how many free parameters were used and exactly
how selectivity changes over time.
Recently, Liu et al. also modeled Gratton et al.'s 
data using a neural network model. However, because their model
involves somewhat arbitrary assumptions on architecture and parameters, the authors also approximated its behavior with a diffusion model with a linear, quadratic, or exponential drift rate. It
turned out that the diffusion model with the exponential drift rate
best accounted for the data, although there were still systematic
deviations. Here, we apply similar types of models to fit our data.
We assumed that response selection proceeds by a diffusion process whose rate can change gradually with time. In our first
approach, we further assumed that the contribution of the flankers
continuously vanishes with time, which corresponds to the idea of
a dynamic spotlight whose diameter shrinks
gradually until it is focused on the target.
For incongruent stimuli, where the initial effect of the flankers
is negative, these assumptions lead to a gradual increase of the
Single-stage model
o incongruent
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Linear increase model
o incongruent
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Race model
o incongruent
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Non-linear increase model
o incongruent
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
The panels show examples of the perfonnance of the alternative models. The symbols in each panel
represent the data of the narrow spacing condition in our first experiment. The lines in each of the four panels
represent the fit values of one of the alternative models as identified above each panel.
overall rate until the spotlight is restricted to the target. For
congruent stimuli, though, where the initial effect of the flankers is
positive, such a dynamic would imply that the overall rate decreases, which seems unreasonable. To avoid such a consequence,
it is usually assumed that the density of the attention resources
increases with a decreasing diameter of the spotlight . For the present
framework this implies that the attentional weight for the target
increases with a shrinking spotlight. If the weight for the target
increases to the same extent as that for the flankers decreases, then
the overall rate for congruent stimuli remains constant. Accordingly, for congruent stimuli we assumed that the overall rate of the
response selection process has a constant value f.Lx' whereas the
rate for incongruent stirilUli starts with a relatively small value and
then increases until it also reaches the value f.Lx'
But exactly how should the rate increase? We first considered a
model with a linearly changing rate . For
incongruent stimuli the overall rate was set to f.L(t) = f.Lx - ".tit)
for t ? 0, where f.L,.(t) decreases linearly with time, that is, f.Lv(t) =
f.Lyo tOy, until it reaches zero. The parameter Oy represents the
decrement per time unit. However, the performance of this model
was rather poor. Therefore, we additionally assumed that the
overall rate further increases even after the spotlight has excluded
the flankers, that is, after f.L/t) has reached zero. Specifically, we
assumed that the common rate f.Lx increases from that point on by
to., up to a maximum rate f.L"UH' Including the boundary and
nondecisional time parameter te,' this dynamic spotlight model has
seven free parameters.
The result of the model fit is also shown in Table 7. As can be
seen, compared to the simple single-stage model the fit has improved for most conditions. If we consider the performance for the
narrow condition in our first experiment (see Figure 6), then it is
obvious that in this case the fit mainly improved for the distributions of correct RTs. The fit to the distribution of the error RTs
remains poor. The parameter estimates for this condition are as
follows: fLx = .1829, i\ .0020, fLmax = .3660, fLyo = .1911, Oy =
.0024, A = .0501, and ter = .2709. For the wide condition the
parameter estimates are as follows: fLx = .1741, ox
fLmax = .3622, fLvo = .1929, 0" = .0037, A = .0536, and ter =
.2402. These values are difficult to interpret. For instance, the
starting value fLyu of the flankers is larger for the wide than for the
narrow condition, and an even more pronounced relation holds for
0Y' which is not very plausible. Taken together, we can conclude
that although the dynamic spotlight led to improved fits compared
to the single-stage model, it remains rather poor in absolute terms.
This demonstrates that the simple assumption of a linearly increasing selectivity, even if there are different periods with different
slopes, is not appropriate for satisfactorily explaining our distributional data.
One might argue that the assumption of a stepwise linearly
increasing rate and the other constraints are too restrictive and that
a nonlinear increase with fewer constraints might be more appropriate. To see whether this is the case, we also considered a model
with a nonlinearly increasing rate. But how should the rate increase? As mentioned, Liu et al. applied a quadratic and an
exponential drift rate, but with moderate success. A proper function might be obtained by examining how the mean rate (across
trials) of the DSTP model changes with time (under the condition
that no response has been selected yet). It turned out that this
change can almost perfectly be described by a logistic growth
function of the form fL(t) = (fLo fLmax)/[l + (tltJ"] + f.lmax' In
this equation the parameters f.lo and f.l""u are the starting and
maximal value of the rate, respectively. The parameter tc is the
point of inflection, and the exponent a determines how fast the
mean rate grows. We used this type of nonlinear function to model
the growth in rate with time. Moreover, except for f.lmax' we used
individual parameter sets of this function for the two congruency
conditions. Thus, including the common response criterion A and
ter we had nine parameters. As can be seen in Table 7, compared
to the piecewise linear model the fit generally improved.
In Figure 6 the fit to the narrow condition in our first experiment
is shown. The values of the common parameter values are f.ln"L< =
.2911, A = .0474, and ter = .2842. The values of the specific
parameters for the congruent condition are f.lo = .0010, t,. = .0232,
a = .6006, and those for the incongruent condition are f.lo = .0002,
tc = .0548, a = .2246. As one would expect, the starting rate (f.lo)
is larger for the congruent condition than the incongruent one. Also
the increase of the rate occurs earlier for the former condition and
is faster, as indicated by the values of tc and a.
If, for comparison, we consider the wide condition, then the
values of the common parameters are f.lmax = .2903, A = .0495,
and ter = .2586. The values of the other parameters for the
congruent condition are f.lo = .0003, tc = .0297, a = .4914, and
those for the incongruent condition are f.lo = .0018, tc = .0400,
a = .2264. Concerning the values of the parameters (. and a, the
difference between the two congruency conditions is smaller compared with the narrow condition, which is plausible. The starting
rate, however, is larger in the incongruent condition than in the
congruent condition, which is implausible.
Nevertheless, the nonlinear model fit the data generally better
than the piecewise linear model. However, due to the costs produced by the increased number of parameters, the BIC is smaller
in only half of the cases (see Table 7). Moreover, the goodness of
fit of the nonlinear model is still far away from that of the DSTP
model. Clearly, we cannot definitely exclude that there is a nonlinear model that fits the data much better. However, it is hard to
tell whether such a model exists, and even if there were such a
model, it would be difficult to find and presumably very special.
Thus, taken together, our considerations suggest that it is rather
unlikely that a model with a gradually increasing selectivity can
generally account well for distributional flanker task data.
Variants of the DSTP Model
The considerations so far suggest that the two discrete stages of
stimulus selection and the corresponding two phases of response
selection are the crucial characteristics of the DSTP model that are
responsible for its successful performance. Additionally, however,
we made a number of further specific assumptions. The question is
how important these assumptions are. For instance, we assumed
that there is only one response selection process that changes its
rate after a stimulus has been selected. Alternatively, though, one
could assume that a second (controlled) response selection process
starts (with a starting value of zero) when a stimulus is selected
and that the first (automatic) response selection process continues
unchanged.
Such an architecture would be a realization of a specific variant
of the dual-route or dual-process idea. As mentioned in the introduction, one version of this idea, which is structurally rather
similar to the DSTP model, assumes that an automatic priming
process and a controlled rule-based process affect the same response selection mechanism . Another version, however, assumes that the automatic and controlled routes
are independent and that each of the corresponding processes can
select a response . Thus, the dual processes compete in a race, and
the process that reaches the response criterion first determines the
response. This idea can easily be implemented as a variant of the
DSTP model. Instead of that RS2 takes over from RS1, one would
simple have to assume that RS2 runs in parallel with RSI after a
stimulus has been selected until one of the processes selects a
response. Such a race model has the same number of parameters as
the DSTP model.
The performance statistics of this race model are also given in
Table 7. As can be seen, in some cases the performance is worse
than that of the DSTP model, in others it is rather similar, and in
one case it is even better. As for the other models, the fit to the
narrow condition in our first experiment is shown as an example
(see Figure 6). The obtained parameter values for the narrow
condition are as follows: f.lta = .0452, f1t7 = .0647, A = .0694,
f.lss = .3681, C = .0864, f.lRS2 =  1.5745, and ter = .2247; those
for the wide condition are as follows: fL'a = .0442, f.lfl = .0172,
A = .0673, f.lss = .3777, C
.0724, f.lRS2 = 1.l606, and ter =
.2135. Obviously, the values are similar to those for the DSTP
model. For instance, the overall rate for the narrow condition is
negative and, compared to the wide condition, the rate for RS2
is larger. If we consider Figure 6, then it is obvious that the fit is
slightly worse than that of the DSTP model. This is also reflected
by an overestimation of the error rate in the incongruent condition
(20% instead of 16%) and by an underestimation of the flanker
congruency effect (15 ms instead of 30 ms).
Nevertheless, all together the performance of the race model is
rather similar to that of the DSTP model. However, this is not
surprising, if one takes into account that, according to the superposition principle , two parallel diffusion processes are equivalent to a single
diffusion process. For this equivalence it is usually assumed that
both processes start from the same value. In the present case,
though, we have the situation that, considered from stimulus
selection onward, RS2 starts from zero, but RSI continues from a
random state, that is, from the end state of the first phase. This fact
is presumably responsible for the small difference in performance
between the race and the DSTP model that was observed in our
These considerations raise the question of whether it is important that RS2 starts from the end state of RSI. This feature was
included in the DSTP model to reflect the priming of the state of
evidence by mechanisms driven by early information, which is a
crucial characteristic of the continuous flow idea . To examine whether this feature is important in the
present case, we also simulated a variant of the DSTP model,
where RS2 again starts at the time when RSl ends, but this time
always with a starting value of zero. If we consider the performance statistic of this no-priming model in Table 7, then we see
that the difference to the DSTP model is rather small. In two cases
the performance is even better. Thus, for fitting the present data the
assumption of response priming is not generally important. However, our results suggest that response priming becomes more
important the more late selection is involved in response selection.
General Discussion
Various results observed during the last decades indicate that the
mechanisms of selective attention are rather flexible and adaptive.
Depending on the circumstances and the specific task, they select
stimulus information at an early and/or late stage of processing . Furthermore, results from
conflict paradigms such as the flanker task suggest that information provided by the early and the late stages contributes to
response selection in a dynamical manner. This can be concluded
from distributional data . They show that
response-incompatible information mainly affects the accuracy of
fast responses, which indicates that there are two phases of selectivity. In the first phase selectivity is poor, which produces fast but
unreliable responses. In the second phase, however, selectivity is
high, which leads to slow but reliable responses. Thus, it seems
that selectivity improves in the course of stimulus processing.
Up to now, however, the flexibility and dynamics of selective
attention have not been appropriately reflected by models of selective attention. Therefore, the aim of the present article was to
introduce a dual-stage two-phase (DSTP) model that takes these
properties into account. The basic idea is that there are two stages
of stimulus selection and that their output leads to two corresponding phases of response selection, which are represented by a
nonstationary diffusion process. In the first phase after stimulus
onset the rate of this process is determined by the output of the
early stage, where stimulus information is selected by means of
perceptual filters. During the second phase the rate of response
selection is determined by the output of a late stimulus selection
stage. Late stimulus selection is also represented by a diffusion
process that runs in parallel to response selection and selects
specific categorical information from the display. Because it is
assumed that perceptual filtering is less effective than categorical
filtering, there are two phases of different selectivity. As the late
stimulus selection process and the response selection process compete in a race, it is possible that a response is already selected
during the first phase, which usually leads to fast but unreliable
responses, or during the second phase, which produces slow but
reliable responses.
The basic idea that stimulus processing consists of discrete
phases differing with respect to processing rate has also been used
in other models . In the model of multidimensional stimulus
categorization of Lamberts and colleagues , for instance, performance depends on the similarity of stimulus features sampled
from the current stimulus to those from exemplars stored in memory . Stimulus features are
sampled in a stepwise manner, and therefore, similarity changes in
discrete steps. Although this resembles the change of processing
rate across phases in our model, there are also a number of
differences. Most important, in their model, the number of processed stimulus features is increasing in the course of stimulus
processing. In contrast, our model implies that the number of
stimulus elements affecting response selection is reduced in the
course of processing. A similar reasoning also applies to multiattribute decision field theory . Nevertheless, the similarities between the models
demonstrate the general applicability of the idea of a nonstationary
process of response selection.
Although the DSTP model is rather abstract and can potentially
be applied to various paradigms, in the present study we restricted
our considerations to selective visual attention in the flanker task
 . We reported a series of three
experiments in which we manipulated the relative contributions of
early and late selection to performance. In the three experiments
this was achieved by varying the spacing between target and
flankers, the spatial uncertainty and eccentricity, and the relative
proportion of congruent and incongruent stimuli, respectively.
Fitting our model to the obtained distributional data should reveal
whether the estimated parameter values vary in the predicted
direction. In the first two experiments it turned out that, as expected, a stronger involvement of the late selection process compensated for early selection deficits in difficult selection conditions. In our third experiment, though, we could show that such
compensation is not obligatory. In the two experimental conditions
the strength of early and late selection strategically changed in the
same direction to improve overall performance.
All together, our results and analyses demonstrate that early and
late selection mechanisms work hand in hand in a rather flexible
way, depending on the demands of the task. That selectivity also
depends on the experimental context can be seen by the fact that,
although the narrow condition in our first experiment was practically identical to the I-position condition in our second experiment, the corresponding performances differed, especially with
respect to the error RT distributions. This demonstrates that the
experience with the specific conditions in an experiment can
influence the stimulus selection strategy.
Our investigation also extends the view of which selection
mechanism can be controlled and how this is achieved to adapt to
task demands. It seems that individuals can not only control early
selection by tuning their perceptual filters but also that they
can regulate the strength ofIate selection. According to our model,
the latter can be achieved indirectly by regulating early selection
and by adjusting the response criterion. That is, increasing the
criterion might not only improve the accuracy of responses determined by the output of early selection processes, but the resulting
prolonged processing may also increase the probability that late
stimulus selection comes into play and improves response selection. However, our results also suggest that late selection can be
controlled directly to some extent.
Possible Alternative Accounts
The DSTP model was mainly developed to overcome the limits
of single-stage models of selection. To demonstrate that these
limits really exist, we also fit a single-stage model to our distributional data and found that, as expected, the fit was rather poor.
It remains poor even when a gradually increasing selectivity is
assumed. Such models have especially been proposed in connection with the zoom-lens metaphor. A specific version is the dynamic spotlight of attention proposed by Heitz et al. . These
authors assumed that at the beginning of stimulus processing the
spotlight always encompasses all items in the display and then
gradually shrinks until it is focused on the target.
A similar idea has also been realized as neural network models
 to account for
the Gratton et al. data . To examine
the effects of a gradually increasing selectivity, we first considered
a model with a piecewise linearly increasing rate and then a model
with a nonlinearly increasing rate. Although these models fit the
data better than the single-stage model, the fit was still worse than
that of the DSTP model. Thus, taken together, our comparison
suggests that models with a gradually increasing selectivity are not
a compelling alternative to our DSTP model. Even if one could
find an exemplar that fits the data quite well, the obtained solution
would presumably be rather specific.
Thus, it seems that the strength of the DSTP model lies in its two
discrete stages of selectivity and in the fact that the transition from
low selectivity to high selectivity occurs randomly at some point in
time. With these properties the model is highly flexible. That the
details of the second phase are less important was demonstrated by
considering two variants of our DSTP model. In one version it was
assumed that the second phase is characterized by a race between
the continuing response selection processes from the first phase
and an additional response selection process. The additional process should represent the effect of late stimulus selection and
increase the selectivity. This model, which is similar to a certain
class of dual-route accounts , also fit the data rather well. The same
holds for a version without priming, that is, a version where we
assumed that response selection in the second phase always starts
from a state of zero instead from the end state of Phase 1.
Even though the considered variants of the DSTP model also fit
the data rather well, overall, the DSTP model turned out to be the
most successful version. Moreover, although the present study
does not provide a strong test between the original and its variants,
the DSTP model is not only more simple but also more plausible.
The assumption of a single response selection process that changes
its rate with the state of stimulus selectivity is conceptually simpler
than a race between two response selection processes. Furthermore, in view of the abundant results collected with the flanker
task it is rather unlikely that there is no response priming. Besides
behavioral data, electrophysiological results, especially lateralized
readiness potentials, also support the existence of such a priming
mechanism . Therefore, it might be informative to see how early and late selection and
their interaction have been conceptualized in this area.
The Stroop task requires participants to name the color of a
word while ignoring the word's meaning, which also refers to a
color. The Stroop effect denotes the finding that color naming
performance is strongly impaired when the word's meaning is
incongruent to the word's color (e.g., the word red presented in
green) compared to when meaning and color are congruent (e.g.,
the word green presented in green). Compared to the flanker task,
the relevant stimulus dimension in the Stroop task cannot be
selected effectively by spatial or other perceptual filters. Therefore, most models assume that late selection is applied to accomplish the task. In the following, we consider some of these models
and how they relate to our DSTP model.
Most recent models for the Stroop task were implemented
within a pure connectionist framework . In these
models, activation spreads from stimulus units via units representing semantic categories to response units. A response is elicited
when the accumulated evidence exceeds a response criterion
 or the network settles
in an attractor state associated with a response .
Early information selection proceeds by biasing units representing
relevant stimulus features, whereas late selection is achieved by
biasing units representing relevant semantic dimensions. Often
these models also include components of dual-route models . However, they usually lack the
idea of a race between early and late selection. Moreover, due to
a gradually increasing bias, selectivity in these models changes
with time. Thus, these models are rather similar to Cohen et al.'s
 model for the flanker task.
Models that bear more resemblance to our model have been
proposed by Hunt and Lansman and by Roelofs .
These researchers combined a symbolic production system with
features of the connectionist framework. Stimuli are transformed
into semantic representations and into a response by production
rules. Because the rules are consistently applied in accord with the
current goal, only relevant stimulus features drive response selection via this route. However, representations can also be activated
by spreading activation across associated nodes. Because associations are rather strong between words and reading responses,
words interfere with color naming.
The models of Hunt and Lansman and Roelofs 
share some crucial properties with our model. First, response
selection proceeds by a race between a slow but reliable goaldirected process (the productions) and a fast but less reliable
automatic process (spreading activation). Second, this race is interactive in a similar way as in our model. The automatic process
wins either the race and produces a response (which is often the
wrong one for incongruent stimuli), or it affects the speed and
accuracy of the controlled process. Third, each process has its own
stimulus selection mechanism. Whereas the selection of goalrelevant stimulus information for the controlled process is based
on semantic features, which can be considered late selection, the
stimulus selection for the automatic process is mainly based on
perceptual filtering, at least in Roelofs's model, which
corresponds to early selection. Thus, these models realize very
similar ideas as the DSTP model, but they do so within a different
framework. How far these models could also account for the
present data remains unclear, as they have not yet been fit to
distributional data.
Limits and Perspectives
The DSTP model of selective attention introduced in the present
article extends existing (formal) models, especially those developed in the area of spatial attention, by a rather general mechanism
of late stimulus selection. The presence of both an early and a late
stimulus selection mechanism, and the specific way they compete,
accounts for relatively complex and detailed attentional phenomena, as the fit of the model to distributional data collected with the
flanker task demonstrates. However, the model is also limited.
First of all, because it is implemented in the framework of diffusion processes, it applies primarily to speeded responses in forcedchoice situations. Moreover, it is rather general and abstract. As a
consequence, the model has to leave several details unspecified.
For instance, in the present article we assumed that early selection
proceeds by spatial filtering, which can be represented by attentional weights. Although we can use our model to estimate how
these weights vary across different condition, it says nothing about
how the attentional weights are determined. In this sense the DSTP
model is not a model of the low-level details of spatial attention.
To model these details one would have to include additional
mechanisms as specified, for instance, by TVA 
or the CODE theory of visual attention .
A similar abstractness holds for our late selection process.
Formally, it is represented by a diffusion process that comes to a
decision at some point in time, which, in turn, changes the rate of
the response selection process. In the present article we interpreted
this process in the sense that it selects a single item from the
display in a categorical manner, and that thereafter the selected
item exclusively drives the response selection process. These assumptions, however, are somewhat vague and need to be validated
in future work.
However, the fact that some mechanisms of our model are abstract
also opens a wide range of potential applications. A potential application of our model is to generate a more detailed picture of those
mechanisms that persons use to adapt their selectivity on a trial-bytrial basis to changing conditions. That such a local adaptation can
take place has been shown by corresponding sequential effects
 and by effects of adaptation after stimulus onset . Current conflict-control theories assume
that early selectivity is adjusted in response to the monitored
conflict on the previous trial. By fitting our model to appropriate
data one might find that the degree of late selection is adjusted as
well. This is only one example of a broad class of conceivable
applications of the DSTP model in future research.