Registered Reports: A new publishing initiative at Cortex
Christopher D. Chambers
Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC)
School of Psychology
Cardiff University
United Kingdom
Email: 
Tel: +44 (0) 2920 870331
Full reference: Chambers, C.D. . Registered Reports: A new publishing initiative at
Cortex. Cortex, 49, 609-610.
Richard Feynman once famously warned his students that “the first principle [of science] is
that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool.” Despite a proud
history of discovery, some aspects of our publishing culture betray a collective failure to heed
Feynman’s lesson. The life sciences in general, and psychology / cognitive neuroscience in
particular, suffer from publication bias , insufficient statistical power , poor
replicability , undisclosed analytic flexibility and a
lack of data transparency . As a community, we have come to value findings
that are novel and eye-catching over those that are true, incentivising a host of questionable
practices that twist the evidence to suit the narrative. Predictably, many researchers admit
(anonymously) to selectively reporting experiments that produce desirable outcomes (67%), p
value fishing (72%), or failing to report all dependent variables in an experiment (78%) .
These problems stem from the simple fact that editorial decisions are often based on the
results – the one aspect of objective enquiry that authors should never be pressured to
control. Indeed, we teach our science undergraduates that predictions and analyses should be
formulated and planned before data are collected, thereby ensuring that the observer is
independent of the observation. Yet when these students proceed to graduate level they
encounter the unedifying reality that many researchers – even unconsciously – will cherry
pick analyses to reveal publishable effects or revise their hypotheses to ‘predict’ unexpected
findings .
How can we fix these problems? At Cortex we believe that an important part of the solution
is to provide authors with a publishing option that neutralises bad incentives, permitting the
publication of null results and encouraging replication attempts. This is why we will soon be
introducing an additional format of empirical article called a Registered Report. In contrast to
the existing publication options at Cortex, which will remain unchanged, the cornerstone of
Registered Reports is that a substantial part of each submission will be reviewed prior to data
collection. Initial manuscripts will be submitted before a study has been undertaken and will
include a slimline introduction, hypotheses, experimental procedures, analysis pipeline, a
statistical power analysis, and pilot data where applicable. An initial round of editorial
selection will triage the most promising studies for in-depth peer review. Following peer
review, the article will then either be rejected or accepted in principle for publication. Once in
principle acceptance (IPA) has been obtained, the authors will proceed to conduct the study,
adhering exactly to their peer-reviewed procedures. When the study is complete the authors
will submit their finalised manuscript for re-review and will publicly share their raw data and
laboratory log. Pending quality checks and a sensible interpretation of the findings, the
manuscript will be published – and, crucially, independently of what the results show.
The Registered Reports format has several attractive characteristics. First, it will be immune
to publication bias because the decision to accept or reject manuscripts will be based on the
significance of the research question and validity of the methods, never on whether results are
novel or statistically significant. Second, by requiring authors to adhere to a preapproved
methodology and analysis pipeline, it will instantly prevent a host of questionable but
common practices that promote false discoveries, including p value fishing, creative outlier
exclusion, and selective reporting of analyses. Third, by requiring an a priori power analysis,
including a minimum power level of 90%, false negatives will be greatly reduced compared
with standard empirical reports . We believe these criteria will help give
Registered Reports the highest ‘truth value’ of any available scientific publication and will be especially suitable for much-needed replication studies.
Not all modes of scientific investigation will be compatible with the Registered Reports
initiative, and we will be maintaining all of our existing publishing options . However, for most types of studies, Registered Reports will not outlaw
serendipity or hinder legitimate scientific flexibility. Authors will be welcome to include post
hoc analyses that were not mentioned in pre-registered submissions. Such analyses will
simply be distinguished from those that were planned in advance, and authors will not be able
to revise their hypotheses to predict unexpected outcomes.
In the coming months we will formulate detailed author and reviewer guidelines for
Registered Reports. We look forward to launching this exciting new platform and welcome
contributions to the discussion from our readers and the broader scientific community.