MARCH 2021
Key Concepts in AI Safety:
Robustness and Adversarial
CSET Issue Brief
Tim G. J. Rudner
Helen Toner
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1
This paper is the second installment in a series on “AI safety,” an
area of machine learning research that aims to identify causes of
unintended behavior in machine learning systems and develop
tools to ensure these systems work safely and reliably. The first
paper in the series, “Key Concepts in AI Safety: An Overview,”
described three categories of AI safety issues: problems of
robustness, assurance, and specification. This paper introduces
adversarial examples, a major challenge to robustness in modern
machine learning systems.
Introduction
As machine learning becomes more widely used and applied to
areas where safety and reliability are critical, the risk of system
failures causing significant harm rises. To avoid such failures,
machine learning systems will need to be much more reliable than
they currently are, operating safely under a wide range of
conditions.1 In this paper, we introduce adversarial examples—a
particularly challenging type of input to machine learning
systems—and describe an artificial intelligence (AI) safety
approach for preventing system failures caused by such inputs.
Machine learning systems are designed to learn patterns and
associations from data. Typically, a machine learning method
consists of a statistical model of the relationship between inputs
and outputs, as well as a learning algorithm. The algorithm
specifies how the model should change as it receives more
information (in the form of data) about the input–output
relationship it is meant to represent. This process of updating the
model with more data is called “training.”
Once a machine learning model has been trained, it can make
predictions (such as whether an image depicts an object or a
human), perform actions (such as autonomous navigation), or
generate synthetic data (such as images, videos, speech, and text).
An important trait in any machine learning system is its ability to
work well, not only on the specific inputs it was shown in training,
but also on other inputs. For example, many image classification
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
models are trained using a dataset of millions of images called
ImageNet; these models are only useful if they also work well on
real-life images outside of the training dataset.
Modern machine learning systems using deep neural networks—a
prevalent type of statistical model—are much better in this regard
than many other approaches. For example, a deep neural network
trained to classify images of cats and dogs in black and white is
likely to succeed at classifying similar images of cats and dogs in
color. However, even the most sophisticated machine learning
systems will fail when given inputs that are meaningfully different
from the inputs they were trained on. A cat-and-dog classifier, for
example, will not be able to classify a fish as such if it has never
encountered an image of a fish during training. Furthermore, as the
next section explores in detail, humans cannot always intuit which
kinds of inputs will appear meaningfully different to the model.
Adversarial Examples
One of the most significant current challenges in AI safety is
creating machine learning systems that are robust to adversarial
examples. Adversarial examples are model inputs (for example,
images) designed to trick machine learning systems into incorrect
predictions. In the case of a machine learning system designed to
distinguish between cats and dogs, an adversarial example could
be an image of a cat modified to appear to the model as a dog.
Since machine learning systems process data differently from
humans, the cat image could be altered in ways imperceptible to
humans but meaningfully different to the machine learning system.
The modified image may still resemble a cat to humans, but to a
machine learning system, it “looks like” a dog.
Adversarial examples can be generated systematically, either by
digitally altering the input to a system or by directly altering the
appearance of objects in the physical world. Unlike other
adversarial attacks, such as “data poisoning,” which seeks to attack
the algorithm used to train a machine learning model, adversarial
examples are designed to attack already trained models.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
Figures 1 and 2 show systematically generated adversarial
examples. Specifically, the adversarial example in Figure 1c digitally
modifies the original image by an imperceptibly small amount,
whereas the adversarial example in Figure 2b is created by adding
patches to the image designed to mimic irregularities found in the
physical world (such as graffiti or stickers). Both adversarial
examples are generated via so-called white-box attacks, which
assume the attacker knows how the trained classification model
works and can exploit this knowledge to create adversarial
examples that trick the model into making incorrect predictions.
Figure 1. An example of a “white-box” adversarial example from Goodfellow et al.
 . The original image (a) is classified as “panda” with 57.7 percent
probability. After being overlaid with a minimal amount of noise—the adversarial
alteration (b) multiplied by a factor of 0.007—the resulting image (c) is classified
as “gibbon” with 99.3 percent probability. The difference between (a) and (c) is
imperceptible to the human eye.
a) Original image b) Adversarial alteration c) Adversarial example
Source: Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy, “Explaining
and Harnessing Adversarial Examples,” International Conference on Learning
Representations, Vol. 3, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
Figure 2. An example of a white-box adversarial example designed to generate
physical alterations for physical-world objects. The adversarial alteration (b),
which is designed to mimic the appearance of graffiti (a), tricks an image
classifier into not seeing a stop sign.
a) Graffiti on stop sign b) Adversarial Example
Source: Kevin Eykholt, Ivan Evtimov, Earlence Fernandes, Bo Li, Amir Rahmati,
Chaowei Xiao, Atul Prakash, Tadayoshi Kohno, Dawn Song, "Robust Physical-
World Attacks on Deep Learning Visual Classification,” 2018 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, June 18-23, 2018, pp. 1625-1634, 
Although modern machine learning systems usually generalize
remarkably well to data similar to the data used for training,
adversarial examples can be created from surprisingly simple
modifications to model inputs. Changes such as blurring or
cropping images, or altering the appearance of the physical-world
objects shown in an image, can fool an otherwise reliable system.
In Figure 3b, an adversarial example is constructed by reducing the
resolution of the original image, thereby changing the model’s
prediction from correct to incorrect. Unlike the adversarial
examples in Figures 1 and 2, the adversarial example in Figure 3
was created via a black-box attack—that is, created without access
to the trained classification model. It is not as subtle as the
alteration in Figure 1 and not as targeted as the alteration in Figure
2. However, it demonstrates that modern machine learning
systems can be fooled with little effort and no knowledge of the
prediction model.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
Figure 3. An example of a black-box adversarial example. The original image (a)
is classified as “washer” with 53 percent probability. The image is altered by
reducing its resolution to create an adversarial example (b), which is classified as
“safe” with 37 percent and as “loudspeaker” with 24 percent probability.
a) Original image b ) Adversarial example
Source: Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio, “Adversarial
Examples in the Physical World,” arXiv [cs.CV] , preprint,
 
Robustness to Adversarial Examples
Robust machine learning systems need to be able to identify data
that is meaningfully different from training data and provide a
defense against adversarial examples. There are a wide range of
different research areas attempting to make progress in this
direction. One such research direction aims to incorporate
predictive uncertainty estimates into machine learning systems.
This way, any prediction from the system would come with an
estimate of certainty. If the machine learning system indicates
uncertainty about the correctness of its prediction, a human
operator can be alerted.
To understand predictive uncertainty estimates and how they can
make machine learning systems more robust to adversarial
examples, consider the classification “probability scores” given in
the descriptions of Figures 1 and 3. In reality, these scores, which
express the probability of an input belonging to a certain class (e.g.,
the class “cat” or “dog”), are misleading. While they do express a
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
probability, they do not actually express the model’s level of
certainty about the correctness of the predictions.
To fully understand this point, consider a machine learning system
trained to distinguish between two classes: cats and dogs. Such a
system will by design have two outputs: one for the class “cat” and
one for the class “dog.” If the model is given an image of a dog, it
will output values between zero and one for each class—for
instance, 90 percent and 10 percent for the classes “dog” and
“cat,” respectively, so that the values sum up to 100 percent.
However, if given an image of a fish, the model will still make
predictions for the two classes on which it was trained, unaware
that it is being asked to identify an object it was not trained to
recognize. In a best-case scenario, it would give outputs of 50
percent for each class, indicating that the input is equally likely to
be either a cat or a dog. In a worst-case scenario, it would give a
high probability score for one class, providing a false sense of
certainty. But the way most machine learning systems are
designed, they cannot give a low score to both the “cat” and “dog”
labels. As such, these outputs should not be read as the machine
learning system’s “confidence” in the correctness of its
classification.
Predictive uncertainty estimates can fill this gray spot. They
complement the regular model outputs by expressing the model’s
uncertainty about the correctness of its predictions. If a machine
learning system has good predictive uncertainty estimates, then
the probability scores in Figure 3 would be accompanied by a high
uncertainty score, indicating that the model is highly uncertain
about the correctness of the predictions. Such uncertainty
estimates can help a human operator avoid wrong predictions in
safety-critical settings and ensure the system’s reliability and
safety, as demonstrated in Figure 4.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
Figure 4. An example of predictive uncertainty estimates for autonomous
vehicles. The first column shows the image fed into the system, the second
column shows the ground truth classification of objects in the image (buildings,
sky, street, sidewalk, etc.), the third column shows the model’s classification, and
the rightmost column shows the system’s uncertainty about its classification. As
can be seen from the image on the bottom right, the system is uncertain about
its classification of parts of the sidewalk and could alert the human operator to
take over the steering wheel.
Source: Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal, “What Uncertainties Do We Need in
Bayesian Deep Learning for Computer Vision?” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2017, Vol. 30, Long Beach, CA, USA, December 4-9, 2017, pp. 5574-
5584, 
Unfortunately, obtaining reliable predictive uncertainty estimates
for modern machine learning systems remains an unsolved
problem. While several existing methods can generate uncertainty
estimates, there are no mathematical guarantees that these
uncertainty estimates are actually accurate. Furthermore, while
empirical studies demonstrate that certain methods produce good
predictive uncertainty estimates in some settings, those results
cannot be generalized to any setting. Like other areas of
robustness research, developing methods that yield reliably wellcalibrated uncertainty estimates for modern machine learning
systems is an active and ongoing area of research.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
While modern machine learning systems often perform well on
narrowly defined tasks, they can fail when presented with tasks
meaningfully different from those seen during training. Adversarial
attacks exploit this vulnerability by presenting inputs to machine
learning systems specifically designed to elicit poor predictions.
Adversarially robust machine learning systems seek to fix this
vulnerability through mechanisms allowing the system to recognize
when an input is meaningfully different from data seen during
training, making the system more reliable in practice.
Unfortunately, while an active area of research, existing
approaches to detecting and defending against adversarial attacks
do not yet provide satisfactory solutions, and the timeline to
develop and deploy truly robust modern machine learning systems
remains uncertain. For now, anyone considering deploying modern
machine learning systems in safety-critical settings must therefore
grapple with the fact that in doing so, they are introducing safety
risks that we do not yet know how to mitigate effectively.2
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
Tim G. J. Rudner is a non-resident AI/ML fellow with CSET and a
PhD candidate in computer science at the University of Oxford.
Helen Toner is director of strategy at CSET.
Acknowledgements
For feedback and assistance, we would like to thank Igor Mikolic-
Torreira, Shelton Fitch, Alexandra Vreeman, Lynne Weil, Larry
Lewis, Jack Clark, Dewey Murdick, and Michael Page.
© 2021 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0
International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
 
CSET Product ID #: 20190041
Document Identifier: doi: 10.0.201.137/20190041
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
1 Organizational factors will also play an important role in whether the
deployment of a given AI system is safe. For more on the importance of robust
organizational practices, see Thomas G. Dietterich, “Robust Artificial
Intelligence and Robust Human Organizations,” arXiv [cs.AI] , preprint, 
2 Andrew Lohn, “Hacking AI” ,