Constructions: a new theoretical
approach to language
Adele E. Goldberg
Linguistics Department, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801-0168, USA
A new theoretical approach to language has emerged in
the past 10–15 years that allows linguistic observations
about form–meaning pairings, known as ‘constructions’, to be stated directly. Constructionist approaches
aim to account for the full range of facts about
language, without assuming that a particular subset of
the data is part of a privileged ‘core’. Researchers in this
ﬁeld argue that unusual constructions shed light on
illuminate
required for a complete account of language.
Constructions – form and meaning pairings – have been
the basis of major advances in the study of grammar since
the days of Aristotle. Observations about speciﬁc linguistic
constructions have shaped our understanding of both
particular languages and the nature of language itself. But
only recently has a new theoretical approach emerged that
allows observations about constructions to be stated
directly, providing long-standing traditions with a framework that allows both broad generalizations and more
limited patterns to be analyzed and accounted for fully.
This is in contrast to the mainstream ‘generative’ approach
to language, which has held sway for the past several
decades, beginning with Chomsky in 1957 .
Many linguists with varying backgrounds have recently
converged on several key insights that have given rise to a
new family of approaches, here referred to as ‘constructionist’ approaches . Constructionist approaches
share certain foundational ideas with the mainstream
generative approach. Both approaches agree that it is
essential to consider language as a cognitive (mental)
system; both approaches acknowledge that there must be a
way to combine structures to create novel utterances, and
both approaches recognize that a non-trivial theory of
language learning is needed.
In other ways, constructionist approaches contrast
sharply with the mainstream generative approach. The
latter has held that the nature of language can best be
revealed by studying formal structures independently of
their semantic or discourse functions. Ever increasing
layers of abstractness have characterized the formal
representations. Meaning is claimed to derive from the
mental dictionary of words, with functional differences
between formal patterns being largely ignored. Semiregular patterns and unusual patterns are viewed as
‘peripheral,’ with a narrow band of data seen as relevant to
the ‘core’ of language. Mainstream generative theory
argues further that the complexity of core language cannot
be learned inductively by general cognitive mechanisms
and therefore learners must be hard-wired with principles
that are speciﬁc to language (‘universal grammar’).
Tenets of constructionist approaches
Each basic tenet outlined below is shared by most
constructionist approaches. Each represents a major
divergence from the mainstream generative approach
and, in many ways, a return to a more traditional view of
Tenet 1. All levels of description are understood to
involve pairings of form with semantic or discourse
partially lexically ﬁlled and fully abstract phrasal
patterns. (See Table 1)
Tenet 2. An emphasis is placed on subtle aspects of the
way we conceive of events and states of affairs.
Tenet 3. A ‘what you see is what you get’ approach to
syntactic form is adopted: no underlying levels of syntax
or any phonologically empty elements are posited.
Tenet 4. Constructions are understood to be learned on
the basis of the input and general cognitive mechanisms
(they are constructed), and are expected to vary crosslinguistically.
Tenet 5. Cross-linguistic generalizations are explained
by appeal to general cognitive constraints together with
the functions of the constructions involved.
Tenet 6. Language-speciﬁc generalizations across constructions are captured via inheritance networks much
like those that have long been posited to capture our
non-linguistic knowledge.
Tenet 7. The totality of our knowledge of language is
captured by a network of constructions: a ‘construct-i-con.’
Each of these tenets is explained in a subsequent
section below.
Constructions: what they are
Constructions are stored pairings of form and function,
including morphemes, words, idioms, partially lexically
ﬁlled and fully general linguistic patterns. Examples are
given in Table 1.
Any linguistic pattern is recognized as a construction as
long as some aspect of its form or function is not strictly
predictable from its component parts or from other
constructions recognized to exist. In addition, many
Corresponding author: Adele E. Goldberg ( ).
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.7 No.5 May 2003
 
1364-6613/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00080-9
constructionist approaches argue that patterns are stored
even if they are fully predictable as long as they occur with
sufﬁcient frequency .
Unlike mainstream generative grammar, the constructionist framework emphasizes the semantics and distribution of particular words, grammatical morphemes, and
cross-linguistically unusual phrasal patterns. The hypothesis behind this methodology is that an account of the rich
semantic, pragmatic, and complex formal constraints on
these patterns readily extends to more general, simple or
regular patterns.
As an example of an unusual pattern, consider the
Covariational Conditional construction in Table 1 (e.g. ‘The
more you think about it, the less you understand’). The
construction is interpreted as involving an independent
variable (identiﬁed by the ﬁrst phrase) and a dependent
variable (identiﬁed by the second phrase). The word the
normally occurs at the beginning of a phrase headed by a
noun. But in this construction it requires a comparative
phrase. The two major phrases of the construction resist
classiﬁcation as either noun phrases or clauses. The
requirement that two phrases of this type be juxtaposed
without conjunction is another non-predictable aspect of
the pattern. Because the pattern is not strictly predictable,
a construction is posited that speciﬁes the particular form
and semantic function involved .
Other unusual constructions include those in Table 2.
colloquially, they are part of every native speaker’s
repertoire of English. (The stranded preposition construction is unusual not by virtue of its being prescriptively
dispreferred, but in that it is found only in a few Germanic
languages).
More common patterns such as passive, topicalization
and relative clauses are understood to be learned pairings
of form and (semantic or discourse) function – that is, they
are also constructions. Each pairs certain formal properties with a certain communicative function.
Even basic sentence patterns of a language can be
understood to involve constructions. That is, the main verb
can be understood to combine with an argument-structure
construction (e.g. transitive, intransitive, ditransitive
constructions, etc.) . The alternative is to assume that
the form and general interpretation of basic sentence
patterns are determined by semantic and/or syntactic
information speciﬁed by the main verb. The sentence
patterns given in (1) and (2) indeed appear to be
determined by the speciﬁcations of give and put respectively:
Chris gave Pat a ball.
Pat put the ball on the table.
Give is a three-argument verb: an act of giving requires
three characters: a giver (or agent), a recipient, and
something given (or ‘theme’). It is therefore expected to
appear with three phrases corresponding to these three
roles. In (1), for instances, Chris is agent, Pat is recipient,
and a ball is theme. Put, another three-argument verb,
requires an agent, a theme (object that undergoes the
change of location) and a ﬁnal location of the theme’s
motion. It appears with the corresponding three arguments in (2). However, whereas (1) and (2) represent
perhaps the prototypical case, in general the interpretation and form of sentence patterns of a language are not
reliably determined by independent speciﬁcations of the
main verb. For example, it is implausible to claim that
sneeze has a three-argument sense, and yet it can appear
as such in (3). The patterns in (4)–(6) are likewise not
naturally attributed to the main verbs:
‘He sneezed his tooth right across town.’ (Robert
Munsch, Andrew’s Loose Tooth)
‘She smiled herself an upgrade.’ (Douglas Adams,
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, Harmony Books)
‘We laughed our conversation to an end.’ (J. Hart. Sin
Ivy Books, New York)
‘They could easily co-pay a family to death.’ (New York
Times, 1/14/02)
Examples need not be particularly novel to make the
point. Verbs typically appear with a wide array of
Table 1. Examples of constructions, varying in size and complexity; form and function are speciﬁed if not readily transparent
Construction
Form/Example
e.g. anti-, pre-, -ing
e.g. Avocado, anaconda, and
Complex word
e.g. Daredevil, shoo-in
Idiom (ﬁlled)
e.g. Going great guns
Idiom (partially ﬁlled)
e.g. Jog ksomeone’sl memory
Covariational-Conditional
construction 
Form: The Xer the
Yer (e.g. The more you think about it,
the less you understand)
Meaning: linked independent and dependent variables
Ditransitive
(double-object)
construction
Form: Subj [V Obj1
Obj2] (e.g. He gave her a Coke; He baked her a mufﬁn)
Meaning: transfer (intended or actual)
Form: Subj aux VPpp (PPby) (e.g. The armadillo was hit
Discourse function: to make undergoer topical and/or
actor non-topical
Table 2. Productive or semi-productive constructions that are
unusual across languages and must be learned on the basis of
time away construction
Twistin the night away 
What’s X doing Y?
What’s that ﬂy doing
in my soup? 
Nominal Extraposition construction
It’s amazing the difference! 
Mad Magazine construction
Him, a doctor?! 
Noun–Pronoun–Noun (N P N)
construction
house by house; day
after day 
Stranded preposition construction
Who did he give
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.7 No.5 May 2003
 
complement conﬁgurations. Consider the verb slice and
the various constructions in which it can appear (labeled in
parentheses):
He sliced the bread. (transitive)
Pat sliced the carrots into the salad. (caused
Pat sliced Chris a piece of pie. (ditransitive)
Emeril sliced and diced his way to stardom. (way
construction)
Pat sliced the box open. (resultative)
In all of these expressions slice means to cut with a
sharp instrument. It is the argument-structure constructions that provide the direct link between surface form and
general aspects of the interpretation, such as something
acting on something else (7a), something causing something else to move(7b), someone intending to cause
someone to receive something (7c), someone moving
somewhere(7d), someone causing something to change
state(7e) .
Thus constructions can be seen to be essential to an
effective account of both unusual or especially complex
patterns, and of the basic, regular patterns of language.
The functions of constructions
Different surface forms are typically associated with
slightly different semantic or discourse functions. Take
for example, the ‘ditransitive’ construction, which involves
the form, Subject–Verb–Object1–Object2, as in (1), (8b)
Liza bought a book for Zach.
Liza bought Zach a book.
Liza sent a book to storage.
Liza sent Stan a book.
??Liza sent storage a book.
The ditransitive form evokes the notion of transfer or
‘giving’. This is in contrast to possible paraphrases. For
example, whereas (8a) can be used to mean that Liza
bought a book for a third party because Zach was too busy
to buy it himself, (8b) can only mean that Liza intended to
give Zach the book. Similarly whereas (9a) can be used to
entail caused motion to a location (the book is caused to go
to storage), the ditransitive pattern requires that the goal
argument be an animate being, capable of receiving the
transferred item (cf. 9b, 9c). As is clear from considering
the paraphrases, the implication of transfer is not an
independent fact about the words involved. Rather the
implication of transfer comes from the ditransitive construction itself.
Other interpretations for the ditransitive can also be
systematically related to the notion of transfer, in that they
imply that the transfer will occur if certain satisfaction
conditions evoked by the main verb occur (10a), that
transfer will not occur (10b), or that the antonymic relation
of giving occurs – that of taking away (10c). Even
examples such as ‘Cry me a river’ can be related to the
notion of giving via a metaphorical extension .
Liza guaranteed Zach a book. (If the guarantee is
satisﬁed, Z. will receive a book)
Liza refused Zach a book. (Liza caused Zach not
to receive a book)
Liza cost Zach his job. (Liza causes Zach to lose
In addition to semantic generalizations there also exist
generalizations about ‘information structure’ properties of
the construction, or the way in which a speaker’s
assumptions about the hearer’s state of knowledge and
consciousness at the time of speaking is reﬂected in surface
form. In particular, there is a statistically reliable
tendency for the recipient argument to have already
been mentioned in the discourse (often encoded by a
pronoun) as compared with prepositional paraphrases
 . Facts about the use of entire constructions,
informal),
variation and so on, are stated as part of the construction
as well. Because they specify a surface form and a
corresponding function, constructionist approaches provide a direct way of accounting for these facts.
The form of constructions
To capture differences in meaning or discourse properties
between surface forms, constructionist theories do not
derive one construction from another, as is commonly done
in mainstream generative theory. An actual expression or
‘construct’ typically involves the combination of at least
half a dozen different constructions. For example, the
construct in Fig. 1a involves the list of constructions given
in Fig. 1b.
Note that ‘surface form’ need not specify a particular
word order, nor even particular grammatical categories,
although there are constructions that do specify these
features. For example, the ditransitive construction (in
Fig. 1 and discussed in the previous section) is characterized in terms of a set of argument types. The overt order of
arguments in the ditransitive construction in Fig. 1 is
determined by a combination of a Verb-Phrase (VP)
construction with the Question construction, the latter
allowing the ‘theme’ argument (represented by What) to
appear in the sentence-initial position.
Constructions can be combined freely to form actual
expressions as long as they are not in conﬂict. For example,
the speciﬁcation of the ditransitive construction that
Fig. 1. (a) An expression, or ‘construct’, that is a combination of the constructions
shown in (b), color-coded to the appropriate parts of the expression (VP, Verb-
Phrase; NP, Noun-Phrase). See text for discussion.
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences
(a) [ What did Liza buy the child? ]
Liza, buy, the, child, what, did constructions (i.e. words)
Ditransitive construction
Question construction
Subject–Auxiliary inversion construction
VP construction
NP construction
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.7 No.5 May 2003
 
requires an animate recipient argument conﬂicts with the
meaning of storage in (9c) resulting in unacceptability. The
observation that language has an inﬁnitely creative
potential is accounted for, then, by the free
combination of constructions.
Learning constructions
The fourth tenet states that constructions are understood
to be learned on the basis of positive input and to vary
across languages. This idea highlights a major difference
between most constructional approaches and most mainstream generative approaches, as the latter have argued
that learners must be hard-wired with principles speciﬁc
to a language faculty, that is, to possess a ‘universal
grammar’ ( ; see also ).
Crucially, all linguists recognize that a wide range of
semi-idiosyncratic constructions exist in every language,
constructions that cannot be accounted for by general,
universal or innate principles or constraints (see examples
in Table 2). Mainstream generative theory has taken the
position that these constructions exist only on the
‘periphery’ of language, and that therefore they need not
be the focus of linguistic or learning theorists .
Constructionist approaches, on the other hand, have
zeroed in on these constructions, arguing that whatever
means we use to learn these patterns can easily be
extended to account for so-called ‘core’ phenomena. In fact,
by deﬁnition, the core phenomena are more regular, and
also tend to occur more frequently within a given
language. Therefore if anything, they are likely to be
easier to learn. Because every linguist would presumably
agree that the ‘peripheral’, difﬁcult cases must be learned
inductively on the basis of the input, constructionist
theories propose that there is no reason to assume that
the more general, regular, frequent cases cannot possibly
be learned in this way.
In fact, constructionist theories argue that language
must be learnable from positive input together with fairly
general cognitive abilities , because the diversity
and complexity witnessed does not yield to accounts that
assume that cross-linguistic variation can be characterized in terms of a ﬁnite set of parameters . Research in
this area is quickly gaining momentum. Several constructionists have made good on the promise to explain how
particular constructions are learned . It turns out
that the input need not be nearly as impoverished as is
sometimes assumed ; analogical processes can be seen
to be viable once function as well as form is taken into
account ; there is good reason to think that
children’s early grammar is quite conservative, with
generalizations emerging only slowly ; and the
ability to record transitional probabilities and statistical
generalizations in the input has proven a powerful means
by which to learn certain types of generalizations .
This approach takes a somewhat different view from
mainstream generative theory of what is universal about
language. Linguists talk of certain constructions as
existing in many languages, for example, the passive
construction, relative clause construction, question construction, and so forth. However, two constructions in
different languages can be identiﬁed as instances of the
same construction if and only if their form and function is
identical once other constructions in the language that
might differ are factored out. In fact, this rarely occurs
except in cases of shared diachronic history or language
contact . What is truly remarkable is the degree
to which human languages differ from one another, given
that all languages need to express roughly the same types
of messages. Constructionist approaches anticipate such
fairly wide variability across languages .
We can understand what is actually intended by
references
construction
languages as types of constructions. Two constructions
might be, for example, of the passive type in that they
share certain functional and formal characteristics even if
they are not identical. That is, two constructions in
different languages can be identiﬁed as instances of the
same type of construction if and only if they serve a closely
related function and form.
Cross-linguistic generalizations
A driving question behind much of linguistic research is
what is the typology of possible constructions and what
constrains it? Constructionist approaches often turn to
grammar-external explanations such as universal functional pressures, iconic principles, and processing and
learning constraints to explain such empirically observable cross-linguistic generalizations. For example, certain
generalizations about how form and meaning tend to be
linked across languages can be explained by appeal to
iconic and analogical processes . Constraints
on long-distance dependency constructions (traditional
‘island constraints’) appear to yield to processing explanations that take into account the function of the
constructions involved . Processing accounts
have also been suggested to account for certain alternative
word-order options .
Even among generative linguists there has been a trend
towards the view that many constraints on language that
have traditionally been seen as requiring recourse to
innate stipulations speciﬁc to language can actually be
explained by general cognitive mechanisms. For example,
the fact that that all languages appear to have noun and
verb (and, possibly, adjective) categories may be explained
by the existence of corresponding basic semantic categories . In a recent paper, Hauser, Chomsky and Fitch
go so far as to suggest that the only language-speciﬁc
innate ability that is absolutely required is recursion, and
they raise the point that even that might turn out not to be
speciﬁc to language (see also Box 1. Questions for
Future Research).
Intra-language generalizations
Inheritance hierarchies have long been found useful for
representing all types of knowledge, for example, our
knowledge of concepts. The construction-based framework
captures linguistic generalizations within a particular
language via the same type of inheritance hierarchies
 . Broad generalizations are captured by constructions that are inherited by many other constructions;
more limited patterns are captured by positing constructions at various midpoints of the hierarchical network.
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.7 No.5 May 2003
 
Exceptional patterns are captured by low-level constructions. For example, the ‘What’s X doing Y?’ construction,
which has a ﬁxed form and connotes some sort of
unexpectedness, captures a pattern in English grammar.
It inherits properties from several other more general
constructions, including the Left Isolation, the Subject–
Auxiliary Inversion, the Subject–Predicate and the Verb-
Phrase constructions .
Constructions all the way down
What makes a theory that allows for constructions a
‘construction-based’ theory is Tenet 7: the idea that the
network of constructions captures our knowledge of
language in toto – in other words, it’s constructions all
the way down.
Conclusion
Constructionist theories set out to account for all of our
knowledge of language as patterns of form and function.
That is, the constructionist approach does not assume that
language should be divided up into ‘core’ grammar and
the to-be-ignored ‘periphery.’ In identifying constructions,
an emphasis is placed on subtle aspects of construal and
on surface form. Cross-linguistic generalizations are
explained by appeal to general cognitive constraints
together with the functions of the constructions involved.
Language-speciﬁc generalizations across constructions
are captured via inheritance networks. The inventory of
constructions,
idioms, partially lexically ﬁlled and fully abstract phrasal
patterns, is understood to be learned on the basis of the
input together with general cognitive mechanisms.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Ray Jackendoff, Fritz Newmeyer, Devin Casenhiser, Mike
Tomasello, Ali Yazdani and the anonymous referees for advice on an
earlier draft. I am sure I will regret any I failed to heed.