Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s
On” to School Education: Practical
Exploration of Chinese Schools during the
COVID-19 Pandemic
Xiaoqiao Cheng
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097, Jiangsu, China
Abstract: “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, i.e. “suspending classes
without stopping learning”, specifically refers to China’s education and
teaching activities during the postponement period during the COVID-
19 pandemic prevention and control. This was an emergency measure to
prevent and control the pandemic in the field of education in China, and
it was also a continuation of school education in this special period.
During the pandemic period, how school education should operate has
become a topic of social concern. I herein discuss the origin and connotation of the concept of “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, analyze the
challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to school education, and
then put forward measures for schools to respond to “School’s Out, But
Class’s On” and explain the practical significance of “School’s Out, But
Class’s On” for school education.
Sci Insigt Edu Front 2020; 5(2):501-516.
Doi: 10.15354/sief.20.ar043
Keywords: COVID-19 Pandemic; School’s Out, But Class’s On; School
Education; Online Teaching; Students Study at Home
Correspondence to: Xiaoqiao Cheng, Professor, School of Institute of Education Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097, Jiangsu, China. Email: .
Conflict of Interests: None. Original Article
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
T the end of 2019, COVID-19 epidemic broke out in Wuhan of China. Because of the strong concealment and contagiousness, rapid spread, and extremely harmfulness, it quickly swept across other regions of the country. Subsequently, 30 provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions nationwide successively initiated the first-level responses to a major public health emergency. In order to
protect the lives and health of the people, the China government has organized a variety
of forces to carry out prevention and control, and adopted various measures to prevent
the epidemic from spreading on a large scale. According to a report published by the
New York Times, about 760 million people in China were in a state of “confinement”
 .
In order to prevent the spread of the pandemic (Editor’s note: due to the
COVID-19 was defined as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, so we herein
use “pandemic” over “epidemic”.) to schools and reduce the impact of pandemic on
teaching, the Chinese Ministry of Education has issued notices that required schools of
all types to postpone the 2020 spring semester and encouraged the provision of guidance services for students’ home study via the Internet. Thus, the implementation of
“School’s Out, But Class’s On” during the postponed period could be realized.
Although “School’s Out, But Class’s On” was a measure for home study during the pandemic, its essence was still a continuation of school education. Schools are
the main implementers of “School’s Out, But Class’s On”. During the postponed period,
each school integrated different types of resources to provide services and support for
the home study and to ensure an effective implementation of “School’s Out, But Class’s
On” policy. This article starts with a discussion of the school education, and then analyzes and summarizes the measures implemented by schools during the pandemic period, and hopes to provide reference for school education during the pandemic in other
countries.
Because school education involves all types of schools including universities,
middle schools and elementary schools, and due to the limitation of information, this
article only analyzes the measures of elementary and middle schools during the pandemic period, and the situation of universities will be analyzed in another article.
Origin, Connotation and Requirements of “School’s
Out, But Class’s On”
The concept of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” originated from a series of documents
from the Chinese Ministry of Education. In order to control the deterioration of the pandemic, the State Council has repeatedly extended the Spring Festival holidays, and the
postponement of the spring semester has become a foregone conclusion. On February
10th, 2020, the Ministry of Education issued the “Notice on Several Issues concerning
Targeted Teacher Work during the Pandemic Prevention and Control”. This notice
proposed “suspending classes without stopping teaching and learning” from the perspective of teachers’ work; it required education departments and schools to organize
teachers to carry out online teaching according to local conditions, and to ensure that
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
teachers undertake online teaching, tutoring, and homework corrections. All these work
would be included in the workload as performance management, and thereby eliminated
the worries of teachers .
On February 12th, 2020, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology jointly issued the “Notice on ‘School’s Out, But Class’s On’
Work Arrangements during the Postponed Period”. This clarified that during the postponed period, in addition to the pandemic prevention and control, the major task was to
conduct “School’s Out, But Class’s On” . On February 28th, 2020, the Ministry of Education issued a “Notice
on Coordinating the Prevention and Control of COVID-19 Pandemic in Education System and Education Reform and Development”. This again emphasized “School’s Out,
But Class’s On” from the perspective of online education and teaching, and believed
that this was a test of the ability of the education system to respond to a major public
health emergency. Therefore, it is of great significance to use information technology to
promote education and teaching reform . For this reason, “School’s Out, But Class’s On” has become a specific
concept of education and teaching in elementary and middle schools during the pandemic prevention and control.
What is the deep meaning of “School’s Out, But Class’s On”? First of all, the
understanding of its connotation is also constantly deepening and changing. “School’s
Out, But Class’s On” refers to a state in which the school operates during the postponed
start of the 2020 spring semester due to the pandemic. The appearance of this state has
led to the inability of teachers and students to carry out educational and teaching activities in the school environment, and the school’s operation can only be realized through
the online platform. Therefore, “School’s Out, But Class’s On” does not only refer to
online teaching or online learning, but a broad-based teaching and learning during a
special period and in a special environment. The relevant notices issued by the Ministry
of Education also gradually made it clearer that “School’s Out, But Class’s On” is a
kind of broad-based learning, and online teaching is only one kind of format and it cannot completely replace classroom teaching .
“School’s Out, But Class’s On”, as the China government’s overall deployment
of school education during the pandemic prevention and control period, put forward the
following seven requirements (Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China,
(1) Strengthen student home study guidance. It is necessary to arrange the work
and rest time reasonably, so that the teaching content and the teaching time
are appropriate.
(2) Standardize online teaching behaviors, so as to prevent increasing the burden
on teachers and students.
(3) Further improve the construction of online learning platforms for elementary
and middle schools, and continuously enrich the learning resources, and pre-
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
vent coping the normal classroom teaching methods, duration and arrangements.
(4) Strengthen the review mechanism of online teaching resources of elementary
and middle school students, and strictly review the online learning resources
to ensure a high quality.
(5) Make full use of the free learning resources provided by the national elementary and middle school network cloud platforms and the China Education Television Channel 4 air classroom to serve students’ home study and ensure the
learning needs of students in rural and remote areas.
(6) Integrate epidemic prevention, life education, public safety, and mental health
into online e-learning.
(7) Concerned about the physical and mental health of students, guide students to
strengthen physical exercise, and seriously improve myopia prevention and
Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to
School Education
A school is a place where the formal education activities can be provided. In the strict
sense of formal education, school education excludes all informal learning opportunities.
During the prevention and control of COVID-19 pandemic, the education and control
measures of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” proposed by the Chinese government have
expanded the scope of school education. It also includes so-called non-formal learning
opportunities, thereby challenging school education in many ways. The “School’s Out,
But Class’s On” initiative proposed by the China government has expanded the scope of
formal school education. It also includes some so-called informal learning opportunities,
which thereby challenges school education in many ways.
Challenges to Traditional Forms of School Education
In the traditional form of school education, schools and classrooms are the basic places
for education and teaching. In the classroom, teachers pass knowledge to students, and
students learn what teachers instructed, so this is obviously a typical form of education.
In this form, teachers fulfill their responsibilities by completing the teaching tasks of
each lesson, and students engage in learning and complete learning tasks under the
teacher’s supervision. The physical space of schools and classrooms has become a necessary condition for school education and teaching activities. However, during the postponed period, neither teachers nor students can come to school, and the physical space
for regular education and teaching no longer exists. To complete the task of “School’s
Out, But Class’s On”, it is necessary to transfer the physical space of the traditional
school education to the virtual space of the Internet platform. How teachers and students adapt to the virtual teaching space is a challenge to the traditional form of education.
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
Challenges to Teachers’ Teaching Methods
In traditional classroom teaching, teachers need to carry out teacher-student and student-student interaction in a variety of ways in order to attract students to participate in
the classroom and reflect the teaching concept of “student as the main body”. “School’s
Out, But Class’s On” has brought about changes in the teaching environment, making
teachers’ teaching methods shift from offline classroom to online teaching. In comparison, online teaching cannot achieve the face-to-face emotional communication between
teachers and students, and lacks real-time feedback of information and classroom constraints. When face-to-face classroom teaching is not available, and how to use online
resources to implement online teaching activities based on the characteristics and rules
of students’ home study through online teaching is the second challenge that school
education faces when implementing “School’s Out, But Class’s On”.
Challenges to Student Learning Styles
In the new round of China’s basic education curriculum reform, promoting the development of students’ innovative consciousness and practical ability through independent,
cooperative, and inquiry learning methods has become one of the cores of curriculum
reform. But all these are done under the guidance of the teacher’s organization. During
the pandemic, the family became the only place for students to learn, they left regular
classroom teaching, and their autonomous learning became an essential learning method
for students while performing “School’s Out, But Class’s On”. Therefore, how to improve the self-study ability and interest of students in school education according to the
characteristics of students’ home study, and how to change the student’s learning style
under the premise of respecting the law of learning, and guide them to effectively learn
at home is another challenge that the school education faces.
Challenges to the Innovation of Teaching Resources
Teaching resources are materials that can be used for the effective development of
teaching. The quality of teaching resources has a pivotal impact on teaching results. In
traditional classroom teaching, teaching resources mainly include materials such as
textbooks, learning materials, courseware, and pictures, etc., whereas online teaching
resources are rarely presented in school teaching. The implementation of “School’s Out,
But Class’s On” has made online teaching the main teaching method. Correspondingly,
the presentation and content of teaching resources also changed. First, the digitization
of teaching resources is necessary, that is, transforming conventional teaching resources
into digital resources as much as possible. The second is the diversification of teaching
content. In addition to the curriculum content stipulated in the spring semester, pandemic prevention and control, home health education, mental health, and practical activities
also need to be added into the instructing contents.
Challenges to School Administration
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
School administration is the activity of planning, organizing, coordinating, and controlling the school’s education, teaching, scientific research, logistics, and staff and students. Through administration, the school combines various tasks and its constituent
elements to give play to its overall function, thereby achieving its training goals for students and various work goals . To achieve the goal of administration, the
school cannot do without effective communication and coordination between administers and teachers and students. During the postponed period, since all the school administrative personnel are at home, and how can school administers coordinate various
types of staff to carry out their work, and handle the relationship between the school’s
unified regulations and the autonomous arrangements of teachers and students is a big
challenge to school administration.
School’s Main Measures to Deal with “School’s Out,
But Class’s On”
While the Ministry of Education issued the “School’s Out, But Class’s On” notice, it
also put forward seven requirements . Each provincial and municipal education administration department had
successively put forward the requirements of their own province and city in accordance
with the actual situation. Schools at all levels following the provisions of the Ministry
of Education and the provincial and municipal education administrative departments,
and based on their actual situation, have formed their own initiatives. After several
weeks of postponement, various measures of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” have been
continuously improved. The main initiatives that have been implemented are summarized below.
Improving Information Release, Publicity and Education
With schools as the main body, use WeChat public account and other network channels
to publish “Open Letters to All Teachers and Students of the School”, “Open Letters to
All Parents”, etc., to carry out pandemic prevention knowledge publicity, announce the
relevant postponed school policies, and promote the deployment of pandemic prevention and control work, publicize the school’s online teaching work during the postponed
period .
Through the WeChat public account, publish the pandemic control information
of the school and the area to the staff, students and parents, so that students and parents
can learn more about the severity and seriousness of the pandemic. The school’s “Pandemic Prevention and Control Guidebook” and “Pandemic Prevention and Control
Brief News” were issued to guide teachers and students to master pandemic prevention
and control knowledge and methods to develop good hygiene habits .
Focusing on the moral education of pandemic prevention and control, publicize
role models who were on the front lines of the pandemic prevention. In this way, a
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
sense of overall situation and responsibility for preventing and controlling the pandemic
was established. It helped students correctly judge and analyze various messages involving pandemic . Also,
pandemic prevention works did by teachers and students were sent out every day.
Formulate the Work Plan of “School’s Out, But Class’s On”
According to the “Notice on Several Issues concerning Targeted Teacher Work during
the Pandemic Prevention and Control” , “Notice on ‘School’s Out, But Class’s On’ Work Arrangements during
the Postponed Period” ,
and “Notice on Coordinating the Prevention and Control of COVID-19 Pandemic in
Education System and Education Reform and Development” issued by the Ministry of Education, all schools
across the country have studied and worked out their own work plans. The content of
the plan includes two major aspects, one is the work of pandemic prevention and control, and the other is the education and teaching work carried out using the Internet platform. These two aspects are essential to complement each other. Simply focusing on
pandemic prevention and control without carrying out education and teaching has abandoned the school’s basic responsibility; but only focusing on education and teaching
without on pandemic prevention and control is a disregard for the physical and mental
health of all teachers and students. So, a complete “School’s Out, But Class’s On” work
plan must include both aspects of pandemic prevention and control and online education and teaching. Here are two typical cases that show the contents of the “School’s
Out, But Class’s On” in their work plans via presenting both Tongshan University Road
Experimental School in Xuzhou City, Jiangsu Province and Tangquan Middle School in
Pukou District, Nanjing City in Jiangsu Province as examples.
On January 30, 2020, the University Road Experimental School in Tongshan
District, Xuzhou City, Jiangsu Province issued a “Notice on Strengthening Pandemic
Prevention and Control Measures” via WeChat public account . They announced the school’s pandemic prevention
and control work plan to all staff, students and parents. The work plan includes the establishment of a pandemic prevention and control work leading group and a special
working group; strictly implement closed campus management and cancel all collective
activities; establish a registration and inspection schedule for all teachers and students
to fully follow their movement; strengthen the timely reporting of information, and clarify the specific person to report pandemic defense and control information; all teachers,
students and parents do not arrange activities such as gatherings, visiting relatives and
friends, and perform self-isolation at home.
The work plan of Tangquan Middle School in Pukou District, Nanjing City,
Jiangsu Province, divided “School’s Out, But Class’s On” into multiple stages . Each stage has specific requirements for technical support, student learning,
teacher instructing, learning schedules, teaching content, learning resources, and home-
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
school co-education. The specific education and teaching requirements for studying
subjects such as Chinese, mathematics, English, science, ethics and law, arts, as well as
activities such as online theme learning, project-based learning, and housework were
clearly defined in sections. Through the overall planning, guidance, inspection and
evaluation, the implementation of the plan was guaranteed.
Provide Technical Support for “School’s Out, But Class’s On”
All school education and teaching work during “School’s Out, But Class’s On” requires
network operation. Therefore, the Ministry of Education issued the “Notice on Supporting Education and Teaching Work with Informationization during the Pandemic Prevention and Control Period” on February 6th, 2020 , to support the implementation of online teaching during
the postponed period. The Ministry of Education organized the China Education and
Research Network (CERNET) and telecommunications operation companies such as
China Mobile, China Telecom, China Unicom, and China Satcom, etc. to strengthen the
protection of national and local education public service platforms and various types of
school networks. This provided fast and stable online services for schools in various
regions to carry out online teaching, and help teachers, students and parents to obtain
digital education resources. The Ministry of Education also required schools in all regions to rely on the national digital education public service system and various educational reform service platforms such to smooth the application of online learning spaces,
and actively support school education and teaching activities including issuing notices,
organizing online teaching, carrying out home-school coordination and tutoring students’ learning.
Select Appropriate Education Resources
In order to support the implementation of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” in various
schools, the Ministry of Education opened the national elementary and middle school
network cloud platform (website: www.ykt.eduyun.cn). This teaching resource includes
courses from the first grade of elementary school to the third grade of high school. Besides, a dedicated TV Channel-China Education TV Channel 4 was launched to cover
the remote rural areas of the country with limited television signal. The Ministry of Education also organized some provincial-level education departments and elementary and
middle schools to open online learning platforms to the country free of charge and provide electronic versions of relevant teaching materials for free. For example, the People’s Education Publishing House has freely opened the digital teaching resource library
of “People’s Education Click Reading” to all . Taking Henan Province as an example, the digital textbook
service platform was free for all elementary and middle school students in the province.
They launched a total of 154 digital textbooks that planed for 2020 spring semester and
tens of thousands of supporting resources, which basically achieved full coverage of
disciplines and semesters. The coverage rate was over 95%. In addition to providing
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
“digital teaching materials”, the elementary and middle school digital teaching materials
service platform also provided teachers and students with traditional cultural videos,
book resources, and “one teacher for one excellent class” teaching case video resources
 .
Based on the rich education and teaching resources provided by the Ministry of
Education and the provincial education department, school had studied and selected the
most appropriate teaching platform and continuously optimized it to meet their technology and teaching foundation. Some schools divided resources into four types: live
broadcasting resources, learning product resources, self-produced resources, and subject
technology tools according to online teaching needs, to maximize the role of various
resources in online teaching. For rural schools, the level of teachers and technology is
limited, and the network of student families cannot fully realize platform online learning. Therefore, the school’s online education is mainly carried out through mobile
phones and the recorded online resources. Schools arranged online assignments and
organized examinations to support “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to varying degrees.
As most schools in China have basically realized the requirements for the construction of education information infrastructure, and established a school education
platform or resource library. This also enables these schools to rely on the existing
teaching platform to strengthen the guidance of students’ online learning resources
when they launch “School’s Out, But Class’s On”. At the same time, according to the
characteristics of online learning and disciplines, we have carefully studied and provided curriculum resources suitable for students’ online learning, and developed schoolbased teaching and learning resources such as digital protocol-guided learning that are
suitable for students’ learning .
Strengthen the Guidance and Management of Teachers
Facing the work of “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, an important factor is the teaching
ability of teachers. As early as the beginning of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” since it
was launched on February 10th, 2020, the Ministry of Education requested in relevant
documents that schools across the country should improve teachers’ information technology capabilities and open and share teacher training resources. It also required each
institution that undertakes national teacher training and provincial teacher training projects to organize online special training for teachers’ long-distance teaching and information technology, and to provide free consultation and online guidance; at the same
time, it required the provincial and municipal education departments to implement relevant supporting measures to strengthen the training of teachers’ informatization ability
to provide support and guarantee for teachers to carry out online education and teaching
scientifically and efficiently . The education departments of various provinces and cities have
launched advanced teachers, subject leading teachers, and famous teachers to guide
schools to formulate online teaching plans scientifically, record live broadcasting
demonstration lessons, research and develop excellent curriculum resources, and guide
teachers to focus on online course preparation and teaching .
In order to make teachers’ guidance and management accurately and precisely,
after two weeks of online teaching in elementary and middle schools, the teaching department summed up the problems in online teaching in time, and focused the teachers
on the needs of the online teaching matter. This includes:
(1) How to carry out online teaching to promote better home study for students?
(2) What should be the difference between the teaching schedule of online teaching and the regular school teaching?
(3) What kind of online teaching content is more suitable for students to learn?
(4) How to adopt a suitable form of online teaching?
(5) What aspects should be paid attention to in preparing for online teaching?
(6) What methods can promote teacher-student interaction?
(7) How can online teaching promote the improvement of students’ autonomous
learning ability?
(8) How to help the graduating class review for the exam?
(9) How to arrange and correct assignments, carry out Q & A and feedback?
(10) How to develop school-based teaching and research for online teaching? .
Pay Attention to Students’ Learning Status
In order to adapt to the characteristics of students’ home study, when the school organized and conducted online teaching, it paid close attention to the student’s learning
status and guided students to have better home study. During the home study, teachers’
instructing time is reduced. Teachers stimulated students’ motivation by giving students
clear learning goals, and designed essential autonomous learning tasks based on the
core content of teaching to increase students’ participation in online learning. The
school organized teachers to select high-quality learning resources to closely follow the
teaching goals and content, meet the physical and mental characteristics of learners,
promote effective but avoid inefficient learning. Instruct students to choose reasonable
learning methods and use home learning opportunities brought by pandemic to cultivate
students’ good self-study habits and improve self-study quality and ability. We value
students’ practice, understand the teaching effect in time through practice, and then
strengthen the learning effect and adjust their learning plans in a more focused manner.
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
Stimulate learning through instant evaluation, strengthen successful experiences and
self-confidence, and encourage them to participate in the learning process to meet the
most basic learning requirements.
In the process of organizing online teaching, we need to always pay attention to
motivate students’ learning motivation and cultivate self-learning ability and level. Empirical research by Zhou et al. showed that students’ learning motivation was highly
correlated with autonomous learning and academic achievements . In
addition, we must focus on the students’ experience on the network platform. Relevant
research during the postponed period showed that the platform satisfaction used by
online teaching had a high correlation with the overall satisfaction of students with
online teaching, that is, the more satisfied students were with the online teaching platform, the more satisfied they were with the overall online teaching .
During the “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, schools must ensure that students
from families with limited resources can participate in online teaching. It is necessary to
carry out comprehensive investigations, find out the bases of students in difficult families, and understand the actual difficulties of students, including any necessary hardware
such as smart phones and computers? Does his family have access to the network? Are
they familiar with the use of smart devices? The school has extensively mobilized social
forces to solve students’ difficulties so that they can smoothly participate in online
teaching activities.
Close Communication between School and Parents
During the postponed period, the family became the only place for students to study at
home. Strengthening communication and cooperation between schools and families is
an important measure to promote “School’s Out, But Class’s On”.
In order to better manage students’ home study, schools organized homeroom
teachers to establish corresponding class platforms for communication management.
Establish contact with students’ families through multiple channels such as class QQ
group, WeChat group or school platform, and school official WeChat. Build up a good,
positive, smooth, and effective communication channel between the school and the family to maximize parental support and cooperation. Through the communication platform
and collect the data of online viewing and homework submission to better understand
their self study situation.
The school developed guidance for parents, and guided parents and students to
make home study and living plans together, so that each student’s home study and living plan could be formulated according to their home study characteristics and family
circumstances, and realized “one student for one case”. During the postponed period,
students were living at home and their parents spent more time with their children together. Schools should help parents establish a sense of family education, help them
create a good family learning environment, and ensure that students’ home study pro-
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
grams were put in place through the guidance and supervision of both schools and families.
It is necessary to establish a school notification system to parents. The school
held an online parental conference once a week, during which the school informed parents of the home study situation, including statistics of home study time, the use of elearning tools, parental accompaniment, student learning status at each period, and
homework completion. At the same time, school informed parents of the online teaching situation of teachers, including the preparation of lessons and teaching seminars. Put
forward requirements for students’ home study, ask parents to urge students to make a
weekly study plan, arrange daily learning activities, and cultivate good study habits.
Told them the expectations for parents, and hoped that parents could serve as role models, guide and supervise students “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, and go along with
their children through every day of the postponed spring semester.
Pay Attention to the Physical and Mental Health of Students
during Home Study
When the Ministry of Education began to deploy “School’s Out, But Class’s On”, it
already paid attention to the physical and mental health of students during the pandemic
prevention and control. It required elementary and middle schools to take care of the
physical and mental health of students in the process of conducting online teaching and
to control the appropriate amount of teaching content and the appropriate teaching time
 .
In order to guide the school to promote the overall development of physical and
mental health during students’ home study, the Jiangsu Provincial Department of Education specially issued documents to schools to put forward specific suggestions on
promoting the development of students’ physical and mental health:
(1) Maintain healthy living habits. It required a reasonable arrangement of study
time (< 3 hours per day for lower graders and < 4 hours for upper graders for
elementary students; < 6 hours for middle school students and < 7 hours for
high school students); sufficient sleep time (elementary school students > 10
hours, and middle school students should be > 9 hours); avoid staying up late
and develop good habits to work on time; increase the interval between study
and rest, take appropriate physical exercise to ensure physical and mental
health; and learn to master the basic skills to prevent infectious diseases.
(2) Carry out physical exercise at home. Instruct parents to exercise with students.
Its content was mainly based on basic skills (strength, flexibility, etc.), basic
activities (such as jumping, supporting, balancing, etc.), and basic movements
of some items (aerobics, hula hoop, jumping rope, etc.). Arrange 2 to 3 time a
day with 20-30 minutes each.
(3) Insist on prevention and control of myopia, and control the length of time of
using eyes. In elementary school, each class does not exceed 20 minutes, and
the total length of online lessons per day does not exceed 80 minutes. Each
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
middle school and high school class should less than 30 minutes each, and the
total length of online lessons per day should not exceed 3 hours and 4 hours,
respectively. The break time is not less than 15 minutes (looking for 10
minutes in the distance, rest with eyes closed, or do vision exercises for 5
(4) Enrich cultural life at home. When choosing educational resources, the school
should pay attention to recommending the content of art appreciation, film
appreciation, calligraphy writing, sports and fitness to students. Guide them to
take the theme of “fighting against pandemic”, and carry out thematic activities such as film and television production, learning to sing songs, home
sports, housework, and research projects . Meanwhile, in the process of
“School’s Out, But Class’s On”, each school formulated specific work plans, schedules
for curriculum, and clarified the distance teaching and assessment process. This allowed
elementary and middle school students across the country to study at home according to
the study schedule every day, and the school evaluated the students according to the
planed teaching stage. This educational practice solved the problem of the actual education and teaching of Chinese schools that were postponed for the purpose of preventing
and controlling the pandemic, and ensured that all students’ learning was not affected
by the pandemic, and its implementation effect had been recognized by the majority of
students. A survey conducted by the China Education Policy Research Institute of Beijing Normal University showed that the satisfaction of home and elementary school
students was generally high, and the vast majority of students acknowledged online
learning methods and the learning effects .
“School’s Out, But Class’s On” education practice has tested the achievements
of China’s education construction of informatization. Since the 1980s, China has been
continuing to promote the construction of education informatization with “three links
and two platforms” as its core, and completed the project of “full coverage of digital
education resources at teaching sites”, which has enabled China to include teaching
sites in remote rural areas with modern teaching equipment and nationally prescribed
curriculum resources. Up to 2019, 98.4% of China’s elementary and middle schools
(including teaching sites) have achieved network access. The national education resource public service system has been connected to 150 online platforms. In addition,
there are Tencent classrooms, NetEase public courses, Chinese university MOOC,
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020
Homework Help, Learn+Think Online School, Ape tutoring, VIPKID and other educational platforms. Based on the construction of online platforms, China has also vigorously promoted the construction of high-quality digital education resources, including
online courses, media material resources, and digital learning resource centers . These national-level online course resources provided strong educational
technology and resource support for “School’s Out, But Class’s On” during the pandemic, thereby making it possible for schools across the country to develop online education and teaching.
“School’s Out, But Class’s On” educational practice is of great significance to
the use of information technology to promote education and teaching reform. Online
learning breaks the limitation of time and space and the limitation of the source flow of
offline teaching, and makes a full use of the advantages of modern education technology. In online teaching, teachers use cutting-edge Internet technology to restore real
teaching situations, and use massive electronic teaching resources to enrich teaching
content, thereby achieving a rich, practical, and interesting live teaching. Students use
the Internet to make learning choices more diverse and personalized, to make learning
content and activities more free, and to make information technology and teaching more
closely. Online teaching is considered to be an essential part of the future teaching
mode, but since its rise in 2013, online learning has not become one of the popular
teaching forms. The successful practice of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” provided
valuable experience for the further implementation of online education, enriched people’s understanding of online education, and increased the stickiness between technology and education. It is foreseeable that after the resumption of the normal school, the
use of the Internet for autonomous learning and after-school supplementary learning
will become a crucial way for students. Online teaching through the Internet will also
become a critical style of teacher instructing. Using the network for teaching administration will also become an important form of school management .
“School’s Out, But Class’s On” is an educational response to the COVID-19
pandemic, but this should not be taken as a passive move under the crisis. On the contrary, we should combine the long-term task of reforming learning and teaching models
in times of crisis to make it a good opportunity for school education reform. Schools
should take advantage of this rare practical opportunity to re-examine the mission of
school education in the spirit of reform, further consider the high-quality construction of
educational resources, and the reconstruction of educational models and forms, and explore new types of education and teaching models.
Cheng. Challenges of “School’s Out, But Class’s On” to School Education.
SIEF, Vol.5, No. 2, 2020