MIND: A Distributed Multi-Dimensional Indexing
System for Network Diagnosis
Xin Li, Fang Bian, Hui Zhang,
Christophe Diot, Ramesh Govindan, Wei Hong and Gianluca Iannaccone
Detecting coordinated attacks on Internet resources requires
a distributed network monitoring infrastructure. Such an infrastructure will have two logically distinct elements: distributed
monitors that continuously collect trafﬁc information, and a distributed query system that allows network operators to efﬁciently
correlate information from different monitors in order to detect
anomalous trafﬁc patterns. In this paper, we discuss the design
and implementation of MIND, a distributed index management
system that supports the creation and querying of multiple
distributed indices. We validate MIND using trafﬁc traces from
two large backbone networks, then examine the performance
of a MIND prototype on more than 100 PlanetLab machines.
Our experiments show that MIND can detect and report network
anomalies in about one second on an inter-continental backbone.
We also analyze the efﬁciency of our load balancing mechanism
and evaluate the robustness of MIND to node failure.
I. INTRODUCTION
Distributed attacks and self-propagating worms have spurred
researchers and industry alike to explore innovative intrusion
or anomaly detection systems. The trafﬁc is generally analyzed
buy an independent physical system located on the link or by
the router itself. The state of the art in operational anomaly
detection is either to apply pre-deﬁned rules corresponding
to known anomalies , or to identify unusual patterns , , in the trafﬁc.
The current systems have two important drawbacks. First,
they have no easy way to correlate observations on multiple
monitoring points, except by exporting summarized trafﬁc
information to a central location, making the overall system
vulnerable to failure, attacks or congestion.Second, they often
do not support historical analysis of network trafﬁc for reconstructing past network events, identifying all compromised
hosts, or detecting vulnerabilities in the network infrastructure
that could lead to future intrusions and attacks.
A robust network monitoring and anomaly diagnosis system
should therefore have the following properties: (i) store some
historical trafﬁc information, (ii) be robust to network failures
and to attacks, and (iii) exhibit low response time when a
problem is detected. These properties imply that moving all
trafﬁc information to a central location is not an option as it
could create congestion, slow down network diagnosis, and
make the system very vulnerable.
This work is supported by a grant from Intel Corporation.
X. Li, F. Bian, and R. Govindan are with the University of Southern
California ({xinli, bian, ramesh}@usc.edu). H. Zhang is with NEC Labs
America ( ). C. Diot is with Thomson Paris Research
Lab ( ). W. Hong is with Arched Rock Corporation ( ). G. Iannaccone is with Intel Research
( ).
We propose to structure such a network-wide monitoring
and anomaly detection system as two logical components:
(1) a set of distributed trafﬁc monitors deployed on as many
network links as possible, and (2) a querying system that
enables fast correlation of trafﬁc data. The trafﬁc monitors
collect and store network traces. They can also generate
trafﬁc summaries in the form of ﬂow records or suitably
aggregated and ﬁltered versions thereof. The querying system
allows users (or monitoring systems) to efﬁciently query these
trafﬁc summaries. In addition, it should make possible to
design decentralized anomaly detection algorithms and to add
some redundancy in order to improve system’s robustness and
availability.
The querying system will likely support several kinds of
queries, ranging from exact match to ﬂexible pattern matching
on ﬂow records. However, it is crucial for such a system
to efﬁciently support multi-dimensional range queries. Many
queries that attempt to correlate trafﬁc summaries are naturally
expressed as multi-dimensional range queries. For example, a
query of the form “was there a ﬂow of size greater than 100MB
to preﬁx X in time interval T” can be used to monitor trafﬁc
volumes to a collection of customers. Similarly, a query of
the form “what is the count of distinct sources sending small
ﬂows to port 3306 to destination preﬁx X” can be used to
detect suspicious port scanning activity.
In this paper, we explore the design and implementation of
MIND, a distributed system that supports the network-wide
monitoring and anomaly detection system described above.
MIND is a hypercube overlay that supports the creation and
querying of multi-dimensional indices with features that are
speciﬁc to network wide anomaly detection. Trafﬁc summaries
expressed as multi-attribute data records and generated at
network monitors can be inserted into one or more MIND
indices. MIND routes these tuples to nodes such that tuples
near each other in the attribute space are likely to be stored
at the same node, making multi-dimensional range searches
efﬁcient. In addition, MIND contains a novel load balancing
technique that avoids storage hotspots arising from skewed
data distributions. Last, MIND replicates indicies for improved
robustness and availability, in the face of attacks (potentially
directed against the anomaly detection system itself) and node
Inserting all ﬂow records from each network monitor into
MIND could incur signiﬁcant trafﬁc overhead and could impact network performance. Instead, we see MIND as being
used in much the same way database administrators build
centralized indices. A network administrator performs careful
off-line analysis to decide the attributes to be indexed, and
the granularity of trafﬁc summaries to be inserted into MIND.
This database design analysis is based on the trade-off between
the cost of building the index, and the expected frequency of
querying the system. MIND could also be made adaptable to
network conditions.
We have implemented a full-featured MIND prototype and
have extensively experimented on PlanetLab using trafﬁc
ﬂow records from two large academic backbones Abilene 
and G´EANT . In one of these experiments, we constructed
a MIND overlay containing 34 nodes that matched the geographical and topological distribution of Abilene and G ´EANT
backbone routers and inserted over 9 million ﬂow records
into the system. In another experiment, we evaluated the
performance and robustness of MIND at a scale of more than
100 nodes. Finally, we compared the anomalies detected by
an online MIND system to those detected by an independently
designed off-line trace analysis algorithm .
Our results reveal that MIND can support median insertion
and query latencies under 1 second, and can provide, with each
data item being replicated once, accurate replies to queries
even when 15% of the nodes fail. MIND exhibited perfect
recall on all the anomalies we searched for, with average
response times on the order of a second.
The contribution of this work is not-yet-another overlay
hypercube validated on PlanetLab. Instead, MIND is the ﬁrst
operational overlay speciﬁcally designed and deployed to
support network wide anomaly diagnosis on the Internet with
the following new features: (i) it allows fast routing of multidimensional range queries, (ii) it load balances indices trafﬁc
in order to minimize search time and risks of congestion, and
(iii) it is robust to attacks and network failures. In addition,
our validation is performed with real trafﬁc traces collected on
two backbone networks and re-deployed on PlanetLab nodes
located near the original backbones’ PoPs.
This paper is organized as follows. We discuss the motivation and design choices of MIND in Section II. In Section III, we describe the design and implementation details.
Section IV shows the results of our experiments for evaluating
the performance of MIND. In Section V, we demonstrate that
one can quickly retrieve real-world anomalies using MIND
queries. We discuss related work in Section VI and conclude
in Section VII.
II. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
As explained earlier, we consider a network of trafﬁc
monitors where each monitor has access to the entire sequence
of packets observed at each link attached to the monitor. These
monitors can either store full packet traces and/or compute
metrics of interests to network operators and generate multiattribute ﬂow records. A ﬂow record typically represents the
summary of trafﬁc aggregated over a speciﬁc time window. For
example, ﬂow records (destIP = www.foo.com,destport =
80,octets = 1K,timewin = 30) measures the volume of Web
trafﬁc to that destination per 30 seconds. Below, We discuss
the design choices we encountered during MIND system
construction. We believe that these design alternatives also
play critical roles for designs of the systems with similar
structures and for similar applications.
A. Architecture
There are three possible ways in which one can structure
MIND and similar systems. A query ﬂooding architecture
keeps the ﬂow records at or near the monitors and ﬂoods each
query to every monitor. A centralized architecture moves the
data to one node (or a cluster for redundancy), and queries are
sent to that cluster. Finally, in a distributed architecture trafﬁc
monitors store summaries in a specialized routing structure
that can forward queries where the summary resides.
trade-offs
architectures
wellunderstood, but in the network monitoring context we ﬁnd
the distributed architecture to be the most attractive. Query
ﬂooding scales well in that it does not involve movement
of ﬂow records, but can lead to poor performance for high
query loads since all queries must be evaluated at each node.
Furthermore, to make this architecture robust to failure, it may
be necessary to replicate the ﬂow records in a topologically
different location, requiring movement of data. The centralized
approach lacks the physical redundancy necessary in an operational network monitoring system. It is always possible to
replicate the central ﬂow record repository, but such a system
will not be that much easier to manage or provision when
compared to a distributed architecture.
A distributed querying system can be organized hierarchically or in a peer-to-peer overlay. Both these structures
have good scaling properties and are natural candidates for
the querying system. Hierarchical systems like Irisnet 
organize the namespace hierarchically, and can efﬁciently
support hierarchical wild-carded queries. Such structures can
only efﬁciently support multi-dimensional range queries that
are well-aligned with the naming hierarchy. However, trafﬁc
data cannot be organized in a manner required by systems
like . For example, even if a network preﬁx is contained
in another, the packets belonging to the two preﬁxes may be
observed in two completely different parts of the network. For
this reason, we only consider peer-to-peer overlays as the basis
for our design.
B. Building Indices
Trafﬁc data can be indexed at various granularities. At one
extreme, one can envision building a single index of every TCP
ﬂow observed on each link in the network. While bandwidth is
not a scarce resource in today’s backbone networks, per ﬂow
data is voluminous (e.g., more than 1 TB/day for G ´EANT)
and most of it is likely to be “normal” trafﬁc and therefore
uninteresting. For this reason, MIND is designed to allow users
to dynamically create multiple indices on arbitrary subsets of
the trafﬁc attributes. Such a capability is analogous to the
creation of indices in classical databases, and will enable a
more bandwidth-efﬁcient and responsive system. We delay the
details about using multiple indices to detect various anomalies
until Section IV and Section V.
C. Hashing
The design of overlays for supporting range queries has
started to receive some attention in the literature , , ,
Number of tuples
Data-space bin ID
average load
The data distribution from one-day real-world network traces.
 . Two classes of approaches have been studied. The ﬁrst
attempts to build support for such queries on top of DHTs. The
second stores data on the overlay in a manner that preserves
locality—data records are routed to nodes such that records
stored at a node are “near” each other in the attribute space.
This locality-preserving hashing is more naturally suited than
the ﬁrst approach to efﬁcient multi-dimensional querying,
since queries can be routed directly to nodes that contain the
relevant parts of the attribute space. For this reason, MIND
employs the latter approach. In Section VI we more carefully
contrast previously proposed systems with MIND and explain
why prior work is unsuitable for network monitoring and
anomaly detection.
D. Load balancing.
Our choice of locality-preserving hashing can, with a naive
design, lead to poor system performance. This is because network trafﬁc data is, in general, signiﬁcantly skewed. Figure 1
plots the number of ﬂow records that would ﬁt into a 64bin multi-dimensional histogram constructed on three different
indices over a one day trafﬁc summary from Abilene and
G´EANT (the indices are described in detail in Section IV).
This ﬁgure illustrates that without a careful systems design,
the amount of data stored at different nodes within the network
can vary by an order of magnitude.
MIND’s load balancing scheme leverages the fact that
network trafﬁc is approximately stationary over diurnal
timescales. It uses an approximate histogram of the data
distribution from a 24-hour period to govern how data storage
is distributed across overlay nodes (this is described in detail
in Section III-E).
To validate that the distribution of trafﬁc summaries is indeed stationary over different timescales, we analyzed Netﬂow
records from all routers on Abilene and G ´EANT over a twoweek period . We indexed the Netﬂow
records aggregated (but not ﬁltered) over 30-second intervals
on six attributes (consisting of the source and destination
addresses, timestamp, the total number of bytes transferred,
the number of distinct connections, and the average size of a
connection). Figure 2 depicts how the distribution of this index
varies day-to-day. We have used different time window size,
including 15 seconds, 60 seconds, 5 minutes, and 15 minutes,
and found that the data stationarity always hold.
We deﬁne a mismatch metric to compare multi-dimensional
histograms representing the data distribution. For a d −
Mismatching Factor (Day-i vs Day-(i+1))
hist. granularity = 4
hist. granularity = 16
hist. granularity = 64
hist. granularity = 256
The daily mismatch of the two backbones’ data in two weeks.
dimensional index, we partition it into kd (k is called histogram
granularity) equal-sized bins. For bin x (1 ≤x ≤kd), we deﬁne
k (i,x) = percentage of Day-i tuples fallen into bin x.
The mismatch between the data distributions of Day-i and
Day-j, MFD
k (i, j), is then deﬁned as
k (i, j) =
k (i,x)−LD
When kd is high enough, a daily balanced data allocation can
be generated by directly assigning the bins to network nodes.
k (i, j) is the upper bound of the re-balancing cost to have
Day-j data allocated evenly among the nodes with Day-i’s
allocation scheme as the base. One can analogously deﬁne the
mismatch at different timescales (e.g., hourly).
We ﬁnd that, even with the ﬁnest grain histogram, no more
than 20% of the data items need be moved from one day’s
histogram to another. By contrast, the trafﬁc distribution can
vary signiﬁcantly hour-to-hour (mismatch close to 1 when the
histogram has a 64 or higher granularity), indicating that the
continuous re-balancing proposed in some other systems 
might be highly inefﬁcient. We have also veriﬁed that this
behavior holds qualitatively for ﬁltered indices built on fewer
attributes.
E. Robustness
By design, MIND is more robust than centralized schemes.
The redundant routing paths provided by the hypercube
overlay of MIND enable a simple probing-based detection
and recovery mechanism. However, events affecting links or
nodes such as transient malfunctions or malicious attacks
can compromize the functioning and performance of MIND.
Therefore, we decided to add to MIND a replication mechanism to increase availability of critical performance and trafﬁc
information.
The MIND replication mechanism is designed in such a way
that the replica can be accessed (stored/retrieved) within limited overlay hops from the original data. With the hypercube
structure it is natural and efﬁcient to locate replicas on the
hypercube neighbors. First, the hypercube neighbors of a node
are all one overlay hop away from the node. Second, by design,
the hypercube neighbors are the nodes that will consecutively
take the place of the original node under failures. Finally,
this gives the user a tunable parameter as to the number of
replicas, traded off between data availability and replication
overhead. We discuss the details of robustness design in MIND
in Section III-F.
III. DESIGN DETAILS
MIND is a distributed system that provides applications
with the abstraction of multi-dimensional indices. Applications
(or users) can create indices with speciﬁc schemas from
any MIND node. Any MIND node can insert data into an
index, or query an index. Finally, users can delete MIND
indices. Thus, in the context of our driving application, a
network operator may install a distributed MIND system, then
create indices for detecting anomalies. A network operator
(or perhaps individual customers) could script periodic queries
that poll for the likely existence of anomalies in different trafﬁc
volumes. That script could also be automated to drill down (by
issuing a sequence of queries) once a potential anomaly was
Note that although we propose to use MIND for network
anomaly detection, the MIND system represents a generic
distributed substrate for multi-dimensional range queries. As
such, it can be used for other tasks, such as root cause
analysis of Internet routing problems, performance analysis
or troubleshooting.
For each index, MIND deﬁnes a mapping between the
multi-dimensional data-space and the underlying hypercube.
MIND’s novelty lies in its de-coupling the data-space mapping
from the underlying routing structure. This allows the MIND
system to naturally balance the storage load across all the
overlay nodes while maintaining the conceptual simplicity of
the overall routing scheme. MIND replicates the record on a
natural “sibling”, in a manner to be described later, to allow
robust retrieval of data.
A. Overlay Construction
The logical structure of an N-node MIND is a N-node
hypercube where each vertex corresponds to one MIND node.
The choice of a hypercube is not fundamental in MIND; we
have not investigated other overlay routing geometries, such
as the ring, but we expect that they can be used for MIND,
perhaps with different trade-offs .
Each MIND node uses its hypercube vertex code as its
“address” on the overlay. MIND attempts to maintain a balanced hypercube, to the extent possible. A balanced hypercube
minimizes the maximum code length of any node, resulting
in about logN neighbors per node. Since the neighbor list is
the only state each MIND node needs to maintain in order to
make routing decisions, a balanced hypercube will even out
the routing table size at all nodes.
There are various ways to establish a balanced hypercube
with a given set of nodes. One approach, for example, would
use a set of well-known hosts to record the current hypercube
topology. Other nodes can join the hypercube by querying a
well-known host to ﬁnd an appropriate neighborhood of nodes
to join. Adler et al. propose a distributed randomized node
join procedure as follows. A host that wants to join randomly
chooses a node in the hypercube. In the neighborhood of
The deadlock free concurrent join procedure in MIND.
the selected node including the node itself, it chooses the
node with the shortest code to join and becomes that node’s
sibling node. This join procedure guarantees that the resulting
hypercube, after a sequence of node joins, is balanced with
high probability. Because it is amenable to a more robust
implementation, we adopted Adler’s algorithm in MIND.
However, our implementation modiﬁes the original join
algorithm to serialize concurrent node joins to the same
neighborhood in a manner that does not introduce deadlocks.
In our modiﬁcation, a node may optimistically accept multiple
join requests. However, a new join request preempts an ongoing join process that has not been committed if it joins a
shallower node. Figure 3 illustrates the concurrent join process.
Consider the case where node X and Y simultaneously join the
overlay. In step 1, node X and Y send join requests to node
00 and node 1, respectively, at the same time. In step 2, X
joins node 1 with code 00 and Y joins node 00 with code
1. In step 3, unless X’s requests have been committed by all
nodes X has contacted, only Y’s join requests are accepted
while X are rejected by both node 00 and node 1 because Y
is joining a shallower neighbor. The procedure shown can be
easily extended to the cases of more than two concurrent node
B. Index Creation and Data Space Embedding
MIND allows the construction of several indices, and maps
each index independently onto the overlay. The procedure for
creating an index in MIND is relatively straightforward. When
an application calls create index,1the index creation request, together with the schema for the index, is ﬂooded on
the overlay. When nodes join the overlay, they obtain the
current set of deﬁned indices from the neighbor to which they
attach. Similarly, when an index is dropped, a message ﬂooded
throughout the overlay causes all state at each overlay node
pertaining to the index to be deleted.
In MIND, the data space associated with an index is stored
on the overlay in the following manner. Consider an index built
on k-dimensions. For example, for our alpha ﬂow monitoring
application, k can be 4 (source IP address, destination IP address, ﬂow size, and time). Conceptually, the data inserted into
such an index can be described as points in a k-dimensional
space. MIND essentially maps hyper-rectangles in this space
into individual overlay nodes, in a manner described below. A
1We describe MIND algorithms without giving their pseudo code for lack
The equal data space division (top left) vs. the histogram based
data space division (bottom right) in a 3-D normalized space for 10 nodes.
key property of this algorithm is that k can be independent of
the dimensionality of the hypercube.
Take the k-dimensional data space and “cut” it (for now,
assume that these cuts divide the data-space equally, but we
shall remove this assumption shortly) along each of these k
dimensions using a k−1 dimensional hyper-plane. This results
in 2k hyper-rectangle. At each cut, deﬁne one half of the
data-space to have a code bit of 0, and the other a code bit
of 1. Thus, following this sequence of cuts, each 2k hyperrectangle is associated with a bit-string “code”. Now, repeat
this procedure until the number of hyper-rectangles equals the
number of nodes (Figure 4, top left). Then, the data points in
a MIND index falling into a hyper-rectangle A are stored (we
describe later how index data is routed) in the overlay node
whose code maximally matches the code of A. When a node
joins an existing overlay and takes over a part of the dataspace from a sibling, data already stored in existing indices
are not moved from the sibling to the joiner. Rather, the joiner
maintains a pointer to the sibling and forwards queries to it.
The pointer will be dropped once the data have aged.
When the data distribution is skewed, the number of data
items in different hyper-rectangles can be different. In that
case, the storage across nodes is not balanced. However, if the
global data distribution were known, even approximately, then
we could “cut” the data space to allow for a more equitable
distribution of data items (Figure 4, bottom right, illustrates
this). We describe this load balancing scheme in greater detail
in Section III-E below.
C. Data Insertion
User applications can insert data (e.g., ﬂow records for network monitoring) into MIND from any MIND node. When an
application calls insert data at a node, the corresponding
MIND instance computes the hyper-rectangle that the data
item would fall into. To do this, each MIND node would
have to know the hyper-planes that cut the index data space;
we describe how a MIND node knows this in Section III-E.
Furthermore, because the cuts will, in general, generate more
hyper-rectangles than there are nodes (a node may not know
the exact number of nodes in the overlay, but computes an
estimate of this from its own code length), the computed code
for the data item may not exactly match the code associated
with a node. In this case, the data item is stored at the node
whose code maximally matches the computed code.
To ﬁnd this node, MIND greedily routes the data item on
the hypercube using the computed code. In this procedure, at
each step the data item is forwarded to that neighbor whose
code maximally matches the computed code until the data
item reaches a node which is assigned the hyper-rectangle
containing the data item. During routing transients, the routing
procedure might hit a dead-end. In such cases, MIND employs
a recovery procedure that attempts to ﬁnd an alternate route
(Section III-F).
D. Query Processing
A query on a MIND index is described by a range of values
for each attribute of the index (of course, any of the attributes
can be wild-carded). Put differently, a query in MIND represents a hyper-rectangle in the data-space. Depending on the
size of the query, this hyper-rectangle may be contained within
a hyper-rectangle resulting from the data-space cuts described
above, or may contain many such hyper-rectangles.
When an application calls query index at a MIND node,
that node computes a code for the query in a manner similar to
computing codes for data items. However, given that a large
query may cover more than one data-space hyper-rectangle,
the computed code can be a preﬁx of the codes assigned to
overlay nodes. The query is routed using exactly the same
strategy described above for routing data items, but with one
important difference. When the query reaches the ﬁrst node
whose associated hyper-rectangle (perhaps partially) intersects
the query hyper-rectangle, that node splits the query into
sub-queries covering data-space hyper-rectangles. These subqueries are independently routed using the strategy described
For simplicity, results from all sub-queries are directly
transferred to the originator rather than being routed on the
overlay. The originator can then determine, by examining
which nodes responded, when the query response is complete.
If a node is assigned a hyper-rectangle in the data-space
covered by the query, but has no matching data, it responds
negatively to the query.
E. Balancing Data Storage in MIND
MIND uses locality-preserving hashing. If the data-space is
embedded on the overlay by recursively cutting the data-space
evenly across each dimension, then a skewed data distribution
(where the data items are unevenly distributed across the
hyper-rectangles) can result in signiﬁcant storage imbalance
across the nodes. This imbalance can be a signiﬁcant practical
problem for applications like network monitoring that can
store large amounts of data items in different indices.
Classical approaches to re-balancing centralized index data
structures usually attempt to do so on the ﬂy, i.e., as data
items are inserted into the index. In an overlay based system
like MIND, this approach can introduce signiﬁcant complexity. MIND would have to dynamically re-partition the dataspace among the overlay nodes, and migrate data items from
one node to the other in order to do this. Care must be
taken to process queries correctly and to robustly handle
node failures during re-balancing. Furthermore, for network
monitoring applications, the re-balancing operations must be
invoked relatively infrequently to avoid moving large volumes
of data between overlay nodes.
For all these reasons, MIND uses a much simpler approach
to load balancing that leverages on two properties of the
data: (i) network trafﬁc data is approximately stationary on
diurnal time-scales (see Section II); (ii) the cuts on the MIND
data-space can be scaled so that the hyper-rectangles contain
approximately the same amount of data. We now describe the
mechanics of this approach.
In MIND, a designated node collects, once a day, an approximate multi-dimensional histogram of the data distribution on
each index, by aggregating the individual data distributions
observed at each node. These per-index distributions are then
sent to each node, which independently computes a balanced
cut on the data-space. In such a balanced cut, a hyper-plane
cuts a hyper-rectangle such that the number of data items on
each division of the hyper-rectangle is approximately the same.
The histogram of the data distribution is used to effect this, and
the efﬁcacy of load balancing depends upon the granularity of
the bins in the histogram.
Having computed the balanced cut, MIND does not attempt
to migrate historical data between overlay nodes. Rather, it
maintains daily versions of each index (we have deferred an
examination of version storage management to future work)
separately, and the histogram describing the data distribution
on one day is used to store data for the next. This is
conceptually easy to do, since a histogram completely deﬁnes
the balanced cuts and the relevant index versions that should be
used will be evident from the query itself (e.g., by examining
the time interval described in the query as in our current
implementation).
Our current prototype does not implement the on-line histogram collection algorithm mentioned above. In the experiments in this paper, we compute the balanced cuts off-line
and install them at nodes. However, implementing the on-line
histogram collection should not be a major endeavor.
F. Robustness to Node and Link Failure
MIND incorporates two classes of mechanisms to make the
system robust to un-anticipated failures of nodes or overlay
Dealing with routing transients
In our experiments, we
have often observed transient overlay link failures, presumably
caused by routing failures in the underlying network. Restoring
a link by repeatedly attempting to reconnect to the peer node
sufﬁces in most cases and has the attractive property that it
minimally perturbs the overlay. When successive reconnection
attempts fail, the MIND node ﬁrst attempts to discover whether
the peer is alive or not, by routing a probe message on the
hypercube overlay to its peer. When a neighbor of the peer
receives this message and can attest to the peer’s liveness, the
node continues to attempt re-connection. The system attempts
to repair the overlay (as described below) only if the peer is
found to have failed.
During these transient link failures, a query may encounter
a failure in greedy routing. The failed link may have been
the only exit from the node towards the destination of the
query. There is a fairly substantial literature on the subject
of robust hypercube routing (see for examples), but our
current implementation uses a rather simple approach. When
a query reaches a MIND node at which greedy routing fails,
that node sends out an expanding-ring scoped broadcast along
the overlay to ﬁnd another node whose address overlaps the
query’s code to an equal or greater extent to that of the
broadcast originator. Query forwarding resumes from that
overlay node. We have seen several instances of this procedure
being invoked during our experiments.
Dealing with node failure
MIND also attempts to reconﬁgure the overlay after a node failure. Recall, that MIND
nodes have addresses on the hypercube. MIND’s recovery
procedure is best understood by thinking of the overlay node
addresses as forming a virtual binary tree whose leaves are
the nodes themselves. On this tree, for example, nodes with
addresses 000000 and 000001 are siblings. Furthermore, a
node with an address 000010 is said to be on a sibling sub-tree
of these nodes.
In MIND, when a node fails, its sibling takes over the hyperrectangle associated with the failed node. It does this simply
by shortening its code. Thus, in our example, if node 000000
fails, its sibling shortens its code to 00000. If both a node
and its sibling fail, then a node in the sibling sub-tree (in our
example, the node 000010) takes over. This procedure can be
applied recursively. Notice that this recovery strategy may not
preserve the balance in the hypercube. We have postponed
the design of a balance-preserving recovery strategy pending
a better understanding of the frequency of node failure—our
sense is that because MIND is intended to be a managed
infrastructure (as opposed to a truly peer-to-peer system in
which nodes may join and leave at will), our current approach
will sufﬁce.
In MIND, this recovery procedure is closely aligned with our
data replication strategy. Notice that the set of nodes that could
potentially take over a node’s hyper-rectangle are its neighbors
on the hypercube overlay. A MIND index’s availability can be
tuned by carefully replicating data items at these neighbors.
With the right choice of neighbors at which to replicate, the
failover to replicas is made transparent. For example, let m be
the desired level of replication and k be the code length of the
original node. Then the replication nodes are those neighbors
that have common preﬁxes of length k −1,k −2,...,k −m
with the original node, and the system is robust to failure of
m nodes. For example, consider node with code 000000 and
m = 3, then the replication nodes are those with codes 000001,
000010, and 000100.
G. Software Structure and Implementation Details
We have implemented a MIND prototype using Java. Figure 5 describes the software structure of our prototype. Conceptually, our prototype consists of two separable components
(separated with a dashed line in the ﬁgure), one dealing with
network communication (the left half of the ﬁgure), and the
other with data storage (the right half). Our implementation is
largely event-driven, but uses three long-lived threads: one for
The MIND node architecture.
TCP communication, one for message dispatch, and one for
managing storage.
At the lowest level of the communication component is a
dispatcher that sends and receive messages. Network maintenance messages including node join and leave, and neighbor
status update are processed within the neighbor management
and the code management components. Should a node’s code
(address) change, the code management module sends a request to the data space management module for remapping
the multi-dimensional data space to the code. Application
data and control messages are delivered to the index management component where messages are further classiﬁed and
handed off to individual indices. Routing decisions for data
and queries are made within the data insertion and query
processing modules. The code management module interacts
with the neighbor management module to maintain the overlay.
The data space management module is also responsible for
collecting and distributing histograms and rebuilding indices
for load balancing purposes (as explained earlier).
The system also implements several modules that maintain
and manage access to the data. Central to this functionality
is the database access control (DAC) module, one for each
index, which buffers database access requests in a queue and
communicates with the local database via JDBC. MIND uses
a mySQL backend to store the data items. When invoked,
the DAC processes each pending insertion received from
the network. DAC is tuned to handle the relatively high
data insertion rates seen in network monitoring applications.
Another important function of the DAC is to resolve queries.
DAC builds an SQL statement for each pending query and
sends it via JDBC to the local database. Upon receiving a
response from the local database, the DAC builds one or
more response messages and sends them directly to the query
originator. Finally, since our robustness mechanisms affect
many components, handling failure recovery has not been
modularized in our implementation.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We have deployed our MIND prototype on PlanetLab. Our
prototype is robust enough to handle insertions of tens of
millions of ﬂow records over several days. We have conducted
several controlled experiments using our implementation, most
of them on PlanetLab, to evaluate MIND’s behavior at the
scale of modern academic backbones, as well as its behavior
at larger scales and under greater churn. This section reports
the results of these experiments.
A. Methodology
For most of our experiments, we deployed a number of
MIND instances on PlanetLab nodes (the node deployment
strategy is discussed when we describe the experiments). In
all experiments, we inserted aggregated ﬂow records from
two large backbone networks: Abilene and G ´EANT. The
ﬂow records were obtained by processing NetFlow or
cﬂowd information collected continuously from all the
routers of the two research networks.
On the resulting MIND overlay, we created three indices,
each corresponding to a real network monitoring or anomaly
detection task.
1) Index-1 for port scan detection: This 3-dimensional
index is built from the ﬁrst three attributes of the aggregated
ﬂow records of the form:
(destination,timestamp, fanout,source,node),
where fanout determines the number of short connection
attempts made by the source to the destination, and the other
attributes are self-explanatory. Such an index is useful for
detecting port scanning activity, using a query of the form:
Find all the sources that attempted to connect to
more than F hosts in destination D within the time
2) Index-2 for unusually large ﬂow detection: This 3dimensional index is also built from the ﬁrst three attributes
of the aggregated ﬂow records of the form:
(destination,timestamp,octets,source,node),
where octets denotes the total size of the ﬂow in bytes. Such
an index can be used to ﬁnd unusually large ﬂows between
aggregates, using queries of the form:
Find all ﬂows destined for D that have carried at
least O octets (or in between O1 and O2) within
time period T.
3) Index-3 for camouﬂaged application detection: Finally,
this 3-dimensional index is built from the ﬁrst three attributes
of the aggregated ﬂow records of the form:
(destination,timestamp, flow size,source,dest port,node)
where the flow size in a time window is the average trafﬁc
sent on each distinct connection from a source to a destination
within the time window. Such an index can be used to identify
network applications that use well-known ports to work around
ﬁrewalls and packet ﬁlters (e.g., peer-to-peer applications )
or that tunnel their trafﬁc using other application layer protocols to avoid connection charges (e.g., DNS tunneling ).
The hallmark of such applications is an unexpected amount
of trafﬁc to ports on which one would not expect large trafﬁc
volumes. Such a pattern can be detected using a query of the
Find all the ﬂows either from source S, or to destination D, or both, that have ﬂow size more than X
and/or destination port P within time period T.
In addition, we also ﬁlter out small and “uninteresting” ﬂow
records. Speciﬁcally, we discard ﬂow records with fanout less
than 16, bytes less than 80 KB, and ﬂow size less than 1.5 KB,
ABILENE NETWORK DATA AMOUNT. ALL NUMBERS ARE IN MILLIONS.
respectively for each index2. Furthermore, in our experiments
the aggregation time window is chosen as 30 seconds for all
three indices. Note that the time window size is a tunable
MIND parameter depending on speciﬁc applications. In each
case, we deem these thresholds as low enough to not be
interesting from an anomaly detection perspective. In Table I
and Table II, we list the summary of the data amount, including
the raw data and the ﬂow records after aggregation, we used
for our experiments.
Finally, in each experiment, we issued queries that were
uniformly sized with respect to all attributes other than the
timestamp. For the timestamp, we always used a time interval
of the last ﬁve minutes i.e., all queries are interested in events
that occurred in the immediately past 5 minutes. The uniform
choice of attributes in other dimensions stresses the system by
including some large and some small queries. The 5 minute
query interval is representative of periodic monitoring queries
that are continuously assessing the state of the network to
determine potential anomalies.
In the following subsections, we measure several aspects
of MIND performance: insertion path length (the number of
overlay hops for tuple insertions), data insertion latency3 ,
query cost (the number of nodes visited in order to resolve
queries), the query latency, and the data and trafﬁc distribution
across nodes and links.
B. The Baseline Experiment
Our baseline experiment was designed to assess the realistic
performance of the MIND prototype at the scale of network
backbones. To achieve this, we carefully selected 34 PlanetLab
nodes (11 from North America and 23 from Europe) such
that their geographic locations were close (to within a city
granularity in most cases) to the routers of Abilene and
G´EANT backbones, respectively (recall that our trafﬁc trace
data sets also come from these backbones). This way we could
emulate the network communication that an actual MIND
deployment on those networks would experience, since most
PlanetLab nodes communicate through these networks.
We inserted data collected during a period of three days
 for a total of nearly 9 million ﬂow
records per day. We inserted the aggregated and ﬁltered ﬂow
records at the same timescales as they would have been
inserted into the real network: a few ﬁltered ﬂow records
from each MIND node every 30 seconds. Due to the different
packet sampling rates conﬁgured in the two networks (1/100
2We chose 1024, 2MB and 128 KB as the maximum ranges respectively
for these attributes after analysis revealed that these bounds were exceeded by
less than 0.1% of the tuples. For these tuples, we assigned them the largest
possible values.
3To measure this, we used the fact that PlanetLab nodes are synchronized
using NTP. As such, our measurements might be affected by NTP errors,
typically around tens of ms.
EANT NETWORK DATA AMOUNT. ALL NUMBERS ARE IN MILLIONS.
Number of seconds
50th - 90th percentile insertion latency
Tuple 50th – 90th percentile insertion latency distribution.
in Abilene and 1/1000 in G ´EANT), more ﬂow record tuples
were injected from Abilene nodes than from G ´EANT nodes.
We ran MIND continuously for three days, but, for brevity,
present results for two different hour-long periods (11am to
noon, and 11pm to midnight GMT) on each day.
Figure 6 shows the insertion latency for these six time
intervals. Most of the insertions were accomplished within a
few seconds with the median varying between 1 and 2 seconds
and the mean varying between 1 and 5 seconds.
However, the insertion latency distribution has a long tail
in many cases, as evidenced by the rather high 90th-percentile
numbers. Two factors contributed to the rather long insertion
latencies: queueing of data at overlay nodes caused by a transient hotspot, or by network dynamics (failed links or changes
in the overlay topology). In particular, we observed that there
were several tuples whose insertion took up to several tens
of seconds. In one particularly pathological case, queueing
delays at successive links delayed the tuple insertion by 48
seconds! We examined the slowest link on this path, plotting
the transmission delays (Figure 7) observed on this link over
the entire hour. In the ﬁrst half of the hour, the transmission
latencies across that link increased dramatically, impacting the
queue lengths at the overlay node. We have found several such
instances of poor performance and conjecture that they may
be due to PlanetLab artifacts, e.g., competing experiments or
slow access links to PlanetLab.
The query cost measures the number of overlay nodes visited by a query, regardless of whether the query is forwarded or
resolved by those nodes. Figure 8 shows the overall query cost
distribution for all three indices measured during the 11:00 to
noon hour on the ﬁrst day. Recall that except for time interval
ﬁxed at 5 minutes, the ranges for all the other attributes were
randomly selected, so that some queries were for relatively
large parts of the data-space. Even so, MIND indexing is quite
efﬁcient at preserving the data locality, and over 90% of the
queries involved 4 overlay nodes or less while retrieving the
Figure 9 depicts the query latency statistics for this ex-
Number of messages
Number of seconds
Time (milliseconds)
Queue size
Transmission delay
Transmission delay and the sending side queue length
distribution at the “slowest” link.
Number of nodes
Query cost CDF
Average query cost
Cumulative query cost distribution.
periment. Notice the low median query latency in the ﬁgure,
about 500 ms. This is very encouraging from the perspective
of anomaly detection: it indicates that it is feasible to deploy
a distributed system based on MIND for on-line detection of
Internet anomalies.
This ﬁgure also indicates that the query latency distribution
is skewed—notice the high 90th-percentiles and means. In
MIND there are two components to query latency: the time
to route the query on the overlay, and the time to send the
response directly back to the originator. The former component
is qualitatively similar to insertion latencies (a fact borne out
by the rough similarity between this plot and Figure 6). Furthermore, in general, the latter component is usually negligible
(dominated by the round-trip time between the originator and
the responder).
However, there were several instances in our experiments
where the query responder could not connect to the query
originator as a result of routing outages. In these cases, the
time to send the response back to the query originator was
signiﬁcantly large. Figure 10 shows the time spent in resolving
all queries during the time period from 23:00 to midnight
on day 3 at a MIND node. There are two spikes back to
back for two different indices corresponding to attempts by
the query responder to contact the query originator. During
this network outage, it took 45 seconds to establish the
connection to the query source. This long delay is an artifact
of our implementation, which attempts 3 times to establish a
connection for sending query results back to the query source.
Additionally, one of these queries was queued behind the other
and suffered an additional delay, also an artifact of the MIND
implementation where query database access is not interleaved
with network transmission of query results.
Finally, we are interested in validating the balancing of
Number of seconds
50th - 90th percentile response time
50th – 90th percentile query response time distribution.
1e+06 1.5e+06 2e+06 2.5e+06 3e+06 3.5e+06 4e+06
Number of seconds
Time (milliseconds)
DB access queuing delay
Contact query source delay
Processing delay per query at the query hotspot node.
network and storage load across the MIND infrastructure.
Clearly, if a few nodes have to carry the bulk of the ﬂow
records and answer most queries then there would be no
beneﬁt in using a distributed solution when compared to a
centralized approach.
In Figure 11 we plot the trafﬁc load over each link as
measured by the number of ﬂow records that traverse the
link. The ﬁgure consider the entire day of September 1, 2004.
The trafﬁc load is not distributed evenly across links mainly
because of the difference in ﬂow record volumes generated by
the Abilene and G´EANT nodes. However, we can see that with
MIND the busiest link carries an order of magnitude fewer
records than what a centralized system would observe (i.e.,
nearly 9 million tuples!).
Furthermore, to validate the performance of our loadbalancing strategy, we compute the number of ﬂow records
stored at each node for Index-1 at the end of Sep 2, 2004. The
partition of the data space across nodes is based on the data
distribution observer during the previous day. For comparison,
we also compute the storage load when no load balancing
is used, i.e., the partition follows a “plain” binary-recursive
Figure 12 shows the number of records stored on each node
using the two schemes. Without load balancing, the majority
(90%) of the ﬂow records are stored on just 8 nodes while 17
nodes are nearly empty! Instead, our load balancing scheme
spreads the ﬂow records more evenly across nodes: the overall
average is 113825.
Note that there is still room for improvement in the load
balancing scheme. Our goal here is to show that even a simple
scheme can achieve extremely good results. However, one
could identify better predictors for the distribution of ﬂow
records in the data space, rather than using the previous day
Number of tuples transmitted over the link
Tuples on links
The number of tuples traversing each link, Sep 01, 2004.
Number of tuples stored
Unbalanced storage
Balanced storage
The distribution of data storage across MIND nodes.
as we have done in this work. In addition, the choice of using
256 bins for the histograms is somewhat arbitrary. A larger
number of bins would allow a better load balancing at the
cost of higher communications overhead.
To conclude, our results are extremely encouraging. When
nodes are deployed geographically close to the Abilene and
G´EANT routers, our experiments show that a few nodes
need to participate in the queries allowing MIND to provide
low insertion and response times. We have also identiﬁed
a few pathological events related to our current prototype
implementation and PlanetLab-speciﬁc artifacts that result in
larger response times. We believe that such artifacts will not
arise when MIND is deployed on a dedicated infrastructure.
C. A Large-Scale Experiment
To explore MIND’s scalability, we deployed the MIND
prototype on 102 nodes. Unlike our baseline experiment, these
nodes were arbitrarily chosen but were distributed across North
America and Europe. During the course of our experiment,
several nodes failed and re-joined the overlay so that the actual
number of operational nodes varied from 70 to 102. In addition
to scaling the network size, we also scaled up the network
trafﬁc inserting aggregated ﬂow records from three days’ worth
of Abilene and G´EANT traces (about 11 million records of
Index-1) at the rate of 1 record per second per node.
The results from this experiment are qualitatively similar
to those obtained in the baseline experiment. Nearly 90% of
insertions incur less than 5 hops on the overlay, but some of
the insertions incur 1-2 hops more than the network diameter
because MIND re-routed those insertions around failures.
Furthermore, 90% of the queries visited less than 5 nodes,
and at most 12 nodes were visited by any query. We have
Insertion latency in seconds (logscale)
CDF of insertion latency
50th Percentile
90th Percentile
The cumulative distribution of insertion latency on the 102-node
MIND overlay.
Number of seconds
Time (milliseconds)
Pathological Link Delay
Output queue size
Pathological link delays during our large-scale experiments with
102 nodes.
omitted graphs describing these results for reasons of space.
Instead, we focus on the distribution of insertion latencies (the
query latency distribution is qualitatively similar). Figure 13
describes the insertion latency distribution across the entire experiment. While the median latency is below 1 second, the tail
of the distribution is long. As in our baseline experiment, there
existed “slow” links in this experiment which signiﬁcantly
increased the insertion latency for several tuples. Figure 14
plots the link latency and queue lengths across one link
which exhibited a fairly pathological behavior. One readily
apparent feature of this plot is the large network outage about
2/3rds of the way into the trace. More interestingly, though,
the plot exhibits very interesting periodic spikes in the link
latency (causing an attendant increase in queue lengths). An
examination of PlanetLab ping latency measurements reveals
no such behavior, so we conjecture that these spikes are caused
by PlanetLab scheduling. As we have discussed before, a
more aggressive re-routing strategy than the one our prototype
currently employs can alleviate this problem.
D. Robustness
Finally, we evaluated the robustness of the MIND design
to node failure. To do this, we deployed a 102-node MIND
prototype on a local cluster of nodes, with several instances
of MIND running on each physical node. This deployment
enabled us to fail individual nodes in a controlled fashion and
observe the availability of data in MIND, at various levels of
replication (Section III-F).
We inserted all three days’ aggregated and ﬁltered ﬂow
records for Index-1, but varied the degree of replication and
measured the fraction of successfully completed queries at
varying levels of random node failures. Figure 15 shows
Query success rate
Fraction of accumulated node failures
No Replication
1-Replication
7-Replication
Neighbor replication for data availability robustness under
random accumulated node failures.
the results of our experiments when using 0, 1, and “full”
replication per ﬂow record. In full replication, each item is
replicated at all overlay neighbors.
Without replication, the fraction of successful queries decreases almost linearly with the number of node failures. This
is because each node failure will make approximately
the total amount of data unavailable after the load has been
balanced among N nodes. With one replica per data item,
MIND can sustain the failure of 15% of the nodes without
compromising the data availability. Figure 15 also shows that
with full replication, MIND can easily survive over 50% node
failures without loss of data availability. In general, for a Nnode hypercube with k replicas, 0 < k ≤logN, the probability
that data loss will occur under a series of k random failures is
. Of course, replication storage and transmission cost
scales linearly with the degree of replication.
V. MIND AND ANOMALY DETECTION
MIND is intended to support ﬂexible examination of trafﬁc
volumes in order to detect potential network anomalies. The
results of MIND queries can be used to drill-down into the
data, i.e., trigger a more detailed examination of ﬂow records
or packet traces. To get an initial sense of how well MIND
achieves this goal, we used results from Lakhina et al.’s work
on the efﬁcacy of off-line centralized anomaly detection .
They detected several anomalies on the Abilene backbone on
December 18th, 2003. These anomalies were of three types:
alpha ﬂows, DoS attacks and port scans .
We conducted an experiment to see if (and how well)
MIND is able to capture the same anomalies. We constructed
an 11-node MIND overlay on PlanetLab congruent to the
Abilene backbone topology, and built two indices on this
overlay (Index-1 and Index-2 from Section IV-A). We then
inserted aggregated ﬂow records from about 25 minutes worth
of Abilene backbone traces during which several anomalies
were observed by . Finally, we issued queries on trafﬁc
volumes (multi-dimensional hyper-rectangles) circumscribing
the observed anomalies. Our goal was to see how quickly
MIND responded to those queries (the average response time
when the query is issued from every node), and how closely
our trafﬁc volumes circumscribed the records corresponding
to the anomaly.
To detect DoS attacks and port scans, we issued a query on
Index-1 of the form:
2 alpha ﬂows
2 alpha ﬂows
2 alpha ﬂows
2 DoS, 1 scan
REAL WORLD ANOMALY DETECTIONS USING MIND INDICES
Find all ﬂow records whose fanout is greater than
1500, and whose timestamp fell within a speciﬁed
5-minute interval.
To detect alpha ﬂows, we issued a query on Index-2 of the
Find all ﬂow records whose total size fanout is
greater than 4000000, and whose timestamp fell
within a speciﬁed 5-minute interval.
Table III summarizes the results of our experiment. The ﬁrst
column identiﬁes the time of occurrence of the anomaly. In
each case MIND returned a super-set of the ﬂow records that
constituted the anomaly. Notice how closely we can constrain
the trafﬁc volume: in all cases, the number of ﬂow records
returned by the MIND query is relatively small (tens of ﬂow
records). Of course, in our experiment, anomalies were known
a priori. In practice, a network operator would arrive at this
by programmatically querying progressively smaller trafﬁc
volumes. Furthermore, note that the average response times
are encouraging, on the order of a second. Finally, a useful
by-product of a MIND query response (which illustrates the
fact that MIND essentially correlates data from different nodes)
is the exact set of network monitors (Abilene routers) which
observed the anomalous trafﬁc. For example, for the 2 DoS
ﬂows captured in time window 19:55, the returned tuples show
that the paths taken by the DoS ﬂows included the Abilene
backbone routers in the following cities:
Chicago, Denver, Indianapolis, Kansas City,
Los Angeles, Sunnyvale
Chicago, Indianapolis
VI. RELATED WORK
To our knowledge, MIND is the ﬁrst system designed
for distributed monitoring. Most closely related to MIND
is the recent literature on support for range searches using
overlays , , , or geographic embeddings . But
none of these have been speciﬁcally designed for wide-area
network monitoring applications.
Mercury replicates data on k separate rings where k is the
number of indexed attributes. It can resolve multi-dimensional
range queries by carefully querying one of the rings based
on the selectivity of the data. It dynamically re-balances
the storage load on the overlay by using random sampling
to approximate the overall data distribution. Mercury’s high
degree of replication and dynamic load balancing mechanisms
may not be suited to the network monitoring application, for
reasons discussed previously.
As we have shown with our mismatch metric, trafﬁc distributions can vary signiﬁcantly hour to hour, so the kinds of
continuous rebalancing proposed in this and like systems can
be highly inefﬁcient.
SkipIndex is a distributed implementation of the Skip-
Graph . Similar to MIND, SkipIndex follows the same data
space embedding scheme described in . Unlike MIND,
however, which decouples the data-space embedding from the
overlay construction, in SkipIndex the entire index may need
to be rebuilt if the data distribution changes signiﬁcantly. For
high volume insertions as in trafﬁc monitoring, for example,
MIND’s approach of histogram-based re-inserting data into a
new version of the index might perform better.
PHT is a qualitatively different approach that attempts
to build support for range queries on an underlying DHT
overlay. It treats the preﬁx of a key as a key, and consecutively
looks up all preﬁxes of the key, increasing one bit each time,
until the key is found. PHT has been shown able to support
range queries in a 2-D space . However, the performance of
PHT, esp. its storage load balancing, under higher dimensional
spaces has not been shown to our knowledge.
MIND is heavily inﬂuenced by the DHT literature , ,
 . Its geometry resembles that of a class of DHT systems
that use hypercubic structures, but differs signiﬁcantly from
DHT systems in the way data items are hashed to nodes.
Finally, prior work on multi-dimensional indexing in wireless sensor networks (DIM ) is related to MIND. However,
unlike MIND, DIM relies on a geographic embedding of the
data space. This difference completely changes the overlay
management and data routing mechanisms and, as such, MIND
is a qualitatively different from DIM.
Ongoing research on distributed database query engines
such as PIER focuses on sophisticated query execution
(e.g., joins). Such a system might be a component of the
network monitoring query sub-system discussed in Section II.
Recent work on anomaly detection is also related to our
work , . Systems like these can be built on top of
MIND, since MIND indices can ﬁrst be used to detect possible
anomalies, and these systems can then be used to improve the
robustness of the detection by detailed trafﬁc analysis from a
subset of the trafﬁc monitors.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have described the design of MIND, a distributed system
to support fast and robust detection of network-wide anomalies. Our initial evaluations suggest that it might be feasible
to use MIND to perform on-line near real-time anomaly
detection in a large network. However, much remains to be
done to achieve this goal, such as how to design queries
for periodic monitoring and how to automate the process of
drilling down to ﬁnd potential anomalies. Then implementing
the actual algorithms that examine detailed trafﬁc traces based
on MIND’s query results, are all interesting challenges.
Another important issue is to study how real time can a
system like MIND be. In general, the smaller the time windows
are for aggregation, the more data are moved around. Finding
the right compromise is an interesting issue as this compromise
is not a static one.
We also intend to address other open issues in the overlay
design area: fast re-routing to avoid re-connection latencies,
more sophisticated but practical alternate path routing on the
hypercube, and automated histogram collection and version
management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Anukool Lakhina for providing the data
on trafﬁc anomalies in the Abilene network, the other members of
ENL group at USC for their feedback on the previous drafts of this
paper, and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments.