The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)
Q-BERT: Hessian Based Ultra Low Precision Quantization of BERT
Sheng Shen,1∗Zhen Dong,1∗Jiayu Ye,1∗Linjian Ma,†1 Zhewei Yao,1
Amir Gholami,1 Michael W. Mahoney,1 Kurt Keutzer1
1University of California at Berkeley,
{sheng.s, zhendong, yejiayu, linjian, zheweiy, amirgh, mahoneymw, keutzer}@berkeley.edu
Transformer based architectures have become de-facto models used for a range of Natural Language Processing tasks.
In particular, the BERT based models achieved signiﬁcant
accuracy gain for GLUE tasks, CoNLL-03 and SQuAD. However, BERT based models have a prohibitive memory footprint
and latency. As a result, deploying BERT based models in
resource constrained environments has become a challenging task. In this work, we perform an extensive analysis of
ﬁne-tuned BERT models using second order Hessian information, and we use our results to propose a novel method for
quantizing BERT models to ultra low precision. In particular, we propose a new group-wise quantization scheme, and
we use Hessian-based mix-precision method to compress the
model further. We extensively test our proposed method on
BERT downstream tasks of SST-2, MNLI, CoNLL-03, and
SQuAD. We can achieve comparable performance to baseline with at most 2.3% performance degradation, even with
ultra-low precision quantization down to 2 bits, corresponding
up to 13× compression of the model parameters, and up to
4× compression of the embedding table as well as activations.
Among all tasks, we observed the highest performance loss
for BERT ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD. By probing into the Hessian
based analysis as well as visualization, we show that this is
related to the fact that current training/ﬁne-tuning strategy of
BERT does not converge for SQuAD.
Related Work
Model compression Model compression is a very active area
of research. Efforts in this area could be broadly categorized
as follows: (i) new architectures that are compact by design
 ; (ii) automated
neural architecture search (NAS) with reward function set
as latency or model size ; (iii) pruning
based methods to reduce model size of existing architectures
 ; (iv) knowledge distillation from a large model to help
train a more compact model ; (v) hardware and architecture codesign ; and (vi) inference quantization
 .
∗Equal contribution.
†Work done while interning at Wave Computing.
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Here we solely focus on quantization . One of the challenges here is that ultra
low precision quantization can lead to signiﬁcant accuracy
degradation. Mixed precision quantization and multi-stage quantization have been proposed to solve/alleviate
this problem. However, the challenge with mixed-precision
quantization is that the search space is exponentially large.
For instance, if we have three precision options for a speciﬁc
layer (2, 4 or 8-bits), then the total search space of each ﬁnetuned BERT model becomes 312 ≈5.3×
105 different precision settings. Recently, 
proposed a second-order sensitivity based method to address
this issue and achieved state-of-the-art results on computer
vision tasks. Part of our paper builds upon this prior work and
extends the results to include other variations of second order
information instead of just the mean value of the Hessian
Compressed NLP model Notable examples for NLP compression work are LSTM and GRU-based models for machine
translation and language model . From the recent introduction of Tranformer models,
we have observed a signiﬁcant increase in NLP model size.
This is due to the incorporation of very large fully connected
layers and attention matrices in Transformers . Model compression is crucial for deploying these models in resource constrained environments. Pilot
work addressing this are . From a different angle, have probed the architectural change of selfattention layer to make the Transformer lightweight. There
have also been attempts to use distillation to reduce large
pre-trained Transformer models such as BERT in . However,
signiﬁcant accuracy loss is observed even for relatively small
compression ratio of 4×. Here we show that this compression
ratio could be increased up to 13×, including 4× reduction
of embedding layer, with much smaller performance degradation.
(c) CoNLL-03
Figure 1: From (a) to (d): Top eigenvalue distributions for different encoder layers for SST-2, MNLI, CoNNL-03, SQuAD,
respectively. Layers in the middle have higher mean values and larger variance than the others. The last three layers have the
smallest variance and mean values among all layers.
Methodology
In this section, we introduce our proposed BERT quantization
methods, including the mixed precision quantization based
on Hessian information, as well as techniques used for the
group-wise quantizing scheme.
As in , a ﬁne-tuned BERTBASE model
consists of three parts: embedding; Transformer based encoder layers; and output layer. Speciﬁcally, assuming x ∈X
is the input word (sentence) and y ∈Y is the corresponding
label, we have the loss function L deﬁned as:
CE(softmax(Wc(Wn(...W1(We(xi))))), yi),
where CE is the cross entropy function (or other appropriate
loss functions), θ is a combination of We, W1, W2, ..., Wn
and Wc. Here, We is the embedding table, W1, W2, ..., Wn
are the encoder layers, and Wc is the output/classiﬁer layer1.
The size of parameters in BERTBASE model is 91MB for
embedding, 325MB for encoder and 0.01MB for output. We
do not quantize the output layer due to its negligible size, and
focus on quantizing both the embedding and encoder layers.
As will be discussed in Sec. 4.1, we ﬁnd that the embedding
layer is much more sensitive to quantization than the encoder
layers. As a result, we quantize embedding and encoder parameters in different ways. The quantization schemes we
used are explained in detail in the following sections.
Quantization process
General NN inference is performed in ﬂoating point precision for both weights and activations. Quantization restricts
the network weights to a ﬁnite set of values as Q(z) =
for tj ≤z ≤tj+1. Here Q is quantization operator,
z is a real valued input tensor (activation or a weight). Here
k is the quantization precision for a speciﬁc layer.
There are multiple choices for quantization function Q.
Here we use uniform quantization function, where the range
of ﬂoating point values in a tensor is equally split and then represented by unsigned integers in
0, . . . , 2k −1
. It should be noted that
1Here, we use W∗for both function and its corresponding parameters without confusion.
a non-uniform quantizer can potentially further increase the
accuracy. However, we solely focus on uniform quantization
since it allows more efﬁcient and easier hardware implementation. To backpropogate gradients through Q, which
is non-differentiable, we use the Straight-through Estimator
(STE) . See Appendix
for more details about the forward and backward propagation
during the entire quantization process.
Mixed precision quantization
Different encoder layers are attending to different structures , and it is expected that they exhibit
different sensitivity. Thus, assigning the same number of bits
to all the layers is sub-optimal. This scenario is more critical
if the targeted model size is very small, which requires ultra
low precision such as 4-bits or 2-bits. As a result we explore
mixed-precision quantization, where we assign more bits to
more sensitive layers in order to retain performance.
In , a Hessian AWare Quantization
(HAWQ) is developed for mixed-bits assignments. The main
idea is that the parameters in NN layers with higher Hessian
spectrum (i.e., larger top eigenvalues) are more sensitive to
quantization and require higher precision as compared to
layers with small Hessian spectrum. However, there exist 7M
parameters for each encoder layer in BERTBASE. Given that
the Hessian of each layer is a matrix of size 7M × 7M, there
is a common misconception that computing second order
statistics is infeasible. However, the Hessian spectrum can
be computed by a matrix-free power iteration method , which does not require explicit formation of the
operator. To illustrate this, we take the ﬁrst encoder layer as
an example. Denoting the gradient of the ﬁrst encoder layer
as g1, for a random vector v independent with g1, we have
where H1 is Hessian matrix of the ﬁrst encoder. The top eigenvalue then can be computed by power iteration, as shown in
Appendix. We denote λi as the top eigenvalue of i-th encoder
layer. Using this approach, we show the distribution of top
Hessian eigenvalue for different layers of BERTBASE are
shown in Fig. 1. Different layers exhibit different magni-
(a) SQuAD 7th layer
(b) SQuAD 11th layer
Figure 2: The loss landscape for different layers in SQuAD
is illustrated by perturbing the parameters along the ﬁrst
two dominant eigenvectors of the Hessian. The silver sphere
shows the point in the parameter space to which the BERT
model has converged.
tude of eigenvalues even though all layers have exactly same
structure and size.
The above Hessian based approach was used in , where top eigenvalues are computed and averaged
for different training data. More aggressive quantization is
performed for layers that have smaller top eigenvalue, which
corresponds to ﬂatter loss landscape as in Appendix. However, we ﬁnd that assigning bits based only on the average
top eigenvalues is infeasible for many NLP tasks. As shown
in Fig. 1, top eigenvalues of Hessian for some layers exhibits
very high variance with respect to different portion of the
input dataset. As an example, the variance of the 7th layer for
SQuAD stays larger than 61.6 while the mean of that layer is
around 1.0, even though each data point corresponds to 10%
of the entire dataset (which is 9K samples). To address this,
we use the following metric instead of just using mean value,
Ωi ≜|mean(λi)| + std(λi),
where λi is the distribution of the top eigenvalues of Hi,
calculated with 10% of training dataset.2
After Ωi is computed, we sort them in descending order,
and we use it as a metric to relatively determine the quantization precision. We then perform quantization-aware ﬁnetuning based on the selected precision setting.
An important technical point that we need to emphasize
is that our method expects that before performing quantization the trained model has converged to a local minima.
That is, the practitioners who trained BERT and performed
its ﬁne-tuning for downstream tasks should have chosen the
hyper-parameters and number of iterations such that a local
minima has been reached. The necessary optimality conditions are zero gradient, and positive curvature (i.e., positive
Hessian eigenvalue). In our analysis, we observed that for the
three tasks of MNLI, CoNLL-03, and SST-2 the top Hessian
eigenvalue is indeed positive for (see Appendix). However,
2Without confusion, we use λi for both single top eigenvalue
and its distribution with respect to 10% of the data.
(a) Layer-wise
Group-wise
(c) Group-wise (2Nh
Figure 3: The overview of Group-wise Quantization Method.
We illustrate this with value matrices of a multi-head self
attention layer. Here Nh(number of heads) value matrices Wv
are concatenated together, which results in a 3-d tensor. The
same color denotes the same group with a shared quantization
we ﬁnd that the BERT model ﬁne-tuned for SQuAD has
actually not converged to a local minima, as evident in the
Hessian eigenvalues shown in Fig. 1(d), where we observe
very large negative eigenvalues. Directly visualizing the loss
landscape also shows this very clearly as in Fig. 2. Because
of this, our expectation is that performing quantization on
SQuAD would lead to higher performance degradation as
compared to other tasks, and this is indeed the case as will
be discussed next.
Group-wise Quantization
Assume that the input sequence has n words and each word
has a d-dim embedding vector (d = 768 for BERTBASE),
i.e., x = (x(1), . . . , x(n))T ∈Rn×d. In Transformer encoder, each self-attention head has 4 dense matrix, i.e.,
Wk, Wq, Wv, Wo ∈R
Nh ×d, where Nh is the number of
attention heads. Here Wk, Wq, Wv and Wo stand for key,
query, value and output weight matrix. Each self-attention
head computes the weighted sum as
Att(x, x(j)) = Wo
Through this reparametrization, the multi-head self-attention
(MHSA) will add these features into the ﬁnal output, that is
we will have Nh
i=1 Atti(x, x(j)). Directly quantizing each
4 matrices in MHSA as an entirety with the same quantization range can signiﬁcantly degrade the accuracy, since there
are more than 2M parameters in total, which corresponds
to 4 × 12 × 64 = 3072 neurons, and the weights corresponding to each neuron may lie in different range of real
numbers. Channel-wise quantization can be used to alleviate
this problem in convolutional neural networks, where each
convolutional kernel can be treated as a single output channel
and have its own quantization range. However, this cannot be
directly applied for dense matrices, since each dense matrix
itself is a single kernel. Therefore, we propose group-wise
quantization for attention-based models. We treat the individual matrix W with respect to each head in one dense matrix
of MHSA as a group so there will be 12 groups. Furthermore,
in each group, we bucket sequential output neurons together
as sub-groups, e.g., each 6 output neurons as one sub-group
so there are 12 × 64
6 = 128 sub-group in total (the hidden
dim in each head of BERTBASE is 768
12 = 64). Each subgroup can have its own quantization range. An illustration
is shown in Fig. 3 for Wv, where we concatenate Nh value
matrix Wv to be a 3-d tensor. For layer-wise quantization,
the entire 3-d tensor will be quantized into the same range
of discrete numbers, as shown in Fig. 3a. A special case of
group-wise quantization is that we treat each dense matrix
as a group, and every matrix can have its own quantization
range as shown in Fig. 3b. A more general case in Fig. 3c
is that we partition each dense matrix with respect to output
neuron, and we bucket every continuous
2Nh output neurons
as a group. The effect of ﬁner group-wise quantization is
further investigated in Sec. 3.2.
Experiment
In this section, we describe our experiments on evaluating
the proposed Q-BERT on four different NLP tasks. Details of
the datasets are shown in Appendix. To the best of our knowledge, there is no published work done on BERT quantization
at this point, so we report Direct quantization (DirectQ), i.e.,
quantization without mixed-precision and group-wise quantization as a baseline.
Main Results
We present results of Q-BERT on the development set of the
four tasks of SST-2, MNLI, CoNLL-03, and SQuAD, as summarized in Tab. 1 and 2. As one can see, Q-BERT performs
signiﬁcantly better compared to the DirectQ method across
all the four tasks in each bit setting. The gap becomes more
obvious for ultra low bit setting. As an example, in 4-bits
setting, Direct quantization (DirectQ) of SQuAD results in
11.5% performance degradation as compared to BERTBASE.
However, for the same 4-bits setting, Q-BERT only exhibits
0.5% performance degradation. Moreover, under 3-bits setting, the gap between Q-BERT and DirectQ increases even
further to 9.68-27.83% for various tasks.
In order to push further the precision setting to lower bits,
we investigate the mixed-precision Q-BERT (Q-BERTMP).
As can be seen, Q-BERT with uniform 2-bits setting has very
poor performance across all four tasks, though the memory
is reduced by 20% against 3-bits setting. The reason behind
this is the discrepancy that not all the layers have the same
sensitivity to quantization as evident from loss landscape
visualizations; see Appendix. Intuitively, for more sensitive
layers, higher bit precision needs to be set, while for layers
that are less sensitive, 2-bits setting is already sufﬁcient. To
set mixed precision to each encoder layer of BERTBASE, we
measure the sensitivity based on Eq. 2, which captures both
mean and variance of the top eigenvalue of the Hessian shown
in Fig. 1. Note that all experiments in Fig. 1 are based on 10
runs and each run uses 10% of the entire training dataset. We
can obverse that for most of the lower encoder layers (layer
1-8), the variance is pretty large compared to the last three
layers. We generally observe that the middle part (layer 4-8)
Table 1: Quantization results for BERTBASE on Natural Language Understanding tasks. Results are obtained with 128
groups in each layer. We abbreviate quantization bits used for
weights as “w-bits”, embedding as “e-bits”, model size in MB
as “Size”, and model size without embedding layer in MB
as “Size-w/o-e”. For simplicity and efﬁcacy, all the models
except for Baseline are using 8-bits activation. Furthermore,
we compare Q-BERT with direct quantization method (“DirectQ”) without using mixed precision or group-wise quantization. Here “MP” refers to mixed-precision quantization.
w-bits e-bits Acc
Size Size-w/o-e
93.00 415.4
92.88 103.9
85.67 63.4
92.66 63.4
82.86 53.2
92.54 53.2
Q-BERTMP 2/4 MP
92.55 53.2
80.62 43.1
84.63 43.1
Q-BERTMP 2/3 MP
92.08 48.1
w-bits e-bits Acc
84.00 84.40 415.4 324.5
83.91 83.83 103.9 81.2
76.69 77.00 63.4
83.89 84.17 63.4
70.27 70.89 53.2
83.41 83.83 53.2
Q-BERTMP 2/4 MP
83.51 83.55 53.2
53.29 53.32 43.1
76.56 77.02 43.1
Q-BERTMP 2/3 MP
81.75 82.29 46.1
(c) CoNLL-03
w-bits e-bits
Size Size-w/o-e
95.00 410.9
94.79 102.8
89.86 62.2
94.90 62.2
84.92 52.1
94.78 52.1
Q-BERTMP 2/4 MP
94.55 52.1
54.50 42.0
91.06 42.0
Q-BERTMP 2/3 MP
94.37 45.0
Table 2: Quantization results for BERTBASE on SQuAD.
w-bits e-bits
Size Size-w/o-e
81.54 88.69 415.4
81.07 88.47 103.9
66.05 77.10 63.4
80.95 88.36 63.4
46.77 59.83 53.2
79.96 87.66 53.2
Q-BERTMP 2/4 MP
79.85 87.49 53.2
4.77 10.32 43.1
69.68 79.60 43.1
Q-BERTMP 2/3 MP
79.25 86.95 48.1
has the largest mean(λi). Beyond the relatively smaller mean,
the last three layers also have much smaller variance, which
indicates the insensitivity of these layers. Therefore, higher
bits will only be assigned for middle layers according to Eq. 2
for Q-BERT 2/3 MP.3 In this way, with only additional 5MB
memory storage, 2/3-bits Q-BERTMP is able to retain the
performance drop within 2.3% for MNLI, SQuAD and 1.1%
for SST-2, CoNLL-03, with up to 13× compression ratio in
weights. Note that this is up to 6.8% better than Q-BERT with
uniform 2 bits.
One consideration for quantization is that 3-bit quantized
execution is typically not supported in hardware. It is however possible to load 3-bit quantized values and cast them to
higher bit precision such as 4 or 8 bits in the execution units.
This would still have the beneﬁt of reduced memory volume
to/from DRAM. It is also possible to avoid using 3 bits and
instead use a mixture of 2 and 4 bits as shown in Tab. 1. For
example, SST-2 Q-BERTMP with mixed 2/4-bit precision
weights has the same model size as the 3 bit quantization in
53.2MB and achieves similar accuracy. We observe similar
trend for other tasks as well.
One important observation is that we found SQuAD to
be harder to quantize as compared to other tasks; see Tab. 2.
For example, 2-bits DirectQ results in more than 10% F1
score degradation. Even Q-BERT has larger performance
drop as compared to other tasks in Tab. 1. We studied this phenomenon further through Hessian analysis. In Fig. 1, among
all the tasks, it can be clearly seen that SQuAD not only has
much larger eigenvalue variance, but it has very large negative eigenvalues. In fact this shows that the existing BERT
model for SQuAD has not reached a local minima. This is
further illustrated in the 3-d loss landscape of all four tasks in
Appendix. It can be clearly seen that for other three tasks, the
stopping point is at a quadratic bowl (at least in the ﬁrst two
dominant eigenvalue directions of the Hessian). However,
compared to the others, SQuAD has a totally different structure to its loss landscape. As shown in Fig. 2, the stopping
points of different layers on SQuAD have negative curvature
directions, which means they have not converged to a local
minima yet. This could well explain why the quantization of
SQuAD results in more accuracy drop. Our initial attempts to
3Exact detailed bits setting is included in the Appendix
address this by changing training hyper-parameters were not
successful. We found that the BERT model quickly overﬁts
the training data. However, we emphasize that ﬁxing BERT
model training itself is outside the scope of this paper and
not possible with academic computational resources.
Effects of group-wise quantization
We measure the performance gains with different group numbers in Tab. 3. We can observe from the table that performing
layer-wise quantization (shown in Fig. 3a) is sub-optimal
for all four tasks (the performance drop is around 7% to
11.5%). However, the performance signiﬁcantly increases
as we increase the number of groups. For example, for 12
groups, the performance degradation is less than 2% for all
the tasks. Further increasing the group number from 12 to
128 increases the accuracy further by at least 0.3% accuracy.
However, increasing the group number further from 128 to
768 can only increase the performance within 0.1%. This
shows that the performance gain almost saturates around 128
groups. It is also preferable not to have very large value for
the number of group since it increases the number of Lookup Tables (LUTs) necessary for each matrix multiplication
which can adversely affect hardware performance, and based
on our results there are diminishing returns in terms of accuracy. In all our experiments, we used 128 groups for both
Q-BERT and Q-BERTMP in Sec. 3.1.
Table 3: Effects of group-wise quantization for Q-BERT on
three tasks. The quantization bits were set to be 4 for weights,
8 for embeddings and 8 for activations for all the tasks.
# Group SST-2 MNLI-m/mm CoNLL-03
Baseline 93.00
84.00/84.40
76.69/77.00
82.37/82.95
83.89/84.17
84.00/84.20
Discussion
In this Section, we further investigate the quantization effects
on different modules, e.g. different embedding layers (e.g.,
word and position embeddings), and we perform qualitative
analysis using attention distribution. This illustrates that Q-
BERT better captures the behaviour of the original model as
compared to DirectQ in all cases.
Quantization effects on different modules
Here we investigate the quantization effects with respect to
different modules of BERT model (multi-head self-attention
versus feed-forward network, and different embedding layers,
i.e., word embedding versus position embedding).
Generally speaking, we ﬁnd that embedding layer is more
sensitive than weights for quantization. This is illustrated
in Tab. 4a, where we use 4-bits layerwise quantization for
4Here we treat each output neuron as a single group.
embedding, which results in an unacceptable performance
drop up to 10% for SST-2, MNLI, CoNLL-03 and even more
than 20% for SQuAD. This is despite the fact that we used
8/8-bits for weights/activations. On the contrary, encoder
layers consume around 79% total parameters (4× embedding
parameter size), while quantizing them to 4-bits in Tab. 1
and 2 leads to less performance loss.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that position embedding is very sensitive to quantization. For instance, quantizing position embedding to 4 bits results in generally 2% additional performance
degradation than quantizing word embedding, even though
the position embedding only accounts for less than 5% of
the entire embedding. This indicates the importance of positional information in Natural Language Understanding tasks.
Given position embedding only accounts for a small portion
of model size, we can do mixed-precision quantization for
embedding to further push down the model size boundary
with a tolerable accuracy drop, as shown in Appendix.
Table 4: Quantization effect to different modules. We abbreviate the quantization bits used for word embedding as
“ew-bits”, position embedding as “ep-bits”, multi-head attention layer as “s-bits” and fully-connected layer as “f-bits”.
In (a), we set weight and activation bits as 8. In (b), we set
embedding and activation bits as 8.
(a) quantization effect on embedding
ew-bits ep-bits SST-2 MNLI-m CoNLL-03 SQuAD
(b) quantization of multi-head attention versus fully-connected
f-bits SST-2 MNLI-m CoNLL-03 SQuAD
Q-BERTMP 1/2MP 2/3MP 89.56
Q-BERTMP 2/3MP 1/2MP 85.89
Q-BERTMP 2/3MP 2/3MP 92.08
To study the quantization effects on self-attention layers
and fully-connected networks, we conducted extensive experiments under different bits settings for the encoder layers.
The results are shown in Tab. 4b. Speciﬁcally, we adopt the Q-
BERTMP setting in Tab. 1, with a mixture of 2 and 3 bits for
encoder weights. To test the robustness of the two modules
inside each encoder layer, we further reduce one more bit in
the corresponding modules and denote the resulting precision
setting 1/2MP. From Tab. 4b, we can conclude that generally
self-attention layer is more robust to quantization than the
fully-connected network, since 1/2MP self-attention results
in about 5% performance drop while 1/2MP fully-connected
will worsen this to 11%.
(c) CoNLL-03
Figure 4: KL divergence over attention distribution between
Q-BERT/DirectQ and Baseline. The distance between Q-
BERT and Baseline is much smaller than that of DirectQ and
Qualitative Analysis
We use attention information to conduct qualitative analysis
to analyze the difference between Q-BERT and DirectQ.
To do so, we compute the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the attention distribution for the same input
from the coordinated head of both quantized BERT and fullprecision BERT. It should be noted that we compute the
average distance out of 10% of the entire training dataset.
The smaller KL divergence here means that the output of
the multi-head attention of the two models is closer to each
other. We illustrate this distance score for each individual
head in Fig. 4 for SST-2, MNLI, CoNLL-03 and SQuAD. We
compared Q-BERT and DirectQ with 4-bits weights, 8-bits
embedding and 8-bits activation. Each scatter point in Fig. 4
denotes the distance w.r.t one head, and the line chart shows
the average results over the 12 heads in one layer. We can
clearly see that Q-BERT always incurs a smaller distance to
the original baseline model as compared to DirectQ model,
for all the different layers.
Conclusion
In this work, we perform an extensive analysis of ﬁne-tuned
BERT and propose Q-BERT, an effective scheme for quantizing BERT. In order to aggressively reduce the model size by
mixed-precision quantization, we proposed a new layer-wise
Hessian based method which captures both the average and
the variance of the eigenvalues. Moreover, a new group-wise
quantization is proposed to perform ﬁne-grained quantization
inside each encoder layer. In four downstream tasks, equipped
with the aforementioned methods, Q-BERT achieves 13×
compression ratio in weights, 4× smaller activation size, and
4× smaller embedding size, with at most 2.3% accuracy loss.
To better understand how different factors will affect the
trade-off between performance and the model compression
ratio in Q-BERT, we conduct controlled experiments to investigate the effect of different quantization schemes and
quantizing different modules in BERT, respectively.