Predicted Influences of Artificial Intelligence on Nursing Education:
Scoping Review
Christine Buchanan1, BNSc, MN; M Lyndsay Howitt1, BScN, MPH; Rita Wilson1, BScN, MN, MEd; Richard G
Booth2, BScN, MScN, PhD; Tracie Risling3, BA, BSN, MN, PhD; Megan Bamford1, BScN, MScN
1Registered Nurses' Association of Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada
2Arthur Labatt Family School of Nursing, Western University, London, ON, Canada
3College of Nursing, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Christine Buchanan, BNSc, MN
Registered Nurses' Association of Ontario
500-4211 Yonge Street
Toronto, ON, M2P 2A9
Phone: 1 800 268 7199 ext 281
Email: 
Background: It is predicted that artificial intelligence (AI) will transform nursing across all domains of nursing practice,
including administration, clinical care, education, policy, and research. Increasingly, researchers are exploring the potential
influences of AI health technologies (AIHTs) on nursing in general and on nursing education more specifically. However, little
emphasis has been placed on synthesizing this body of literature.
Objective: A scoping review was conducted to summarize the current and predicted influences of AIHTs on nursing education
over the next 10 years and beyond.
Methods: This scoping review followed a previously published protocol from April 2020. Using an established scoping review
methodology, the databases of MEDLINE, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, Embase, PsycINFO,
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central, Education Resources Information Centre, Scopus, Web of Science,
and Proquest were searched. In addition to the use of these electronic databases, a targeted website search was performed to
access relevant grey literature. Abstracts and full-text studies were independently screened by two reviewers using prespecified
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Included literature focused on nursing education and digital health technologies that incorporate
AI. Data were charted using a structured form and narratively summarized into categories.
Results: A total of 27 articles were identified (20 expository papers, six studies with quantitative or prototyping methods, and
one qualitative study). The population included nurses, nurse educators, and nursing students at the entry-to-practice, undergraduate,
graduate, and doctoral levels. A variety of AIHTs were discussed, including virtual avatar apps, smart homes, predictive analytics,
virtual or augmented reality, and robots. The two key categories derived from the literature were (1) influences of AI on nursing
education in academic institutions and (2) influences of AI on nursing education in clinical practice.
Conclusions: Curricular reform is urgently needed within nursing education programs in academic institutions and clinical
practice settings to prepare nurses and nursing students to practice safely and efficiently in the age of AI. Additionally, nurse
educators need to adopt new and evolving pedagogies that incorporate AI to better support students at all levels of education.
Finally, nursing students and practicing nurses must be equipped with the requisite knowledge and skills to effectively assess
AIHTs and safely integrate those deemed appropriate to support person-centered compassionate nursing care in practice settings.
International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID): RR2-10.2196/17490
 :e23933) doi: 10.2196/23933
nursing; artificial intelligence; education; review
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 1
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
Introduction
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) has been defined as technology that
enables a computer system or computer-controlled robot to
“learn, reason, perceive, infer, communicate, and make decisions
similar to or better than humans” . AI is interwoven in our
everyday lives through our use of technologies such as cellular
phones, smart televisions, and wearable fitness devices. New
AI technologies are rapidly emerging, and within health systems,
the use of AI health technologies (AIHTs) has become
increasingly popular owing to their capacity for sorting and
analyzing large amounts of research evidence, as well as clinical
and patient data to identify patterns that enhance knowledge
generation and decision making . Based on these capabilities,
AIHTs are predicted to transform various aspects of health
systems in the coming decade.
In Canada, nurses represent the largest group of regulated health
professionals, accounting for approximately 50% of the health
workforce . As AIHTs become more pervasive in the
Canadian health system, it is predicted that nurses will function
in greatly different roles and care delivery models . These
new roles and models will necessitate changes to nurses’ core
competencies and educational requirements.
In the last 5 years, multiple expository papers and research
studies have explored the current and predicted influences of
AIHTs on nurse educators, nursing students, and practicing
nurses . Given the prediction that new technological
advances are expected to transform aspects of nursing and its
education , nurse educators need to increase their
knowledge and comfort levels with both the concept and realities
to be brought by emerging AIHTs. Additionally, nurses in
clinical practice urgently require new knowledge and skills to
effectively incorporate AIHTs into their practice .
Background
As cited in the Framework for the Practice of Registered Nurses
in Canada, “nursing knowledge is organized and communicated
by using concepts, models, frameworks, and theories” .
There are four central concepts in particular that form the
metaparadigm of nursing, and they are as follows: the person
or client, the environment, health, and nursing . Nurses use
knowledge from a variety of sciences and humanities to inform
their practice, including biology, chemistry, social and
behavioral sciences, and psychology . The integration of
AIHTs into nursing education is essential to ensure nurses are
adequately equipped with the requisite knowledge to optimize
patient health outcomes in an evolving clinical and technological
environment.
As emerging AIHTs modify health practices, health
professionals will need to adapt their current ways of practicing
to operationalize these technological advances . Therefore,
it is important for nurses to understand how AIHTs can be
integrated into the conceptual foundation of nursing practice as
they cocreate new models, frameworks, and theories that may
be required to support the emerging technologies. This is
particularly important given the increasing usage of AIHTs to
enhance clinical decision making and their potential to
influence the traditional nurse-patient relationship.
Machine learning (ML), a subset of AI, uses algorithmic
methodologies and techniques to process information in ways
that can imitate human decision making . Predictive analytics
is a “branch of data analytics that uses various techniques,
including ML, to analyze patterns in data and predict future
outcomes” . Clinical decision support systems that use
AI-powered predictive analytics and ML algorithms to assist
nurses in making clinical decisions for their patients based on
trends in data are currently being used in clinical practice
 . Similarly, virtual avatar apps that integrate chatbot
technology to simulate interactive human conversations between
health professionals and patients are growing in popularity
 . Furthermore, social robots with natural language
processing abilities that enable them to understand, analyze,
and manipulate data and generate language are being
increasingly used to provide additional companionship for
residents in long-term care homes under the supervision of
nurses. These technological advances are expected to cause
considerable changes to the nursing landscape over the next
decade , and nursing education as well as nurse educators
will be at the forefront of these changes .
Current State
Preparing nursing students and nurses for clinical practice in
the age of AI requires a balance between teaching for current
needs and anticipating future demands . In the last two
decades, there have been important accomplishments in nursing
informatics that can be leveraged to provide curricular reform
support for nurse educators . For example, in 2004, the
Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform (TIGER)
initiative was launched in the United States to provide resources
to integrate technology and informatics into education, clinical
practice, and research . The TIGER Nursing Informatics
Competencies Model was published in 2009 to support
practicing nurses and nursing students . Additionally, in
2012, the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing (CASN)
published the document, Nursing Informatics Entry-to-Practice
Competencies for Registered Nurses . Although these
resources have been in existence for several years now, it is
unclear if educators are effectively applying them and promoting
their use . A 2017 national survey of Canadian nurses
found that the majority of respondents were unfamiliar with the
CASN entry-to-practice informatics competencies .
According to Nagle et al and Risling , one reason for
the lack of uptake of these resources may be that a limited
number of nurse educators possess the requisite knowledge,
skills, and confidence themselves to address students’ learning
associated with AI and digital health concepts. Transformation
of nursing curricula will be necessary to ensure future nurses
are equipped with informatics competencies, as well as
competencies in digital and data literacy to work in clinical
settings that increasingly use AI and ML technology. Strong
nursing leadership will be required to incentivize nurse educators
to embrace the need for curricular reform and to adopt new
pedagogies that prepare nurses and nursing students to use these
emerging technologies .
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 2
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
Objectives
Considering the nascent topic of AIHTs and their influence on
the nursing profession, it is important to understand the breadth
and depth of literature that currently exists on this topic in order
to prepare for future practice considerations. A scoping review
was conducted to summarize the findings of four distinct
research questions that explore the relationships between nurses,
patients, and AIHTs . A scoping review methodology was
deemed appropriate for the aims of this project owing to its
exploratory nature . Given the number of articles included
in the scoping review, a decision was made to divide the results
into two standalone papers to improve clarity. This manuscript
summarizes the findings of a research question that specifically
addressed the current and predicted influences of AIHTs on
nursing education. The results of the remaining three research
questions have been published separately .
Scoping Review
This scoping review follows the methodological framework
developed by Arksey and O’Malley and further advanced
by Levac et al , which delineates six steps to map the extent
and range of material on a research topic . The scoping
review methodology helps to provide clarity on what is known
and not known on a topic and situate this within policy and
practice contexts . The six steps included in the framework
are as follows: (1) identifying the research question, (2)
identifying relevant studies, (3) selecting the studies, (4) charting
the data, (5) collating, summarizing, and reporting the results,
and (6) consultation . This scoping review was registered
in the Open Science Framework database . A scoping review
protocol publication outlining the full methods of this review
can be found elsewhere . A steering committee, consisting
of a person with lived experience and key stakeholders from
various domains of nursing including nursing education, was
convened to provide consultation throughout the project .
Identifying the Research Questions and Relevant
The research questions were co-developed by project team
members and the steering committee. An information specialist
was consulted in order to develop an effective search strategy
 . This review details results from the following research
question: what influences do emerging trends in AI-driven
digital health technologies have, or are predicted to have, on
nursing education across all domains? . The databases of
MEDLINE, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health
Literature, Embase, PsycINFO, Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central, Education Resources
Information Centre, Scopus, Web of Science, and Proquest were
searched for peer-reviewed literature using search strategies
developed in consultation with the information specialist
(Multimedia Appendix 1). A targeted website search was also
conducted for pertinent grey literature, using Google search
strings developed by the information specialist. Searches were
limited to the last 5 years ,
after it was determined through consultation with the steering
committee that the majority of literature on this emerging topic
had been published within this time period .
Study Selection
All peer-reviewed and grey literature results were downloaded
into EndNote X7.8 (Clarivate Analytics) and imported into
Distiller SR (Evidence Partners), a web-based systematic review
software program used for screening. A screening guide was
developed by two reviewers (CB and LH), and two levels of
screening took place . During title and abstract screening,
articles were independently assessed by each reviewer and
included if they were deemed relevant to the concepts of AI and
nursing . During second-level screening (full text relevance
review), reviewers independently assessed each article to
ascertain its relevance to one of the four research questions. The
Joanna Briggs Institute suggests that when reporting inclusion
criteria, they should be based on PCC elements (population,
concept, and context) . In terms of the population, articles
that discussed nurses, nursing students, or nurse educators, or
referred to health professionals more generally were included
in this review if the information was relevant to nursing practice
 . The core concept of this research question was AI and its
influence on nursing education; therefore, in order to be included
for this question, articles required a clear focus on AI and
nursing education. The context and setting of focus included
both clinical and academic settings. Finally, owing to the
emerging nature of this topic, articles that only briefly discussed
nursing education and AI were also included. Conflicts were
resolved through discussion and consensus with a third party
(RW) .
Charting the Data
Standardized data charting forms were created by the two
reviewers and tested with a representative sample of articles,
with each reviewer independently charting the data . Once
consistency in data charting was achieved, data from each
included full-text article were charted by one reviewer and
verified by the second reviewer to ensure all relevant data were
charted. Findings were recorded by study type in separate data
charting forms for each research question (ie, qualitative versus
quantitative study designs, and expository papers).
Collating, Summarizing, and Reporting the Results
Once all the data from each included article were charted, the
findings were summarized in the form of a data package and
sent to members of the steering committee for review. Findings
were organized by research question, with a table outlining
overall descriptive findings of the included studies (ie, number
of articles, setting, population, and types of AIHTs discussed).
Additionally, categories were identified by the reviewers and
outlined in a narrative fashion below the table of descriptive
findings for each question.
Consultation
The findings in the summary data package were discussed with
the steering committee during two virtual meetings. Feedback
was solicited to confirm the categories identified and their
applicability or relevance to nursing education.
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 3
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
Overview of Articles
A total of 27 articles were included for this research question;
these were further characterized as 20 expository papers, six
studies with quantitative or prototyping methods, and one
qualitative study (see Figure 1 for the full Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses [PRISMA]
flow diagram ). The recipients of education included nursing
students at the entry-to-practice, undergraduate, graduate, and
doctoral levels, and practicing nurses in clinical settings. Faculty
and instructors delivering educational content were referred to
as nurse educators, nurse researchers, and nursing leaders. See
Multimedia Appendix 2 for further details.
Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram. AI: artificial intelligence.
The types of emerging AIHTs discussed in the literature that
have influenced or are predicted to influence nursing education
included the following: virtual avatar apps (ie, chatbots) ,
smart homes , predictive analytics , virtual or
augmented reality devices , and robots . An
overview of these emerging AIHTs and their current or predicted
influences on nursing education is provided in Multimedia
Appendix 2.
Specific examples of AIHTs that could be used as teaching tools
in educational settings were also discussed. These included a
face tracker system used to analyze nursing students’ emotions
during clinical simulations and ML wearable armbands
used to measure the accuracy of students’ hand washing
technique . One article discussed a virtual patient gaming
app used by nurse educators as an interactive teaching tool,
providing students with virtual case scenarios congruent with
the curriculum objectives . One article encouraged the use
of predictive analytics by nurse educators to enhance students’
clinical judgment and decision-making skills as they explore
the executed decision path provided by the AIHT . Finally,
some articles simply presented a broad discussion of AIHTs
and their potential influences on nursing education with no
mention of specific examples .
The reviewers categorized the articles into the following two
broad groups: (1) influences of AI on nursing education in
academic institutions and (2) influences of AI on nursing
education in clinical practice. The results of each of these
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 4
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
categories and their subcategories are detailed in the ensuing
paragraphs.
Influences of AI on Nursing Education in Academic
Institutions
Influences of AI on Nurse Educators
This scoping review revealed a growing trend in the use of
AIHTs in nursing education in academic settings, which is
expected to greatly increase in the near future. For instance, one
article predicted that clinical simulation labs in these settings
will have an increased presence of humanoid robots and cyborgs
to complement their existing high-fidelity simulators . Other
emerging AIHTs in clinical simulation labs that were discussed
in the literature included face tracker software, which uses ML
to analyze students’ emotions during clinical simulations .
Authors noted that this type of technology allows nurse
educators to assess the students’ emotions at each point of the
simulation, along with the time spent on each component of the
scenario . The information gleaned through this process
enables nurse educators to tailor the simulations to meet the
students’ needs more effectively . In addition, it was
reported that this technology may help students to better
understand emotion in their patients . Finally, one article
noted that in the foreseeable future, predictive analytics may be
used to enhance students’clinical judgment and decision-making
skills as they analyze the executed decision path provided by
the AIHT .
It is also predicted that virtual avatar apps, including virtual
patient gaming apps and virtual tutor chatbots, may influence
the delivery of nursing education in academic settings as
educators use them as teaching tools to simulate interactive
clinical scenarios and increase students’ comprehension of
specific nursing concepts . It was identified in the literature
that these technologies have the potential to help students
improve their communication skills with patients and the
interprofessional team and enhance their confidence and
self-efficacy prior to entering a real-life clinical environment
 . Another AIHT that is expected to influence academic
settings is a wearable armband that uses ML to evaluate a
person’s hand washing technique . Authors noted that nurse
educators may use this technology to teach nursing students
and practicing nurses in clinical settings proper hand washing
techniques . Finally, one author suggested that in the age
of AI, ML could be used to analyze student data and create
personalized learning pathways; this could assist nurse educators
with student engagement and retention, and help meet their
learning needs .
One article stated that the use of AIHTs to support learning in
undergraduate nursing programs may positively influence
nurses’ transition to practice by improving their clinical
reasoning skills . It is forecasted that students’ exposure to
AIHTs in their undergraduate clinical experiences may help
prepare them for jobs in technology-rich clinical settings .
For example, AIHTs that incorporate virtual or augmented
reality provide students with an innovative approach to
experiencing the clinical environment . Another article
suggested that nursing students are responsive and receptive to
virtual reality education modalities and virtual reality training
may be more effective than traditional teaching modalities in
some situations . Given these potential benefits, several
authors urge nurse educators to consider the value of adopting
new pedagogies that provide opportunities for undergraduate
nursing students to engage with these emerging technologies
 .
There was minimal literature discussing the influence of AIHTs
on the delivery of nursing education at the postgraduate level
specifically. One article noted that nursing faculty (ie, at the
postgraduate level) will need to know how to use specialized
data science methods, and understand how to identify policy
trends and implications related to these methods to bring value
to nursing science . The authors noted that big data should
be used by educators to make nursing knowledge more
accessible, visible, visually interesting, and data enhanced ,
both in the classroom and beyond.
The emergence of AIHTs in nursing is predicted to shift nurse
educators toward a more multidisciplinary teaching approach
collaboratively
information
technologists, robotics experts, and computer programmers)
 . One article noted that these types of collaborations have
the potential to bridge the skills gaps in nursing and support the
advancement of professional groups such as clinical data
scientists, medical software engineers, and digital medicine
specialists , and nurses could then explore these roles.
Influences of AI on Nursing Students
Several articles have highlighted the need for a focused
transformation of undergraduate nursing curricula to ensure
future nurses are equipped to work in clinical settings that
increasingly use AIHTs . Risling purports
that informatics should be a required nursing competency and
that nursing curricula should include core courses on this topic.
Others have suggested that nursing curricula should be
redesigned to include topics such as data literacy, technological
literacy, systems thinking, critical thinking, genomics and AI
algorithms, ethical implications of AI, and analysis and
implications of big data sets .
Curricular revisions are also delineated in the literature for
graduate-level nursing courses to integrate more advanced AI
content on topics such as informatics, ethics, privacy, research,
and engineering concepts . In one article, authors
noted that smart homes are expected to influence graduate
nursing curricula as they grow in popularity . It is predicted
that students will need to understand how AI smart home
technology uses sensor data to assist older adults with “aging
in place” by monitoring their movement in the home .
Changes are also suggested for courses at the doctoral level to
provide more in-depth opportunities for nurses to develop
competencies
predictive
biostatistical
programming, data management, risk adjustment, multivariable
regression, ML, governance of big data, and cyberthreats .
Two universities in the United States have strategically
incorporated data science into the core curriculum for their
nursing doctoral program . It was noted that the integration
of data sciences with nursing theory development will be an
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 5
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
important addition to the curriculum at the postgraduate level
in these universities as more AIHTs are being used in the health
system .
In addition to the need for new AI technological competencies,
several authors accentuated the importance of a continued focus
on interpersonal human communication skills and empathy in
nursing education curricula. This combined focus is deemed
necessary to ensure that nurses continue to provide
person-centered compassionate care in a health system
increasingly being dominated by machines .
Innovative educational programs that combine biomedical
engineering and nursing have been proposed as a way to educate
a new cadre of health professionals and increase opportunities
for nurses to contribute to the co-design of AIHTs . At the
time this scoping review was conducted, no universities had
created an entirely new discipline to support the anticipated
nursing-AI integration (eg, nurse-engineering); however, a few
universities had created unique collaborations or joint degrees
to improve patient experiences or health system efficiencies
with greater use of technology .
Influences of AI on Nursing Education in Clinical
The majority of articles in this category focused on the
influences of AI on nurses within the hospital setting. However,
some publications focused on the influences of AI on nurses in
long-term care or home care settings as well. Given the scope
of change that AIHTs are likely to engender, authors have
recommended that nurse educators in all practice settings
provide appropriate professional development education to
equip nurses with the requisite knowledge and skills to use these
tools in their work environment . It has also been suggested
that nurses assume responsibility for upgrading their skills as
AIHTs are increasingly deployed in clinical practice settings
 .
It was predicted in the literature that more professional
development opportunities (eg, courses and workshops) will be
needed in the workplace to support emerging areas of AIHTs
 to ensure nurses maintain relevant competencies and
skills in their practice setting . One article suggested that
nursing informaticians should be utilized to establish a strong
foundation of evidence regarding the necessity of nursing data
 , which can be used to inform professional development
workshops and nursing clinical competencies. Furthermore,
two articles suggested that educational resources be tailored to
recipients . For example, educational resources to
“educate the educators” will differ from those used to train
point-of-care nurses in their clinical settings , and continued
professional development will need to be tailored to those
specialists who work more intimately with AIHTs (eg, nursing
informaticians) . One article suggested that in the clinical
setting, examining predictive analytics models can help facilitate
knowledge transfer and build capacity in newer less experienced
nurses to understand AI’s personalized decision-making process
Discussion
Key Considerations
AIHTs are already beginning to influence the nursing practice,
and it is crucial that nurse educators are prepared to equip nurses
and nursing students to integrate AIHTs effectively into practice.
Considerable curricular reform is needed at all education levels
and all designations to support this paradigm shift, and this
includes entry-to-practice, undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral
education. This reform must ensure that nurses and nursing
students are educated on emerging topics that are relevant to
AI, based on their roles and responsibilities. Recommended
topics of education included the following: basic informatics
competencies , data analytics, predictive modeling
and ML principles , engineering principles
 
digital/data
 , privacy issues (including security breaches
or “cyberthreats”) , big data governance ,
technocentric cultural competence , AI research design ,
and robotics care and operations .
Efforts to align nursing education with this paradigm shift should
also include new pedagogies that support emerging AIHTs .
Incorporating these technologies into nursing education can
increase familiarity and comfort for students when they enter
the clinical practice setting . As suggested by Murray ,
the nursing profession is entering an inflection point where
AIHTs may enhance various aspects of nursing practice and
catalyze much needed changes in contemporary nursing
education. Nurse educators, practicing nurses, and students need
to remain actively engaged in the planning and implementation
of these technologies, thereby enhancing opportunities for their
successful integration.
Future State: Nursing Leadership Requirements
Nurse educators in both clinical practice settings and academic
institutions have an essential leadership role in preparing nurses
and nursing students for a future that will certainly include a
wide variety of AIHTs. In order to support a technologically
proficient nursing workforce, educators must create a learning
environment conducive to nurses evolving their understandings
of the novel relationships that exist among nurses, patients, and
AIHTs . An important first step will be embedding
informatics and digital health technology competencies into all
areas of nursing education. A solid understanding of these
principles will ensure nurses are equipped to use AIHTs in their
clinical practice and, perhaps even more importantly, have the
potential to be valuable contributors to the ongoing development
of these technologies (ie, co-designers). It has been suggested
that the AI industry would benefit from hiring experts from
various health disciplines to engage in design processes, and
the nursing profession has the potential to provide this expertise
In order to facilitate such a substantial shift, curricula will need
to be assessed for their contemporary relevance to health care
realities and for their ability to proactively prepare nursing for
the future demands of AIHTs . One way of
accommodating this will be to develop curricula that address
the need for a new specialty, the nurse-engineer role, to develop
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 6
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
a nurse’s role as a co-designer of AIHTs. Undergraduate nursing
programs that combine nursing principles with engineering
principles can advance the development of AIHTs and help
nurses understand the principles behind the AIHTs that they
will likely encounter in clinical settings . The
involvement of nurses in co-design of these AIHTs at all stages
of design, implementation, and evaluation will reduce the risk
of creating technology that burdens health professionals and
will help to prevent costly mistakes that arise from lack of
clinician input . Once again, in order for this to happen,
nursing leadership will be required to equip nurses with
knowledge and skills in informatics, digital literacy, engineering,
and ML in their preliminary nursing education.
Nurses, especially those involved in co-design, must also be
prepared to address the nuanced privacy, equity, and ethical
implications that will likely arise from the use of AIHTs in
nursing practice. Nursing curricula should discuss ethical
concerns such as data breaches, the potential for bias in the data
used to develop algorithms, and the importance of social justice
and person-centered approaches in the design of AIHTs .
In addition to the proposed curricular revisions discussed above,
authors also stressed the importance of placing continued
emphasis on therapeutic relationships and interpersonal
communication in nursing education, as these are core values
of nursing care that differentiate nursing from AIHTs . A
continued focus on these core nursing values will serve to equip
students with the skills necessary to convey compassion and
empathy in technology-rich health systems. Nurses and nursing
students must begin to reflect on the ways AIHTs may impact
nurse-patient interactions and communication patterns between
patients, caregivers, and other members of the interprofessional
team . Fernandes et al stated, “the transformation of
curricula and professional practice focusing on interpersonal
and intrapersonal intelligence with attitudes that value human
skills will ensure nursing’s place/role in a society dominated
by machines and scientific progress.”
Empowering Nurses and Nursing Students
It has been forecasted that in the immediate future, nurses may
use predictive analytics to prioritize educational topics for their
patients before discharge . It is also likely that nurses will
use virtual avatar apps with chatbot technology to assist in
providing patients with additional education, coping strategies,
and mental health supports . Building deeper awareness
and sensitivity around the implications of these AIHTs through
nursing education is a pragmatic first step toward the eventual
goal of developing competency and expertise across all domains
of nursing practice, and in all settings. This education should
be provided in both academic settings (for nursing students)
and in clinical practice settings (for practicing nurses) through
professional development opportunities such as courses and
workshops .
Along with building deeper awareness of the topic, nursing
students must be empowered to re-envision health practices of
the future, as it is clear that these forms of advanced technology
will likely change traditional nursing processes and ways of
knowing. Furthermore, the emergence of AIHTs demands
changes in the usual way of conducting nursing education.
Emerging technologies have accentuated the need for nurse
educators to reflect on past practices and transition toward new
ways of engaging students . However, in order for new
models of nursing education to be successful, both educators
and students must be receptive to sizable changes likely to occur
with the scaling of AIHTs in all areas of health systems.
Subsequently, for nursing education to evolve successfully,
both students and educators must appreciate the transformative
nature of AIHTs, and their direct and indirect impacts upon all
aspects of health delivery and nursing education .
While the receptivity of nursing education toward appreciating
the growing ubiquity of AIHTs varies among health
professionals and educators, ensuring the various fundamental
tenets of nursing are not minimized or diluted will be essential
moving into the future. For instance, the role of compassionate
care within nursing practice should be viewed as an important
and requisite feature of all care provided through or with AIHTs
that are used by nurses. The nursing profession must not lose
sight of its greatest attributes, including compassionate care, in
light of a technological future . Concerns related to
nurse-patient interactions and therapeutic relationships will be
paramount in the years to come, and nurses require the skills to
balance human caring needs with technological AI
advancements . While technology and nursing are
inextricably linked in nursing practice, the caring values
espoused by nurses must be protected and amplified through
the technology used to support care delivery .
Future Research
While discussions about AI are beginning to emerge in the
nursing education literature, many of the articles included in
this review focused on nursing informatics more generally and
briefly mentioned AI. Additionally, as the majority of papers
included in this review were expository papers and white papers,
there is a need for more research in this context. Further research
is needed to continue identifying the educational requirements
and core competencies necessary for specifically integrating
AIHTs into nursing practice. Future research should also focus
on identifying the most effective ways AI can be used as a tool
in nursing education.
Limitations
The findings of this review should be interpreted in light of
some limitations. Computer science and engineering databases
were not searched owing to accessibility issues and
organizational licensing restrictions. This limitation may have
led to research gaps, and it is recommended that future reviews
on the topic of AI and nursing utilize these databases. In
addition, only articles published in English were considered for
selection and the reference lists of included studies were not
searched. This may have led to important articles on the topic
being missed. The reviewers did not use Cohen kappa when
calculating interrater agreement during title and abstract
screening, and instead used percentage agreement (97%
agreement). While this was done for feasibility purposes, it is
recognized that percentage agreement is not as reliable as Cohen
kappa when calculating interrater agreement. Finally, the authors
acknowledge the likelihood that more research has been
conducted on this topic since performing the original search in
JMIR Nursing 2021 | vol. 4 | iss. 1 | e23933 | p. 7
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Buchanan et al
JMIR NURSING
2019; however, owing to feasibility restrictions, it was not
possible to perform an updated search.
Conclusions
Nurse educators in clinical practice and academic institutions
around the world have an essential leadership role in preparing
nurses and nursing students for the future state of AIHTs. It is
evident that AIHTs are transforming heath systems as they
currently exist, and the nursing profession needs to be actively
involved in this rapidly evolving process or risk unwanted
consequences for both patients and the discipline if this
technological revolution proceeds unchecked. Nurse educators
need to prepare the profession for a future that in many
institutions and settings is already here.
AIHTs are destined to transform health education and delivery,
and this process will require education, preparation, and
adoption by nurse educators, as well as a strong amount of
co-design of these technologies. In collaboration with other
health disciplines, nurses are in an ideal position to lead research
on AIHTs. Nurses uniquely understand the complexities of the
health environment and can identify the ways patients are
best served by technology . A strong educational foundation
in AI principles is the first step to ensuring nurses’contribution
at all levels of design, implementation, and evaluation of AIHTs.
To our knowledge, this is the first scoping review to examine
AIHTs and their influence on nursing education. While there
has been research conducted on AIHTs and on nursing education
as separate research topics, now is the time to realize the critical
relationship between these two entities. AIHTs cannot be
implemented in an effective manner without the solid foundation
of nursing education, in both academic and clinical practice
settings. The findings of this review will help nurse educators
across all sectors to proactively shape the nursing-AI interface,
ensuring that nursing education aligns with core nursing values
that promote compassionate care.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the steering committee for their ongoing contributions to this project (Jocelyn Bennett, Vanessa Burkoski,
Connie Cameron, Roxanne Champagne, Cindy Fajardo, Cathryn Hoy, Vicki Lejambe, Lisa Machado, Shirley Viaje, Bethany
Kwok, Kaiyan Fu, and Angela Preocanin). We also gratefully thank Marina Englesakis, information specialist at the University
Health Network in Toronto, and Erica D’Souza for assistance with project coordination. This project was jointly funded by
Associated Medical Services (AMS) Healthcare and the Registered Nurses’Association of Ontario (RNAO). We also thank Doris
Grinspun (CEO of RNAO) and Gail Paech (CEO of AMS Healthcare) for their support and contributions to this project.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
MEDLINE and targeted website search strategies.
[DOCX File , 721 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
Overview of the findings.
[DOCX File , 24 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]