Segmentation of ultrasound images––multiresolution 2D
and 3D algorithm based on global and local statistics
Djamal Boukerroui a,b,*, Atilla Baskurt c, J. Alison Noble a, Olivier Basset b
a Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK
b CREATIS CNRS Research Unit (UMR 5515) and aﬃliated to INSERM, INSA-502 Villeurbanne Cedex 69621, France
c LIGIM (EA 1899), Claude Bernard University Lyon 1, Villeurbanne Cedex 69622, France
In this paper, we propose a robust adaptive region segmentation algorithm for noisy images, within a Bayesian
framework. A multiresolution implementation of the algorithm is performed using a wavelets basis and can be used to
process both 2D and 3D data. In this work we focus on the adaptive character of the algorithm and we discuss how
global and local statistics can be utilised in the segmentation process. We propose an improvement on the adaptivity by
introducing an enhancement to control the adaptive properties of the segmentation process. This takes the form of a
weighting function accounting for both local and global statistics, and is introduced in the minimisation. A new formulation of the segmentation problem allows us to control the eﬀective contribution of each statistical component. The
segmentation algorithm is demonstrated on synthetic data, 2D breast ultrasound data and on echocardiographic sequences ð2D þ TÞ. An evaluation of the performance of the proposed algorithm is also presented.
 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ultrasound; Bayesian segmentation; Adaptive algorithm; Multiresolution
1. Introduction
The ﬁrst step toward automatic analysis or
evaluation of a given image is generally considered
to be successful segmentation. In recent years,
many authors have applied Bayesian estimation
techniques for image segmentation. These statistical approaches have improved the segmentation
results of diﬀerent image modalities , ultrasonic images ).
The segmentation results usually depend heavily
on the estimation of the model region parameters
that can be based on local/global statistics and can
be adaptive.
Ultrasound images are of relatively poor quality
and segmentation is a diﬃcult problem . The image degradation includes
primarily speckle noise, which can be modelled as
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: (D. Boukerroui),
 
noble@robots.
 
(O. Basset).
0167-8655/03/$ - see front matter  2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0167-8655(02)00181-2
Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
www.elsevier.com/locate/patrec
a multiplicative degradation ﬁeld , the blurring of spatial information
perpendicular to the propagation direction of ultrasonic waves and the non-linear attenuation of
ultrasound. When specular structures are imaged,
the detected echo amplitude varies according to
the orientation of the reﬂecting structure and
therefore the contours can appear discontinuous.
Moreover, despite the use of dynamic focusing
techniques, the lateral resolution is poor and the
structures are often blurred in a direction perpendicular to ultrasonic propagation. Therefore,
segmentation algorithms based only on global information (such as thresholding techniques, global
clustering
approaches
intensity-dependant
edge detection) are not suitable and give poor results. This emphasises a need to develop segmentation (or feature detection) techniques that can
avoid the intensity inhomogeneity problem or
approaches which take into account the non-uniformity of tissue classes. To our knowledge three
kinds of solution are proposed in the literature:
• Mulet-Parada and Noble suggest a
phased-based feature detection method. The
most important advantage of this technique is
its intensity-independence. However, as the noise
rejection in this method involves an intensitybased noise threshold the method is not truly intensity invariant and is highly susceptible to
noise. Applied to echocardiographic image sequences, the 2D þ T version of the published
technique takes advantage of temporal continuity in order to improve its robustness to noise
and detect only relevant and continuous features
over time.
• Recently, Xiao et al. proposed a statistical model that exploits knowledge of tissues
properties and intensity inhomogeneities in ultrasound for simultaneous contrast enhancement
and segmentation. The underlying model was
proposed by Wells et al. for bias ﬁeld correction and segmentation of magnetic resonance
(MR) images. Results shown for breast and cardiac ultrasound images demonstrate that it can
successfully remove intensity inhomogeneities
and signiﬁcant improvement is achieved in tissue
contrast and the resulting image segmentation.
Although, this is a promising result, it still requires user interaction to set the image model
parameters.
• Recently, following the publication of the adaptive clustering K-means algorithm
1992), several adaptive approaches have been
proposed for ultrasound images. Indeed, the
adaptive property of the Pappas algorithm is
useful because it considers local class mean with
a slowly spatial variation, compensating for
the non-uniformity of ultrasound echo signals within the same tissue region. Therefore,
intensity-based and
texture-based 
segmentation
approaches
taking into account, intrinsically, the non-uniform nature of the tissue classes, have yielded
promising results.
In previous work , we
have presented an adaptive segmentation algorithm based on texture characterisation in a
Bayesian framework. The underlying model was
originally proposed by Ashton and Parker .
In the current work we focus on the adaptive
character of the algorithm and we discuss how
global and local statistics can be utilised during the
segmentation process. In other words, the paper
proposes an improvement of the adaptivity by
introducing a function to control the adaptive
properties of the segmentation process. A weighting
function, taking into account both local and global
statistics is used during the segmentation process.
This new formulation of the segmentation problem allows us to control the eﬀective contribution
of each statistic.
The paper is organised as follows. After a description of the mathematical framework of our
previous work, the proposed improvement on the
adaptive character of the algorithm is presented in
Section 2. A brief description of the algorithm and
implementation details are given in Section 3.
Section 4 presents segmentation results on synthetic data, 2D ultrasound breast images and
echocardiographic images ð2D þ TÞ. In the case of
echocardiographic
comparison
computer-generated boundaries of the left ventricle with the hand-outlined contours drawn by a
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
medical expert is presented. Results obtained with
Xiao et al. segmentation method are also
presented for comparison. The paper’s conclusions
are summarised in Section 5.
2. Segmentation method
In this section we brieﬂy outline the adaptive
texture-based clustering algorithm. The reader
may refer to for further details.
We assume that the observed data Y is a random ﬁeld deﬁned on a 2D (or 3D) isotropic rectangular grid S. Ys denotes the value of Y at the site
s 2 S. A segmentation of the image (volume) into
regions will be denoted by X, where Xs ¼ i means
that the pixel (voxel) at S belongs to region i. The
probability PðX ¼ xÞ is written as PðxÞ. The
number of diﬀerent regions in X is k. The conditional density function of Y given X is assumed to
exist and to be strictly positive and is denoted by
PðyjxÞ. The image may be segmented by estimating the pixel classiﬁcation X given the observed
image Y using the maximum a posteriori criteria.
We use a Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) to model
the region process X, due to its restriction to local
interaction.
assumption,
to Hammersley–Cliﬀord theorem ,
and for a given neighbourhood system, the prior
density PðxÞ can be written as a Gibbs density
2dðxs; xtÞÞ:
Here, VcðxÞ are the clique potentials and d is the
Kronecker delta function.
We use an 8-connected (6-connected) spatial
neighbourhood for 2D (3D) lattice. bhs;ti ¼ b if the
clique hs; ti is horizontal or vertical and bhs;ti ¼ b=
if it’s right or left diagonal. b is a positive
parameter, so that two neighbouring pixels are
more likely to belong to the same class than to
diﬀerent classes.
The conditional density distribution Psðysjxs ¼ iÞ
of the observed grey level intensity at a site s is
assumed to be Gaussian, with mean li
s and variance ðri
sÞ2. The local class mean li
s is a slowly
varying function of s. These assumptions lead to
the following posterior energy function:
Vhs;tiðxÞ:
This function has two components. The ﬁrst term
constrains the region intensity to be close to the
data and the second is a regularisation term, which
imposes a smoothness constraint. To improve the
robustness of the algorithm, in our earlier work
 we have modiﬁed the
energy function (2) by adding other constraints
based on parametric measurements that are representative of each region.
Let fY1; . . . ; Ypg be a set of features calculated
on each site of the data. Grey-scale parametric
images (volumes) are modelled in the same way as
grey scale intensity images in .
Using the same notations, the complete energy
function takes the following form:
Uðxjy;y1;...;ypÞ ¼
Computation of the exact minima of energy
functions ((2) and (3)) is time consuming. As an
alternative to simulated annealing , the Iterated Conditional Mode algorithm has been used which does not
guarantee a global minimum of the energy function, but is a fast deterministic algorithm.
2.1. Limitations and discussion
A major diﬃculty with version of the algorithm
described in 779–790
1995; Boukerroui et al., 1998), is that it takes into
account the global statistics of the regions only in
the ﬁrst few iterations. Indeed, when the algorithm
starts from a bad initialisation or when the statistics of regions are not Gaussian the adaptive
properties decrease the robustness of the algorithm
and prevent it from converging to the optimal
Unser proposed a diﬀerent and interesting adaptive extension of the K-means clustering
algorithm. The essential diﬀerence between this
algorithm and Pappas approach is that
Unser utilises a membrane model to specify the
smoothness of the means over regions rather than
a sliding windows approach. Additionally this
technique does not include the MRF regularisation term. The use of a membrane spline regulariser to control the spatial smoothness of the means
is an interesting idea as sharp changes of the mean
are not expected within the same region. However,
the smoothness is controlled by one global parameter for all the regions of the data. Moreover,
such a regularisation model (based on a priori
information) does not take into account the observed data. Indeed, in the special case of ultrasonic images, the spatial variation of the local
means depends on their absolute value because of
the multiplicative nature of the degradation.
In the next section, we present a new formulation to control the adaptive properties of the segmentation process which takes into account the
illustrate
the enhancement made, the new formulation of the
segmentation problem is presented only for grey
level data.
2.2. The proposed energy function
We propose, in this paper, to introduce a
weighting function into the energy function to take
into account the global statistics of the image. The
energy function becomes:
Vhs;tiðxÞ;
where W xs
is a weighting coeﬃcient which measures the similarity between the local statistics of
the region xs and the global statistics. u is a
transformation function and N u
s is a normalisation
constant of the function u at the site s deﬁned by
the following condition:
Here, ~k is the number of regions in the analysing
window centred at the site s.
In the case of a segmentation problem, the
similarity measure that is largely used to compare
two distributions is the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
distance . So we deﬁne W xs
DðyðxsÞ; yðs; xsÞÞ; where D is the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov distance between the cumulative distribution functions of the whole sites of the class xs
and the sites of the same class in the analysed
window W centred at s. The introduction of the
transformation function u aims to control the
adaptive term As and the weighting one W xs
deﬁne u as
s Þ ¼ As þ ðW xs
all class ½ðW xs
all class ½ðW xs
where a and b are positive constants.
Thus, at each site s, the constant a controls the
contribution of the adaptive term As (local statistics) and the weight W xs
which, takes into account
the global statistics. The inﬂuence of the control
parameters a and b on the u function is illustrated
in Fig. 1 (For example for a  1, Eq. (4) is
equivalent to Eq. (2); see Appendix A). Thus, for
large values of the parameter a, the weighting
function considers mainly the local statistics, and
the adaptive character of the algorithm is emphasised. Conversely, for small values of a (1),
the contribution of the local statistics to the labelling decision is relatively low in comparison to
the global one, leading to the decreasing of the
adaptive property of the algorithm. We use b ¼ 1
in the following.
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
3. Algorithm
In Section 2, the conditional density distribution of the observed grey level intensity at a site
s is assumed to be Gaussian. Clearly this assumption is not true in many cases, especially for displayed ultrasound data. As in we make use of the Central Limit Theorem
which states that the distribution of the mean of a
large number of independent random observations
tends toward a Gaussian distribution centred on
the collective mean. This assumption is reasonably
acceptable for low-pass ﬁltered and decimated
images that are originally governed by non-
Gaussian statistics and leads to a multiresolution
implementation of our algorithm .
Starting from the highest resolution image, a
multiresolution discrete wavelet transform (DWT)
pyramid is built. The coarsest resolution is initially
segmented and the result of the segmentation is
passed on to the next ﬁner level of resolution and
so on, until the ﬁnest resolution image is segmented. An initial solution of the minimisation
problem, at the coarsest resolution, is obtained
with the K-means clustering algorithm. Starting
from this segmentation, the algorithm alternates
between the estimation of region labels and model
parameters and is stopped when no further changes in the labels occur.
A major diﬃculty with the multiresolution
structure is the adhoc choice of the Gibbsian parameter b at each resolution level. The problem of its
estimation is studied in in the
special case of the segmentation of brain MR images. The authors propose a prior model for the
estimation problem. Some studies propose a constant value
for parameter b whereas Ashton and Parker 
suggest adapting its value to each resolution (b
increases linearly with resolution). In , the authors propose to derive the Gibbsian
parameter at each scale, directly from the full
resolution scale. This method shows clearly that
the Gibbsian parameter has a small value at the
coarsest resolution and increases, but not linearly.
In this paper, the Gibbsian parameter at each scale
is derived from the full resolution scale (b0) according to the multiscale approach proposed in
 . The number of regions k and
the Gibbsian parameter at the full resolution b0
are not estimated.
4. Results
4.1. Synthetic data
The ﬁrst two experiments were carried out on
synthetic data. Synthesised images provide a controlled environment, which allows quantiﬁcation
of the performance of the algorithm because a
reference image is available. The aim of these experiments was to evaluate the improvement of the
segmentation when the global statistics were taken
into account in an adaptive algorithm. Two
128  128 synthetic images (Fig. 2) were used in
the experiments. The image in Fig. 2(a) contains
four distinct white Gaussian textures with close
means and variances (1: l ¼ 180, r ¼ 25; 2:
l ¼ 120, r ¼ 30; 3: l ¼ 150, r ¼ 30; 4: l ¼ 150,
r ¼ 20). In Fig. 2(b), the intensities in the image in
Fig. 2(a) has undergone a vertical linear attenuation. This is achieved by multiplying the original
intensity values by a multiplicative coeﬃcient
which is constant horizontally and decreases linearly in the vertical direction.
Fig. 3 shows the segmentation results for the
two synthetic images and for three diﬀerent values
of the control parameter a. For both images, poor
Fig. 1. The inﬂuence of the control parameters a and b. D is the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance.
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
segmentation results are obtained if the weighting
function considers mainly the local statistics (large
value of a). One can observe that the segmentation
results of image (a) for a ¼ 1 and a ¼ 0:1 appear in
good agreement whereas there is a diﬀerence of
regions labelling for the segmentation of the image
(b). This is because the diﬀerent regions are homogeneous in image (a). This is not the case in image
(b) because of the vertical attenuation. The segmentation result of the image (b) for a ¼ 0:1 is
interesting. Knowing that the degradation ﬁeld
varies vertically, the resulting mean of the upper
part (top right) and the lower part (bottom left) of
the same region will be slightly diﬀerent. When the
weighting function considers mainly the global
statistics (a ¼ 0:1) the algorithm classiﬁed the upper part and the lower part of this class into two
diﬀerent classes because of the non-homogeneity
of the regions whereas it labelled the ring and the
right bottom square to the same class. Note that
the ring region and the right bottom square have
the same mean. An examination of the segmenta-
Fig. 2. Synthetic original images; four white Gaussian textures (a); image (a) with a vertical linear attenuation (1–0.9 from top to
bottom) (b); means and standard deviations of the homogeneous regions (c).
Fig. 3. Segmentation results for k ¼ 4, b0 ¼ 0:3 and for diﬀerent values of the control parameter a: image 2(a) (a); image 2(b) (b).
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
tion results indicates that a ¼ 1 gives a good tradeoﬀbetween global and local statistics.
The evolution of the segmentation map of the
image in (Fig. 2(b)) from coarse to ﬁne resolution
with an overestimated number of classes (k ¼ 5)
is shown in Fig. 4. When the distribution is not
homogeneous within the regions (case of Fig. 2(b)),
the assumption of a Gaussian distribution for the
grey levels is not valid. The initial segmentation
provided by the K-means algorithm (Fig. 4(a)) is
far from an optimal solution. If we chose to emphasise the adaptive character of the algorithm
(a ¼ þ1), false regions are preserved and the
algorithm does not converge toward a satisfying
segmentation (Fig. 4(e)). Note how close the result
(e) is to the initial solution (a). If instead we chose
to take global statistics into account in the
weighting function, this leads to less false regions
and to a segmentation closer to the optimal solution (Fig. 4(d)). The intermediate results (b) and
(c), illustrate the behaviour of the algorithm
and the evolution of the segmentation with resolution. The improvement achieved by taking into
account the global statistics in the segmentation
process is seen by comparing results (d) and (e).
However the computation complexity increases
with the introduction of the weighting term. For
example the processing times on a Pentium 400
MHz for the result (e), obtained with Ashton and
Parker method is 4 and 16 s for the results
(d) obtained with the new method.
4.2. Cardiac 2D þ T data
In the third experiment, the application of our
new algorithm on a long-axis echocardiographic
sequence of 106 images ð2D þ TÞ is carried out. In
the segmentation process the sequence is considered as a 3D volume to enable temporal continuity
to be used in the segmentation process. Results
segmentation method are also presented for comparison
Fig. 4. Evolution of the segmentation map of the original image Fig. 2(b) from coarse to ﬁne resolution for k ¼ 5, a ¼ b ¼ 1 and
b0 ¼ 0:3: initial solution (a); results at the end of resolution 2 (b); at the end of resolution 1 (c); ﬁnal result (resolution 0) (d). The
segmentation result (e) was obtained using the same parameters but for a ¼ þ1 (i.e. using the energy function in Eq. (2)).
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
(Fig. 5D). Xiao’s approach is semiautomatic, as it
requires user interaction to set the image model
parameters. The results presented in this paper
were obtained after a moderate number of experiments (3–5) to set the image parameters. The Xiao
algorithm was run with two classes; the means/
standard deviations were set to 35/10 for the cavity
region and 100/40 for the background. The proposed segmentation technique was run with three
classes, b0 ¼ 1 at the full resolution and for three
levels of decomposition of the DWT.
Fig. 5 shows the segmentation results (superimposed on the original data) for four frames (1–4)
and for three diﬀerent values of the control parameter a (A, B, C). Images A were obtained for
a ¼ þ1 i.e. using the energy function in (2). B and
C were obtained with a ¼ 10 and a ¼ 1 respectively. A deviation with respect to the true boundaries is observed in the left part of the images (right
ventricle) when the adaptive character is emphasised (Fig. 5A), whereas a good detection was obtained when global statistics are included in the
Fig. 5. Segmentation results for three diﬀerent values of the control parameter a: a ¼ þ1 (A), a ¼ 10 (B) and a ¼ 1 (C). Segmentation
results of Xiao et al. (D). Frames 1 and 2: systole, frames 3 and 4: diastole.
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
segmentation process (Fig. 5C). As expected, the
segmentation is better when both global and local
statistics were included in the segmentation process. Our formulation of the problem allows us to
control the eﬀective contribution of each set of
statistics by varying the parameter a. There is little
diﬀerence between results A and B, probably because in experiment B the global statistics are involved with a low weight (10% of the weight of
local statistics). This provides some insight into the
importance of the parameter a.
An evaluation of the computer detection of the
boundary of the left ventricle has been made. First
we computed two classical measures (perimeter
and area) on the 106 frames of the computergenerated and the hand-outlined boundaries. The
results are summarized in Table 1. In particular,
we can see that the perimeter results show us that
little improvement is achieved when global statistics are involved and that Xiao’s algorithm has
the smallest perimeter error. However it is quite
diﬃcult to make a conclusion using only these two
measures. Indeed, the perimeter error is highly
related to the smoothness of the contours then to
its localisation. Xiao’s segmentation is smoother
then the three results obtained with the proposed
method. Moreover the area errors do not show
any signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the four algorithms.
Recently, a more applicable methodology for
evaluation of boundary detection algorithm has
been proposed . This
methodology uses essentially two distance measures: The Hausdorﬀdistance (HD) and the average distance (AD). The HD between two curves
is deﬁned as the maximum of the distance to the
closest point’s (DCP) between the two curves. The
DCP associates each point on both curves to a
point on the other curve, and the HD ﬁnds the
largest distance between the associated points.
The AD is the average of all distances between the
corresponding points between the curves. This effectively allows us to analyse the regional diﬀerences between the curves.
Table 2 shows the minimum, the maximum, the
mean and the standard deviation of the two distances over all data sets (106 frames). Note that
the HD does not show any signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the performance of the three algorithms
A, B and C. However the AD shows clearly that
the third algorithm is better than the two others
(p < 0:0001 for the Friedman’s rank test). Regarding the comparison between the proposed
technique (results C) and Xiao’s algorithm 
Perimeter, % (pixel size)
Area, % (pixel size)2
a The minus sign indicates that the estimation is larger than the medical expert’s.
Direct comparison of the computer-generated boundaries of the left ventricle to the hand-outlined by a medical expert (results in pixel)
Xiao et al. 
ðmin; maxÞ
8.06, 23.53
8.06, 23.53
8.48, 22.56
8.06, 25.50
14.21, 3.91
13.63, 3.74
13.64, 3.48
16.35, 4.49
ðmin; maxÞ
2.49, 17.13
2.45, 15.80
1.82, 11.75
2.64, 12.40
8.78, 3.09
8.19, 2.94
5.96, 2.20
5.67, 2.07
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
D), the HD distance shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
(p < 0:001), however the AD measure shows that
the performance of the two algorithms are similar
(p > 0:7). In other words, the average segmentation error of the left ventricle of the two techniques in comparison to the manual contours is
relatively the same.
4.3. Breast data
Finally, we applied the new weighting function
to the multiparametric model, and an example of
segmenting breast ultrasound images is shown in
Fig. 6. In this experiment we made use of the cooccurrence matrix method 1 to calculate three
textural parameters. In our previous work , we have shown that a more
robust lesion detection can be obtained when the
textural features characterising pathological tissues are involved in the segmentation process. The
Fig. 6. Breast lesion segmentation with k ¼ 2 for diﬀerent resolution level values (n) of the DWT. All the results were obtained using
three textural features calculated on the co-occurrence matrix (angular second moment, correlation and sum average). Results obtained
with: a ¼ þ1 (i.e. energy function in (3)) (a); a ¼ b ¼ 1 (b).
1 The reader may ﬁnd more details about the co-occurrence
matrix method in and on the contribution of the textural features in .
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
three textural parameters used in this experiment
were: angular second moment, correlation and
sum average.
The aim of this experiment was to show that
including the global statistics in the segmentation
segmentation
parameter dependent. Fig. 6 shows the segmentation results of the fully adaptive algorithm for
three diﬀerent resolution level ðnÞ and for 2 values
of the regularisation parameter b0 (results (a)). We
observe that the results of the fully adaptive
algorithm depend on the number of the resolution
levels of the DWT. The results are better for four
levels than for a lower number of resolution levels.
This result was expected as the approximation
error of the image statistics by a Gaussian distribution decreases with the resolution levels in
the pyramid . However,
the proposed approach converges almost to the
same solution for the three values of the resolution
level (see results (b)). This experiment oﬀers a
clear demonstration of the robustness of our algorithm.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed an adaptive
region segmentation algorithm based on global
and local statistics in a Bayesian framework. The
enhancement we developed can be regarded as a
generalisation of our previous work . The formulation of the segmentation
problem allows us to control the eﬀective contribution of the local and global statistics. The eﬀect
of the weighting introduced to control the adaptivity of the segmentation process has been illustrated
echocardiographic sequences ð2D þ TÞ and on 2D breast
ultrasound images. Our experiments indicate that
including the global statistics in an adaptive context improves signiﬁcantly the segmentation results and the robustness of the algorithm.
The results obtained with our algorithm on
echocardiographic data gives a good segmentation
result when compared against boundaries of the
left ventricle hand-outlined by a medical expert.
However, a comparison of the segmentation results with boundaries outlined by multiple observers would be an important future step to
conﬁrm this conclusion. It would be also interesting to associate our approach with high-level
model-guided segmentation using ‘‘deformabletemplates’’ for instance, which include a priori
knowledge about the expected object.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Guofung Xiao from
Medical Vision Laboratory, Oxford University,
for providing segmentation results on our data set
for comparison.
Appendix A
In this appendix, we propose a diﬀerent formulation of the weighting coeﬃcients. The interpretation of this new expression of the weighting
coeﬃcient is easier. For each site s, we adopt the
simpliﬁed following notation:
W l ¼ ðW xs
s Þb 2 ½0; 1;
all classes fW lg
all classes fW lg;
wl ¼ uðW l
Hence, from Eqs. (5)–(7), the diﬀerent weighting
coeﬃcients of the diﬀerent labels in the analysing
window centred at the site s are given by
aDyn þ W l
l¼1 ðaDyn þ W lÞ
aDyn þ W ;
for l ¼ 1; . . . ; ~k;
¼ 1 þ DðW lÞ;
where W is the mean value of fW l; l ¼ 1; . . . ; ~kg.
The interpretation of the diﬀerent weighting
coeﬃcients from equation (A.1) is much easier
and we can note the following properties of the
weighting coeﬃcients:
D. Boukerroui et al. / Pattern Recognition Letters 24 779–790
if W l < W ;
if W l > W ;
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
if a1 < a2;
a!1wl ¼ 1;