Lunar impact crater identiﬁcation and age
estimation with Chang’E data by deep and transfer
1,2✉, Haishi Zhao
3, Lorenzo Bruzzone4, Jon Atli Benediktsson
5, Yanchun Liang3, Bin Liu
Xingguo Zeng
2, Renchu Guan
3✉, Chunlai Li
2✉& Ziyuan Ouyang1,2
Impact craters, which can be considered the lunar equivalent of fossils, are the most
dominant lunar surface features and record the history of the Solar System. We address the
problem of automatic crater detection and age estimation. From initially small numbers of
recognized craters and dated craters, i.e., 7895 and 1411, respectively, we progressively
identify new craters and estimate their ages with Chang’E data and stratigraphic information
by transfer learning using deep neural networks. This results in the identiﬁcation of 109,956
new craters, which is more than a dozen times greater than the initial number of recognized
craters. The formation systems of 18,996 newly detected craters larger than 8 km are estimated. Here, a new lunar crater database for the mid- and low-latitude regions of the Moon is
derived and distributed to the planetary community together with the related data analysis.
 
1 College of Earth Sciences, Jilin University, 130061 Changchun, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Lunar and Deep Space Exploration, National Astronomical
Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China. 3 Key Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of
Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, 130012 Changchun, China. 4 Department of Information Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Trento, I-38122 Trento, Italy. 5 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. ✉email: yangc616@jlu.
edu.cn; ; 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1234567890():,;
he Moon’s surface contains numerous impact craters that
occupy most of the Moon’s surface. Impact craters on the
Moon span ﬁve lunar geologic time periods, i.e., the pre-
Nectarian System, the Nectarian System, the Imbrian System, the
Eratosthenian System and the Copernican System, spanning
approximately four billion years. Their formation and evolution
record the history of the inner Solar System1–5. Sixty years of
advances in lunar exploration projects (e.g., the Luna missions
and NASA’s Apollo programme) have accumulated various lunar
data, including digital images, digital elevation models (DEM)
and lunar samples. Visual inspection of images and/or DEM data
by experts or automatic detection6–8 has recognized a large
number of lunar craters, and consequently, many crater databases9–13 have been established. However, the subjectivity of
manual detection and the limitations of automatic detection with
different types of data have resulted in signiﬁcant disagreement in
crater number among existing databases14,15. The International
Astronomical Union (IAU)16 has recognized 9137 lunar impact
craters since 1919. The formation ages of 1675 of these lunar
craters were aggregated by the Lunar and Planetary Institute
(LPI)17 in 2015, according to a professional paper, i.e., the Geologic History of the Moon (GHM)18 from the United States
Geological Survey (USGS), updated with the stratigraphy of
craters database19 (see Fig. 1a); at present, this represents a
comprehensive database of craters ages.
The typical characteristics of a crater include large extents, differences in diameter on the scale of orders of magnitude, large
variations in shape due to overlapping or ﬁlling, and variable and
complex morphologies. Existing automatic detection algorithms6–8
based on pattern recognition and machine learning (ML) can
determine the large extent characteristic of craters from the general
features of craters. Deep learning (DL), in particular convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) applied for the extraction of ﬁne-grained
information, has been used for the identiﬁcation of lunar
craters20,21. DL has demonstrated fast and accurate performances
based on huge amounts of detected craters as labelled samples.
Nevertheless, available samples mainly include simple craters and
thus do not represent irregular and seriously degraded craters that
may have formed in early periods and provide an important historical record.
In lunar impact chronology, the relative age of lunar geologic
units was ﬁrst determined by the stratigraphic coverage relationship22, the morphologic features of craters23,24 and the
optical maturity (OMAT)25. The stratigraphic coverage relationship is a basic and reliable method. In the absence of stratigraphic control, relative age is estimated according to the
degradation and freshness of crater morphology, e.g., ray
brightness, rim and terrace sharpness, rim texture, crater shape,
crater walls and superimposed craters26. OMAT is based on the
degree of modiﬁcation of lunar soil by exposure to space and is
applied to large rayed craters27. The absolute age was obtained by
analyzing the crater cumulative size-frequency distributions
(CSFDs)28–30 and the radiometric ages of returned samples.
These analyses have made OMAT a fundamental technique
applicable to large craters. Recently, a crater age-rock abundance
regression function was derived to estimate the ages of young
craters (age ≤1 Ga) with diameters (D) ≥10 km by analyzing the
thermophysical characteristics of lunar impact ejecta31. However,
crater statistics with scarce lunar samples and complex impact
events result in an extraordinarily difﬁcult age estimation task. It
is difﬁcult to obtain satisfactory crater identiﬁcation and age
estimation results with a single type of data using conventional
In the new generation of exploration of the Moon, the
Chang’E-1 (CE-1) and Chang’E-2 (CE-2) orbiters32,33 of China’s
Lunar Exploration Program (CLEP) have provided rich lunar
data, acquiring two image sets with different spatial resolutions,
i.e., 120 and 7 m digital orthophoto images (DOM), and 500 and
7 m DEM data. Obviously, large-scale data with a low resolution
can capture the morphology of large craters, while highresolution data are important for capturing the morphology of
small craters. Transfer learning (TL)34, one of the frontiers of ML
that is motivated by the fact that humans can apply previous
knowledge to solve new problems intelligently35, has been successfully applied to problems in which sufﬁcient training samples
are not available36–38. Here, we convert the crater identiﬁcation
problem into a target detection task and progressively identify
craters using the global lunar terrain products of CE-1 and CE-2
DOM and DEM by means of TL34 using deep neural networks.
Then, the estimation of crater age is mapped into a taxonomic
structure, and the relative speciﬁc chronology of craters, i.e., the
formation systems, is determined by combining crater morphological markers with stratigraphic information by an ensemble TL
strategy. In the process of crater identiﬁcation and age estimation,
only the recognized craters of IAU and dated craters aggregated
by the LPI are used for the training set for TL to ensure the
generalization of the model.
Multiscale lunar impact crater identiﬁcation. To comprehensively identify lunar impact craters, we proposed a two-stage
crater detection approach with CE-1 and CE-2 data. The process
of identiﬁcation of lunar craters is described in Fig. 2. Considering the magnitude difference of crater scale, a series of crater
images are taken from the CE-1 and CE-2 data corresponding to
different spatial resolutions and sizes from different angles from
−65° to 65° in latitude and from −180° to 65°, and 65° to 180° in
longitude on the Moon (the mid- and low-latitude regions).
These crater images are obtained by the fusion of DOM and DEM
data (see Methods section for data consolidation). The DOM data
present the morphological characteristics of craters, whereas the
DEM data present topographic information. Three scales of
images, i.e., 120 m CE-1 images with 5000 × 5000 and 1000 ×
1000 pixels and 50 m CE-2 images with 1000 × 1000 pixels, are
used to detect craters with large, medium and small diameter
ranges, i.e., 50–600, 20–120 and 1–50 km (Fig. 2a). Adjacent
images have a 50% overlap, and each crater may appear in two or
three images.
In the stage of the detection approach (Fig. 2b), recognized
craters in CE-1 images are randomly divided into three separate
datasets, i.e., 5682, 1422 and 791 images for training, validation
and testing, respectively, and all the recognized craters in CE-2
images, i.e., 6511 craters, are used for testing the second stage of
the detection model. In the ﬁrst stage, a partial network of the
existing CNNs pre-trained with ImageNet data is transferred and
reuses CE-1 data, according to a network-based deep TL
method38. The ﬁrst stage that uses CE-1 images with 5000 ×
5000 pixels and 1000 × 1000 pixels achieves 94.71% recall,
recovering almost all the recognized craters in the test set.
Figure 2c shows the detection maps with CE-1 images (1000 ×
1000 pixels). There are six adjacent maps that have 50% overlap
with each other. Red squares represent the newly detected craters,
and the red dashed squares represent the undetected craters that
are on the image edge or are not fully displayed. However, these
undetected craters can be detected in other adjacent maps. Then,
in the second stage, we assume that no training data are available
from CE-2, and the ﬁrst-stage detection model is transferred to
procedure of the second stage follows transductive TL35, which
can derive learned features and knowledge for CE-2 data,
obtaining a 93.35% recall. Finally, 117,240 craters that range in
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
size from approximately 0.9 to 532 km are identiﬁed. These
craters are almost 15 times more than the recognized craters, and
88.14% of them are less than 10 km in diameter. Craters that
appear in both CE-1 and CE-2 were removed by selecting the
diameter D ≥20 km for CE-1 detections and D < 20 km for CE-2
detections. The average detection time required for each image is
0.17 s. The catalogues of training, validation and test craters with
the DOM and the DEM data and the models of crater
identiﬁcation
 
hszhaohs/DeepCraters. The identiﬁed lunar craters can be found
at 
Identiﬁed crater distribution and reliability assessment. Figure 3 shows the distribution of identiﬁed craters by the detection
Pre-Nectaria
Eratosthenian
Copernican
Fig. 1 Distribution of lunar impact craters on the Moon. a The distribution of recognized and dated craters. The red, brown, yellow, green and blue squares
and points represent the craters of the pre-Nectarian System, the Nectarian System, the Imbrian System, the Eratosthenian System and the Copernican
System, respectively. The grey points show recognized craters without ages. b Distribution of identiﬁed craters with assigned ages. From the time scale and
spatial distribution, these dated craters exhibit speciﬁc characteristics. Craters with diameters smaller than 8 km and larger than 550 km are not shown in
the distribution map.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
model compared with the distribution of recognized craters. The
number of identiﬁed lunar craters is systematically higher than
that of recognized craters for diameters between 1 and 100 km.
This indicates that the detection model ﬁnds a substantial number of craters with both small and medium diameter ranges.
Although large craters can be irregular, seriously degraded and
sparse on the Moon, 46 lunar craters with diameters ranging from
200 to 550 km were identiﬁed.
To verify the reliability of identiﬁed craters, we analysed
identiﬁed craters in comparison with three manually derived
lunar crater databases: (1) Head et al.9 contains 5185 craters with
diameters D ≥20 km obtained by using the digital terrain model
(DTM) acquired by the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) of
the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO). (2) Povilaitis et al.10
extended the above database to 22,746 craters with D = 5–20 km.
(3) Robbins11 has a database containing over 2 million craters
with 1.3 million craters with D ≥1 km and is the database with
the largest number of lunar craters at present. Moreover, we
considered three automated crater catalogues: (1) Salamunićcar
et al.12, i.e., LU78287GT, which was generated based on the
Hough transform. (2) Wang et al.13 compiled a global catalogue
of 106,016 craters with D > 500 m using CE-1 data. (3) Silburt
data label 1
data label 2
Feature maps
Feature maps
CE1 slope in degree
CE1 profile curvature
CE2 slope in degree
CE12 profile curvature
CE1 fusion data
CE1 fusion data
CE2 fusion data
Fig. 2 Identiﬁcation of lunar impact craters based on transfer learning (TL) with Chang’E-1 (CE-1) data and Chang’E-2 (CE-2) data. a CE-1 and CE-2
digital orthophoto images (DOM) and DOM data fusion and multiscale crater images. b The ﬂowchart demonstrates the two-stage crater detection
approach based on TL. The ﬂowchart is split by a vertical dotted line. The left part shows the TL process, and the right part shows the corresponding
network structure in detail. In the left part, the light pink area indicates the ﬁrst-stage TL. The detection module is the region-based fully convolutional
network with the basic network of the ResNet101 convolutional neural networks (CNN) architecture. ResNet101 (only the convolutional layers, not
including the top fully connected layers) is transferred for crater detection. The detection module is ﬁne-tuned by CE-1 data. Then, the detection module is
directly transferred to CE-2 data, as shown in the light green area. It should be emphasized that there is no training in the second-stage TL. c Detection
maps with CE-1 data. There are six adjacent detection maps that have a 50% overlap with each other. The red squares show the edge of detected craters,
and the red dashed squares represent the individual undetected craters (on the image edge or not fully displayed on the image) in one of the detection
maps. However, the individual undetected craters can be detected in the other adjacent detection maps.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
et al.21 generated a crater database using CNN with DEM data
from the LRO. The comparison between craters detected in this
paper and currently public lunar crater databases was carried out
by matching criteria11 in terms of both location and diameter:
distance ≤0.25 × avg(Di + Dj), where Di and Dj are the diameters
of the ith and jth craters, respectively, and intersection over union
IoU(Ci, Cj) = (Ci ∩Cj)/(Ci ∪Cj) ≥0.1, where Ci and Cj indicate the
areas of the ith and jth craters, respectively. In the comparison
process, two craters were recognized as matching when the two
criteria were satisﬁed simultaneously. Figure 4 shows the CSFD of
the identiﬁed craters compared with the published lunar crater
databases. The comparison results in terms of the number and
percentage of matching craters at different scales are listed in
For the manual databases, we can see that for databases of both
Head et al.9 and Povilaitis et al.10, the CSFD and the matching
numbers of identiﬁed craters show good agreement with our
work. The matching percentage for both databases from 5 to
550 km is relatively stable. For the largest manual database, i.e.,
Robbins11, it can be observed that the CSFD of craters between 1
and 20 km is systematically higher than that of the identiﬁed
craters, whereas at larger diameters, the values are almost
overlapping. It should be noted that the Robbins11 database has
many more craters than estimated in our work for D ≈1–20 km
and a comparable number of craters for D ≈50–550 km. In terms
of the matching percentage, most of the craters in this work are
consistent with those in Robbins11 when craters with D>3 km are
considered, yielding a high agreement (85.24%). In general, our
results achieve 85.30% agreement with published manual lunar
crater databases for diameters D ≳1 km.
For the automated catalogues, the CSFD of Salamunićcar
et al.12 is lower than that of the identiﬁed craters when D ≲8 km.
Our database has a signiﬁcant mismatch for small craters D ≈
1–3 km, whereas the agreement increases as diameter increases.
This may be because small craters are not sufﬁcient in that
automated crater catalogue. For Wang et al.13, the CSFD of
craters between 1 and 5 km is lower than that of the identiﬁed
craters, but at larger diameters, they are almost overlapping and
are slightly higher when craters D > 100 km. However, the centre
location of craters in Wang et al.13 has different offsets from those
of other databases due to the lack of global correction. Here, only
the detected craters in CE-1 are used for comparison, representing ~10% of the total detected craters. The analysis shows that
most of the craters extracted from CE-1 data have good
consistency when D ≈10–50 km. For Silburt et al.21, the curve
origin at ~3 km increases gradually but cuts off sharply at
diameters of ~200 km. The curve of the identiﬁed craters is
relatively smooth and reaches ~532 km. This indicates that the
TL-based detection approach ﬁnds a substantially larger number
of craters (>7× more craters) than the only DL-based model in
both small and large diameter ranges, which include faint, heavily
degraded, and secondary craters that are often hard to detect with
assessment when D is between 50 and 550 km in overlapping
areas, a disagreement appears when decreasing the diameter. This
might be due to the crater detection in CNN, which is based on
rectangular windows that cannot guarantee proper scaling to
small crater diameters.
Then, the newly identiﬁed craters, i.e., 109,956 craters which
are not included in the recognized craters, are divided into two
sets of scales for manual assessment of detection accuracy. In the
ﬁrst set, all the newly identiﬁed craters with diameters larger than
100 km (i.e., 166) are involved in the assessment. In the second
set, 10% of the other identiﬁed craters (i.e., 10,979) with
diameters between 1 and 100 km are considered using a statistical
sampling by random selection. These craters are assessed by
matching with three manual databases and independently
inspected by four scientists from Key Laboratory of Lunar and
Deep Space Exploration, Chinese Academy of Sciences, simultaneously. The selected newly identiﬁed craters are projected onto
CE-2 7m images and the mean ± standard deviation (s.d.) error
results are provided. The false-positive rates (FPRs) of the newly
identiﬁed craters are listed in Table 2. From Table 2, we can see
that the FPRs of identiﬁed craters with D = 1–100 and D =
100–550 km are 4.49 ± 0.70% and 4.67 ± 2.10%, respectively. In
the only DL-based model, i.e., Silburt et al.21, the FPR of 361 new
Fig. 3 Identiﬁed lunar impact craters distributions compared with the
recognized craters from the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in
different diameter scales. The red column represents the number of the
identiﬁed craters compared with the number of the recognized craters
(blue column). Recognized craters used for identiﬁcation are the ones
completely located within the study area having diameters larger than 1 km
and smaller than 500 km. Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle.
Head et al. + Povilaitis et al. (N=24415, Matched=19012)
Robbins (N=1105378, Matched=99934)
Salamuniccar et al. (N=58131, Matched=30554)
Wang et al. (N=85343, Matched=9188)
Silburt et al. (N=15658, Matched=10260)
Ours (N=117240)
log10(nd/A)
Diameter [Km]
Fig. 4 The cumulative size-frequency distributions (CSFDs) of craters in
the existing databases and those identiﬁed in this paper. The light blue
and blue lines show the crater CSFDs of the manual lunar crater databases,
i.e., combined Head et al. + Povilaitis et al. and Robbins. The light green,
green and dark green lines show CSFDs of the three automated crater
catalogues, i.e., Salamunićcar et al., Wang et al. and Silburt et al. The red
line represents the CSFD of the craters identiﬁed in this paper. The
conﬁdence interval ±σ, which for the kth crater is log
is the surface area, kth crater means that the kth-largest crater at the level
of diameter. Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Table 1 Comparison between the identiﬁed craters and existing lunar crater databases in terms of number and percentage of
matching craters for different diameter scales.
Head et al. + Povilaitis et al.
Salamuniccar et al.
Wang et al.
Silburt et al.
100–200 km
200–550 km
All compared datasets are sampled from −65° to 65° in latitude and −180° to 180° in longitude on the Moon, and crater diameter is limited in the range of 1–550 km.
aNA is the number of craters in the existing lunar crater databases used for comparisons at different crater scales; NM is the number of matching craters in our lunar craters database.
bMR is the matching percentage between the compared datasets computed as the ratio between NM and NA for different diameter scales; OMR is the overall matching percentage computed as the ratio
between the total NM and the total NA from 1 to 550 km.
Table 2 False-positive rates of newly identiﬁed craters.
Num. newly identiﬁed
Num. assessment
Num. false detectiona
64/37/20/44
4.49% ± 0.70%
187/119/104/133
153/121/103/117
147/138/125/135
40/38/34/35
15/13/12/13
100–200 km
4.67% ± 2.10%
200–550 km
All the newly identiﬁed craters with diameters larger than 100 km are involved in assessment; 10% of the other newly identiﬁed craters between 1 and 100 km are considered using statistical sampling by
random selection.
aNum. false detection is the number of craters that are supposed to not be craters by matching with the manual databases and scientists.
bFPR is the false-positive rate (mean ± s.d.) of the newly identiﬁed craters with D = 100–550 and D = 1–100 km.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
craters is 11 ± 7% derived also with manual inspection by four
scientists and average results. This FPR latter is more than twice
than that of the proposed model. Meanwhile, it should be noted
that the number of detected craters of our TL-based model is
obviously higher than that of DL-based model. This illustrates the
reliability and stability of our detection model in the identiﬁcation
of lunar craters with both small and large sizes.
Lunar impact crater age estimation. The geological time scale
established for the Moon was based on the recognition of convenient geomorphological markers with major impact events18.
Absolute ages can be assigned to the geological periods by correlating the ages of samples obtained from Apollo missions. The
pre-Nectarian System is deﬁned as the period from when the
lunar crust formed to when the Nectaris Basin was formed by a
large impact, and its ejecta blanket serves as a useful stratigraphic
marker. The Nectarian System and Imbrian System are deﬁned by
the occurrence of the Nectaris and Imbrium impact events,
respectively. The Eratosthenian System is the period in which
lunar craters can be recognized with freshly excavated materials
on the lunar surface but with bright sputtering materials, i.e., rays
around those craters, beginning to darken and disappear. The
Copernican System is deﬁned by craters generally surrounded by
bright rays that represent recent lunar geologic records. It is
important to note that some of the ages are uncertain, and we
consider only the formation epoch. Here, the period boundaries
of the ﬁve systems deﬁned by Wilhelms18 are used, i.e., the pre-
Nectarian (>3.92 Ga), the Nectarian (3.92–3.85 Ga), the Imbrian
(3.85–3.2 Ga), the Eratosthenian (3.2–1.1 Ga) and the Copernican
(<1.1 Ga). Then, we mapped the ﬁve systems into a taxonomic
structure.
As in the detection case, a two-stage crater classiﬁcation
approach based on TL with CE-1 and CE-2 data is proposed. The
estimation of the age of the lunar crater scheme is shown in Fig. 5.
semi-supervised
dual-channel
classiﬁcation
strategy is employed. One of the channels is used for extracting
morphology marks with CNN; the other analyses the generic
morphological information (e.g., diameter and depth) and
stratigraphic attributes (i.e., coverage relationship) of craters
(which cannot be directly derived from DOM data) with a
feedforward neural network. The information on the scarce dated
craters and enormous identiﬁed craters are simultaneously
considered (see Methods section for age estimation algorithm).
In the ﬁrst stage of the classiﬁcation approach, 1411 dated
craters with sizes ranging from approximately 1.26–1160 km in
CE-1 were associated with the training, validation and test sets
with proportions of 8:1:1. Twelve deep CNN models were
transferred and ﬁne-tuned with CE-1 data following the networkbased deep TL technique38. For CE-2, the learning procedure of
the second stage also followed transductive TL without any
training data. A total of 502 craters from 1.26–50.66 km in the
CE-2 images were used for testing the second stage of
classiﬁcation. The effectiveness of the classiﬁcation approach in
the ﬁrst stage was tested with CE-1 data in ﬁve trials. The ﬁrst
stage of classiﬁcation obtained an overall accuracy (OA) of 85.44
± 1.94% (mean ± s.d.) (see Methods section for evaluation of ages
of craters classiﬁcation) and achieves the best OA of 88.97% on
the test set of the dated craters. The corresponding confusion
matrices of the CE-1 and CE-2 data are shown in Fig. 6. This
demonstrates that the crater classiﬁcation model trained in the
ﬁrst stage has the ability to accurately classify lunar craters into
their respective systems. The best performance model in the ﬁrst
stage is transferred to CE-2 without training, resulting in 89.04%
of dated craters being classiﬁed correctly. Finally, the best
classiﬁcation model is utilized to assign ages to identiﬁed and
recognized craters larger than 8 km in diameter (because small
craters degrade at an accelerated rate23 with respect to large
Randomly initialized
Randomly initialized
Student model
Classification cost
Consistency cost
Teacher model
Source data
fully connected
fully connected
Target data
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
Target data
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
fully connected
Exponential
Fig. 5 Estimation of the age of lunar craters based on transfer learning (TL) with Chang’E-1 (CE-1) data and Chang’E-2 (CE-2) data. The ﬂow chart
demonstrates the two-stage crater classiﬁcation approach based on TL. The two stages are separated by dotted lines. The left part is the TL process, and
the right part shows the crater classiﬁcation network structure. In the left part, the light green area indicates the ﬁrst-stage TL. The crater classiﬁcation
model includes two types of input data, i.e., images and attribute data. Thus, the model consists of two channels. One of the channels is based on the pretrained deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) model on ImageNet (only convolutional layers, not including the top fully connected layers) for images,
and the other is the feedforward neural network for attribute data. Meanwhile, a semi-supervised learning strategy, i.e., Meanteacher, is adopted to take
advantage of a large number of newly identiﬁed craters. In the second TL stage, the two-channel classiﬁcation model with the Meanteacher strategy is
directly used for estimating ages with CE-2 data, as shown in the light pink area. There is no other training in the second TL stage. A series of deep CNN
techniques are then used for the classiﬁcation of crater ages with CE images.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
craters of the same age). The average time of the classiﬁcation of
each crater is 0.006 s.
Dated lunar impact crater distribution and mapping. The dated
lunar crater distribution is given in Fig. 7. Figure 7a compares the
number of lunar craters with estimated ages to the recognized
craters with formation systems. The results show that the lunar
craters of the pre-Nectarian System are large in diameter (the
number of craters with D ≥50 km is far greater than those of
other systems) in both our dataset and previous datasets. There
are 18,996 craters in the study areas and ~1270 larger than 50 km.
However, most of the recognized craters (733 out of 1453) in the
pre-Nectarian System are distributed from 50 to 550 km. Similar
results are obtained for the Nectarian System, which was associated with only 645 of the previous mapped craters. The number
of dated craters in the Nectarian System is the highest, i.e., 11,050.
However, there are more craters with diameters smaller than
20 km than those in the pre-Nectarian System. For the Imbrian
System, the number of craters is 1431, and most of them are
smaller than 50 km. For the two young geological periods, the
number of craters in the Eratosthenian System, i.e., 850, and the
Copernican System, i.e., 4212, are obviously different. Craters in
the Eratosthenian System range in size from 20 to 50 km, whereas
the craters in the Copernican System are mainly smaller than
In Fig. 7b, we show the CSFDs of the craters with estimated
ages by the TL-based classiﬁcation model compared with those of
recognized craters in the ﬁve systems. For the pre-Nectarian
System, the CSFD curve of estimated craters ﬁrst decreases slowly
with increasing diameter and runs parallel to or overlaps the
CSFD of recognized craters between 20 and 200 km. Then, it
displays a prominent kink at 200 km and cuts off at diameters of
~500 km. The CSFD curve of estimated craters in the Nectarian
System is clearly higher than that of the recognized craters for
diameters D ≤50 km, whereas the number of craters increases
slowly for diameters between 60 and 200 km, breaking at
~532 km (which is the largest identiﬁed crater with a radius of
~4433 pixels in the CE1 image). For diameter values between 8
and 30 km, the CSFD curves derived by the TL-based model for
the Imbrian System are higher than the CSFD curves of
recognized craters. Then, they overlap with each other for larger
values and cut off at diameters of ~200 km. For the two relatively
young systems, the TL-based model-derived CSFDs of the
Eratosthenian System and the Copernican System are systematically higher than those of the recognized ones when the
diameters of craters are relatively small (D ≤30 km). Then, the
newly dated CSFD curve follows the same size distribution as the
recognized craters.
Two typical regions, i.e., nearside mare10 and the northwest of
the farside highlands39, were selected for analyzing the superimposed crater populations associated with the ﬁve systems
(Fig. 7c, d). Widespread basin resurfacing and basaltic ﬂooding
reset the vast majority of the nearside mare. The Imbrium basin
formed at ~3.91 Ga40 and provides an upper limit for the
emplacement of basalts in this basin. This area has the lowest
density of craters across the entire diameter range in existing
manual databases9–11. In contrast, the northwestern farside
highland region is one of the most heavily cratered terrains of
the Moon for craters with diameters of both >20 (ref. 9) and
5–20 km10. Meanwhile, this area is far from large impact basins
(e.g., the South Pole-Aitken basin) and is unaffected by >5 km
secondaries39. The “Relative” plots (R plots) in Fig. 7c, d show a
distinct difference between the shapes of the CSFDs of the ancient
highlands and the young mare crater population. The farside
highlands have a high density of large craters with D ≈50–100 km
in the pre-Nectarian System and the Nectarian System and of
small craters with D ≈15–20 km in the Copernican System. The
density of the Imbrian System is intermediate, with craters
with D ≈8–50 km. A low density of craters associated with
the Eratosthenian System (D ≈8–20 km) is observed. For the
nearside mare, the R plots show a separable distinction between
1 - Pre-Nectarian System 2 - Nectarian System 3 - Imbrian System 4 - Eratosthenian System 5 - Copernican System
Assigned Systems
Assigned Systems
Esmated Systems
Esmated Systems
Fig. 6 Confusion matrix of the age estimation algorithm with Chang’E-1 (CE-1) data and Chang’E-2 (CE-2) data. Confusion matrices for the crater age
classiﬁcation task of CE-1 and CE-2 data reveal acceptable misclassiﬁcation of different systems. Element (i, j) of each confusion matrix represents the
probability of estimating system j given that the true system is i, with i and j referring to different systems. The diagonal of the matrix represents the
probability of corrected classiﬁcation for each system. Note that with both CE-1 and CE-2 images, there is some confusion between adjacent systems. For
the ﬁrst stage of classiﬁcation with CE-1 images, compared with other systems, the pre-Nectarian System and the Copernican System have a very high
accuracy (100%). Some of the craters of the Imbrian System are confused with those of the Eratosthenian System. For the second stage with the CE-2
image, only two craters of the pre-Nectarian System are used for testing owing to the resolution and confusion with those of the Nectarian System. The
diameters of craters in the Eratosthenian System and the Copernican System are relatively small, and craters of the Copernican System sometimes do not
feature bright rays in the DOM data. However, the overall classiﬁcation results are accurate and reliable for supporting scientiﬁc analysis and
interpretation. Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
the pre-Nectarian System and the Eratosthenian System. This
area has a much higher crater density separable distinction
between the pre-Nectarian System and the Eratosthenian System.
This area has a much higher crater density of small craters with
D ≈10–20 km in the Eratosthenian System, whereas it shows the
lowest density of large craters with D ≈100–200 km in the pre-
Nectarian System. The Nectarian System and the Imbrian System
have similar crater frequencies. However, their R curves are
different in terms of the crater diameter range. This result
indicates that the populations of craters in the pre-Nectarian
System, the Nectarian System and the Imbrian System were
signiﬁcantly affected by the resurfacing events. The low density of
the Copernican System is reﬂected in craters with D ≈8–20 km.
In general, the density of large craters (D ≈60–100 km) is much
higher than that of small craters (D ≈10–20 km) in the farside
highlands than in the nearside mare. This is consistent with a
less-steep production function for this size range9.
The spatial distribution of all the dated craters (D ≥8 km) in
the study area is shown in Fig. 1b. The spatial distribution varies
greatly for the ﬁve different systems. Craters of the pre-Nectarian
System are widely distributed in the south and north and on the
back of the Moon in the mid- and low-latitude regions. The
craters in the Nectarian System are located on a larger area of the
Moon except for lunar mare. Meanwhile, data from lunar samples
(Apollo, Luna and lunar meteorites) indicate that the Moon was
subjected to an intense period of bombardment, i.e., the Late
Heavy Bombardment (LHB), at approximately 3.8–4.0 Ga41,42.
Craters of the Imbrian System are mainly distributed on
the front of the Moon and around lunar mare, mostly above the
ejecta of mare and ﬁlled with mare basalts. This may be due to the
hypothesis that many large-scale basaltic eruptions occurred after
formation of the lunar mare (known as lunar mare ﬂooding),
which occurred between ~3 and 3.5 Ga43. The craters that formed
during the Eratosthenian System are mainly distributed in the
medium and high TiO2 (ref. 44) and FeO45 basalt regions of the
Mare Imbrium. From the chemical compositions of rocks and
surface ages of mare basaltic units in Mare Imbrium estimated
with CE-1 and Clementine ultraviolet to visible spectrum
Fig. 7 Dated lunar crater size-frequency distributions. a Number of estimated craters and related assigned ages from the Lunar and Planetary Institute
(LPI) with ﬁve ages in different diameter scales. Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle. b The cumulative size-frequency distributions (CSFDs) of
identiﬁed craters with estimated ages and recognized craters with ages. Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle. The red, brown, yellow, green and
blue lines represent the estimated crater CSFDs of the pre-Nectarian System, the Nectarian System, the Imbrian System, the Eratosthenian System and the
Copernican System, respectively, and the hollow lines show recognized crater CSFDs of the ﬁve systems in the LPI used for age estimation. The conﬁdence
interval ±σ, which for the kth crater is log
, where A is the surface area, kth crater means that the kth-largest crater at the level of diameter.
Source data are provided as a source data ﬁle. c, d R plots (areal density) of dated craters superimposed on lunar nearside mare and farside highland areas,
illustrating the difference in density and CSFD slope of the ﬁve systems on the two terrains. The conﬁdence interval ±σ is log R ± R=
, where R is the R
value, N is the cumulative number of craters. Source data for c, d are provided as a source data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
(UVVIS) data, the evolution of the basalts is from low-titanium
and low-iron compositions to high-titanium and high-iron
compositions from the Imbrian System to the Eratosthenian
System46. The impact in the Eratosthenian System may have
been the external cause of the multistage volcanic eruption in
the Imbrium basin. The results show that craters formed in the
Copernican System are scattered all over the lunar surface in the
study area. Recent research47 has pointed out that sporadic
meteoroid bombardment occurred across the whole Moon at
Analysis of consistency with existing lunar age chronology. The
estimated ages for craters in this work are based on morphologic
and stratigraphic information. Therefore, we compared dated
craters with related literature using OMAT data27, CSFDs30 and
thermophysical characteristics of lunar impact ejecta31 described
in the Introduction section.
Table 3 summarizes the comparison of relative crater ages
derived from the OMAT data27 and the assigned formation
system ages based on the best classiﬁcation model. The categories
are listed on the basis of the shape of the OMAT proﬁles of crater
Table 3 Comparison of crater relative ages derived from the optical maturity parameter (OMAT).
The compared craters are identiﬁed and recognized craters without assigned formation systems based on the best classiﬁcation model. The position and diameters of crater centres were measured from
the CE data.
aStratigraphic epoch estimated in USGS Lunar Geologic Map Renovation .
bOld represents the craters older than Copernicus (inferred age of ∼810 Myr), and Young is as young or younger than Tycho (inferred age of ∼109 Myr), and Intermediate is between Old and Young in
which Copernicus and Tycho are the oldest and youngest end-members, respectively.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
ejecta in which three relative age groups were classiﬁed, i.e., older
than Copernicus (~810 Myr), intermediate and as young or
younger than Tycho (~109 Myr). The estimated ages of craters
are ﬁtted well by the OMAT. We observe only one crater, i.e.,
Stefan L (marked with “+” in Table 3), with an estimated age that
is not consistent with the category derived from OMAT. From
Table 3, one can see that the Stefan L crater has a low ray
brightness
Additionally,
stratigraphic information estimated in the USGS maps is the
Eratosthenian.
The craters in the test set of the classiﬁcation model were
selected for comparison of the absolute age by using CSFDs
(Table 4). The previously assessed formation epochs obtained
from the USGS Geologic Atlas of the Moon, the ages aggregated
by the LPI, the absolute ages computed by CSFDs and the
estimated age using the proposed TL-based classiﬁcation model
are given in the 4–7th columns. Table 4 is organized from old to
young relative to the formation system (column 7). In total, the
ages of 50% of the craters are estimated by the LPI and our
method to be older than those in the USGS maps. The estimated
ages of these craters are generally in the CSFD age range within
error. We observe two craters, i.e., Langmuir and Vavilov
(marked with “+” in Table 4), for which there are differences
between the CSFDs and this work. From Table 4, one can see that
the Langmuir crater features some small superimposed craters,
and the rim and terrace sharpness show irregular degradation.
The CSFD age of Langmuir may be affected by resurfacing; thus,
it is uncertain30. Vavilov shows clear geomorphic features with
only a minimum of subsequent impact erosion but features weak
rays, which may cause confusion with respect to the formation
Table 5 reports the comparison between craters with absolute
ages by analysis of thermophysical characteristics of lunar impact
ejecta31 and those with estimated ages obtained by the best
classiﬁcation model. The absolute ages of all determined craters
are located in the Copernican. A majority of compared craters
(81%) that do not have any age information are also assigned to
the Copernican. We observe 14 craters (marked with “+” in
Table 5) with estimated ages that are not consistent with the
absolute age. To obtain representative craters, four inconsistent
craters, i.e., Euclides C, Sirsalis F, 16 and 31, and four consistent
craters, i.e., Larmor Q, Cauchy, 15 and 22, were selected for
comparison. The Euclides C and Sirsalis F craters are located in
and around the lunar mare and show weak rays. Crater 16
features three small superimposed craters and a polygonal shape.
In the bottom of crater 31, a sloping channel is observed on the
crater wall. The comprehensive features extracted from the
morphology and the stratigraphic information determined that
these craters are hard to classify as Copernican. In contrast,
Larmor Q, crater 15 and crater 22 are located in the highlands
and have relatively intense rays that help decision-making. The
rays of the Cauchy crater seem not evident for distribution in
comprehensive
Copernican.
Table 4 Comparison with the crater age by the crater size–frequency distributions (CSFDs).
The compared craters are recognized ones in the test set of the classiﬁcation model. The position and diameters of crater centres were measured from the CE data.
aStratigraphic epoch estimated in USGS Lunar Geologic Map Renovation .
bIn Ga with 1r error.
cThe classiﬁcation model in ﬁve trials.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Discussion
Through the proposed two-stage detection and classiﬁcation
approaches, an enormous number of craters were identiﬁed, and
starting from the limited number of recognized craters, their ages
were estimated. There are many reasons to argue that the TLbased strategy with a deep neural network has properly learned
the complex features that deﬁne a crater and its age. For identiﬁed
craters, despite the large variations in size and shape across the
lunar surface, our approach was able to recover 94.71 and 93.35%
of craters already known and that were not used to train our
model previously. Moreover, it detected a number of new craters
dozens of times larger than the number of recognized craters
throughout the mid- and low-latitude regions of the Moon.
Meanwhile, most of the craters known in the existing manual
database and automated catalogues were also accurately detected
by the proposed approach. The newly identiﬁed craters were
attained with low FPR, i.e., 4.49 ± 0.7% and 4.67 ± 2.1% for small
and large sizes, respectively, which demonstrates that our
approach can be used to produce high-precision lunar crater
catalogues. Regarding the ages of craters, 88.97 and 89.04% of the
estimated craters were assigned to their corresponding formation
systems with CE-1 and CE-2 data, respectively, by learning the
Table 5 Comparison of crater ages by analysis of thermophysical characteristics of lunar impact ejecta.
The compared craters are identiﬁed and recognized ones without assigned formation systems based on the best classiﬁcation model. The position and diameters of crater centres were measured from
the CE data.
aAges in Myr estimated by analysis of thermophysical characteristics of lunar impact ejecta.
bNo name craters with assigned number.
cStratigraphic epoch estimated in USGS Lunar Geologic Map Renovation .
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
morphological features and stratigraphic information. From
comparisons with existing lunar age chronologies, most craters
have been shown to have good consistency in terms of both
relative age and absolute age.
As mentioned in the multiscale crater identiﬁcation section,
missed craters can be avoided to a certain extent by using two
types of Chang’E data with different scales and overlapping
images. From the detection results, large craters (D ≥50 km)
exhibited good agreement with existing crater databases and
catalogues. Furthermore, some faint and heavily degraded craters,
which are often hard to detect with automated methods, appear
in our database. However, the identiﬁcation is obviously incomplete, as many medium and small craters (D < 50 km) are missing
from our database compared with the Robbins11 database. This
depends on three main reasons. First, the size of small craters in
the feature map of the last convolutional layer is too small for
accurate detection. Thus, the two spatial resolutions of the data,
i.e., CE-1 120 and CE-2 50 m, are not enough to deal with the vast
presence of craters. In further research, we plan to transfer the
detection approach to the CE-2 global lunar terrain product with
20 and 7 m spatial resolutions for identifying smaller craters and
to build a more complete lunar crater database. Moreover, our
model was able to understand the training objective and correlate
the binary ring targets with the true rims of the craters with a
limited amount of training data. However, the distribution of
recognized craters used is incomplete, thus affecting the complete
learning of crater features.
The age of craters, i.e., the formation system estimated in our
database, is comprehensively estimated by considering morphological
stratigraphic
information.
approach works on windows of pixels. It does not recognize the
actual size of craters from the image. Thus, the morphological
features were extracted from DOM images of Chang’E data and
the calculated morphological data of craters. The stratigraphic
features were mapped to corresponding craters. Then, integrated
features were learned to contribute to the estimation of craters by
a dual-channel crater classiﬁcation model. The need for integrated feature learning was tested by an ablation study48, which
refers to removing some features of the model and analyzing
performance. We applied the classiﬁcation model with only
stratigraphic features by removing the morphological data and
obtained an OA of 72.21 ± 3.79% and the best OA of 75.74% on
the CE-1 test set of the dated craters. Then, this model was
transferred to CE-2, resulting in a 77.09% OA. Compared with
the proposed classiﬁcation model with both morphology and
stratigraphic information, the OAs of integrated features are
13.24 ± 2.67% and 11.95% higher than those obtained with only
stratigraphic features. These results highlight the robustness and
ﬂexibility of crater classiﬁcation solutions. However, it is worth
noting that due to the difference and incompleteness of dated
craters from the LPI with stratigraphic information, some limitations exist in the crater age estimation. For example, the crater
density in the Eratosthenian System may be underestimated
because of the availability of dated samples. More precise stratigraphic data should be determined in future research to guarantee
the universality of this method.
In conclusion, a new lunar crater database of 117,240 craters of
D ≥1 km (the highest quantity with a low FPR among existing
automated catalogues) and 18,996 craters of D ≥8 km with ages
(13 times higher than that in existing dated crater datasets)
throughout the mid- and low-latitude regions of the Moon has
been derived and made available. Additionally, the adopted
progressive TL strategy can be applied to assist human crater
studies, in particular generating reliable suggestions when facing
limited samples in planetary research. This progressive TL
strategy implemented in deep architecture is similar to a
supervisor passing his/her knowledge (feature representation)
and experience (detection and classiﬁcation capability) from one
generation to another. The complex features can be learned
identically for every crater to ensure consistency of decisions. The
student-like learned model (e.g., the two-stage crater detection
approach) can be adapted to other Solar System bodies, e.g., Mars,
Mercury, Venus, Vesta and Ceres, to extract much more semantic
information than the usual manually analysis method. This prediction will generally take minutes followed by a few hours of
post-processing on standard computation hardware.
Datasets. The data used in this paper come from the CE-1 and CE-2 orbiters of
the CLEP, the IAU, the LPI and the USGS. The DOM and DEM data from the
CCD stereo cameras aboard CE-1 and CE-2. The 120 and 50 m/pixel images and
DEM data were produced by the CE-132 and CE-233 CCD stereo cameras at orbital
altitudes of 200 and 100 km, respectively. The recognized lunar craters come from
the IAU16. The crater dataset was downloaded on June 17, 2018, and contains 9137
craters. The craters with constrained ages are derived from the LPI document
 
craters span ﬁve lunar geologic periods, i.e., the pre-Nectarian System, the Nectarian System, the Imbrian System (the Lower Imbrian Series and the Upper
Imbrian Series), the Eratosthenian System and the Copernican System. The lunar
geological map is derived from 1:5,000,000 Lunar Geologic Renovation produced by the U.S. Geological Survey ( 
search/map/Moon/Geology/Lunar_Geologic_GIS_Renovation_March2013).
Problem extension. Impact craters, as the most dominant lunar surface features,
can usually be identiﬁed according to their near-circular depression structure, and
their ages are further estimated from morphological markers and stratigraphic
control19. To identify craters and estimate their ages automatically, we convert the
identiﬁcation of craters into a target detection task and the age estimation of craters
into a taxonomy structure.
Data consolidation. The study area ranges from −65° to 65° in latitude and from
−180° to 65°, and 65° to 180° in longitude on the Moon. The DOM data and DEM
data are projected by Mercator at 33°. For the crater detection task, the DEM data
of CE-1 and CE-2 were resampled to 120 and 50 m/pixel. The slope information
and the proﬁle curvature were extracted from the DEM data. DOM data and DEM
data were fused. To train the crater detection model, the craters in the study area
were marked based on the lunar dataset published by IAU16. At the same time, the
CE-1 data were cut into 5000 × 5000 pixel and 1000 × 1000 pixel images (two
different projection coordinates), and CE-2 data were cut into 1000 × 1000 pixel
images to detect multiscale craters in the whole study area. To avoid incomplete
craters caused by clipping, the adjacent images have a 50% overlap rate.
For classiﬁcation of craters, we extracted the recognized and identiﬁed craters with
CE-1 and CE-2 DOM data. Forty morphological information of the craters (e.g.,
diameter (km), rim to ﬂoor depth (km) and interior volume (km3)) were calculated
with Chang’E data with reference to the lunar impact crater database published by the
LPI17, and 38 stratigraphic attributes of craters were extracted from the 1:5,000,000
Lunar Geologic Renovation produced by the U.S. Geological Survey.
Finally, 78 attributes of craters were constructed by integrating the morphological
features with the corresponding stratigraphic attributes. In the experiments, the craters
images with all these attributes are used as the input in deep neural network which can
automatically discover the representations needed for classiﬁcation of craters37. Note
that the 40 morphological information are the generic morphological parameters of
craters, and the 38 stratigraphic attributes are related to the crater materials of the ﬁve
systems, which are listed in the table of attribute data. Information on these attributes
can be found at 
together with the documentation of each attribute.
Sample selection. For crater detection, combined with the catalogue data published by IAU16, the CE-1 and CE-2 data yield 7895 and 6511 recognized craters in
the study area, respectively. In the detection model, the recognized craters of CE-1
are divided into training and tests set at a ratio of 9:1. During the training process,
20% of the training set is used for validation. All the recognized craters in the CE-2
data are used as the test set.
For estimating crater ages, ﬁve classes corresponding to ﬁve lunar geologic
periods, i.e., the pre-Nectarian System, the Nectarian System, the Imbrian System,
the Eratosthenian System and the Copernican System, are considered. A total of
1491 craters with constrained ages in the study area were selected based on the
lunar crater database published by the LPI17. On the basis of spatial resolution, the
CE-1 and CE-2 images contain 1411 and 502 craters with different ages,
respectively. To estimate the performance of the classiﬁcation model and monitor
the training process, these craters in the CE-1 data were divided into training,
validation and test sets at a proportion of 8:1:1 according to the principle of
stratiﬁed sampling. All the craters in the CE-2 data are used for testing.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 11:6358 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Crater identiﬁcation algorithm. For multiscale crater identiﬁcation, a two-stage
crater detection approach based on TL is designed. The region-based fully convolutional network (R-FCN)49 is selected as the detection model. First, Resnet101 (ref. 50)
is used as the basic network of the R-FCN detection model to extract features from
CE-1 data. The model is initialized with pre-trained parameters on ImageNet51. Then,
all the parameters of the network are ﬁne-tuned by back propagation using the
training craters of CE-1. This is the ﬁrst-stage TL. The initial learning rate is 0.001.
The total number of iterations is set to 100,000, and the learning rate is reduced to
0.0001 when the training iterations reach 80,000. We use the mini-batch stochastic
gradient descent optimization method to learn the parameters, in which the batch size
is set to 128, the momentum is 0.9, and the weight decay coefﬁcient is 0.0005. The
Caffe52 DL framework is used to train, validate and test the whole detection network.
Then, the ﬁrst-stage crater detection model is obtained for identifying large-scale
craters. For the 5000 × 5000 pixel and 1000 × 1000 pixel images, we use the same
parameter setting. To identify small-scale craters, we carried out the second stage of
the detection approach, i.e., the ﬁrst-stage crater detection model, which is ﬁne-tuned
on CE-1 data, is directly transferred to CE-2 data without any training. The two-stage
crater detection approach is implemented with a PC workstation (Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-5930K CPU at 3.50 GHz with 128 GB of RAM and NVIDIA GeForce GTX TITAN
X Graphics Processing Unit).
Identiﬁed accuracy metrics. To evaluate our crater identiﬁcation algorithm, recall
(R) is used to measure the performance of detection and can be calculated as
where Tp is true positives and Fn is false negatives.
In the calculation process, we deﬁne detected craters as those that have
intersection over union (IoU) overlap with a ground-truth box of at least 0.5;
otherwise, they are considered undetected.
Age estimation algorithm. Considering the small number of available craters with
a constrained age, a two-stage crater classiﬁcation approach based on TL is proposed. For two types of lunar data, i.e., DOM and attribute data, a dual-channel
crater classiﬁcation model is constructed. One of the channels utilizes a classical
deep CNN to extract information from the image features of craters. The other uses
a feedforward neural network to assess the morphological and stratigraphic features of craters of different ages. Finally, the two types of features obtained from the
two channels are merged for classiﬁcation. A large number of newly identiﬁed
craters are used as unlabelled data. A semi-supervised learning strategy (i.e.,
Meanteacher53) is adopted to prevent overﬁtting37 of the classiﬁcation model. To
ensure the quality of the unlabelled data, we select identiﬁed craters with a con-
ﬁdence level of 0.99 as the input data. In the ﬁrst stage of the classiﬁcation
approach, the network is initialized by pre-trained parameters on ImageNet51.
Then, the CE-1 dated craters and the identiﬁed craters are fed into the classiﬁcation
model to ﬁne-tune all the parameters. In this model, the image size is set to 256 ×
256 pixels (i.e., the craters DOM are resampled for network size). In the training
process of the ﬁrst-stage model, all parameters are ﬁne-tuned by back propagation
and trained by the Adam54 optimizer; the learning rate is 0.0003, the total number
of epochs is set to 10, the batch size is set to 32 and the weight attenuation
coefﬁcient is 0.0001. The PyTorch DL framework ( is used to
train, validate and test the classiﬁcation network. In the second stage of the classiﬁcation approach, the model trained by CE-1 data is directly transferred to CE-2
without training and learning. To improve the classiﬁcation performance of craters,
12 deep CNN models were utilized to extract crater features, i.e., Resnet50 (ref. 50),
Resnet101(ref. 50), Resnet152 (ref. 50), Senet55, se_Resnet50 (ref. 55), se_Resnet101
(ref. 55), se_Resnet152 (ref. 55), se_Resnext101 (ref. 55), Polynet56, Inceptionv3
(ref. 57), DPN68b58 and Densenet201 (ref. 59). Thus, we obtain 12 age classiﬁcation
results for the craters. For the CE-1 and CE-2 data, the ensemble strategy is based
on a genetic algorithm for weighting the 12 age classiﬁcation results. The age that
receives the highest weighted sum is selected as the ﬁnal age of the crater.
Evaluation of crater age classiﬁcation. In the age estimation algorithm, the OA is
used to analyse the crater classiﬁcation results, and the confusion matrix is given to
show the classiﬁcation situation of craters with different ages in an overall way. The
OA is deﬁned as:
where N is the total number of craters, C represents the number of categories, and
xii is the number of correctly classiﬁed craters of the ith class.
Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis. The lunar impact crater age estimation
experiments were repeated ﬁve times independently. In each trial, 10% craters with
constrained ages were independently selected by stratiﬁed sampling as the test set.
The OA represents the mean ± s.d.
Data availability
The lunar craters datasets of recognized craters and craters with ages are available from
the IAU ( and the LPI (https://
www.lpi.usra.edu/lunar/surface/), respectively. The Chang’E data used in the experiment
are available from the Data Publishing and Information Service System of the CLEP
( The databases of identiﬁed and dated craters are available in
ﬁgshare with the identiﬁer [ The
experimental data (including the catalogues of craters and attribute data used to train,
validate and test the TL-based strategy) are available at 
DeepCraters. Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
The models of crater identiﬁcation and age estimation are publicly available at https://
github.com/hszhaohs/DeepCraters.
Received: 22 November 2019; Accepted: 11 November 2020;