ORBIT: A Multiresolution Framework for Deformable
Registration of Brain Tumor Images
Evangelia I. Zacharaki,
Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania,
3600 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Dinggang Shen [Senior Member, IEEE],
Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Seung-Koo Lee, and
Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Christos Davatzikos [Senior Member, IEEE]
Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Evangelia I. Zacharaki: ; Dinggang Shen: ; Seung-Koo
Lee: ; Christos Davatzikos: 
A deformable registration method is proposed for registering a normal brain atlas with images of
brain tumor patients. The registration is facilitated by first simulating the tumor mass effect in the
normal atlas in order to create an atlas image that is as similar as possible to the patient’s image.
An optimization framework is used to optimize the location of tumor seed as well as other
parameters of the tumor growth model, based on the pattern of deformation around the tumor
region. In particular, the optimization is implemented in a multiresolution and hierarchical
scheme, and it is accelerated by using a principal component analysis (PCA)-based model of
tumor growth and mass effect, trained on a computationally more expensive biomechanical model.
Validation on simulated and real images shows that the proposed registration framework, referred
to as ORBIT (optimization of tumor parameters and registration of brain images with tumors),
outperforms other available registration methods particularly for the regions close to the tumor,
and it has the potential to assist in constructing statistical atlases from tumor-diseased brain
Index Terms
Atlas registration; brain tumor; deformable registration; image attributes; tumor growth model
I. INTRODUCTION
Statistical atlases have been used in a variety of studies of normal brain development and
aging, as well as of brain diseases – , but they have rarely been used in studies of brain
cancer. Building statistical models of brain tumor evolution could help gain insight into the
© 2008 IEEE
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2008 August ; 27(8): 1003–1017. doi:10.1109/TMI.2008.916954.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
brain tumor disease. For example, population-based statistical atlases can potentially
indicate whether a multiparametric imaging, or proximity to certain fiber tracts, profile
suggests higher likelihood of tumor progression in a particular direction. Moreover,
augmenting these models with tumor size and location relative to brain structures, could
further improve predictive accuracy. The construction of such statistical models requires the
integration of a variety of patient data, such as conventional magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), perfusion, and diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI) of a large number of patients, into the
same space and also requires the linking of all these data to outcome measures. For this
purpose, a registration method is needed that can map all the imaging data to a common
space (normal atlas). While the problem of coregistering brain images of healthy subjects
has been addressed by many approaches in the literature, the normalization of tumor
diseased images into a common template space, is still a very challenging problem that has
motivated our work.
Besides their potential value in predicting tumor progression, anatomical and functional
statistical atlases or models are also useful in neurosurgical treatment planning, since they
can integrate diverse information about anatomical and functional variability, thereby
helping design treatment plans that minimize the risk for significant functional impairment
of the patient or facilitate safe dose escalation. Here again, a method that can register a
statistical atlas (image without disease) to the patient-specific brain tumor image is required.
Most of the available registration methods in neuroimaging – are designed to register
a normal atlas with generally normal neuroanatomies. Direct application of these methods to
images of tumor patients can lead to poor registration around the tumor region, due to large
deformations and lack of clear definition of anatomical detail in a patient’s images.
Specifically, in the images with tumor, the fundamental assumption of topological
equivalence between the atlas and the patient’s image, which is almost ubiquitous in
deformable registration methods, is violated due to the anatomical changes caused by tissue
death and tumor emergence. Moreover, the confounding effects of edema and tumor
infiltration, which cause changes in the image intensities, render the task of finding
correspondences very difficult. Finally, the large distortions caused by the mass effect of a
growing tumor violate the usual assumption of smoothness of the deformation fields.
The framework proposed herein aims to facilitate the registration process by creating an
atlas image that is as similar as possible to the patient’s image, in the sense that it contains a
tumor and mass effect similar to those in the patient’s image. Specifically, it is based on the
idea of first creating a topologically equivalent atlas image by replacing part of the healthy
tissue with a tumor seed and then decoupling the total deformation (between atlas and
patient’s image) into two components, i.e., the deformation caused by the tumor mass effect
and the deformation due to the intersubject differences. The tumor-induced deformation can
be calculated by a biomechanical model of soft tissue deformation , , whereas the
inter-subject deformation can be calculated by a deformable registration method. In other
words, the tumor modeling component aims to resolve both the geometric discrepancies
from the physiologic process of tumor growth and the image differences from the tumor
emergence. The registration component is then based on the assumption that 1) there is
equivalent image content between the atlas with simulated tumor and the patient’s image,
and 2) the deformation between the tumor-bearing images is smooth, similar to normal
image registration.
Similar approaches of brain tumor image registration have already been investigated –
 . Some of these methods use a normal-to-normal brain matching method after shrinking
the tumor in the patient’s images . Some apply first an affine transformation between the
normal atlas and the patient’s image and subsequently either use a rich tumor simulation
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
model of mass-effect and invasion without further accounting for the intersubject differences
 , or use a simplified radial growth model refined by a nonrigid deformation based
on optical flow , . Other methods just combine the Talairach transformation with the
simple radial expansion model in order to speed up the algorithm, or do not deal with
tumor growth and mass effect at all, but manually place a mask on and around the tumor, in
order to ignore those regions during the image matching process since they are regarded as
unreliable . These approaches are based on oversimplified assumptions, because 1)
tumor growth cannot be simply modeled as a radial expansion process, 2) the tumor seed
cannot be simply estimated by calculating the mass center of tumor or shrinking the tumor,
and 3) the morphological variability across individuals can not be captured by an affine
transformation. The study presented in this paper, addresses all of these three issues, but
gives special emphasis to the last two, since the first issue has been addressed in previous
work – , .
An earlier approach of our group for registering brain tumor images to a normal atlas, which
avoids the previous simplifications, has been presented in . We proposed a maximum
likelihood framework for estimating the tumor model parameters by collecting statistics
obtained from mass effect simulations. Although this method reported promising results for
small quasi spherical tumors, more experiments on different kind of tumors revealed some
limitations, which motivated us to examine alternative methodologies. First, this method
applied normal-to-normal registration, as part of both the model parameters estimation and
the final warping of the tumor-bearing images, whereas the new approach uses a registration
method developed for brain images under the presence of tumors (in corresponding or close
locations to each other). Also, the method in was a statistical approach; it did not apply
optimization and therefore did not provide any measure of confidence on the final solution
(optimality criterion). Additionally, the method in retrieved the tumor model parameters
based only on the tumor-induced deformation. Especially under the assumption of the brain
being a homogenous material, that is, having the same material properties for white and gray
matter, local information is lost. In the current method, additionally to the information from
the tumor-induced deformation fields, we incorporate local information from the image
content, thus increasing the sensitivity of the optimization procedure. Finally, perhaps most
importantly, the statistically-based method of required a very large number of
simulations of tumor growth, in order for shape statistics to be gathered. This renders this
approach quite limiting in many practical situations.
Built upon the idea of HAMMER registration algorithm developed for normal brain
registration , in this paper we present a framework for optimization (of tumor model
parameters) and registration of brain images with tumors, that we shall from here on refer to
as ORBIT. The main advantages of the ORBIT algorithm are 1) the incorporation of a
similarity criterion that uses two kinds of information, namely tissue properties and spatial
location relative to tumor, and 2) the development of a deformation strategy that is robust to
unreliable matches caused by the presence of tumor. Moreover, one of the novelties of the
proposed framework is the estimation of the optimal tumor-related parameters (including the
origin of the tumor and the amount of tissue death), via optimization of a criterion reflecting
the elastic stretching energy and the image similarity. Robustness is achieved by applying
the optimization in a multiresolution scheme. Also, efficiency is achieved by replacing the
expensive nonlinear biomechanical model with a principal component analysis (PCA)-based
model of tumor growth, as well as by refining the warping throughout the optimization only
in the regions of low confidence.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the basic
components of ORBIT, i.e., the PCA-based model for simulating tumor mass effect, the
registration method for tumor-bearing images, and the criterion for optimizing tumor
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
parameters. The implementation details of these methods in a multi-resolution framework
are introduced in Section III. In Section IV, we show the efficacy of this framework on both
synthetic and clinical cases, i.e., by providing the sensitivity of registration to the tumor
parameter estimation. The paper concludes in Section V.
II. METHODS
The basic components of ORBIT include: 1) a simulation model for tumor growth and mass
effect, 2) a deformable registration method for tumor-bearing images, and 3)an optimization
method for estimating the parameters of the tumor growth and mass effect model. Fig. 1
summarizes a closed-loop process for registering a normal brain atlas to a tumor-bearing
image, using all three components. The illustrated mapping is useful for transferring
information from the atlas to the patient’s space. The normalization of the patient’s image
into a common (normal) atlas space can be performed by the reverse mapping.
A. Local PCA-Based Model for Simulating Tumor Mass Effect
The simulation of tumor mass effect is based on the application of a statistical model that
describes the variation in deformability of the atlas brain due to different tumor model
parameters. One way of modeling tumor growth and mass effect is via biomechanical
simulators. Two examples of such simulators are based on 1) finite element models of
nonlinear elasticity , and 2) incremental linear elasticity models on regular grids
 . However, incorporating such biomechanical models (especially the first one) into an
iterative registration procedure could be computationally prohibitive. In this paper, we have
circumvented this limitation by using the mass effect model of , to train a PCAbased mass effect model and then using it in the registration framework. It is worth noting
that the PCA-based tumor growth and mass effect simulation is extremely fast, since it can
be achieved via linear combination of a relatively small number of principal components
(deformations), thereby leaving the burden of simulation to offline training using the costly
biomechanical model. As a note, any biomechanical simulator could be used for training
purposes, subject always to the requirements of each application. As our experiments will
show, this approach leads to very efficient approximation of the types of deformations
caused by tumor growth, especially in view of the very approximating nature of any such
modeling method.
The use of a statistical model for simulating the tumor mass effect involves the following
steps. First, the parameters that are necessary for the simulation of tumor-induced
deformation are defined. Then, the training step is presented. Finally, the interpolation step,
on how to produce an estimator with continuous values of the model parameters, is given.
1) Definition of Tumor Model Parameters—The applied biomechanical model
simulates the displacement of structures caused by the tumor mass effect and edema
swelling, as well as tissue death in a somewhat simplistic way, since our goal here is merely
to construct an atlas that looks similar to the patient’s images and to facilitate subsequent
deformable registration. The tumor mass effect is simulated by replacing part of the brain
tissue with a small tumor seed and applying a pressure normal to the seed’s boundary. In the
current approach, the initial tumor seed is created by approximately warping the tumor from
the patient’s to the atlas space and then applying multiple erosions. This provides an initial
estimate of the tumor location, but since the initial warping of the patient’s image to the
normal atlas is not very accurate, the exact seed location,
defined by the
center of mass of the tumor, is part of the tumor model parameters to be estimated. The
amount of shrinkage determines the initial size of the seed, rt, and it is also one of the tumor
model parameters.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2) Training—Consider the discrete displacement maps ui(x), i = 1,…,N, at the 3-D
Cartesian coordinates x = (x(1), x(2),x(3)) due to the tumor mass effect, simulated by a
biomechanical model with parameters θi = (xti,rti), i = 1,…,N in the atlas image. The
displacement maps are first defined in a coordinate system x′, centered at each tumor center,
in order to make the domain of all the maps the same and allow point-to-point comparison
and collection of statistics. Moreover, the domain is restricted inside a region around each
tumor center, where nonzero displacement due to mass effect is expected.
Under the assumption of a Gaussian distribution, each ui(x′) can be represented as
where μ the mean of the displacement at each voxel location, V the matrix containing the
eigenvectors of the covariance matrix that correspond to the M largest eigenvalues, and
the corresponding coefficients vector.
3) Interpolating—Provided that the statistical parameters μ and V have been determined
from the training set,1 the displacement map û(x′) can be calculated for any new tumor
parameters θ = (xt, rt) as û = µ + Vẑ, if ẑ is known. Since it is reasonable to assume that the
coefficients change smoothly for small variations of θ, we approximate each coefficient ẑ(j)
in the coefficients vector ẑ = [ẑ(1),…,ẑ(M)]T by interpolating between the corresponding
coefficients
of the training samples in θ-space, in order to produce an estimator with
continuous values of the model parameters. For this purpose, two scattered interpolation
methods were implemented and compared. The method with the smallest reconstruction
error is chosen, as described in Appendix I. Finally, the tumor-induced deformation map is
calculated by re-centering the displacements at the original coordinate system, û(x) = û(x′ +
Fig. 2 shows an example of an image with simulated tumor using the biomechanical model
and the proposed PCA-based model, respectively. The two simulation results are very
similar and thereby indicate that, from the registration perspective, the substitution of the
computationally expensive biomechanical model is justified.
B. Deformable Registration Method
The elastic deformation field is calculated according to the hierarchical approximation of an
energy function, which consists of the similarity matching criterion defined in the template
space, a constraint on the inverse matching, and smoothness constraints on the displacement
field, following the general framework of the HAMMER algorithm . Critical parts of
our formulation of the registration of tumor-bearing images are 1) the definition of the
similarity criterion, 2) the deformation mechanism, and 3) the mechanism for improving the
robustness of the method to slightly inaccurate estimates of the tumor simulation parameters.
1) Similarity Criterio—The similarity criterion is designed based on the similarity of
attribute vectors, which are defined for each voxel in the image in order to capture the
anatomical context (including healthy and malignant tissue) around it. Specifically, the
attribute vector, a(x) = [a1(x) a2(x) a3(x) a4(x) a5(x)], reflects edge type (a1), tissue type (a2),
and geometric moment invariants
from all tissue types, respectively.
1Details about the model parameters selection for creating sample deformations for training the local PCA-based model of tumor
growth, can be found in Appendix I.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
a1 and a2 are scalars taking discrete labels, whereas a3 is a 1 × K vector comprising the
geometric moment invariants of each tissue and is used to capture shape information, as
described more analytically in . In this application, only zero-order regular moments are
used. The number of tissue types depends on the segmentation method applied to labeling
brain tissue. Besides the attributes that capture brain structure information, the attribute
vector captures also the geometric location relative to the brain tumor. Specifically, a4 is
used to reflect the signed distance from the tumor boundary, and a5 to reflect the angular
location with respect to the tumor center.
The elastic deformation field that spatially warps the template to the patient’s image is
calculated by maximizing a similarity criterion reflecting the distance of attributes, as will
be defined in the following. Fig. 3 demonstrates how such a similarity criterion can
distinguish between different parts of a tumor-bearing brain image, which might otherwise
be indistinguishable.
The similarity of two voxels x and y is defined as the weighted summation of a similarity
criterion matching the brain structures, SimB, and a similarity criterion matching the tumor
geometry, SimT, as given below
where, as shown in the equation at bottom of page, w(x, y) is a weighting factor which
decreases with the distance of x and y from each tumor respectively, and ci are positive
constants. If at least one of the two images is normal (without tumor), w becomes zero and
the similarity criterion matches only the brain structures, similar to HAMMER . The use
of spatially adapted weights ensures that the identification of corresponding points is driven
mainly by one of the two matching criteria, whereas the spatially smooth decrease of w
makes the total similarity Sim smooth. Regarding the intrinsic difference between the
similarity criteria, we should note that the function values of both SimT and SunB are
normalized in the range . Moreover, the constants c1 and c2 determine the sensitivity
(gradient) of SimT.
Notice that the incorporation of the similarity based on the tumor location SimT into the
proposed similarity criterion serves the purpose of enforcing the warping of the tumor
volumes, in order to facilitate the method for estimating the optimal parameters for the
tumor growth model. As will be explained in the corresponding paragraph, the hypothesis is
that the optimal tumor parameters minimize the discrepancy between the coregistered atlas
and the patient’s images. Since the deformation pattern is most informative around the
tumor, the similarity criterion is designed to put special emphasis on the registration of the
tumor neighborhood.
2) Image Deformation Mechanism—The registration process starts by registering
points with salient features (driving voxels), in order to reduce ambiguity in finding
correspondence. The voxels that drive the deformation are selected hierarchically according
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
to the distinctiveness of their attributes, i.e., points on the roots of sulci, crowns of gyri, and
strong isolated edges. As the registration process proceeds, additional driving voxels are
selected to increase local accuracy. Especially for the tumor area, the selection of driving
voxels is not only based on the saliency of features, but also depends on the necessity of
warping of the tumor volumes. When registration is used as part of the estimation process of
the tumor model parameters, driving voxels are selected on the tumor boundaries in order to
facilitate the warping of the tumor volumes. Upon parameters estimation and tumor growth
simulation, the registration is performed by relaxing all forces that prioritize the matching of
the tumor boundaries. The reason is that the final registration should not be affected by 1)
not accurately determined tumor boundaries and 2) the residual variability in the tumor
vicinity which is primarily due to fundamental differences in the growth process between a
real and a simulated tumor.
The optimal correspondence of each driving voxel is determined by integrating the
similarity of all voxels within a small spherical neighborhood around this driving voxel. If
the similarity is high, then the respective driving voxel is displaced. This displacement is
also interpolated in the neighborhood via a Gaussian kernel function. Upon interpolation of
the displacement everywhere, a Laplacian-based smoothing is applied to ensure locally
smooth displacement fields. The smoothing reduces with time, as the level of confidence in
estimating the tumor model parameters increases.
3) Robustness—Robustness is achieved by requiring all the driving voxels (close and far
from tumor) to deform together and nearly to a global affine transformation in each iterative
registration step. Since the pattern of deformation around the tumor might deviate
significantly from the pattern of deformation in the rest of the brain, e.g., some inaccurate
estimate of the tumor location would result in a large translational component, all the driving
voxels in the tumor neighborhood are required to deform at the same affine transformation
as the driving voxels in the rest of the brain. The opposite requirement is not placed, and
therefore the deformation in the healthy part of the brain does not depend on the selected
tumor simulation parameters. This registration procedure is robust in registering the healthy
part of the brain, even if the tumor simulation parameters are slightly inaccurately estimated.
C. Optimality Criterion for θ
The optimal set of tumor growth parameters, θ, is not known for a particular patient; it must
be estimated from the patient’s image. The pattern of deformation around the tumor can be
indicative of the accuracy in estimating the parameters of the tumor model, θ. If the
estimation of θ is wrong and thus the tumor is incorrectly simulated in the atlas, unrealistic
and severe deformations are expected around the tumor region, when trying to match the
atlas with the patient’s image. Conversely, if tumor location and mass effect in the atlas are
estimated in agreement with those in the patient, a relatively smooth deformation can be
obtained. Additionally, due to the smoothness constraints applied during registration, the
similarity of the two coregistered images is expected to be low around the tumor if the
estimation of θ is inaccurate. Accordingly, we use the characteristics of the deformation
field and the anatomical characteristics of the coregistered atlas and patient’s images around
the tumor to define an optimality criterion, E, for estimating θ
Specifically, E is defined as the combination of three normalized measures: 1) the residual
volume of overlap of the coregistered atlas and patient’s images (E1), 2) the distance of
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
attribute vectors (E2), and 3) the Laplacian of the deformation field defined to reflect the
smoothness property of the deformation field (E3), as mathematically given below
The constants ck are used to assign different weights on different measures, whereas hk(x) is
used to assign different weights according to the voxel’s location x. hk(x) is selected to
decrease with the distance from the tumor boundary for all three measures, and to increase
on voxels lying on edges particularly for the image-related measures, i.e., E1 and E2. The
constants ck are learned by evaluating the performance of each measure separately in the
registration of patient images, i.e., how informative each measure is in estimating θ.ΩE is the
volume over which E is calculated, and it is defined in the subject brain within a specific
distance from tumor boundary, where the effects of misregistration are expected to be more
prominent. The part of the image that has no tissue label due to low confidence in tissue
segmentation, is excluded from ΩE.
III. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The detailed procedure of the proposed registration framework is described next. First, the
images are preprocessed as detailed in Section III-A. Then, the tumor center and initial seed
size are optimized and the images are coregistered following a multiresolution strategy
described in Section III-B. Afterwards the amount of tumor expansion is estimated, in order
to allow the tumor growth simulation to finish before reaching the size of the delineated
tumor in the patient’s image. This step is introduced to make the registration robust to
inaccuracies in tumor segmentation in the patient’s image and is described in Section III-C.
Since the deformation field displays almost negligible changes in the regions far away from
the tumor during the iterative process of optimizing the tumor model parameters, the
optimization is performed only in a subdomain in order to considerably speed up the
implementation, as described with more details in Appendix I.
A. Preprocessing
The first task is to remove skull from the brain and segment the atlas and individual MR
images into four tissue types: white matter (WM), gray matter (GM), ventricular
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and cortical CSF. For this purpose, the tumor is first delineated by
an expert in the patient’s original image and then masked out. Herein, we would like to note
that in this paper, we do not attempt to solve the problem of automated tumor segmentation,
which has been actively treated in the literature. The images are segmented into WM, GM,
and CSF using FAST (FMRIB’s Automated Segmentation Tool) . After tissue
segmentation, different labels are assigned to ventricular CSF and cortical CSF by using a
modified version of HAMMER.
Subsequently, the patient’s scan is registered globally with the normal template without
tumor (atlas A0) by applying an affine transformation . For this purpose, the tumor
region in the patient’s segmented image is first marked as GM, in order to achieve better
affine registration. After global alignment, the tumor region in the patient’s segmented
image is assigned a separate label, in order to provide appropriate information for the next
step of elastic registration. If the uncertainty of segmentation is high due to confounding
effects of edema and tumor infiltration, an additional label can be assigned for these regions
that cannot be classified into any of the previous categories.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
B. Workflow in a Multiresolution Strategy
The registration procedure that maps the normal atlas to the globally-aligned patient’s
image, is performed in a coarse to fine resolution scheme in order to speed up the algorithm,
reduce susceptibility to local minima in both registration and estimation, and achieve
robustness. A detailed diagram is schematically shown in Fig. 4. In particular, each
resolution level involves two steps. In the first step, the elastic deformation map is
calculated from the patient’s scan S to the normal template (atlas) T, ϕ :ΩS → ΩT by
applying the previously described registration method.
Since the atlas does not include a tumor, the deformation is likely to be inaccurate in the
regions close to the tumor. Therefore, in the second step, the deformation map is refined by
it-eratively simulating the tumor growth in the normal atlas with different tumor model
parameters θ and registering the tumor-bearing atlas with the patient’s image S, until a
minimum error (as quantified by the optimality criterion E) is reached. In other words, this
optimization step aims to estimate the tumor model parameters that reduce the discrepancies
between the coregistered images as much as possible. The optimization is performed with
the Downhill Simplex method. Since the deformation field ϕ remains unchanged in the
regions far away from the tumor when parameters θ are changed slightly, the refinement of
θ is performed only in a region of focus MS ⊆ ΩS in order to considerably reduce the
computational cost. A modified deformation strategy is performed in order to avoid
discontinuities of the deformation field on the boundary, ∂MS (see Appendix II for details).
In every resolution level, the estimated tumor model parameters are used as an initial
estimate for the next high-resolution level, and the optimized deformation field that
coregisters the tumor-bearing atlas and the patient’s scan is upsampled and linearly
interpolated to the next high resolution.
C. Estimation of the Tumor Growth Factor
After estimating θ in the fine resolution level, the final step is to estimate the tumor growth
factor, defined as the ratio of the tumor volume in the patient’s image to the volume of the
initial seed. During the previous steps of the optimization process, the final tumor volume
has been assumed equal to the segmented tumor volume in the patient’s image. This is a
good approximation, but the actual value might slightly deviate due to segmentation
inaccuracies. Specifically, since part of the tissue inside the segmented tumor region might
be tumor infiltration, which is assumed to cause negligible mass effect, the tumor mass
effect simulation should terminate before the volume reaches the size in the segmented
image. The estimation of the tumor growth factor (gf) is performed by simulating tumor
growth using the estimated parameters, θ̂, for various stages of tumor expansion. The
minimization of E from (2) (after registration) gives the optimum amount of expansion
In this registration stage, we are setting the weights for the features related to the tumor
geometry (SimT) to zero, in (1), and let the deformation be guided only from the
surrounding brain structures. We are also using the biomechanical model instead of the
PCA-based model for simulating the mass effect. The reasons for using the biomechanical
model are that 1) the number of simulations to be performed is small, 2) it provides the
original solution whereas the PCA model is based on approximation, 3) the PCA model is
trained in a lower resolution causing a reduction in accuracy due to the required upsampling,
and 4) it allows tracking of all instances during tumor growth, whereas the local PCA-based
model is trained only for final tumors exhibiting the same size as in the patient’s image.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IV. RESULTS
The registration accuracy is assessed by both synthetic and real brain tumor images. In
particular, the synthetic brain tumor images are produced by first simulating anatomical
variability by the method in , thereby creating synthetic brains from a template brain
with exactly known displacement fields. Then, tumor growth is simulated in the synthetic
brains, and the final images are treated as individual brain tumor images. Since the same
mass effect model , is utilized for tumor simulation, as used for the training of our
PCA model, this set of synthesized images provides primarily a means of assessing the
accuracy of our method. We assessed the sensitivity of both the proposed optimality
criterion and the registration method as a function of the applied θ, as described,
respectively, in Sections IV-A and IV-B. The total registration error, by using this synthetic
data, is also reported. It is expected that, for the brain images with large tumors, the use of
our proposed framework should outperform normal brain registration algorithms. Thus, here
we select the synthetic cases with small tumor, to show that even for such cases, the
registration can benefit from the simulation of tumor growth in the atlas. In particular, the
final tumor volume in the synthetic images is 8.1 cc, with an initial radius of seed 5 mm.
Moreover, ORBIT is applied to register real brain images, with results presented in Section
IV-C. All real images are registered with a normal brain image serving as a template, with
image size 256 × 256 × 198 voxels and voxel size 1×1×1 mm3. It should be noted that the
same set of parameters is used for all the results shown in this paper, and two levels of
resolution are used in the multiresolution framework, corresponding to the original image
resolution (high resolution) and a subsampled version by a factor of two (midresolution).
A. Sensitivity of the Optimality Criterion E
In order to test the potential of optimizing the tumor growth parameters using the proposed
optimality criterion, we have plotted E as a function of the error in estimating θ, using one
of the synthetic images. The proposed criterion has a global minimum at the correct tumor
center, and it is also minimized around the correct size of the initial tumor seed. Therefore,
this experiment demonstrates that the optimality criterion E can be used for estimating the
parameters of the tumor growth model. E seems to vary across rt (Fig. 5, right) less smoothly
than across xt (Fig. 5, left). This ambiguity is likely due to the very small increment of tumor
size (1 mm), used for evaluating E.
B. Sensitivity of Registration as a Function of the Applied θ
The purpose here is to investigate the robustness of the proposed registration algorithm to
the estimated tumor parameters θ. The root-mean square (rms) and the maximum (max)
registration errors of the estimated deformations from synthetic images to the atlas are
calculated separately over the tumor neighborhood Ω and the rest of the brain Ω̅as detailed
In the tumor neighborhood Ω, the rms registration error without the application of
the tumor growth model is 2.5 mm, and the max registration error is 14.6 mm, for
the same synthetic brain image as in Section IV-A. If the tumor growth model is
applied, the registration accuracy varies with the model parameters used, as shown
in Fig. 6. If the error of estimating tumor center is less than 7 mm, the rms
registration error decreases to a value of 1.4 mm with the application of the tumor
growth model prior to registration. The rms registration error is less sensitive to the
initial tumor radius. On the other hand, the max registration error decreases
significantly from 14.6 to 4.4 mm, when the tumor growth model is applied in the
atlas. As a conclusion, if the tumor-mass effect model is applied prior to
registration, the max registration error decreases significantly, and so does the rms
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
registration error in the tumor vicinity for a range of the model parameters around
the true values.
In the rest of the brain Ω̅, the deformation field is almost the same, whether the
tumor mass effect model is used or not (rms = 0.8 mm, max = 5.1 mm, for the same
synthetic brain image as above). Also, if the tumor mass effect model is used, the
registration far from the tumor is not sensitive to the tumor parameters applied, as
indicated by averaging the registration error map over the nine different synthetic
brain images. The registration error maps, calculated by using optimal and
suboptimal tumor parameters (tumor center misplaced by 5 mm), showed that the
registration accuracy is affected only in the regions very close to the tumor seed.
This observation prompted our decision to optimize the deformation only in a
region around the tumor MS during the process of estimating the tumor model
parameters (as described in Section III-B).
Finally, after assessing the sensitivity of the two basic steps in ORBIT (θ-estimation and
registration), we applied those steps to the same nine synthetic images in order to assess the
finally achieved registration accuracy. The average rms registration error is 1.9 ± 0.2 mm for
the tumor vicinity, and 0.8 mm for the rest of the brain. These results show that the rms
registration error of ORBIT on synthetic images is at subvoxel accuracy for the healthy
brain part and at the order of the diagonal voxel distance for the region close to the tumor.
C. Registration Assessment of ORBIT on Real Brain Tumor Patient Scans
Ten T1-weighted tumor-bearing brain images were selected for registration with the normal
template which include tumors of different types, grades, and sizes. For comparison, these
ten images were registered using ORBIT, the Image Registration Toolkit (ITK) , ,
 , and HAMMER, respectively. The global alignment of each tumor-bearing brain image
with the normal atlas is completed by using affine transformation with twelve degrees of
The ITK-based nonrigid image registration was executed with the following options: three
resolution levels, 64 bins, 20 iterations, and four steps of length 5. The similarity measure
was the normalized mutual information. The parameter Lamda, used to control the
smoothness of deformation, was chosen such that the deformation field seemed to preserve
topology (i.e., Lamda = 0.03).
For the other two methods, i.e., ORBIT and HAMMER, these ten brain images were
preprocessed, as described in Section III-A. The tumor region is used in HAMMER as a
mask to avoid the mismatch in the tumor vicinity due to the missing tumor in the normal
template. It is worth noting that the use of such a mask has increased significantly the
registration accuracy of HAMMER in the tumor vicinity, as compared to previous results
 , where the automatic segmentation of the brain (including the tumor) into normal tissue
classes was directly used. The purpose here is to see if ORBIT can further increase the
registration accuracy. Notice that the selection of the best possible options in ITK-based
registration and the use of a tumor mask in HAMMER are expected to provide the best
possible results for these two methods, thus removing potential biases in favor of our current
The execution time for the 256 × 256 × 198 images was | 17 h for ITK-based registration in
a PC with Intel Pentium 4 and CPU 1.7 GHz. HAMMER algorithm took | 1.5 h in a Linux
cluster with Dual Intel Xeon 2.80 GHz, running on a single CPU. The overall computational
cost for the ORBIT pipeline on the same Linux cluster on a single CPU was |14 h, with most
computations used for estimation of the tumor model parameters. We would like to
acknowledge here that this algorithm, in its current state, is not intended for real-time usage,
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
but rather as an offline preplanning tool. The performance of these three methods is
evaluated quantitatively and visually as detailed next.
1) Quantitative Assessment Based on Landmarks—In order to quantitatively assess
the registration accuracy, landmark points were manually placed in the patient’s images by a
neuroradiologist with expertise on brain tumors, in anatomical regions displaced by the
tumor and also in anatomical regions that were not displaced by the tumor. Similarly, the
corresponding landmarks are manually identified in the atlas. This set of landmarks shall be
referred to as the first set of landmarks. In order to ensure the consistency in the
identification of landmarks, the reverse procedure was followed a few weeks later. The same
expert first looked at the selected landmarks locations in the atlas, and then identified the
corresponding points in the patient’s images. This set of landmarks is labeled as the second
set of landmarks. The minimum (min), mean, maximum (max), and standard deviation
(stdev) of the landmarks distance (between mapped and actual landmarks in the atlas) for the
regions displaced by the tumor are shown in Table I. For each patient’s image, the first row
in the table indicates the intrarater variability in placing the landmarks; the other three rows
show the statistics of landmarks error for each of the first and second set of landmarks,
shown at each cell, left and right, respectively. The landmark-based results show that on
average ORBIT has higher registration accuracy than ITK and HAMMER in the tumor
vicinity, especially in the case of large tumors. For patient 5, the mean error decreases |40%.
The only cases where the mean error is slightly larger are patient 3 and patient 6. Regarding
patient 3, it should be noted that the tumor exhibits a very small size, and the use of a tumor
mass effect model is not expected to improve registration. Regarding patient 6, we would
like to note that, despite the reported landmarks errors, the registration using ORBIT, as
visually assessed later in Fig. 7, seems better than with the other two methods. Moreover, in
order to determine the significance of the assessment based on landmark errors, we
performed an independent t-test between each two methods, ORBIT and ITK or ORBIT and
HAMMER under the null hypothesis that there is “no difference” between the landmark
errors of the two methods
where NL is the number of landmarks and the indices 1 and 2 correspond to the first and
second method, respectively. With a significance level α = 0.09, the null hypothesis could
be rejected only for patient 5. This indicates that the landmarks errors are not statistically
different for most patients, including the ones ORBIT performs slightly worse, but they are
statistically different for the case ORBIT performs better than the other two methods (patient
Additionally, we assessed the registration accuracy with a rater-independent measure, such
as the surface distance of the ventricles (VN–dist) between the coregistered images. We
calculated VN – dist as the mean Euclidean distance of the ventricular boundaries in both
directions, from the patient’s image to the warped atlas image and reversely. Table II shows
VN – dist calculated only in the tumor vicinity, in order to emphasize differences between
the three methods. It can be seen that ORBIT, in comparison to HAMMER, exhibits the
smallest distance for all patients and also it performs better than ITK for all patients except
patient 7, for whom ITK shows a marginally smaller error. It should be noted that the tumor
in patient 7 is far from the ventricles and there is no actual deformation of the ventricles due
to tumor mass effect.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In the following, we evaluated the registration accuracy in areas not displaced by tumor by
calculating the error of the remaining landmarks. The landmarks error statistics of ORBIT,
HAMMER, and ITK-based registration, showed that the three registration methods are
comparable (a t-test between ORBIT-ITK and ORBIT-HAMMER showed p-values larger
than 0.4 for all patients). The errors, averaged across the two sets of landmarks and across
all patients for ORBIT (min = 2.415, mean = 7.635, max = 15.62, stdev = 4.58), for ITK
(min = 2.32, mean = 8.015, max = 18.32, stdev = 5.46), and for HAMMER (min = 2.345,
mean = 7.335, max = 16.205, stdev = 4.62), respectively, showed that ORBIT exhibits the
smallest average maximum error and the smallest average standard deviation.
2) Visual Assessment—Besides providing the quantitative errors by landmarks, the
registration accuracy of ORBIT can be also visually assessed. Fig. 7 illustrates the
registration result of those ten patients’ images with the normal template (without tumor)
using the three registration methods, respectively. It is notable that ORBIT outperforms ITK
and HAMMER for all patients’ images. High similarity between the warped tumor-bearing
template with ORBIT and the patient’s image can be observed for all cases, except for
patient 10. Patient 10 has a tumor consisting of a solid and a cystic portion, both together
exhibiting a size of |200 cc. The deformation caused on the ventricles is disanalogously
larger than on the rest of the structures, and also it resembles more to rigid motion. It is
possible that the current tumor mass effect model is not adequate for cystic tumors and that
the presence of a cyst requires the application of a more accurate biophysical model
compensating also for the incompressibility effects of the cystic fluids.
Moreover, the effect of the tumor segmentation refinement step in the ORBIT algorithm, is
visible in many of the warped images with ORBIT. These warped images have tumors
exhibiting smaller size than the tumors in the patient’s image. They indicate that the part of
the tumor causing brain tissue displacement during tumor growth is smaller than the one
manually segmented. Also, the presence of tumorous tissue outside this bulk region
indicates the existence of tumor that infiltrates the brain without displacing structures.
Finally, an example of inverse mapping is shown in Fig. 8 for patient 7. In this case, the
tumor consists of an enhancing and a nonenhancing region, as illustrated by the T1-weighted
image with gadolinium. The nonenhancing region indicates the presence of edema or tumor
infiltration. The patient image is warped to the normal atlas space by reversing the
deformation field produced by ORBIT, û o φ̂ through the concatenation of the two
components. This warping causes relaxation of the mass effect and correction of the
intersubject differences facilitating the detection of the two tumorous regions: 1) the initial
seed (as estimated by ORBIT) showing the tissue that is replaced by tumor, and 2) the
surrounding region that is infiltrated by tumor or edema.
V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
A framework for deformable registration of brain tumor images (ORBIT) has been
presented, which incorporates an elastic feature-based registration method, along with a
tumor mass-effect model. Moreover, an optimality criterion has been proposed for
optimization of the parameters pertinent to the tumor of a specific patient, such as tumor
location in the atlas space, amount of tissue death, and amount of expansion (growth factor).
After optimization is achieved, the proposed registration method shows good performance
for both tumor and other brain regions, as validated by both simulated and real tumor cases.
ORBIT has been compared with two other registration methods, HAMMER and Image
Registration Toolkit (ITK), using the best possible options for these two methods. The
efficacy of the three registration methods is not easy to compare in brain regions far from
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the tumor due to the ambiguity in defining correspondence between different brains. The
landmarks error seems to be quite large for all registration methods and also indicates that
the methods have a similar performance in brain regions not displaced by the tumor.
However, this is not conclusive since the intrarater variability in placing the landmarks was
also relatively large.
On the other hand, the assessment through quantitative and visual criteria in the tumor
vicinity, which is the main region of interest for this study, showed that ORBIT outperforms
the other two methods. It is notable that the landmark-based quantitative evaluation did not
show a significant improvement achieved by ORBIT, relative to the other two methods,
except for one patient. We attribute this largely to the fact that the neuroradiologist tended
not to place landmarks extremely close to the tumor, since it was difficult to reliably define
the anatomy in that region. Therefore, the landmarks tend to reflect performance not too
close to the tumor, i.e., in regions where we expect all three methods to be relatively
comparable. Visual evaluation (e.g., Fig. 7) shows more marked improvement achieved by
ORBIT, which is also in agreement with our expectation, since ORBIT uses a tumor growth
and mass effect model to simulate tumor before registration. Moreover, the registration
error, calculated on the ventricular boundary in the tumor vicinity, shows that ORBIT
outperforms the other two methods. It should be noted that we selected the ventricles for
validation, because they are structures with distinct boundaries providing accurate
segmentation.
A linear PCA model of tumor growth is used in order to interpolate between precalculated
solutions. Besides the reduction of the computational cost, the replacement of the complex
biomechanical model insures that the template with simulated tumor will be produced for
any seed location inside the brain parenchyma and for any seed size. On the contrary, the
biomechanical model does not converge in some cases, e.g., if the tumors are large and very
close to the skull or the ventricular boundary, since remeshing of the 3-D finite element grid
does not necessarily guarantee that the large elements distortions will be eliminated. In these
cases, the failure to converge could mislead the optimization procedure of the model
parameters to wrong optimum. Our experiments showed that the PCA-based approximation
did not significantly affect registration accuracy; hence it was adopted, due to the significant
computational savings in comparison to using a biomechanical model.
It is worth noting here, that the training step in the proposed framework is not very costly
computationally, since it is performed only in the selected template. On the contrary, the
training in method in is computationally very expensive because it requires the
performance of tumor growth simulations for a large number of subjects, in order to capture
the statistical variation of tumor mass effect for each set of model parameters. In both
methods, the tumor model parameters used for training are chosen to cover the range
expected for the subject to be registered, i.e., selected locally. Therefore, the training step
has to be repeated for each new tumor-bearing image to be registered. In the future, the PCA
models used by each method could be trained once for every possible set of tumor growth
parameters, thus eliminating completely the training step.
One of the contributions of this work is the procedure for estimation of the optimal set of
parameters of the tumor growth and mass effect model. Our results are generally promising,
in that the tumor model parameters can be estimated accurately. However, more
experimentation along this direction is necessary in future work, especially with respect to
sensitivity of this parameter estimation process for different growth models. It is notable
(Fig. 5) that tumor position seems to be relatively easier to estimate, as opposed to initial
tumor seed size. This was indeed our expectation prior to developing this estimation
procedure, since wrong tumor location estimates will generate atlases that are very different
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
from the patient’s images close to the tumor, whereas small variations in tumor seed size
cause much more subtle differences.
One of the motivations of the current work is the coregistration of patient images in a
common atlas space, as illustrated in the example shown in Fig. 8. This inverse registration
procedure causes relaxation of the tumor growth mass effect and removal of the intersubject
differences. Such mappings can facilitate the correlation of treatment parameters with
therapy outcome. For example, the correlation of tumor recurrence with radiation dose
profiles (inevitably defined in the common atlas space) can be studied for patients with
tumors emerging from similar anatomical locations. Also, tumor model parameters, e.g., size
of initial seed indicating tissue death or amount of infiltration, can be quantified and
compared across patients, since they are measured in a common space.
Since a great deal of effort has been devoted by the computational biology community to the
development of mathematical and simulation tools that help predict how cancer evolves, in
the future we plan to efficiently exploit this knowledge to improve the component related to
tumor modeling. As an example, more advanced biophysical models of tumor infiltration
and edema spread , , could be integrated to the applied biomechanical model of
tumor mass effect to provide better initializations for the registration component. It also
should be noted, that the biomechanical model in and can also simulate the
swelling caused by possible peri-tumor edema. Currently, we do not simulate edema
swelling, first because the expansion caused by edema, if present, is not large and can
therefore be captured by the deformable registration method, and second, in order to reduce
the computational cost by limiting the number of modeling parameters. Moreover, edema
can have very diverse size and shape causing the parameterization to be very difficult.
A current limitation of our approach is that it is based on the prior tissue segmentation,
which poses considerable difficulties in practice, especially in the region around the tumor
that often displays edema and infiltration. The proposed framework is mostly suitable for
tumors with distinct tumor boundaries, which are not very challenging from segmentation
perspective. However, it is important to note that the current implementation is robust to
inaccuracies in tumor segmentation because the simulated tumor is not forced to expand
until it reaches the manually segmented tumor in the patient’s image. The amount of tumor
expansion is rather determined by optimizing the defined optimality criterion. One future
extension of the proposed registration method could be the transition from hard tissue
segmentation into a fuzzy or probabilistic segmentation framework, which is more
appropriate for the inherently diffuse and infiltrative brain tumors, since in those cases the
tumorous area can only be characterized through probabilistic tissue abnormality maps. Ongoing work in our laboratory investigates pattern classification methods that use
multiacquisition imaging profiles, including T1, T1-GAD-enhanced, FLAIR, DTI, and aims
to achieve a more accurate tissue classification, thereby assisting in the registration process.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. Z. Xue at the Section of Biomedical Image Analysis for providing the synthetic
data and Dr. E. R. Melhem in the Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, for providing the patient’s
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant NS042645. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Appendix I
Implementation Details on the PCA-Based Model of Tumor Mass Effect
In the following, we present some implementation details of the PCA model of tumor
growth, which provides the tumor-induced deformation field for generating the tumorbearing atlas image through the placement of initial seed in the atlas. The criterion of
selecting sample deformations for training the PCA model of tumor growth and the
technique for interpolating between the coefficients vectors are both explained next.
1) Selection of Training Samples
Tumor mass effect simulations are conducted in the atlas space for building a set of training
samples with tumor parameters, θi = (xti,rti), i = 1,…,N. Tumor center in the atlas space can
be roughly estimated as the center of mass of the tumor of the globally aligned and
approximately warped patient’s image. Thus, the locations of tumor samples can be selected
close to this center, with a sampling rate that is higher in areas close to the cortical or
ventricular boundary. Notice that the sampling rate should be spatially adjusted, since the
tumor deformations close to the boundary show larger variation due to different boundary
conditions, compared to the ones developed in uniform regions, with deformation pattern
similar to radial expansion. Moreover, samples that lie on the different sides of the ventricle
are not jointly used, since their deformation patterns are very different.
As to the size of the initial seed, there is no immediate way of acquiring an initial estimate.
Therefore, two or three values are chosen for the training, between the lower and upper
limits of the initial seed size. In particular, the upper limit is smaller than the final tumor in
the patient’s image, whereas the lower limit is larger than the grid discretization of the
biomechanical model.
2) Selection of Interpolation Method
The coefficient vector used to reconstruct the tumor-induced deformation field for new
model parameters can be interpolated from the coefficient vectors of the training samples.
Two scattered interpolation methods, based on either inverse distance weighting or local
fitting, were tested. The inverse distance weighting interpolation method was finally chosen
and given below, since it provided slightly smaller reconstruction errors
M is the number of retained principal components and g is the bivariate Gaussian distance
function prescribing that the influence of the sample θi fades away with the distance from
the fitting point θ. K is a kernel used to control the number of neighboring samples
contributing for interpolation, and h1 and h2 corresponding constants
Zacharaki et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 04.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Appendix II
Optimization in a Subdomain
In order to speed up the execution, the optimization of θ is performed in a subdomain of the
subject space, which is larger than the tumor neighborhood ΩE used to evaluate the
optimality criterion, ΩE ⊂ MS. The optimization method Downhill Simplex is applied.
A modified deformation strategy is performed in order to avoid discontinuities of the
deformation field on the boundary ∂MS. First of all, driving voxels are selected only inside
MS. Since the identification of corresponding voxels is based on maximization of the
similarity of the attributes in a sphere around each driving voxel, in order to avoid partial
volume effects, MS is expanded to include also parts of the spherical subvolume that might
fall outside the initial subdomain.
Then, when deforming the subvolume of a template driving voxel x, the deformation is
propagated on every neighboring voxel y according to a Gaussian kernel that should leave
the boundary voxels of the kernel unchanged. In order to preserve the continuity of the
displacement field around ∂MS, the displacement field is scaled according to the distance of
y to ∂MS, in addition to the Gaussian scaling based on the distance ∥x – y∥.
After deforming the subvolume, Laplacian smoothness constraints are applied to refine the
displacement field. The smoothing is applied only in the subdomain MS, in order to retain
the estimated deformations outside MS. Additional to the minimization of the Laplacian cost
term which leads to smooth first derivatives, a constraint on the second derivatives is applied
inside MS as well as close to the boundary ∂MS, thus leading to well behaved deformation