Deep Closest Point: Learning Representations for Point Cloud Registration
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139
 
Justin M. Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139
 
Point cloud registration is a key problem for computer
vision applied to robotics, medical imaging, and other applications. This problem involves ﬁnding a rigid transformation from one point cloud into another so that they align.
Iterative Closest Point (ICP) and its variants provide simple and easily-implemented iterative methods for this task,
but these algorithms can converge to spurious local optima.
To address local optima and other difﬁculties in the ICP
pipeline, we propose a learning-based method, titled Deep
Closest Point (DCP), inspired by recent techniques in computer vision and natural language processing. Our model
consists of three parts: a point cloud embedding network,
an attention-based module combined with a pointer generation layer, to approximate combinatorial matching, and a
differentiable singular value decomposition (SVD) layer to
extract the ﬁnal rigid transformation. We train our model
end-to-end on the ModelNet40 dataset and show in several
settings that it performs better than ICP, its variants (e.g.,
Go-ICP, FGR), and the recently-proposed learning-based
method PointNetLK. Beyond providing a state-of-the-art registration technique, we evaluate the suitability of our learned
features transferred to unseen objects. We also provide preliminary analysis of our learned model to help understand
whether domain-speciﬁc and/or global features facilitate
rigid registration.
1. Introduction
Geometric registration is a key task in many computational ﬁelds, including medical imaging, robotics, autonomous driving, and computational chemistry. In its most
basic incarnation, registration involves the prediction of a
rigid motion to align one shape to another, potentially obfuscated by noise and partiality.
Many modeling and computational challenges hamper the
design of a stable and efﬁcient registration method. Given exact correspondences, singular value decomposition yields the
Figure 1. Left: a moved guitar. Right: rotated human. All methods
work well with small transformation. However, only our method
achieve satisfying alignment for objects with sharp features and
large transformation.
globally optimal alignment; similarly, computing matchings
becomes easier given some global alignment information.
Given these two observations, most algorithms alternate between these two steps to try to obtain a better result. The resultant iterative optimization algorithms, however, are prone
to local optima.
The most popular example, Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
 , alternates between estimating the rigid motion based
 
on a ﬁxed correspondence estimate and updating the correspondences to their closest matches. Although ICP monotonically decreases a certain objective function measuring
alignment, due to the non-convexity of the problem, ICP
often stalls in suboptimal local minima. Many methods
 attempt to alleviate this issue by using heuristics
to improve the matching or by searching larger parts of the
motion space SE(3). These algorithms are typically slower
than ICP and still do not always provide acceptable output.
In this work, we revisit ICP from a deep learning perspective, addressing key issues in each part of the ICP pipeline using modern machine learning, computer vision, and natural
language processing tools. We call our resulting algorithm
Deep Closest Point (DCP), a learning-based method that
takes two point clouds and predicts a rigid transformation
aligning them.
Our model consists of three parts: (1) We map the input
point clouds to permutation/rigid-invariant embeddings that
help identify matching pairs of points (we compare PointNet
 and DGCNN for this step); then, (2) an attention
based module combining pointer network predicts
a soft matching between the point clouds; and ﬁnally, (3) a
differentiable singular value decomposition layer predicts
the rigid transformation. We train and test our model endto-end on ModelNet40 in various settings, showing our
model is not only efﬁcient but also outperforms ICP and
its extensions, as well as the recently-proposed PointNetLK
method . Our learned features generalize to unseen
data, suggesting that our model is learning salient geometric
Contributions:
Our contributions include the following:
• We identify sub-network architectures designed to address
difﬁculties in the classical ICP pipeline.
• We propose a simple architecture to predict a rigid transformation aligning two point clouds.
• We evaluate efﬁciency and performance in several settings
and provide an ablation study to support details of our
construction.
• We analyze whether local or global features are more
useful for registration.
• We release our code1, to facilitate reproducibility and
future research.
2. Related Work
Traditional point cloud registration methods:
is the best-known algorithm for solving rigid registration
problems; it alternates between ﬁnding point cloud correspondences and solving a least-squares problem to update
the alignment. ICP variants consider issues with
1 
the basic method, like noise, partiality, and sparsity; probabilistic models also can improve resilience to
uncertain data. ICP can be viewed as an optimization algorithm searching jointly for a matching and a rigid alignment;
hence, propose using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to optimize the objective directly, which can yield a
better solution. For more information, summarize
ICP and its variants developed over the last 20 years.
ICP-style methods are prone to local minima due to nonconvexity. To ﬁnd a good optimum in polynomial time, Go-
ICP uses a branch-and-bound (BnB) method to search
the motion space SE(3). It outperforms local ICP methods when a global solution is desired but is several orders
of magnitude slower than other ICP variants despite using
local ICP to accelerate the search process. Other methods
attempt to identify global optima using Riemannian optimization , convex relaxation , and mixed-integer
programming .
Learning on graphs and point sets:
A broad class of
deep architectures for geometric data termed geometric deep
learning includes recent methods learning on graphs
 and point clouds .
The graph neural network (GNN) is introduced in ;
similarly, deﬁnes convolution on graphs (GCN) for
molecular data. uses renormalization to adapt to graph
structure and applies GCN to semi-supervised learning on
graphs. MoNet learns a dynamic aggregation function
based on graph structure, generalizing GNNs. Finally, graph
attention networks (GATs) incorporate multi-head attention into GCNs. DGCNN can be regarded as graph
neural network applied to point clouds with dynamic edges.
Another branch of geometric deep learning includes Point-
Net and other algorithms designed to process point
clouds. PointNet can be seen as applying GCN to graphs
without edges, mapping points in R3 to high-dimensional
space. PointNet only encodes global features gathered from
the point cloud’s embedding, impeding application to tasks
involving local geometry. To address this issue, PointNet++
 applies a shared PointNet to k-nearest neighbor clusters to learn local features. As an alternative, DGCNN 
explicitly recovers the graph structure in both Euclidean
space and feature space and applies graph neural networks
to the result. PCNN uses an extension operator to deﬁne
convolution on point clouds, while PointCNN applies
Euclidean convolution after applying a learned transformation. Finally, SPLATNet encodes point clouds on a
lattice and performs bilateral convolution. All these works
aim to apply convolution-like operations to point clouds and
extract local geometric features.
Sequence-to-sequence learning and pointer networks:
Many tasks in natural language processing, including ma-
(a) Network architecture
(b) Transformer module
Figure 2. Network architecture for DCP, including the Transformer module for DCP-v2.
chine translation, language modeling, and question answering, can be formulated as sequence-to-sequence problems
(seq2seq). ﬁrst uses deep neural networks (DNN) to
address seq2seq problems at large scale. Seq2seq, however,
often involves predicting discrete tokens corresponding to
positions in the input sequence. This problem is difﬁcult because there is an exponential number of possible matchings
between input and output positions. Similar problems can
be found in optimal transportation , combinatorial
optimization , and graph matching . To address this
issue, In our registration pipeline, we use a related method
to Pointer Networks , which use attention as a pointer to
select from the input sequence. In each output step, a Pointer
Network predicts a distribution over positions and uses it as
a “soft pointer.” The pointer module is fully differentiable,
and the whole network can be trained end-to-end.
Non-local approaches:
To denoise images, non-local
means leverages the simple observation that Gaussian
noise can be removed by non-locally weighted averaging
all pixels in an image. Recently, non-local neural networks
 have been proposed to capture long-range dependencies
in video understanding; uses the non-local module to
denoise feature maps to defend against adversarial attacks.
Another instantiation of non-local neural networks, known as
relational networks , has shown effectiveness in visual
reasoning , meta-learning , object detection ,
and reinforcement learning . Its counterpart in natural
language processing, attention, is arguably the most fruitful
recent advance in this discipline. replaces recurrent
neural networks with a model called Transformer,
consisting of several stacked multi-head attention modules.
Transformer-based models outperform other recurrent models by a considerable amount in natural language
processing. In our work, we also use Transformer to learn
contextual information of point clouds.
3. Problem Statement
In this section, we formulate the rigid alignment problem and discuss the ICP algorithm, highlighting key issues in the ICP pipeline. We use X and Y to denote two
point clouds, where X = {x1, . . . , xi, . . . , xN} ⊂R3 and
Y = {y1, . . . , yj, . . . , yM} ⊂R3. For ease of notation, we
consider the simplest case, in which M = N; the methods
we describe here extend easily to the M ̸= N case.
In the rigid alignment problem, we assume Y is transformed from X by an unknown rigid motion. We denote the
rigid transformation as [RXY, tXY] where RXY ∈SO(3)
and tXY ∈R3. We want to minimize the mean-squared
error E(RXY, tXY), which—if X and Y are ordered the
same way (meaning xi and yi are paired)—can be written
E(RXY, tXY) = 1
∥RXYxi + tXY −yi∥2.
Deﬁne centroids of X and Y as
Then the cross-covariance matrix H is given by
(xi −x)(yi −y)⊤.
We can use the singular value decomposition (SVD) to decompose H = USV ⊤. Then, the alignment minimizing
E(·, ·) in (1) is given in closed-form by
RXY = V U ⊤
tXY = −RXYx + y.
Here, we take the convention that U, V ∈SO(3), while S is
diagonal but potentially signed; this accounts for orientationreversing choices of H. This classic orthogonal Procrustes
problem assumes that the point sets are matched to each
other, that is, that xi should be mapped to yi in the ﬁnal
alignment for all i. If the correspondence is unknown, however, the objective function E must be revised to account for
E(RXY, tXY)= 1
∥RXYxi + tXY −ym(xi)∥2. (5)
Here, a mapping m from each point in X to its corresponding
point in Y is given by
m(xi, Y) = arg min
∥RXYxi + tXY −yj∥
Equations (5) and (6) form a classic chicken-and-egg
If we know the optimal rigid transformation
[RXY, tXY], then the mapping m can be recovered from
(6); conversely, given the optimal mapping m, the transformation can be computed using (4).
ICP iteratively approaches a stationary point of E in (5),
including the mapping m(·) as one of the variables in the
optimization problem. It alternates between two steps: ﬁnding the current optimal transformation based on a previous
mapping mk−1 and ﬁnding an optimal mapping mk based
on the current transformation using (6), where k denotes
the current iteration. The algorithm terminates when a ﬁxed
point or stall criterion is reached. This procedure is easy to
implement and relatively efﬁcient, but it is extremely prone
to local optima; a distant initial alignment yields a poor
estimate of the mapping m, quickly leading to a situation
where the algorithm gets stuck. Our goal is to use learned
embeddings to recover a better matching m(·) and use that
to compute a rigid transformation, which we will detail in
next section.
4. Deep Closest Point
Having established preliminaries about the rigid alignment problem, we are now equipped to present our Deep
Closest Point architecture, illustrated in Figure 2. In short,
we embed point clouds into high-dimensional space using
PointNet or DGCNN (§4.1), encode contextual
information using an attention-based module (§4.2), and ﬁnally estimate an alignment using a differentiable SVD layer
4.1. Initial Features
The ﬁrst stage of our pipeline embeds the unaligned input
point clouds X and Y into a common space used to ﬁnd
matching pairs of points between the two clouds. The goal
is to ﬁnd an embedding that quotients out rigid motion while
remaining sensitive to relevant features for rigid matching.
We evaluate two possible choices of learnable embedding
modules, PointNet and DGCNN .
Since we use per-point embeddings of the two input
point clouds to generate a mapping m and recover the
rigid transformation, we seek a feature per point in the
input point clouds rather than one feature per cloud. For
this reason, in these two network architectures, we use the
representations generated before the last aggregation function, notated FX = {xL
2 , ..., xL
i , ..., xL
N} and FY =
2 , ..., yL
i , ..., yL
N}, assuming a total of L layers.
In more detail, PointNet takes a set of points, embeds each
by a nonlinear function from R3 into a higher-dimensional
space, and optionally outputs a global feature vector for the
whole point cloud after applying a channel-wise aggregation
function f (e.g., max or P). Let xl
i be the embedding of
point i in the l-th layer, and let hl
θ be a nonlinear function
in the l-th layer parameterized by a shared multilayer perceptron (MLP). Then, the forward mechanism is given by
While PointNet largely extracts information based on the
embedding of each point in the point cloud independently,
DGCNN explicitly incorporates local geometry into its representation. In particular, given a set of points X, DGCNN
constructs a k-NN graph G, applies a nonlinearity to the
values at edge endpoints to obtain edgewise values, and performs vertex-wise aggregation (max or P) in each layer.
The forward mechanism of DGCNN is thus
) ∀j ∈Ni}),
where Ni denotes the neighbors of vertex i in graph G. While
PointNet features do not incorporate local neighborhood information, we ﬁnd empirically that DGCNN’s local features
are critical for high-quality matching in subsequent steps of
our pipeline (see §6.1).
4.2. Attention
Our transition from PointNet to DGCNN is motivated
by the observation that the most useful features for rigid
alignment are learned jointly from local and global information. We additionally can improve our features for matching
by making them task-speciﬁc, that is, changing the features
depending on the particularities of X and Y together rather
than embedding X and Y independently. That is, the task
of rigidly aligning, say, organic shapes might require different features than those for aligning mechanical parts with
sharp edges. Inspired by the recent success of BERT ,
non-local neural networks , and relational networks 
using attention-based models, we design a module to learn
co-contextual information by capturing self-attention and
conditional attention.
Take FX and FY to be the embeddings generated by the
modules in §4.1; these embeddings are computed independently of one another. Our attention model learns a function
φ : RN×P × RN×P →RN×P , where P is embedding dimension, that provides new embeddings of the point clouds
ΦX = FX + φ(FX , FY)
ΦY = FY + φ(FY, FX )
Notice we treat φ as a residual term, providing an additive change to FX and FY depending on the order of its
inputs. The idea here is that the map FX 7→ΦX modiﬁes
the features associated to the points in X in a fashion that is
knowledgeable about the structure of Y; the map FY 7→ΦY
serves a symmetric role. We choose φ as an asymmetric
function given by a Transformer ,2 since the matching
problem we encounter in rigid alignment is analogous to the
sequence-to-sequence problem that inspired its development,
other than their use of positional embeddings to describe
where words are in a sentence.
4.3. Pointer Generation
The most common failure mode of ICP occurs when the
matching estimate mk is far from optimal. When this occurs,
the rigid motion subsequently estimated using (6) does not
signiﬁcantly improve alignment, leading to a spurious local
optimum. As an alternative, our learned embeddings are
trained speciﬁcally to expose matching pairs of points using
a simple procedure explained below. We term this step
pointer generation, again inspired by terminology in the
attention literature introduced in §4.2.
To avoid choosing non-differentiable hard assignments,
we use a probabilistic approach that generates a (singlystochastic) “soft map” from one point cloud into the other.
That is, each xi ∈X is assigned a probability vector over
elements of Y given by
m(xi, Y) = softmax(ΦYΦ⊤
Here, ΦY ∈RN×P denotes the embedding of Y generated
by the attention module, and Φxi denotes the i-th row of
the matrix ΦX from the attention module. We can think of
m(xi, Y) as a soft pointer from each xi into the elements of
4.4. SVD Module
The ﬁnal module in our architecture extracts the rigid
motion from the soft matching computed in §4.3. We use
the soft pointers to generate a matching averaged point in Y
for each point in X:
ˆyi = Y ⊤m(xi, Y) ∈R3.
Here, we deﬁne Y ∈RN×3 to be a matrix containing the
points in Y . Then, RXY and tXY are extracted using (4)
based on the pairing xi 7→ˆyi over all i.
2For details, see 
03/attention.html.
Figure 3. Top left: input. Top right: result of ICP with random
initialization. Bottom left: initial transformation provided by DCP.
Bottom right: result of ICP initialized with DCP. Using a good
initial transformation provided by DCP, ICP converges to the global
To backpropagate gradients through the networks, we
need to differentiate the SVD. describes a standard
means of computing this derivative; version of this calculations are included in PyTorch and TensorFlow . Note
we need to solve only 3 × 3 eigenproblems, small enough
to be solved using simple algorithms or even (in principle) a
closed-form formula.
Combined, the modules above map from a pair of point
clouds X and Y to a rigid motion [RXY, tXY] that aligns
them to each other. The initial feature module (§4.1) and
the attention module (§4.2) are both parameterized by a
set of neural network weights, which must be learned during a training phase. We employ a fairly straightforward
strategy for training, measuring deviation of [RXY, tXY]
from ground truth for synthetically-generated pairs of point
We use the following loss function to measure our model’s
agreement to the ground-truth rigid motions:
Loss = ∥R⊤
XY −I∥2 + ∥tXY −tg
XY∥2 + λ∥θ∥2
Here, g denotes ground-truth. The ﬁrst two terms deﬁne a
simple distance on SE(3). The third term denotes Tikhonov
regularization of the DCP parameters θ, which serves to
reduce the complexity of the network.
5. Experiments
We compare our models to ICP, Go-ICP , Fast Global
Registration (FGR) , and the recently-proposed Point-
NetLK deep learning method . We denote our model
without attention (§4.2) as DCP-v1 and the full model with
attention as DCP-v2. Go-ICP is ported from the authors’ released code. For ICP and FGR, we use the implementations
in Intel Open3D . For PointNetLK, we adapt the code
partially released by the authors.3 Notice that FGR uses
additional geometric features.
The architecture of DCP is shown in Figure 2. We use 5
EdgeConv (denoted as DGCNN ) layers for both DCPv1 and DCP-v2. The numbers of ﬁlters in each layer are
 . In the Transformer layer, the number
of heads in multi-head attention is 4 and the embedding
dimension is 1024. We use LayerNorm without Dropout
 . Adam is used to optimize the network parameters,
with initial learning rate 0.001. We divide the learning rate
by 10 at epochs 75, 150, and 200, training for a total of 250
epochs. DCP-v1 does not use the Transformer module but
rather employs identity mappings ΦX = FX and ΦY = FY.
We experiment on the ModelNet40 dataset, which
consists of 12,311 meshed CAD models from 40 categories.
Of these, we use 9,843 models for training and 2,468 models
for testing. We follow the experimental settings of PointNet
 , uniformly sampling 1,024 points from each model’s
outer surface. As in previous work, points are centered and
rescaled to ﬁt in the unit sphere, and no features other than
(x, y, z) coordinates appear in the input.
We measure mean squared error (MSE), root mean
squared error (RMSE), and mean absolute error (MAE) between ground truth values and predicted values. Ideally, all
of these error metrics should be zero if the rigid alignment is
perfect. All angular measurements in our results are in units
of degrees.
5.1. ModelNet40: Full Dataset Train & Test
In our ﬁrst experiment, we randomly divide all the point
clouds in the ModelNet40 dataset into training and test sets,
with no knowledge of the category label; different point
clouds are used during training and during testing. During
training, we sample a point cloud X. Along each axis, we
randomly draw a rigid transformation; the rotation along
each axis is uniformly sampled in [0, 45◦] and translation
is in [−0.5, 0.5]. X and a transformation of X by the rigid
motion are used as input to the network, which is evaluated
against the known ground truth using (11).
Table 1 evaluates performance of our method and its
peers in this experiment (vanilla ICP nearly fails). DCP-v1
already outperforms other methods under all the performance
metrics, and DCP-v2 exhibits even stronger performance.
Figure 4 shows results of DCP-v2 on some objects.
5.2. ModelNet40: Category Split
To test the generalizability of different models, we split
ModelNet40 evenly by category into training and testing sets.
3 
894.897339
Go-ICP 
140.477325
PointNetLK 
227.870331
DCP-v1 (ours)
DCP-v2 (ours)
Table 1. ModelNet40: Test on unseen point clouds
892.601135
Go-ICP 
192.258636
PointNetLK 
306.323975
DCP-v1 (ours)
DCP-v2 (ours)
Table 2. ModelNet40: Test on unseen categories
882.564209
Go-ICP 
131.182495
607.694885
PointNetLK 
256.155548
DCP-v1 (ours)
DCP-v2 (ours)
Table 3. ModelNet40: Test on objects with Gaussian noise
We train DCP and PointNetLK on the ﬁrst 20 categories, then
test them on the held-out categories. ICP, Go-ICP and FGR
are also tested on the held-out categories. As shown in Table
2, on unseen categories, FGR behaves more strongly than
other methods. DCP-v1 has much worse performance than
DCP-v2, supporting our use of the attention module. Although the learned representations are task-dependent, DCPv2 exhibits smaller error than others except FGR, including
the learning-based method PointNetLK.
5.3. ModelNet40: Resilience to Noise
We also experiment with adding noise to each point of
the input point clouds. We sample noise independently from
N(0, 0.01), clip the noise to [−0.05, 0.05], and add it to X
during testing. In this experiment, we use the model from
§5.1 trained on noise-free data from all of ModelNet40.
Table 3 shows the results of this experiment. ICP typically
converges to a far-away ﬁxed point, and FGR is sensitive
to noise. Go-ICP, PointNetLK and DCP, however, remain
robust to noise.
5.4. DCP Followed By ICP
Since our experiments involve point clouds whose initial
poses are far from aligned, ICP fails nearly every experiment
we have presented so far. In large part, this failure is due to
the lack of a good initial guess. As an alternative, we can
PointNetLK
Table 4. Inference time (in seconds)
PN+DCP-v1,
DGCNN+DCP-v1
DGCNN+DCP-v2
Table 5. Ablation study: PointNet or DGCNN?
use ICP as a local algorithm by initializing ICP with a rigid
transformation output from our DCP model. Figure 3 shows
an example of this two-step procedure; while ICP fails at
the global alignment task, with better initialization provided
by DCP, it converges to the global optimum. In some sense,
this experiment shows how ICP can be an effective way to
“polish” the alignment generated by DCP.
5.5. Efﬁciency
We proﬁle the inference time of different methods on a
desktop computer with an Intel I7-7700 CPU, an Nvidia
GTX 1070 GPU, and 32G memory. Computational time
is measured in seconds and is computed by averaging 100
results. As shown in Table 4, DCP-v1 is the fastest method
among our points of comparison, and DCP-v2 is only slower
than vanilla ICP.
6. Ablation Study
We conduct several ablation experiments in this section,
dissecting DCP and replacing each part with an alternative
to understand the value of our construction. All experiments
are done in the same setting as the experiments in §5.1.
6.1. PointNet or DGCNN?
We ﬁrst try to answer whether the localized features gathered by DGCNN provide value over the coarser features
that can be measured using the simpler PointNet model. As
discussed in , PointNet learns a global descriptor of
the whole shape while DGCNN learns local geometric
features via constructing the k-NN graph. We replace the
DGCNN with PointNet (denoted as PN) and conduct the
experiments in §5.1 on ModelNet40 , using DCP-v1 and
DCP-v2. Table 5. Models perform consistently better with
DGCNN that their counterparts with PointNet.
DCP-v1+MLP
DCP-v1+SVD
DCP-v2+MLP
DCP-v2+SVD
Table 6. Ablation study: MLP or SVD?
DCP-v1 (512)
DCP-v1 (1024)
DCP-v2 (512)
DCP-v2 (1024)
Table 7. Ablation study: Embedding dimension
6.2. MLP or SVD?
While MLP is in principle a universal approximator, our
SVD layer is designed to compute a rigid motion speciﬁcally.
In this experiment, we examine whether an MLP or a customdesigned layer is better for registration. We compare MLP
and SVD with both DCP-v1 and DCP-v2 on ModelNet40.
Table 6 shows both DCP-v1 and DCP-v2 perform better
with SVD layer than MLP. This supports our motivation to
compute rigid transformation using SVD.
6.3. Embedding Dimension
 remarks that the embedding dimension is an important parameter affecting the accuracy of point cloud deep
learning models up to a critical threshold, after which there
is an insigniﬁcant difference. To verify our choice of dimensionality, we compare models with embeddings into spaces
of different dimensions. We test models with DCP-v1 and
v2, using DGCNN to embed the point clouds into R512 or
R1024. The results in Table 7 show that increasing the embedding dimension from 512 to 1024 does marginally help
DCP-v2, but for DCP-v1 there is small degeneracy. Our
results are consistent with the hypothesis in .
7. Conclusion
In some sense, the key observation in our Deep Closest
Point technique is that learned features greatly facilitate rigid
alignment algorithms; by incorporating DGCNN and an
attention module, our model reliably extracts the correspondences needed to ﬁnd rigid motions aligning two input point
clouds. Our end-to-end trainable model is reliable enough to
extract a high-quality alignment in a single pass, which can
be improved by iteration or “polishing” via classical ICP.
DCP is immediately applicable to rigid alignment prob-
Figure 4. Results of DCP-v2. Top: inputs. Bottom: outputs of DCP-v2.
lems as a drop-in replacement for ICP with improved behavior. Beyond its direct usage, our experiments suggest several
avenues for future inquiry. One straightforward extension is
to see if our learned embeddings transfer to other tasks like
classiﬁcation and segmentation. We could also train DCP
to be applied iteratively (or recursively) to reﬁne the alignment, rather than attempting to align in a single pass; insight
from reinforcement learning could help reﬁne approaches in
this direction, using mean squared error as reward to learn a
policy that controls when to stop iterating. Finally, we can
incorporate our method into larger pipelines to enable highaccuracy Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
or Structure from Motion (SFM).
8. Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge the generous support of Army
Research Ofﬁce grant W911NF-12-R-0011, of National Science Foundation grant IIS-1838071, from an Amazon Research Award, from the MIT-IBM Watson AI Laboratory,
from the Toyota-CSAIL Joint Research Center, and from the
Skoltech-MIT Next Generation Program. Yue Wang wants
to thank David Palmer for helpful discussion.