Traditional science courses, even nowadays, present
science as a collection of facts, while scientific
methodology is presented as homogeneous and based
on empirical research. This leads to a static and
context-independent view of discovery outcomes.
Students are required to memorize facts without
questioning either their development or relationship
to other scientific or nonscientific knowledge5.
These problems, which result in high attrition and failure
rates among students, have been found in both high school
and undergraduate physics courses. Some researchers cite the
lack of a common language between mathematicians and
physicists as the root of learning difficulties experienced by
physics students6. Other studies place the blame on
traditional teaching methods, which reward memorization
over conceptual thinking7 or just simply do not address
adequately the needs of individual classes8.
Cognitive psychologists and educators have pointed to a
strong relation between visual abilities and learning science9.
Problem solving in physics often requires visualizing abstract
physical concepts or manipulating diagrams and graphs,
demanding high visual and cognitive capabilities. Hestenes
emphasized the necessity of developing teaching models that
encourage conceptual understanding in physics classrooms10.
Teaching models are playing an increasing role in the
science curriculum11. Science educators and instructors agree
that students need to understand the models of scientific
phenomena with which they are presented12 and to be able
to construct their own13. If students are to fully understand a
model’s nature and implications, it should cover a broad
Yehudit Judy Dori1,2, John Belcher3, Mark Bessette2,
Michael Danziger2, Andrew McKinney2, and Erin Hult2
Technology
for active learning
1Department of Education in Technology and Science,
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel
2Center for Educational Computing Initiatives,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
E-mail: 
December 2003
ISSN:1369 7021 © Elsevier Ltd 2003
Problems related to passive learning in large
undergraduate physics classes were first identified
and researched over a decade ago1 and are still under
investigation2,3. Students experience difficulties in
learning physics because they must fully understand
concepts and principles of the physical world that are
sometimes impossible to see (as in electromagnetism
phenomena) and often difficult to comprehend. On
top of these difficulties, there are the requirements to
master quantitative and formulaic representations of
scientific phenomena in order to conceptualize and
use them in work4.
REVIEW FEATURE
range of modes12,14, including concrete, verbal, symbolic,
mathematical, and visual.
This review reports on the Technology-Enabled Active
Learning (TEAL) Project at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT)15. In the TEAL project, we use
mathematical, concrete, and visual modes of
representations. Our media-rich visualizations of
electromagnetic phenomena are based on Java simulations,
three-dimensional illustrations and animations, and
ShockWave visualizations16.
TEAL project: motivation and setting
The motivation for moving to a different mode of teaching
introductory physics courses was threefold. First, the
traditional lecture and recitation format for teaching the
mechanics and electromagnetism courses at MIT had a
40-50% attendance rate, even with good lecturers, and a
10% or higher failure rate. Second, a range of educational
innovations in teaching freshman physics had demonstrated
that any pedagogy using ‘interactive-engagement’ methods
results in higher learning gains than the traditional lecture
format2,17,18. Finally, unlike many educational institutions in
the US and around the world, the mainline introductory
physics courses at MIT had not included a laboratory
component for over three decades. This was something we
wanted to re-introduce.
The objective of the TEAL project is to transform the way
physics is taught to large physics classes at MIT in order to
decrease failure rates and increase students’ conceptual
understanding. Visualization technology can support
meaningful learning by enabling the presentation of spatial
and dynamic images, which portray relationships between
complex concepts. The first course selected to be
transformed into the TEAL format was Electricity and
Magnetism (E&M). The reason for this choice was that the
topics discussed in the course are of abstract nature and
visualization can potentially alleviate students’ difficulties in
understanding.
The TEAL project is centered on an ‘active learning’
approach, aimed at helping students visualize, develop better
intuition about, and conceptual models of electromagnetic
phenomena. Taught in a specially designed classroom with
extensive use of networked laptops, this collaborative,
hands-on approach merges lectures, recitations, and desktop
laboratory experience in a media-rich environment. In the
TEAL classroom, nine students sit together at round tables
(Fig. 1), with a total of thirteen tables.
Five hours of class per week is broken into two, two-hour
sessions and a one-hour problem-solving session led by
graduate student teaching assistants. The students are
exposed to a mixture of presentations, desktop experiments,
web-based assignments, and collaborative exercises. The
desktop experiments and computer-aided analysis of
experimental data provide the students with direct
experience of various electromagnetic phenomena.
It should be noted that the Fall 2001 E&M course was
taught by two instructors, one of whom (the second author)
initiated and led the TEAL project, while the other was part of
the development team. In Spring 2003, there were six new
instructors, none of whom had previously been involved in
TEAL and some of whom were not comfortable with using
the media-rich environment.
Fig. 1 Undergraduate physics students in the d’Arbeloff Studio Classroom.
December 2003
Fig. 3 The ‘Creating a Magnetic Field’ visualization.
Visualizations
Patterned in some ways after the Studio Physics project of
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute19 and the Scale-Up project of
North Carolina State University20, TEAL extends these efforts
by incorporating advanced two- and three-dimensional
visualizations that employ Java applets. The visualizations
allow students to gain insight into the way in which fields
transmit forces by watching how the motions of objects
evolve in time in response to those forces. For a selection of
the visualizations, see21,22. Such animations allow students to
intuitively relate the forces transmitted by electromagnetic
fields to more tangible forces. The following three examples
show visualizations developed especially for and used in the
TEAL E&M course.
In the topic of electrostatics, the ‘Molecules 3D’
visualization23 simulates the interaction of charged particles
in three-dimensional space (Fig. 2). The particles interact via
the classical Coulomb force, as well as the repulsive
quantum-mechanical Pauli force, which acts at close
distances (accounting for the ‘collisions’ between them).
REVIEW FEATURE
December 2003
Fig. 2 The ‘Molecules 3D’ visualization.
REVIEW FEATURE
The motion of the particles is also damped by a term
proportional to their velocity, allowing them to ‘settle down’
into stable (or metastable) states.
The ‘Creating a Magnetic Field’ visualization24 illustrates
Faraday’s Law (Fig. 3). It assumes that we have five rings
carrying a number of free positive static charges. Since there
is no current, there is no magnetic field. Suppose a set of
external agents come along (one for each charge) and spin up
the charges counterclockwise, as seen from above, at the
same time and rate, in a pre-arranged manner. Once the
charges on the rings start to accelerate, there is a magnetic
field in the space between the rings, mostly parallel to their
common axis, which is stronger inside the rings than outside.
This is the solenoid configuration. As the magnetic flux
through the rings grows, Faraday’s Law tells us that there is
an electric field induced by the time-changing magnetic field,
which is circulating clockwise as seen from above. So the
force on the charges caused by this electric field is opposite
to the direction in which the external agents are trying to
spin the rings up (counterclockwise). The agents then have to
do additional work to spin up the charges. This is the source
of the energy in the magnetic field between the rings.
In magnetostatics, the ‘Two Wires in Series’ visualization25
shows the magnetic field configuration around two wires
carrying current in opposite directions (Fig. 4). The
Maxwell stresses associated with the magnetic fields cause
the wires to feel a mutual repulsion, and they spread apart as
Study setting and method
This study focuses on students’ perceptions of the visual
representations, along with other teaching methods, as tools
to comprehend abstract concepts.
We present and analyze the educational impact of the
TEAL approach using questionnaire results obtained after the
Fall 2001 and Spring 2003 courses. The assessment of
students’ learning outcomes in the TEAL project, which are
reported elsewhere26, strongly suggests that the learning
gains are significantly greater than those obtained in the
traditional lecture and recitation setting. The results are
consistent with other studies of introductory physics
education over the last two decades27. It is also in line with
the much lower failure rates for the TEAL course of Spring
2003 (a few percent) compared to traditional failure rates in
recent years (from 7% to 13%).
The students were asked to list the most important
elements that contributed to their understanding of the
taught subject matter and explain their selection. We divided
December 2003
Fig. 4 The ‘Two Wires in Series’ visualization.
their responses into four categories: oral explanations in
class, technology, written problems, and textbooks28. The
technology category included: desktop experiments
performed in groups; two- and three-dimensional
visualizations; individual, web-based home assignments
submitted electronically; and individual, real-time class
responses to conceptual questions using a personal response
system (PRS) accompanied by peer discussion. Written
problems included both individual problem sets given as
home assignments and analytical problems solved in class
workshops.
The experiment started in Fall 2001, and continued
throughout Spring 2003, involving about 350 students. By
Fall 2001, the physical infrastructure for teaching the course
in the d’Arbeloff Studio Classroom was in place. The
experimental group of Fall 2001 included about two-thirds
upper classmen, who had failed either the mechanics course
or the E&M course. One third was comprised of freshmen
that had either studied physics in high school at an advanced
level or taken the examination for the advanced placement
mechanics course. Therefore, most of the Fall 2001 students
were to some extent familiar with basic E&M concepts. We
expanded the TEAL Project such that full implementation of
the course took place in Spring 2003, encompassing about
600 students and six new instructors. The students consisted
of 90% freshmen and 10% upper classmen, so most of them
had never been exposed to the E&M learning material before.
The Fall 2001 and Spring 2003 questionnaires were
completed by 174 and 308 students, respectively. The results
are presented in Fig. 5 and Table 1.
Fig. 5 shows that three of the four categories are equally
important. The role of problem solving is highest in both
years. A frequent student complaint in the Spring 2003
questionnaire was that “the blind can’t lead the blind” in
group work. Students complained that they felt they did
most of their learning outside class.
Typical reasons given by students to explain their selection
of technology-based teaching methods included elements of
visualization, desktop experiments, PRS-based conceptual
questions, and web-based assignments (Table 1). However,
the teacher remains indispensable for both the oral
explanations and the problem-solving workshops.
Discussion
Science educators are facing increasing demands as they are
asked to teach more content, more effectively, and engage
REVIEW FEATURE
December 2003
Table 1 Sample explanations given by 2003 students to explain their selection of the various teaching methods.
Teaching method
Student’s explanation
Oral explanations in class
Having teachers at our disposal when we have questions with specific problems is
possibly the best aspect of TEAL.
Technology
Desktop experiments
The experiments were interesting, but often not easy to learn from.
Two- and three-dimensional
The visuals and simulations were great for conceptualizing and visualizing how electric
visualizations
and magnetic fields interact with charged particles/wires/etc., and what affects, creates,
and changes them.
The three-dimensional visualizations are the one thing that I can’t get from a book or
learning on my own.
Web-based home assignments
I think the readings for the web assignments were really important. They forced me to
actually do the readings before class.
Conceptual questions
PRS was the best part of class because it took general concepts and shrank them down
into concise, multiple-choice questions that both reviewed old stuff and taught new things.
We get to test our knowledge without fear of failure.
Written problems
Home assignments
The problem sets offered the main opportunity to connect material presented in class and
figure out how it related to actual material covered in exams.
Class workshops
The workshops help me most because I seem to be learning a great deal from working
with other students and discussing questions with them.
I learn the most from the textbook because I can learn at my own pace and go back over
concepts that I don’t understand as many times as I want.
REVIEW FEATURE
their students in scientific practices29. The National Science
Education Standards30 express strong disapproval of the
traditional emphasis on memorizing and reciting facts. They
stress the need to foster conceptual understanding and give
students firsthand experience of questioning, evidence
gathering, and analysis, which resembles the process of
authentic science. In the TEAL project, direct hands-on
exposure to the electromagnetic phenomena under study,
visualization of those phenomena, and active learning in a
collaborative setting were combined to achieve the desired
effect on the students’ learning outcomes.
Our results26 have shown that problem-solving sessions,
two- and three-dimensional visualizations, along with
collaborative desktop experiments, web-assignments, and
PRS-based conceptual questions, significantly enhance
students’ understanding of electromagnetism. In Spring 2003,
when the teachers were novices in the TEAL approach,
students’ perceptions were indicative of the potential of this
approach on the one hand, and of the need to improve
teachers’ integration of the educational technology into the
E&M course on the other. MT
Acknowledgments
The TEAL project is supported by the d’Arbeloff Fund, the MIT/Microsoft iCampus
Alliance, National Science Foundation Grant #9950380, the MIT School of Science, and
the Department of Physics. Special thanks to Steve Lerman, director of the Center for
Educational Computing Initiatives and MIT, for hosting the first author throughout the
research period. Thanks also to faculty, staff, and students of the MIT Center for
Educational Computing Initiatives who have contributed to the TEAL project.
December 2003