This document is downloaded from DR‑NTU ( 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
CANet : class‑agnostic segmentation networks
with iterative refinement and attentive few‑shot
Zhang, Chi; Lin, Guosheng; Liu, Fayao; Yao, Rui; Shen, Chunhua
Zhang, C., Lin, G., Liu, F., Yao, R., & Shen, C.  . CANet : class‑agnostic segmentation
networks with iterative refinement and attentive few‑shot learning. Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
doi:10.1109/CVPR.2019.00536
 
 
© 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted
component of this work is available at:  
Downloaded on 26 Mar 2025 23:49:24 SGT
CANet: Class-Agnostic Segmentation Networks with Iterative Reﬁnement and
Attentive Few-Shot Learning
Chi Zhang1,
Guosheng Lin1∗,
Fayao Liu2,
Chunhua Shen2
1Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2The University of Adelaide, Australia
3China University of Mining and Technology, China
E-mail: , 
Recent progress in semantic segmentation is driven by
deep Convolutional Neural Networks and large-scale labeled image datasets.
However, data labeling for pixelwise segmentation is tedious and costly. Moreover, a trained
model can only make predictions within a set of pre-deﬁned
classes. In this paper, we present CANet, a class-agnostic
segmentation network that performs few-shot segmentation
on new classes with only a few annotated images available. Our network consists of a two-branch dense comparison module which performs multi-level feature comparison between the support image and the query image, and
an iterative optimization module which iteratively reﬁnes
the predicted results. Furthermore, we introduce an attention mechanism to effectively fuse information from multiple support examples under the setting of k-shot learning.
Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 show that our method
achieves a mean Intersection-over-Union score of 55.4%
for 1-shot segmentation and 57.1% for 5-shot segmentation,
outperforming state-of-the-art methods by a large margin of
14.6% and 13.2%, respectively.
1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks have made signiﬁcant breakthroughs in many visual understanding tasks
including image classiﬁcation , object detection , and semantic segmentation . One
crucial reason is the availability of large-scale datasets such
as ImageNet that enable the training of deep models.
However, data labeling is expensive, particularly for dense
prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation. In contrast to machine learning algorithms,
humans are able to segment a new concept from the image easily when only seeing a few examples. The gap be-
∗Guosheng Lin is the corresponding author.
Support set
Figure 1 – Overview of our proposed network for 1-shot segmentation.
Our framework consists of a dense comparison module (DCM) and an
iterative optimization module (IOM). Given only one annotated training
image, our network is able to segment test images with new classes and
iteratively optimize the results.
tween humans and machine learning algorithms motivates
the study of few-shot learning that aims to learn a model
which can be generalized well to new classes with scarce
labeled training data.
In this paper, we undertake the task of few-shot semantic segmentation that only uses a few annotated training
images to perform segmentation on new classes.
Previous work on this task follows the design of
two-branch structure which includes a support branch and
a query branch. The support branch aims to extract information from the support set to guide segmentation in the
query branch. We also adopt the two-branch design in our
framework to solve the few-shot segmentation problem.
Our network includes a two-branch dense comparison
module, in which a shared feature extractor extracts representations from the query set and the support set for comparison. The design of the dense comparison module takes
inspiration from metric learning on image classi-
ﬁcation tasks where a distance function evaluates the similarity between images. However, different from image classiﬁcation where each image has a label, image segmentation needs to make predictions on data with structured representation. It is difﬁcult to directly apply metric learning
to dense prediction problems. To solve this, one straightforward approach is to make comparisons between all pairs
of pixels. However, there are millions of pixels in an image
and comparison of all pixel pairs takes enormous computational cost. Instead, we aim to acquire a global representation from the support image for comparison. Here, to
only focus on the assigned category, we use global average
pooling over the foreground area to ﬁlter out irrelevant information. Then the global feature is compared with each
location in the query branch, which can be seen as a dense
form of the metric learning approach.
Under the few-shot setting, the network should be able to
handle new classes that are never seen during training. Thus
we aim to mine transferable representations from CNNs for
comparison. As is observed in feature visualization literature , features in lower layers relate to low-level
cues, e.g., edges and colors while features in higher layers
relate to object-level concepts such as categories. We focus on middle-level features that may constitute object parts
shared by unseen classes. For example, if the CNN learns
a feature that relates to wheel when the model is trained on
the class car, such feature may also be useful for feature
comparison on new vehicle classes, e.g., truck and bus. We
extract multiple levels of representations in CNNs for dense
comparison.
As there exist variances in appearance within the same
category, objects from the same class may only share a few
similar features. Dense feature comparison is not enough
to guide segmentation of the whole object area. Nevertheless, this gives an important clue of where the object is. In
semi-automatic segmentation literature, weak annotations
are given for class-agnostic segmentation, e.g., interactive
segmentation with click or scribble annotations 
and instance segmentation with bounding box or extreme
point priors . Transferable knowledge to locate the
object region is learned in the training process. Inspired
by semi-automatic segmentation tasks, we hope to gradually differentiate the objects from the background given the
dense comparison results as priors. We propose an iterative
optimization module (IOM) that learns to iteratively reﬁne
the predicted results. The reﬁnement is performed in a recurrent form that the dense comparison result and the predicted masks are sent to an IOM for optimization, and the
output is sent to the next IOM recurrently. After a few iterations of reﬁnement, our dense comparison module is able to
generate ﬁne-grained segmentation maps. Inside each IOM,
we adopt residual connections to efﬁciently incorporate the
predicted masks in the last iteration step. Fig. 1 shows an
overview of our network for one-shot segmentation.
Previous methods for k-shot segmentation is based on
the 1-shot model. They use non-learnable fusion methods to
fuse individual 1-shot results, e.g., averaging 1-shot predictions or intermediate features. Instead, we adopt an attention mechanism to effectively fuse information from multiple support examples.
To further reduce the labeling efforts for few-shot segmentation, we explore a new test setting: our model uses
the bounding box annotated support set to perform segmentation in the query image. We conduct comprehensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset and COCO
dataset to validate the effectiveness of our network. Main
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We develop a novel two-branch dense comparison
module which effectively exploits multiple levels of
feature representations from CNNs to make dense feature comparison.
• We propose an iterative optimization module to re-
ﬁne predicted results in an iterative manner. The ability of iterative reﬁnement can be generalized to unseen classes with few-shot learning for generating ﬁnegrained maps.
• We adopt an attention mechanism to effectively fuse
information from multiple support examples in the kshot setting, which outperforms non-learnable fusion
methods of 1-shot results.
• We demonstrate that given support set with weak annotations, i.e., bounding boxes, our model can still
achieve comparable performance to the result with expensive pixel-level annotated support set, which further reduces the labeling efforts of new classes for fewshot segmentation signiﬁcantly.
• Experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset
show that our method achieves a mean Intersectionover-Union score of 55.4% for 1-shot segmentation
and 57.1% for 5-shot segmentation, which signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art results by 14.6% and
13.2%, respectively.
2. Related Work
Few-shot learning.
Few-shot learning aims to learn
transferable knowledge that can be generalized to new
classes with scarce labeled training data. There exist many
formulations on few-shot classiﬁcation, including recurrent
neural network with memories , learning to ﬁnetune models , network parameter prediction ,
and metric learning .
Metric learning based
methods achieve state-of-the-art performance in the fewshot classiﬁcation tasks and they have the trait of being
fast and predicting in a feed-forward manner. Our work is
most related to Relation Network . Relation Network
meta-learns a deep distance metric to compare images and
compute the similarity score for classiﬁcation. The network
consists of an embedding module which generates the representations of the images and a relation module that compares the embeddings and outputs a similarity score. Both
modules are in the form of convolutional operations. The
dense comparison module in our network can be seen as an
extension of Relation Network in a dense form to tackle the
task of segmentation.
Few-shot semantic segmentation. Fully supervised semantic segmentation is the task of classifying each pixel in
an image to a set of pre-deﬁned categories . Few-shot semantic segmentation, on the other hand,
aims to generalize the segmentation ability to any new categories with only a few annotated examples. Previous work
on few-shot semantic segmentation employs two-branch
structures. Shaban et al. ﬁrst adopt few-shot learning
on semantic segmentation. The support branch directly predicts the weights of the last layer in the query branch for
segmentation. In , the support branch generates an embedding which is fused to the query branch as additional
features. Our network also follows the two-branch design.
However, different from previous work where two branches
have different structures, the two branches in our network
share the same backbone network. The models in previous
methods focus on the 1-shot setting, and when extending 1shot to k-shot, they apply 1-shot method independently to
each support example and use non-learnable fusion methods to fuse individual predicted results at the image level or
feature level. For example, Shaban et al. propose to use
logic OR operation to fuse individual predicted masks and
Rakelly et al. average the embedding in the support
branch generated by different support examples. Instead,
we adopt a learnable method through an attention mechanism to effectively fuse information from multiple support
3. Task Description
Suppose that our model is trained on a dataset with the
class set Ctrain, our goal is to use the trained model to make
the prediction on a different dataset with new classes Ctest
where only a few annotated examples are available. Intuitively, we train the model to have the ability that for a new
class c ̸∈Ctrain, our model is able to segment the class from
the images when only sees a few pictures of this class. Once
the model is trained, the parameters are ﬁxed and require no
optimization when tested on a new dataset.
paradigm to handle the few-shot scenario. Speciﬁcally,
given a k-shot learning task, each episode is constructed by
sampling 1) a support (training) set S = {(xi
s ∈RHi×Wi×3 is an RGB image and yi
RHi×Wi is a binary mask for class c in the support image;
and 2) a query (test) set Q = {xq, yq(c)} where xq is the
query image and yq(c) is the ground-truth mask for class c
in the query image. The input to the model is the support set
S and the query image xq, and the output is the predicted
mask ˆyq(c) for class c in the query image. As there may
be multiple classes in one query image xq, the ground truth
query mask is different when a different label c is assigned.
Fig. 1 shows an illustration of the task when k = 1.
We propose a new framework that solves the few-shot
semantic segmentation problem. We begin with the illustration of our model in the 1-shot setting ﬁrst without loss of
generality. Our network consists of two modules: the dense
comparison module (DCM) and the iterative optimization
module (IOM). The DCM performs dense feature comparison between the support example and the query example,
while IOM performs iterative reﬁnement of predicted results. Fig. 2 (a) shows an overview of our framework. To
generalize our network from 1-shot learning to k-shot learning, we adopt an attention mechanism to fuse information
from different support examples. Moreover, we propose a
new test setting that uses support images with bounding box
annotations for few-shot segmentation, which is described
subsequently.
4.1. Dense Comparison Module
We develop a two-branch dense comparison module that
densely compares each position in the query image with the
support example, as shown in Fig. 2 (b). The module consists of two sub-modules: a feature extractor that extracts
representations and a comparison module that performs feature comparison.
Feature extractor. The feature extractor aims to harvest different levels of representations from CNNs for feature matching. We use a ResNet-50 as the backbone
of the feature extractor. As done in previous few-shot segmentation work, the backbone model is pre-trained on Imagenet . As is observed in CNN feature visualization literature , features in lower layers often relate to lowlevel cues, e.g., edges and colors while features in higher
layers relate to object-level concepts such as object categories. In the few-shot scenario, our model should adapt to
any unseen classes. Thus we can not assume that a feature
corresponding to an unseen category is learned during training. Instead, we focus on middle-level features that may
constitute object parts shared by unseen classes. The layers in ResNet are divided into 4 blocks based on the spatial
resolution which naturally correspond to 4 different levels
of representation. We choose features generated by block2
and block3 for feature comparison and abandon layers after block3. We use dilated convolutions in layers after
block2 to maintain the spatial resolution of feature maps.
All feature maps after block2 have a ﬁxed size of 1/8 of the
input image. Features after block2 and block3 are concatenated and encoded to 256 dimensions by 3×3 convolutions.
We investigate the choice of features for comparison in Section 5.1.3. Both the support branch and the query branch use
Concatenation
Element-wise multiplication
Conv + ReLU
Support image
Support mask
Weights sharing
Dense Comparison Module
Query image
Support set
Iterative Optimization Module
Figure 2 – CANet for 1-shot semantic segmentation. (a) Overview of our network structure. (b) Dense Comparison Module. (c) Iterative Optimization
the same feature extractor. We keep the weights in ResNet
ﬁxed during training.
Dense Comparison. As there may be multiple object
categories and cluttered backgrounds in the support image,
we want to acquire an embedding that only corresponds to
the target category for comparison. Here, we use global average pooling over the foreground area to squeeze the feature maps to a feature vector. Global image features turn out
to be useful in segmentation tasks , which can be
easily achieved by global average pooling. In our network,
we only average features over the foreground area to ﬁlter
out irrelevant areas. After we obtain the global feature vector from the support set, we concatenate the vector with all
spatial locations in the feature map generated by the query
branch. This operation aims to compare all the spatial locations in the query branch to the global feature vector from
the support branch. Then, the concatenated feature maps go
through another convolutional block with 256 3 × 3 convolutional ﬁlters for comparison.
For efﬁcient implementation, we ﬁrst bilinearly downsample the binary support mask to the same spatial size of
the feature maps and then apply element-wise multiplication with the feature maps. As a result, features belonging to the background area become zero. Then we adopt
global sum pooling and divide the resulting vector by the
foreground area to obtain the average feature vector. We
upsample the vector to the same spatial size of query features and concatenate them for dense comparison.
Support sample k
Support sample 2
Support sample 1
Attention Module
Figure 3 – Attention mechanism for k-shot semantic segmentation. We
use the softmax function to normalize the outputs of the attention module from different support examples.
4.2. Iterative Optimization Module
As there exist variances in appearance within the same
category, dense comparison can only match a part of the
object, which may not be sufﬁciently powerful to accurately
segment the whole object in the image. We observe that the
initial prediction is an important clue about the rough position of the objects. We propose an iterative optimization
module to optimize the predicted results iteratively. The
structure is shown in Fig. 2 (c).
The module’s input is
the feature maps generated by the dense comparison module and predicted masks from the last iteration. Directly
concatenating feature maps with predicted masks as additional channels causes mismatch to the feature distribution
as there is no predicted mask for the ﬁrst forward pass. Instead, we propose to incorporate the predicted masks in a
residual form:
Mt = x + F(x, yt−1),
where x is the output feature of the dense comparison module; yt−1 is the predicted masks from the last iteration step,
and Mt is the output of the residual block. Function F(·) is
the concatenation of feature x and predicted masks yt−1,
followed by two 3 × 3 convolution blocks with 256 ﬁlters.
Then we add two vanilla residual blocks with the
same number of convolutional ﬁlters. On top of that, we
use Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling module (ASPP) proposed in Deeplab V3 to capture multi-scale information.
The module consists of four parallel branches that include
three 3 × 3 convolutions with atrous rates of 6, 12, and 18
respectively and a 1 × 1 convolution. The 1 × 1 convolution is operated on the image-level feature which is achieved
by global average pooling. Then the resulting vector is bilinearly upsampled to the original spatial size. The output
features from 4 branches are concatenated and fused by another 1 × 1 convolution with 256 ﬁlters. Finally, we use
1 × 1 convolution to generate the ﬁnal masks which include
a background mask and a foreground mask. We use a softmax function to normalize the score in each location, which
outputs the conﬁdence maps of the foreground and the background. The conﬁdence maps are then fed to the next IOM
for optimization. Our ﬁnal result is achieved by bilinearly
upsampling the conﬁdence map to the same spatial size of
the query image and classifying each location according to
the conﬁdence maps. At the training time, to avoid the iterative optimization module over-ﬁtting the predicted masks,
we alternatively use predicted masks in the last epoch and
empty masks as the input to IOM. The predicted masks yt−1
is reset to empty masks with a probability of pr. This can
be seen as dropout of the whole mask, an extension of the
standard dropout . In comparison to previous iterative
reﬁnement methods in segmentation literature ,
our method integrates the reﬁnement scheme into the model
with residual connection so that the whole model could run
in a feed-forward manner and is trained end-to-end.
4.3. Attention Mechanism for k-shot Segmentation
In order to efﬁciently merge information in the k-shot
setting, we use an attention mechanism to fuse the comparison results generated by different support examples. Specifically, we add an attention module parallel to the dense
comparison convolution in DCM (see Fig. 3). The attention branch consists of two convolutional blocks. The ﬁrst
Support set
Support set
Figure 4 – (a) CANet with pixel-wise annotated support set. (b) CANet
with bounding box annotated support set.
one has 256 3×3 ﬁlters, followed by 3×3 max pooling. The
second one has one 3 × 3 convolution followed by a global
average pooling. The result from the attention branch serves
as the weight λ. Then, the weights from all support examples are normalized by a softmax function:
The ﬁnal output is the weighted sum of features generated
by different support samples.
4.4. Bounding Box Annotations
As the essence of our dense comparison module is to
densely compare each location in the query image to the
global representation provided by the support example, we
explore a new form of support set annotation that uses
bounding boxes. Compared with pixel-wise annotations,
the bounding box annotation uses a rectangular box to denote the object area, which is often used in object detection
tasks. Labeling bounding box annotations is much cheaper
than pixel-wise labeling. We relax the support set by treating the whole bounding box area as the foreground. We test
our model under this setting to evaluate the capability of
our framework. The comparison of the two test settings is
shown in Fig. 4.
5. Experiments
To evaluate the performance of our proposed method, we
conduct extensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset and COCO dataset. Our network is trained end-toend. The loss function is the mean of cross-entropy loss
over all spatial locations in the output map. Our network is
trained using SGD for 200 epochs with the PyTorch library
on Nvidia Tesla P100 GPUs. We set the learning rate to
0.0025 and set probability pr to 0.7. We use a mini-batch of
4 episodes for training on PASCAL-5i and 8 on COCO. At
inference time, we iteratively optimize the predicted results
for 4 times after the initial prediction.
(a) 1-shot and 5-shot results under the meanIoU evaluation metric.
OSLSM 
co-FCN 
(b) 1-shot and 5-shot results under the FB-IoU evaluation metric.
Table 1 – Results on the PASCAL-5i dataset. Our proposed method outperforms all previous methods under both evaluation metrics and sets a new
state-of-the-art performance (bold).
Evaluation metric. There is a minor difference of evaluation metrics in previous work. Shaban et al. measure
the per-class foreground Intersection-over-Union (IoU) and
use the average IoU over all classes (meanIoU) to report the
results. While in , they ignore the image categories
and calculate the mean of foreground IoU and background
IoU over all test images (FB-IoU). We choose the meanIoU
evaluation metric for our analysis experiments due to the
following reasons: 1) The numbers of test samples in different classes are not balanced (e.g., 49 of class sheep vs. 378
of class person). Ignoring the image categories may lead to
a biased result towards the class with more images. Also,
we can observe the effectiveness of our model in different
classes with the meanIoU evaluation metric. 2) As most
objects are small relative to the whole image, even though
the model fails to segment any objects, the background IoU
can still be very high, thus failing to reﬂect the capability of
the model. 3) Foreground IoU is more often used in binary
segmentation literature (e.g., video segmentation and interactive segmentation). Nevertheless, we still compare our
results with previous work under both evaluation metrics.
5.1. PASCAL-5i
PASCAL-5i is a dataset for few-shot semantic segmentation proposed in . It is built on images from PASCAL
VOC 2012 and extra annotations from SDS . 20 object
categories from PASCAL VOC are evenly divided into 4
splits with three splits for training and one split for testing.
At test time, 1000 support-query pairs are randomly sampled in the test split. More details of PASCAL-5i can be
found in .
Comparison with the State-of-the-art Methods
We compare our model with the state-of-the-art methods in
Table 1. Table 1 (a) shows the results evaluated under the
meanIoU evaluation metric and Table 1 (b) shows the results under the FB-IoU metric. For the performance of 
under the FB-IoU metric, we quote the result reproduced
Annotation
Result (meanIoU %)
Pixel-wise labels
Bounding box
Table 2 – Evaluation with different support set annotations. Our model
with bounding box annotated support set can achieve comparable performance to the result with pixel-wise annotations
in . Our model signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods under both evaluation metrics. Particularly,
our meanIoU score outperforms the state-of-the-art results
by 14.6% for the 1-shot task and 13.2% for the 5-shot task.
Qualitative Results. Fig. 5 shows some qualitative examples of our segmentation results. Note that given the
same query image, our model is able to segment different
classes when different support examples are presented (See
the 5th and the 6th examples in Fig. 5).
Experiments on Bounding Box Annotations
We evaluate CANet with the bounding box annotated support set at test time. We acquire bounding box annotations
from the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset and SDS . The
support mask is the region inside the bounding box of one
instance instead of all instances in a support image. The instance is chosen randomly. As is shown in Table 2, the performance with bounding box annotated support set is comparable to the result with expensive pixel-level annotated
support set, which means our dense comparison module is
able to withstand noise introduced by the background area
within the bounding box.
Ablation Study
We implement extensive ablation experiments on the
PASCAL-5i dataset to inspect the effectiveness of different
components in our network. All results are average mean-
IoU over 4 splits on the PASCAL-5i dataset.
Features for Comparison.
In Table 3, we compare
our model variants that use different levels of feature in
Figure 5 – Qualitative examples of 1-shot segmentation on the PASCAL-5i dataset. The ﬁrst row is query images and support images (right bottom) with
ground-truth annotations. The second row is our predicted results. Note that the 5th and the 6th examples have the same query images and our model is
able to segment different classes when different support examples are presented.
Table 3 – Ablation experiments on the choice of features in ResNet
for comparison. The combination of features after block2 and block3
achieves the best result.
ResNet-50 for feature comparison. In all cases, we encode
the features to 256 dimensions before comparison and we
do not adopt iterative optimization. We experiment feature
comparison with single block and multiple blocks. When
single block is used for comparison, block3 performs the
best. When multiple blocks are used for comparison, the
combination of block2 and block3 achieves the best result.
The reason is that block2 corresponds to relatively lowlevel cues, which alone is not enough to match object parts.
While block4 corresponds to high-level features, e.g., categories, and incorporates a great number of parameters , which makes it hard to optimize under the fewshot setting. The combination of block2 and block3 is the
best for matching class-agnostic object parts. We also implement experiments with VGG16 as the feature extractor.
We choose features of stage 2, 3, and 4 (out of 5). The
ﬁnal multi-scale test result with VGG as the backbone is
54.3%. Compared with the ResNet50 version (55.4%), the
performance only drops by 1.1% and still signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art results.
Iterative Optimization Module. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed iterative optimization module, we
compare our network with a baseline model that does not
employ additional IOM for optimization, i.e., the initial prediction from CANet(CANet-Init). We also compare our iterative optimization scheme with DenseCRF , which
is a post-processing method widely used in segmentation
Result (meanIoU %)
CANet-Init
CANet-Init + DenseCRF
Table 4 – Ablation experiments on the iterative optimization module.
CANet-Init denotes the initial prediction from CANet without additional
optimization. Our iterative optimization scheme outperforms the baseline models by 2.8% and is more effective in reﬁning the segmentation
maps than DenseCRF.
literature to reﬁne segmentation maps. Table 4 shows the
results of different model variants. As is shown, the iterative optimization yields 2.8% improvement over the initial
prediction. DenseCRF does not signiﬁcantly improve the
few-shot segmentation prediction. We visualize the results
and ﬁnd that for the predicted masks which successfully locate most of the object region, DenseCRF can effectively
improve segmentation results, particularly in the region of
object boundaries. However, for failure masks, e.g., false
localization of objects, DenseCRF expands false positive
regions, which deteriorates the IoU score. Our IOM, on
the other hand, can effectively ﬁll the object region and remove irrelevant areas in a learnable way. We visualize the
intermediate results of our iterative optimization process in
Attention vs. Feature Fusion vs. Mask Fusion.
the k-shot setting, we compare our attention mechanism to
several solutions in previous work: 1) Feature-level average
fusion. We experiment the method in , which is to average the features generated by different support examples.
2) Logic OR fusion for masks. Shaban et al. use 1-shot
model to make predictions with each support example and
use logic OR operation to fuse individual predicted masks.
Logic OR operation means that a position is predicted as
foreground if any support example predicts it as foreground.
3) Average fusion for masks. Moreover, we also experiment
with average operation to fuse individual 1-shot predicted
conﬁdence maps. We report the results of CANet with different fusion solutions in Table 5. Our attention mechanism
Number of iterations (N)
Figure 6 – Visualization of the iterative optimization process. The ﬁrst
column shows the query and support images with ground-truth masks
annotated. The rest columns show our iterative optimization results.
Result (meanIoU %)
1-shot baseline
Feature-Avg
Table 5 – Comparison of different 5-shot solutions.
Our attention
method performs the best and brings the most increment in the mean-
IoU score over the 1-shot baseline.
performs the best and brings the most increment over 1-shot
baseline. This indicates that a learned attention module can
be more effective in fusing information from different support examples than non-learnable fusion methods in feature
level or image level. Using logic OR operation to fuse predicted masks does not show improvement over the 1-shot
Multi-scale evaluation. We also experiment multi-scale
evaluation as is commonly done in segmentation literature.
Speciﬁcally, we re-scale the query image by [0.7, 1, 1.3 ]
and average their predicted results. Multi-scale evaluation
brings 1.4% and 1.3% meanIoU improvement in 1-shot and
5-shot settings, respectively.
COCO 2014 is a challenging large-scale dataset,
which contains 80 object categories. The original dataset
contains 82,783 and 40,504 images for training and validation respectively. Directly experimenting on the original
dataset is very demanding on time and computation. Instead, we choose a subset of the original dataset to evaluate our model and for further research on this topic. We
choose 40 classes for training, 20 for validation and 20 for
test, which contain 39,107 (train), 5,895 (validation) and
9,673 (test) samples, respectively. Training images are cho-
Result (meanIoU %)
CANet-Init
(a) 1-shot results on COCO dataset.
Result (meanIoU %)
Feature-Avg
(b) 5-shot results on COCO dataset.
Table 6 – MeanIoU results on COCO dataset. MS denotes multi-scale
evaluation.
sen from the COCO training set, while validation and test
images are chosen from the COCO validation set.
For the 1-shot task, we compare our network with the
baseline model that does not employ additional iterative optimization (CANet-Init), and for the 5-shot task, we compare our attention mechanism with three non-learnable fusion methods described in Section 5.1.3.
The result is
shown in Table 6.
In the 1-shot setting, our iterative
optimization scheme brings 4.1% meanIoU improvement.
Multi-scale evaluation shows extra 3.3% increase. In the 5shot setting, our attention mechanism outperforms all nonlearnable methods. Multi-scale evaluation obtains another
1.9% gain.
6. Conclusion
We have presented CANet, a novel class-agnostic segmentation network with few-shot learning. The dense comparison module exploits multiple levels of feature in CNNs
to perform dense feature comparison and the iterative optimization module learns to iteratively reﬁnes the predicted
results. Our attention mechanism for solving the k-shot
problem turns out to be more effective than non-learnable
methods. Comprehensive experiments show the effectiveness of our framework, and the performance signiﬁcantly
outperforms all previous work.
Acknowledgements
G. Lin’s participation was partly supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore under its AI Singapore Programme [AISG-RP-2018-003] and a MOE Tier-1
research grant [RG126/17 (S)]. R. Yao’s participation was
supported by the National Natural Scientiﬁc Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61772530. We would like
to thank NVIDIA for GPU donation. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect
the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore.