Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
www.nature.com/scientificreports
DNA binding protein identification
by combining pseudo amino acid
composition and profile-based
protein representation
Bin Liu1,2, Shanyi Wang1 & Xiaolong Wang1,2
DNA-binding proteins play an important role in most cellular processes. Therefore, it is necessary
to develop an efficient predictor for identifying DNA-binding proteins only based on the sequence
information of proteins. The bottleneck for constructing a useful predictor is to find suitable features
capturing the characteristics of DNA binding proteins. We applied PseAAC to DNA binding protein
identification, and PseAAC was further improved by incorporating the evolutionary information
by using profile-based protein representation. Finally, Combined with Support Vector Machines
(SVMs), a predictor called iDNAPro-PseAAC was proposed. Experimental results on an updated
benchmark dataset showed that iDNAPro-PseAAC outperformed some state-of-the-art approaches,
and it can achieve stable performance on an independent dataset. By using an ensemble learning
approach to incorporate more negative samples (non-DNA binding proteins) in the training process,
the performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC was further improved. The web server of iDNAPro-PseAAC is
available at 
DNA-binding proteins have diverse functions in the cell, and play vital roles in various cellular processes,
such as gene regulation, DNA replication, and repair1. Identification of DNA-binding proteins is one of
the most important tasks in the annotation of protein functions. In recent years, DNA-binding proteins
can be identified by several experimental techniques, including filter binding assays2, X-ray crystallography3 and NMR4. However, it is time-consuming and expensive to identify DNA-binding proteins by
experimental approaches. Facing the avalanche of new protein sequences generated in the post-genomic
and big data age5,6, it is highly desired to develop automated methods for rapidly and effectively identifying DNA-binding proteins basing on the protein sequence information alone.
The computational methods for DNA binding protein identification can be grouped into two categories: (i) methods based on structures (ii) methods based on sequences. The first type makes use of both
the structural and sequential information of target proteins (see, e.g.,7–10). Although these methods show
promising predictive performance, the structural information of proteins is not always available, particularly for the huge amount of proteins, which prevents the application of these methods. In contrast, the
second type methods overcome this shortcoming by only requiring the sequence information as input
for the prediction11–20.
A key to improve the performance of the sequence-based methods is to find suitable feature extraction algorithms that can capture the characteristics of DNA binding proteins and non DNA binding
proteins. Motivated by the successful application of Chou’s pseudo amino acid composition (PseAAC) to
many important tasks in the field of computational proteomics, here we are to propose a new approach
1School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 2Key Laboratory of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation, Harbin Institute of
Technology Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. Correspondence and requests for materials
should be addressed to B.L. (email: )
received: 29 May 2015
accepted: 28 September 2015
Published: 20 October 2015
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
for DNA binding protein identification called iDNAPro-PseAAC, which extends the classic PseAAC
approach by incorporating the evolutionary information in the form of profile-based protein representation21. The iDNAPro-PseAAC has the following advantages compared with other currently available
approaches: (i) It is able to incorporate the global or long range sequence-order effects by means of
PseAAC. (ii) The evolutionary information imbedded in the profile-based protein representation is
employed by iDNAPro-PseAAC. (iii) It considers the various physical-chemical properties of amino
To establish a really useful statistical predictor for a protein system, we need to consider the following procedures: (i) Construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor. (ii)
Formulate the protein samples with an effective mathematical expression that can truly reflect their
intrinsic correlation with the attribute to be predicted. (iii) Introduce or develop a powerful algorithm
(or engine) to operate the prediction. (iv) Perform properly cross-validation tests to objectively evaluate
the anticipated accuracy of the predictor. Below, we are going to describe how to build the new predictor
according to the four procedures.
The influence of λ and ω on the performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC.
There are two parameters
λ and ω in iDNAPro-PseAAC, which would influence its performance (see method section). λ can be
any integer between 1 and L-1, where L is the shortest length of sequences in the benchmark dataset.
The range of ω is 0-1. The performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC with different λ and ω combinations is
shown in Fig.  1 and Supplementary S1, from which we can see that iDNAPro-PseAAC achieves the
best performance with λ =  3 and ω =  0.7. These parameter values are used in the following experiments.
Discriminant Visualization.
To further study the discriminant power of features, we calculate
the discriminant weight vectors in the feature space. In the SVM training process, we can get the
sequence-specific weights, which can be used to calculate the discriminant weight of each feature. The
feature discriminant weight vector W can be calculated as following:
where the weight vector A of the training set with N samples obtained from the kernel-based training;
M is the matrix of sequence representatives; j is the dimension of the feature vector. The element in W
represents the discriminative power of the corresponding feature.
The discriminative weights of all the 23 features are shown in Fig. 2. We can see that 9 amino acids
show positive values, while the other 11 amino acids show negative values. Interestingly, most of the
amino acids with positive values, such as R, K, have been reported as important residues in DNA binding
proteins, and they are redundant in DNA protein binding regions22. iDNAPro-PseAAC is able to capture
Figure 1.  The performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC with different λ and ω combinations. iDNAPro-
PseAAC achieves the best performance with λ =  3 and ω  =  0.7.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
this kind of features of DNA binding proteins, which could explain the reason for its better performance.
Another interesting pattern is that all the three features capturing the sequence-order effects (λ =  1, 2, 3)
show negative values, indicating that this kind of features is useful for representing the features of non
DNA binding proteins.
Results on the benchmark dataset.
Table 1 shows the predictive results of iDNAPro-PseAAC on
the benchmark dataset by using Jackknife test. For comparison, the results of four state-of-the-art methods are also listed, including DNAbinder (dimension 21)23, DNAbinder (dimension 400)23, DNA-Prot24
and iDNA-Prot25. The reason why we select these four methods is that they have public available software
tools with reported optimized parameters. Their optimized results on the benchmark dataset can be
easily obtained by using these tools and parameter settings.
From Table 1 we can see that iDNAPro-PseAAC achieves the best performance. In order to further
study the performance of the proposed method, the ROC curve is employed to evaluate the performance
of different methods. ROC curve is a graphical plot that illustrates the performance of a binary classifier
system with its discrimination threshold varying. The horizontal coordinate is false-positive rate and the
vertical is true-positive rate. The true-positive rate is also known as sensitivity in biomedical informatics,
or recall in machine learning5,26. The false-positive rate is also known as the fall-out and can be calculated
as 1 -specificity. The area under the curve (AUC) is the evaluation criteria for the classifier. Figure  3
shows the ROC curve of the five methods, from which we can see that iDNAPro-PseAAC outperforms
other four approaches in terms of AUC.
Performance comparison with other related computational predictors.
To further evaluate the
performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC and facilitate the comparison against previous predictors, an independent test dataset PDB186 constructed by Lou et al. is used27, where 93 proteins are DNA-binding
proteins and 93 proteins are non-DNA-binding proteins. To avoid the homology bias, we use the
NCBI’s BLASTCLUST28 to remove those proteins from the benchmark dataset that have more than 25%
sequence identity to any protein within a same subset of the PDB186 dataset. The iDNAPro-PseAAC
is re-trained on the resulting benchmark dataset, and then this model is used to predict the samples
in the independent dataset. The results are shown in Table 2, and the ROC curves of various methods
are plotted in Fig. 4. Compared with the results listed in Table 2, we can see that iDNAPro-PseAAC
can achieve stable performance on the independent dataset, indicating that the proposed method is a
Figure 2.  The discriminative weights of all the 23 features.
iDNAPro-PseAAC
DNAbinder (dimension 21)a
DNAbinder (dimension 400)b
iDNA-Protd
Table 1.  A comparison of the jackknife test results by iDNAPro-PseAAC with the other methods on the
benchmark dataset of Eq. 2 (cf. Supporting Information S3).
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
useful tool for DNA binding protein identification. iDNAPro-PseAAC outperforms other approaches
except for DBPPred. However, our method is more efficient than DBPPred. DBPPred uses 1486 features
derived from predicted secondary structure, predicted relative solvent accessibility, and position specific
scoring matrix. These features are calculated with the help of two software tools, including SPINE-X and
Psi-Blast. All these tools require a time consuming multiple sequence alignment process29. Furthermore,
these features contain several parameters, which should be optimized on a validate dataset. This requires
additional running time for DBPPred and raises the risk of over-fitting problem caused by this parameter optimization process. In contrast, the 23 features used in iDNAPro-PseAAC can be easily generated
only based on the protein sequences. Therefore, iDNAPro-PseAAC is more efficient than DBPPred, and
avoids the risk of over-fitting.
Influence of Negative Samples on the Predictive Performance.
In real world application, there
are more non DNA binding proteins (negative samples) than the DNA binding proteins (positive samples)30. However, in order to avoid the classifier biased problem, a balanced benchmark dataset  is used
to construct iDNAPro-PseAAC. Therefore, it is interesting to explore the influence of different negative
sets on the predictive performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC. In this regard, we conduct the following experiments. First we extend the size of the negative set − in the the benchmark dataset  by selecting more
non DNA binding proteins from PDB31. After removing the redundant proteins sharing more than 25%
Figure 3.  The ROC curves obtained by different methods on the benchmark dataset using the jackknife
tests. The areas under the ROC curves or AUC are 0.839, 0.826, 0.814, 0.815, 0.789 and 0.761 for iDNAPro-
PseAAC, DNAbinder (dimension 21), DNAbinder(dimension 400), DNA-Prot and iDNA-Prot, respectively.
See the main text for further explanation.
iDNAPro-PseAAC
DNA-Threader
Table 2.  A comparison of the resultsa obtained by iDNAPro-PseAAC and the other methods on the
independent dataset PDB186. aThe results of iDNA-Prot25, DNA-Prot24, DNAbinder23, DNABIND47, DNA-
Threader48, and DBPPred27 were obtained from27. bN/A represents the unreported values.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
similarity with the independent dataset, we obtain 2059 negative samples, which were listed in
Supplementary S2. The extended negative set is then randomly divided into 4 subsets. For each subset,
its size is approximately equal to that of the positive set + in the the benchmark dataset . These four
subsets are respectively combined with the positive set +, and four new datasets are generated. Four
predictors of iDNAPro-PseAAC trained with these four datasets can be represented as iDNAPro-PseAAC-1,
iDNAPro-PseAAC-2, iDNAPro-PseAAC-3, and iDNAPro-PseAAC-4, respectively. Their performance
is then evaluated on the independent dataset. Table 3 shows the results of the four methods, and the
corresponding ROC curves are plotted in Fig. 5, from which, we can see that the four predictors show
similar performance, indicating that different subsets of negative samples don’t have significant impact
on the performance of iDNAPro-PseAAC. Next, we investigate if these four predictors can be combined
to further improve the performance. In this regard, we employ a simple ensemble learning approach to
combine them32,33. For each test sample, it is predicted by the four predictors respectively, and the final
class label of the test sample is assigned based on the average values of the four probability values calculated by the four predictors. The results of iDNAPro-PseAAC-EL (iDNAPro-PseAAC with the ensemble
learning approach) are shown in Table 3 and Fig. 5. Performance improvement can be observed. This is
because by using ensemble learning method, more negative samples are used to train iDNAPro-PseAAC,
leading to a more accurate predictor.
Discussion
Because of the importance of DNA binding protein identification, computational predictors only using
the sequence information for DNA binding protein identification is highly desired. In this study, we
proposed a method called iDNAPro-PseAAC for DNA binding protein identification, which combines
the pseudo amino acid composition with profile-based protein representation. Experimental results show
Figure 4.  The ROC curves obtained by different methods on the independent dataset PDB186. The
areas under the ROC curves or AUC are 0.775, 0.607, 0.694, and 0.791 for iDNAPro-PseAAC, DNAbinder,
DNABIND and DBPPred, respectively. See the main text for further explanation.
iDNAPro-PseAAC-1
iDNAPro-PseAAC-2
iDNAPro-PseAAC-3
iDNAPro-PseAAC-4
iDNAPro-PseAAC-EL
Table 3.  Results on independent dataset PDB186 achieved by iDNAPro-PseAAC trained with different
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
that it outperform other approaches in both benchmark dataset and independent dataset. Furthermore,
the discriminative model can be analyzed to reveal the in-depth features of DNA binding proteins, which
would benefit the researchers who want to investigate the characteristics of DNA binding proteins. Some
recent studies have shown that DNA-binding proteins also regulate the microRNA targets, and involve
in the noncoding RNA-protein-disease network 34–39. We believe that this predictor would be a high
throughput tool for DNA binding protein investigation.
Benchmark Dataset.
A reliable and stringent benchmark dataset is necessary to build and evaluate
a statistical predictor. In this regard, an updated benchmark dataset for this study is constructed based
on the latest version of Protein Data Bank (PDB)31, which can be formulated as:
where + represents the subset containing DNA binding proteins (positive samples), − represents the
subset containing non DNA binding proteins (negative samples), and the symbol ∪ is the “union” in the
set theory. DNA-binding protein sequences are collected from the PDB by searching the mmCIF keyword of ‘DNA binding protein’, ‘protein-DNA complex’, and other key words with similar meaning. To
construct a high quality and non-redundant benchmark dataset, the protein sequences obtained should
be filtered by the following 2 criteria. (1) Proteins with length less than 50 AA were removed, which
might be fragment. (2) To reduce redundancy and homology bias, the sequence similarity lower than
25% between any two proteins were cut off by using PISCES40. Finally, we obtained 525 DNA binding
proteins for the subset of +. 550 non DNA binding proteins were randomly selected from the PDB
according to the above criteria. The accession codes and sequences of the 525 positive and 550 negative
samples are given in the Supplementary S3.
Profile-based protein representation.
Profile-based protein representation21 is an efficient approach
to extract the evolutionary information from frequency profiles. Its main steps are as follows.
Given the protein sequence P consisting L amino acids as formulated as:
R R R R R R
where R1 represents the 1st residue, R2 represents the 2nd residue and so forth. The frequency profile of
sequence P generated by PSI-BLAST28 with default parameters can be represented as a matrix M:
Figure 5.  The ROC curves obtained by different iDNAPro-PseAAC predictors on the independent
dataset PDB186. The areas under the ROC curves or AUC are 0.750, 0.750, 0.741, 0.702, 0.778 for
iDNAPro-PseAAC-1, iDNAPro-PseAAC-2, iDNAPro-PseAAC-3, iDNAPro-PseAAC-4, and iDNAPro-
PseAAC-EL, respectively.
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
where 20 is the number of standard amino acids; mij is the target frequency representing the probability
of amino acid i (i =  1, 2, …, 20) appearing in sequence position j (j =  1, 2, 3…, L) of protein P during
evolutionary process. The mij is calculated as:
where fij represents the observed frequency of amino acid i in column j, α is the number of different
amino acids in column j-1. β is a free parameter set to a constant value of 10, which is initially used by
PSI-BLAST. gij is the pseudo-count for standard amino acid i in position j. It is calculated as follows:
where pk is the background frequency of amino acid k, qik is the score of amino acid i being aligned to
amino acid j in BLOSUM62 substitution matrix, which is the default score matrix of PSI-BLAST.
For each column in M, the amino acids are sorted in descending order according to their frequency
values. Thus the sorted matrix
M can be represented as:
The profile-based protein representation P′ of protein P can be generated by combining the most
frequent amino acids in all the columns of M, and can be represented as:
R i represents the most frequent amino acid in the i-th column of
M , whose frequency value is
Pseudo amino acid composition (PseAAC).
One of the most important but also most difficult
problems in computational biology and biomedicine is how to formulate a biological sequence with a
discrete model or a vector, yet still keep considerable sequence order information. This is because all
the existing operation engines, such as SVM (Support Vector Machine) and NN (Neural Network),
can only handle vector but not sequence samples, as elaborated in41,42. However, a vector defined in a
discrete model may completely lose all the sequence-order information. To avoid completely losing the
sequence-order information for proteins, the pseudo amino acid composition or PseAAC was proposed43.
The PseAAC approach then performs on the profile-based protein representation P′ (c.f. Eq. 9) to
convert it into a fixed length feature vector by using PseAAC:
where T is transpose operator, λ is the distance parameter considering the sequence-order effects of
residues in proteins. xu can be calculated by
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
where fu is the occurrence frequency of 20 standard amino acid in profile-based protein representation
P′. ω is the weight factor for the sequence-order effect. θk is the sequence-order correlation factor, which
can be calculated as:
R i is the i-th amino acid in P′. L is the length of P′. k is the distance between two amino acids
along P′. Θ( ′ ,
k represents the scores calculated according to seven kinds of physical-chemical
properties of amino acids (their values are listed in Supplementary S4, which can be calculated by:
k are the normalized physicochemical property values of amino acid ′
k in property j, which can be calculated by the following equation:
i represents the raw physicochemical property value of amino acid aj in property j. ak (k =  1,
2, 3, 4, …, 20) represents the 20 standard amino acids.
Support Vector Machine.
In machine learning, support vectors are supervised learning models with
associated learning algorithms44. For a given training samples, the basic mission of SVM is constructing
a separating hyper-plane to maximize the margin of different samples in training set. An SVM model is
a representation of examples as points in space, mapped so that the examples of the separate categories
are divided by a clear gap.
In this study, we adopt the Lib-SVM package. The kernel function was set as Radial Basis Function(RBF)
which can be defined as:
The two parameters C and γ  were were optimized on the benchmark dataset by the grid tools in the
LIBSVM. After optimizing, C is set as 8192 and γ  is set as 8.0.
The flowchart of generating the feature vectors and constructing the SVM classifier for
iDNAPro-PseAAC is shown in Fig. 6.
Evaluation methodology.
How to evaluate the performance of a new predictor is a key component.
There are three cross-validation methods, which are often used: independent dataset, subsampling or
K-fold(such as 5-fold, 7-fold, or 10-fold) test, and Jackknife test. However, there are considerable arbitrariness exists in the independent dataset test and the K-fold cross validation. Jackknife can make the
least arbitrary and has been widely used in computational genomics and proteomics. In the jackknife
test, each of the proteins sequence in the benchmark is singled out as an independent test sample in turn.
Also, four metrics called the sensitivity(Sn), specificity(Sp), accuracy(Acc), and Mathew’s correlation
coefficient(MCC), are often used to measure the test quality of a predictor from different angles45.


where TP represents the number of the true positive; TN, the number of the true negative; FP, the number of the false positive; FN, the number of the false negative; SN, the sensitivity; Sp, the specificity; Acc,
the accuracy; MCC, the Mathew’s correlation coefficient.
In the study, we also use the metrics receiver operation characteristics (ROC) score. ROC curve is a
graphical plot that illustrates the performance of a binary classifier system as its discrimination threshold
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports | 5:15479 | DOI: 10.1038/srep15479
is varied46. A score 1 denotes perfect separation of positive samples from negative ones, whereas a score
of 0 indicates that none of the sequences selected by the algorithm is positive.