NHITS: Neural Hierarchical Interpolation for Time Series Forecasting
Cristian Challu1*, Kin G. Olivares1*, Boris N. Oreshkin2, Federico Garza Ramirez3, Max
Mergenthaler-Canseco3, Artur Dubrawski1
1Auton Lab, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2Unity Technologies, Labs, Montreal, QC, Canada
3Nixtla, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{cchallu, kdgutier, awd}@cs.cmu.edu, , {federico, max}@nixtla.io
Recent progress in neural forecasting accelerated improvements in the performance of large-scale forecasting systems.
Yet, long-horizon forecasting remains a very difficult task. Two
common challenges afflicting the task are the volatility of the
predictions and their computational complexity. We introduce
NHITS, a model which addresses both challenges by incorporating novel hierarchical interpolation and multi-rate data
sampling techniques. These techniques enable the proposed
method to assemble its predictions sequentially, emphasizing
components with different frequencies and scales while decomposing the input signal and synthesizing the forecast. We
prove that the hierarchical interpolation technique can efficiently approximate arbitrarily long horizons in the presence
of smoothness. Additionally, we conduct extensive large-scale
dataset experiments from the long-horizon forecasting literature, demonstrating the advantages of our method over the
state-of-the-art methods, where NHITS provides an average
accuracy improvement of almost 20% over the latest Transformer architectures while reducing the computation time by
an order of magnitude (50 times). Our code is available at
 
Introduction
Long-horizon forecasting is critical in many important applications, including risk management and planning. Notable
examples include power plant maintenance scheduling and planning for infrastructure construction , as well as early warning
systems that help mitigate vulnerabilities due to extreme
weather events . In healthcare,
predictive monitoring of vital signs enables the detection of
preventable adverse outcomes and application of life-saving
interventions .
Recently, neural time series forecasting has progressed in
a few promising directions. First, the architectural evolution
included adopting the attention mechanism and the rise of
Transformer-inspired approaches , as
well as the introduction of attention-free architectures composed of deep stacks of fully connected layers . All rights reserved.
250 500 750 1000
Horizon [H]
Parameters [Millions]
Time [Train Step / Seg]
(a) Computational Cost
250 500 750 1000
Horizon [H]
Performance [MAE]
Log10 Scale
(b) Prediction Errors
100 150 200 250 300
100 150 200 250 300
Low freq latent
100 150 200 250 300
Prediction τ ∈ {t+1,..., t+H}
High freq latent
(c) Neural Hierarchical Interpolation
Figure 1: (a) The computational costs in time and memory (b)
and mean absolute errors (MAE) of the predictions of a high
capacity fully connected model exhibit evident deterioration
with growing forecast horizons. (c) Specializing a flexible
model’s outputs in the different signal frequencies through
hierarchical interpolation combined with multi-rate input
processing offers a solution.
2020; Olivares et al. 2021a). Both approaches are relatively
easy to scale up in terms of capacity, compared to LSTMs,
and have proven capable of capturing long-range dependencies. The attention-based approaches are generic as they can
explicitly model direct interactions between every pair of
input-output elements. Unsurprisingly, they happen to be the
most computationally expensive. The architectures based on
fully connected stacks implicitly capture input-output relationships and tend to be more compute-efficient. Second, both
approaches have replaced the recurrent forecast generation
strategy with the multi-step prediction strategy. Aside from
The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)
its convenient bias-variance benefits and robustness , the
multi-step strategy has enabled the models to efficiently predict long sequences in a single forward pass .
Despite all the recent progress, long-horizon forecasting
remains challenging for neural networks because their unbounded expressiveness translates directly into excessive computational complexity and forecast volatility, both of which
become especially pronounced in this context. For instance,
both attention and fully connected layers scale quadratically
in memory and computational cost with respect to the forecasting horizon length. Fig. 1 illustrates how forecasting
errors and computation costs inflate dramatically with the
growing forecasting horizon in the case of the fully connected
architecture electricity consumption predictions. Attentionbased predictions show similar behavior.
Neural long-horizon forecasting research has mostly
focused on attention efficiency making self-attention
sparse or
local . In the same vein, attention has been
cleverly redefined through locality-sensitive hashing or FFT .
Although that research has led to incremental improvements
in computing cost and accuracy, the silver bullet long-horizon
forecasting solution is yet to be found. In this paper, we make
a bold step in this direction by developing a novel forecasting
approach that cuts long-horizon compute cost by an order
of magnitude while simultaneously offering 16% accuracy
improvements on a large array of multi-variate forecasting
datasets compared to existing state-of-the-art Transformerbased techniques. We redefine existing fully-connected
N-BEATS architecture by enhancing
its input decomposition via multi-rate data sampling and
its output synthesizer via multi-scale interpolation. Our
extensive experiments show the importance of the proposed
novel architectural components and validate significant
improvements in the accuracy and computational complexity
of the proposed algorithm.
Our contributions are summarized below:
1. Multi-Rate Data Sampling: We incorporate subsampling layers in front of fully-connected blocks, significantly reducing the memory footprint and the amount
of computation needed, while maintaining the ability to
model long-range dependencies.
2. Hierarchical Interpolation: We enforce smoothness of
the multi-step predictions by reducing the dimensionality
of neural network’s prediction and matching its time scale
with that of the final output via multi-scale hierarchical
interpolation. This novel technique is not unique to our
proposed model, and can be incorporated into different
architectures.
3. NHITS architecture: A novel way of hierarchically synchronizing the rate of input sampling with the scale of
output interpolation across blocks, which induces each
block to specialize in forecasting its own frequency band
of the time-series signal.
4. State-of-the-art results on six large-scale benchmark
datasets from the long-horizon forecasting literature: electricity transformer temperature, exchange rate, electricity consumption, San Francisco bay area highway traffic,
weather, and influenza-like illness.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First,
we review the relevant literature. Second, we introduce notation and describe the methodology. After it, we describe and
analyze our empirical findings. The last section concludes
the paper.
Related Work
Neural forecasting. Over the past few years, deep forecasting methods have become ubiquitous in industrial forecasting systems, with examples in optimal resource allocation
and planning in transportation , large ecommerce retail , or financial trading
 . The evident success
of the methods in recent forecasting competitions has renovated the interest within the academic community . In the context of multi-variate long-horizon
forecasting, Transformer-based approaches have dominated
the landscape in recent years, including Autoformer , an encoder-decoder model with decomposition capabilities and an approximation to attention based
on Fourier transform, Informer , Transformer with MLP based multi-step prediction strategy, that
approximates self-attention with sparsity, Reformer , Transformer that
approximates attention with locality-sensitive hashing and
LogTrans , Transformer with local/logsparse attention.
Multi-step forecasting. Investigations of the bias/variance
trade-off in multi-step forecasting strategies reveal that the
direct strategy, which allocates a different model for each
step, has low bias and high variance, avoiding error accumulation across steps, exhibited by the classical recursive strategy,
but losing in terms of net model parsimony. Conversely, in
the joint forecasting strategy, a single model produces forecasts for all steps in one shot, striking the perfect balance
between variance and bias, avoiding error accumulation and
leveraging shared model parameters .
Multi-rate input sampling. Previous forecasting literature recognized challenges of extremely long horizon predictions, and proposed mixed data sampling regression to ameliorate the problem of parameter proliferation while preserving high-frequency temporal
information. MIDAS regressions maintained the classic recursive forecasting strategy of linear auto-regressive models
but defined a parsimonious fashion of feeding the inputs.
Interpolation. Interpolation has been extensively used to
augment the resolution of modeled signals in many fields
such as signal and image processing . In
time-series forecasting, its applications range from com-
Forecast Period
Backcast Period
Model Input
̂yt+1:t+H,ℓ
Stack Input
yt−L:t,s−1
Global Forecast
(model output)
Stack Residual
(to next stack)
Block Input
yt−L:t,ℓ−1
Figure 2: NHITS architecture. The model is composed of several MLPs with ReLU nonlinearities. Blocks are connected via
doubly residual stacking principle with the backcast ˜yt−L:t,ℓand forecast ˆyt+1:t+H,ℓoutputs of the ℓ-th block. Multi-rate input
pooling, hierarchical interpolation and backcast residual connections together induce the specialization of the additive predictions
in different signal bands, reducing memory footprint and compute time, improving architecture parsimony and accuracy.
pleting unevenly sampled data and noise filters to fine-grained
quantile-regressions with recurrent networks . To our knowledge, temporal interpolation has not been
used to induce multi-scale hierarchical time-series forecasts.
NHITS Methodology
In this section, we describe our proposed approach, NHITS,
whose high-level diagram and main principles of operation
are depicted in Fig. 2. Our method extends the Neural Basis
Expansion Analysis approach in several important respects, making it more accurate
and computationally efficient, especially in the context of
long-horizon forecasting. In essence, our approach uses multirate sampling of the input signal and multi-scale synthesis
of the forecast, resulting in a hierarchical construction of
forecast, greatly reducing computational requirements and
improving forecasting accuracy.
Similarly to N-BEATS, NHITS performs local nonlinear
projections onto basis functions across multiple blocks. Each
block consists of a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which learns
to produce coefficients for the backcast and forecast outputs
of its basis. The backcast output is used to clean the inputs of
subsequent blocks, while the forecasts are summed to compose the final prediction. The blocks are grouped in stacks,
each specialized in learning a different characteristic of the
data using a different set of basis functions. The overall network input, yt−L:t, consists of L lags.
NHITS is composed of S stacks, B blocks each. Each
block contains an MLP predicting forward and backward
basis coefficients. The next subsections describe the novel
components of our architecture. Note that in the following,
we skip the stack index s for brevity.
Multi-Rate Signal Sampling
At the input to each block ℓ, we propose to use a MaxPool
layer with kernel size kℓto help it focus on analyzing components of its input with a specific scale. Larger kℓwill tend to
cut more high-frequency/small-time-scale components from
the input of the MLP, forcing the block to focus on analyzing
large scale/low frequency content. We call this multi-rate
signal sampling, referring to the fact that the MLP in each
block faces a different effective input signal sampling rate.
Intuitively, this helps the blocks with larger pooling kernel
size kℓfocus on analyzing large scale components critical for
producing consistent long-horizon forecasts.
Additionally, multi-rate processing reduces the width of
the MLP input for most blocks, limiting the memory footprint
and the amount of computation as well as reducing the number of learnable parameters and hence alleviating the effects
of overfitting, while maintaining the original receptive field.
Given block ℓinput yt−L:t,ℓ(the input to the first block ℓ= 1
is the network-wide input, yt−L:t,1 ≡yt−L:t), this operation
can be formalized as follows:
t−L:t,ℓ= MaxPool (yt−L:t,ℓ, kℓ)
Non-Linear Regression
Following subsampling, block ℓlooks at its input and nonlinearly regresses forward θf
ℓand backward θb
ℓinterpolation
MLP coefficients that learns hidden vector hℓ∈RNh, which
is then linearly projected:
ℓ= LINEARf (hℓ)
ℓ= LINEARb (hℓ)
The coefficients are then used to synthesize backcast ˜yt−L:t,ℓ
and forecast ˆyt+1:t+H,ℓoutputs of the block, via the process
described below.
Hierarchical Interpolation
In most multi-horizon forecasting models, the cardinality
of the neural network prediction equals the dimensionality
of the horizon, H. For example, in N-BEATSi |θf
in Transformer-based models, decoder attention layer crosscorrelates H output embeddings with L encoded input embeddings (L tends to grow with growing H). This leads to
quick inflation in compute requirements and unnecessary
explosion in model expressiveness as horizon H increases.
We propose to use temporal interpolation to combat these
issues. We define the dimensionality of the interpolation coefficients in terms of the expressiveness ratio rℓthat controls the number of parameters per unit of output time,
ℓ| = ⌈rℓH⌉. To recover the original sampling rate and
predict all H points in the horizon, we use temporal interpolation via the interpolation function g:
ˆyτ,ℓ= g(τ, θf
∀τ ∈{t + 1, . . . , t + H},
˜yτ,ℓ= g(τ, θb
∀τ ∈{t −L, . . . , t}.
Interpolation can vary in smoothness, g ∈C0, C1, C2. In
Appendix G we explore the nearest neighbor, piece-wise
linear, and cubic alternatives. For concreteness, the linear
interpolator g ∈C1, along with the time partition T = {t +
1, t + 1 + 1/rℓ, . . . , t + H −1/rℓ, t + H}, is defined as
g(τ, θ) = θ[t1] +
θ[t2] −θ[t1]
t∈T :t≤τ τ −t,
t2 = t1 + 1/rℓ.
The hierarchical interpolation principle is implemented
by distributing expressiveness ratios across blocks in a manner synchronized with multi-rate sampling. Blocks closer to
the input have smaller rℓand larger kℓ, implying that input
blocks generate low-granularity signals via more aggressive
interpolation, being also forced to look at more aggressively
sub-sampled (and smoothed) signals. The resulting hierarchical forecast ˆyt+1:t+H is assembled by summing the outputs
of all blocks, essentially composing it out of interpolations at
different time-scale hierarchy levels.
Since each block specializes on its own scale of input and
output signal, this induces a clearly structured hierarchy of
interpolation granularity, the intuition conveyed in Fig. 1 and
3. We propose to use exponentially increasing expressiveness ratios to handle a wide range of frequency bands while
controlling the number of parameters. Alternatively, each
Prediction τ ∈{t + 1, … , t + H}
Coefficients Scale
Length=1/rℓ
Coefficients θf
Figure 3: NHITS composes its predictions hierarchically
using blocks specializing on different frequencies, through
expressiveness ratios, and interpolation. The coefficients are
locally determined along the horizon, allowing NHITS to
reconstruct non-periodic/stationary signals, beyond constant
Fourier transform.
stack can specialize in modeling a different known cycle of
the time-series (weekly, daily etc.) using a matching rℓ(see
Table A.3). Finally, the backcast residual formed at previous
hierarchy scale is subtracted from the input of the next hierarchy level to amplify the focus of the next level block on
signals outside of the band that has already been handled by
the previous hierarchy members.
ˆyt+1:t+H =
ˆyt+1:t+H,ℓ
yt−L:t,ℓ+1 = yt−L:t,ℓ−˜yt−L:t,ℓ
Hierarchical interpolation has advantageous theoretical
guarantees. We show in Appendix A, that it can approximate
infinitely/dense horizons. As long as the interpolating
function g is characterized by projections to informed
multi-resolution functions Vw, and the forecast relationships
are smooth.
Neural Basis Approximation Theorem. Let a forecast
mapping be Y(· | yt−L:t) : L →F, where the forecast
functions F = {Y(τ) : →R} = L2( ) representing a infinite/dense horizon, are square integrable. If the
multi-resolution functions Vw = {ϕw,h(τ) = ϕ(2w(τ −
h)) | w ∈Z, h ∈2−w × [0, . . . , 2w]} can arbitrarily approximate L2( ). And the projection ProjVw(Y(τ)) varies
smoothly on yt−L:t. Then the forecast mapping Y(· | yt−L:t)
can be arbitrarily approximated by a neural basis expansion
learning a finite number of multi-resolution coefficients ˆθw,h.
That is ∀ϵ > 0,
|Y(τ | yt−L:t) −
ˆθw,h(yt−L:t)ϕw,h(τ)|dτ ≤ϵ (5)
Examples of multi-resolution functions Vw = {ϕw,h(τ) =
ϕ(2w(τ −h)) | w ∈Z, h ∈2−w × [0, . . . , 2w]} include
piece-wise constants, piece-wise linear functions and splines
with arbitrary approximation capabilities.
Experimental Results
We follow the experimental settings from . We first describe datasets, baselines and metrics used
for the quantitative evaluation of our model. Table 1 presents
our key results, demonstrating SoTA performance of our
method relative to existing work. We then carefully describe
the details of training and evaluation setups. We conclude the
section by describing ablation studies.
All large-scale datasets used in our empirical studies are
publicly available and have been used in neural forecasting
literature, particularly in the context of long-horizon . Table
A1 summarizes their characteristics. Each set is normalized
with the train data mean and standard deviation.
Electricity Transformer Temperature. The ETTm2
dataset measures an electricity transformer from a region
of a province of China including oil temperature and variants of load (such as high useful load and high useless load)
from July 2016 to July 2018 at a fifteen minutes frequency.
Exchange-Rate. The Exchange dataset is a collection of
daily exchange rates of eight countries relative to the US
dollar. The countries include Australia, UK, Canada, Switzerland, China, Japan, New Zealand and Singapore from 1990 to
2016. Electricity. The ECL dataset reports the fifteen minute
electricity consumption (KWh) of 321 customers from 2012
to 2014. For comparability, we aggregate it hourly. San Francisco Bay Area Highway Traffic. This TrafficL dataset
was collected by the California Department of Transportation,
it reports road hourly occupancy rates of 862 sensors, from
January 2015 to December 2016. Weather. This Weather
dataset contains the 2020 year of 21 meteorological measurements recorded every 10 minutes from the Weather Station
of the Max Planck Biogeochemistry Institute in Jena, Germany. Influenza-like illness. The ILI dataset reports weekly
recorded influenza-like illness (ILI) patients from Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention of the United States from
2002 to 2021. It is a ratio of ILI patients vs. the week’s total.
Evaluation Setup
We evaluate the accuracy of our approach using mean absolute error (MAE) and mean squared error (MSE) metrics,
which are well-established in the literature , for varying horizon lengths H:
(yτ −ˆyτ)2 ,
Note that for multivariate datasets, our algorithm produces
forecast for each feature in the dataset and metrics are averaged across dataset features. Since our model is univariate,
each variable is predicted using only its own history, yt−L:t,
as input. Datasets are partitioned into train, validation and
test splits. Train split is used to train model parameters, validation split is used to tune hyperparameters, and test split
is used to compute metrics reported in Table 1. Appendix C
Horizon [H]
Computational Time
[Log10 Scale, Seconds]
Autoformer
Transformer
(a) Time Efficiency
Horizon [H]
Parameters
[Millions]
(b) Memory Efficiency
Figure 4: Computational efficiency comparison. NHITS exhibits the best training time compared to Transformer-based
and fully connected models, and smallest memory footprint.
shows partitioning into train, validation and test splits: seventy, ten, and twenty percent of the available observations
respectively, with the exception of ETTm2 that uses twenty
percent as validation.
Key Results
We compare NHITS to the following SoTA multivariate baselines: (1) FEDformer , (2)
Autoformer , (3) Informer , (4) Reformer and (5) LogTrans . Additionally, we
consider the univariate baselines: (6) DilRNN and (7) auto-ARIMA .
Forecasting Accuracy. Table 1 summarizes the multivariate forecasting results. NHITS outperforms the best baseline,
with average relative error decrease across datasets and horizons of 14% in MAE and 16% in MSE. NHITS maintains a
comparable performance to other state-of-the-art methods for
the shortest measured horizon (96/24), while for the longest
measured horizon (720/60) decreases multivariate MAE by
11% and MSE by 17%. We complement the key results in
Table 1, with the additional univariate forecasting experiments in Appendix F, again demonstrating state-of-the-art
performance against baselines.
Computational Efficiency. We measure the computational
training time of NHITS, N-BEATS and Transformer-based
methods in the multivariate setting and show compare in Figure 4. The experiment monitors the whole training process
for the ETTm2 dataset. For the Transformer-based models we
used hyperparameters reported in . Compared
to the Transformer-based methods, NHITS is 45× faster than
Autoformer. In terms of memory, NHITS has less than
26% of the parameters of the second-best alternative since it
scales linearly with respect to the input’s length. Compared
to the original N-BEATS, our method is 1.26× faster and requires only 54% of the parameters. Finally, while NHITS is
an univariate model, it has global (shared) parameters for all
time-series in the dataset. Just like , our
experiments (Appendix I) show that NHITS maintains constant parameter/training computational complexity regarding
dataset’s size.
Autoformer
Table 1: Main empirical results in long-horizon forecasting setup, lower scores are better. Metrics are averaged over eight runs,
best results are highlighted in bold. In Appendix E we complement the main results with standard deviations.
Prediction τ ∈ {t+1,..., t+H}
(a) hie. interp., multi-rate sampling
Prediction τ ∈ {t+1,..., t+H}
(b) No hie. interp., multi-rate sampling
Figure 5: ETTm2 and 720 ahead forecasts using NHITS (left panel), NHITS with hierarchical linear interpolation and multi-rate
sampling removed (right panel). The top row shows the original signal and the forecast. The second, third and fourth rows show
the forecast components for each stack. The last row shows the residuals, y −ˆy. In (a), each block shows scale specialization,
unlike (b), in which signals are not interpretable.
Table 2: Empirical evaluation of long multi-horizon multivariate forecasts for NHITS with/without enhancements. MAE
for predictions averaged over eight runs, and five datasets.
Training and Hyperparameter Optimization
We consider a minimal search space. We tune the kernel size
for multi-rate sampling from Equation (1) and the number of
coefficients from Equation (2), some matching common seasonalities and others exponentially increasing. Additionally,
we tune the random seed to escape underperforming local
minima. Details are reported in Table A3 in Appendix D.
During the hyperparameter optimization phase, we measure MAE on the validation set and use a Bayesian optimization library , with 20
iterations. We use the optimal configuration based on the validation loss to make predictions on the test set. We refer to the
combination of hyperparameter optimization and test prediction as a run. NHITS is implemented in PyTorch and trained using ADAM optimizer , MAE loss, batch size 256 and initial learning rate of
1e-3, halved three times across the training procedure. All our
experiments are conducted on a GeForce RTX 2080 GPU.
Ablation Studies
We believe that the advantages of the NHITS architecture are
rooted in its multi-rate hierarchical nature. Fig. 5 shows a
qualitative comparison of NHITS with and without hierarchical interpolation/multi-rate sampling components. Unlike the
control model, we clearly see NHITS developing the ability
to produce interpretable forecast decomposition providing
valuable information about trends and seasonality in separate
channels. Appendix G presents the decomposition for the
different interpolation techniques.
We support our qualitative conclusion with quantitative
results. We define the following set of alternative models:
NHITS2 only hierarchical interpolation, NHITS3 only multirate sampling, NHITS4 no multi-rate sampling or interpolation ), finally N-BEATSi, the interpretable version
of the N-BEATS ). Tab. 2 clearly
shows that combining both proposed components results in
the best performance, emphasizing their complementary nature in long-horizon forecasting. We see that the original
N-BEATS is consistently worse, especially the N-BEATSi.
The advantages of multi-rate sampling, and interpolation for
long-horizon forecasting, are not limited to the NHITS architecture. In Appendix H we demonstrate how adding them to
a DilRNN improves its performance.
Additional ablation studies are reported in Appendix
G. The MaxPool multi-rate sampling wins over Average-
Pool. Linear interpolation wins over nearest neighbor and
cubic. Finally and most importantly, we show that the order in which hierarchical interpolation is implemented matters significantly. The best configuration is to have the lowfrequency/large-scale components synthesized and removed
from analysis first, followed by more fine-grained modeling
of high-frequency/intermittent signals.
Discussion of Findings
Our results indicate the complementarity and effectiveness of
multi-rate sampling and hierarchical interpolation for longhorizon time-series forecasting. Table 2 indicates that these
components enforce a useful inductive bias compared to both
the free-form model NHITS4 (plain fully connected architecture) and the parametric model N-BEATSi (polynomial
trend and sinusoidal seasonality used as basis functions in two
respective stacks). The latter provides a detrimental inductive
bias for long-horizon forecasting. We barely scratched the
surface in the right direction and further progress is possible using advanced multi-scale processing approaches in the
forecasting context, motivating further research.
NHITS outperforms SoTA baselines and provides an interpretable non-linear decomposition. Fig. 1 and 5 showcase
NHITS perfectly specializing and reconstructing latent harmonic signals from synthetic and real data respectively. This
novel interpretable decomposition can provide insights to
users, improving their confidence in high-stakes applications
like healthcare. Finally, NHITS hierarchical interpolation is
connected to Wavelet’s multi-resolution analysis . Replacing the interpolation functions with orthogonal
Wavelet spaces is a possible research line.
Our study questions the effectiveness of existing longhorizon multi-variate forecasting approaches, as all of them
are substantially outperformed by our univariate algorithm.
If these approaches underperform due to overfitting problems
at the level of marginals, the integration of our approach with
Transformer-inspired architectures is a promising research
direction as Appendix F results suggest. However, there is
a chance that existing approaches underperform due to their
inability to integrate information from multiple variables,
which clearly hints at possibly untapped research potential.
Whichever is the case, we believe our results provide a strong
guidance signal and a valuable baseline for future research in
the area of long-horizon multivariate forecasting.
Conclusions
We proposed a novel neural forecasting algorithm NHITS
that combines two complementary techniques, multi-rate input sampling, and hierarchical interpolation, to produce drastically improved, interpretable, and computationally efficient
long-horizon time-series predictions. Our model, operating
in the univariate regime and accepting only the predicted
time-series history, significantly outperforms all previous
Transformer-based multi-variate models using an order of
magnitude less computation. This sets a new baseline for all
ensuing multivariate work on six popular datasets and motivates research to effectively use information across variables.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (award FA8750-17-2-
0130), the National Science Foundation (grant 2038612), the
Space Technology Research Institutes grant from NASA’s
Space Technology Research Grants Program, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (award 18DN-ARI-00031),
and by the U.S. Army Contracting Command (contracts
W911NF20D0002 and W911NF22F0014 delivery order #4).
Thanks to Mengfei Cao for in-depth discussion and comments on the method, and Kartik Gupta for his insights on
the connection of NHITS with Wavelet’s theory. The authors
are also grateful to Stefania La Vattiata for her assistance in
the upbeat visualization of the Neural Hierarchical Interpolation for Time Series method.