HiCS: High Contrast Subspaces
for Density-Based Outlier Ranking
Fabian Keller, Emmanuel M¨uller, Klemens B¨ohm
Institute for Program Structures and Data Organization
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany
{fabian.keller, emmanuel.mueller, klemens.boehm}@kit.edu
Abstract—Outlier mining is a major task in data analysis.
Outliers are objects that highly deviate from regular objects in
their local neighborhood. Density-based outlier ranking methods
score each object based on its degree of deviation. In many
applications, these ranking methods degenerate to random listings due to low contrast between outliers and regular objects.
Outliers do not show up in the scattered full space, they are
hidden in multiple high contrast subspace projections of the data.
Measuring the contrast of such subspaces for outlier rankings is
an open research challenge.
In this work, we propose a novel subspace search method that
selects high contrast subspaces for density-based outlier ranking.
It is designed as pre-processing step to outlier ranking algorithms.
It searches for high contrast subspaces with a signiﬁcant amount
of conditional dependence among the subspace dimensions. With
our approach, we propose a ﬁrst measure for the contrast of
subspaces. Thus, we enhance the quality of traditional outlier
rankings by computing outlier scores in high contrast projections
only. The evaluation on real and synthetic data shows that
our approach outperforms traditional dimensionality reduction
techniques, naive random projections as well as state-of-the-art
subspace search techniques and provides enhanced quality for
outlier ranking.
I. INTRODUCTION
Outlier mining is an important task in the ﬁeld of knowledge discovery. In applications such as fraud detection, geneexpression analysis or environmental surveillance, one is interested in rare, suspicious, and unexpected objects. Outlier
analysis searches for such highly deviating objects in contrast
to regular objects. An outlier has highly deviating attribute
values compared to its local neighborhood. For example, in
environmental surveillance (cf. Fig. 1) a sensor node might be
an outlier as it shows an abnormally high deviation w.r.t. air
pollution index and noise level. For instance, outlier1 shows a
high deviation in this speciﬁc subset of attributes only. Another
sensor node (outlier2) shows high deviation w.r.t. humidity
and temperature, independent of its air pollution index and its
noise level. Thus, a sensor node might be an outlier in one of
these attribute combinations and a regular object in all other
attributes. In general, these multiple roles (outlying vs. regular
behavior) of objects can be observed in other domains as well:
Suspicious customers show fraud activity only w.r.t. some
ﬁnancial transactions, and genes show unexpected expression
only under speciﬁc medical conditions.
Traditional outlier mining , , , , , is
unable to detect such outliers hidden in subsets of all given
noise level
air pollution index
noise level
temperature
low contrast
high contrast
high contrast
Environmental surveillance example: suspicious sensor readings
attributes. Most outlier mining techniques search for outliers
w.r.t. all given attributes. Considering object distances in the
full data space, these methods fall prey to randomly distributed
attribute combinations. In our example, humidity and noise
level in combination show no clear outlier objects and hinder
outlier detection. Furthermore, due to the increasing number
of attributes in today’s databases, distances between objects
grow more and more alike . Outlier ranking techniques
score each object based on the degree of deviation, e.g.,
by computing its density in the full data space . Thus,
for high dimensional data, outlier rankings degenerate to
random listings, as outliers do not show up in the full space.
Other common statistical techniques try to detect outliers in
single attributes . However, by ignoring the dependencies
between several attributes, these techniques miss outliers that
appear only due to correlations in multi-dimensional spaces.
We focus on such outliers, which are neither visible in the full
space nor in a single attribute.
Subspace mining has been proposed as a novel data mining
paradigm to tackle this challenge. It detects highly deviating
objects in any possible attribute combination (low dimensional
projection). While dimensionality reduction techniques aim at
such lower dimensional projections, they are not designed as
pre-processing step for outlier ranking. General measures, such
as the variance of the data in PCA , are not appropriate
objective functions for outlier ranking. Novel quality criteria
and processing schemes are required for subspace outlier
mining. In particular, we search for high contrast subspaces.
Such subspaces have the deﬁning characteristic that outliers
can be clearly distinguished from regular objects within the
subspace context. Our general aim is a two-step processing:
(1) Subspace search: measuring the contrast of subspaces
(2) Outlier ranking: score objects in high contrast subspaces
We consider the decoupling of these two steps to be an open
research issue. Current subspace outlier mining techniques ,
 , , focus on interleaved algorithms only, which
select subspaces during outlier mining. We propose to consider
subspace outlier mining as a decoupled process, divided into
“subspace search” and “outlier ranking”. By treating these
two steps as independent problems, one can design and
combine the respective algorithms in a modular fashion. It
also allows both research ﬁelds to evolve independently. In
conclusion, any improvement in either of these steps will lead
to an improvement in the overall outlier detection quality.
Thus, future research in outlier mining may beneﬁt from the
proposed decoupling.
In this work, we focus on the ﬁrst step and propose a novel
subspace search method that selects high contrast subspaces
for density-based outlier ranking. As outlier score for the
ranking we rely on the commonly used local outlier factor
(LOF) . However, any other outlier score could be used as
instantiation of the second step. Our subspace search technique
is based on a novel selection of high contrast subspaces
(HiCS). It provides three main contributions:
• The decoupling of subspace search as generalized preprocessing step for outlier ranking
• A contrast measure based on the conditional dependence
of dimensions in the selected subspaces
• Two statistical instantiations of our contrast measure
ensuring a robust parametrization of our technique
Our contrast measure is based on statistical tests and enables
a high quality outlier ranking of outliers hidden in arbitrary
subspace projections. Our approach searches for high contrast
subspaces with a signiﬁcant amount of conditional dependence
among the selected dimensions. Thus, we enhance the quality
of traditional outlier rankings by computing outlier scores in
high contrast projections only. The evaluation on real and
synthetic data shows that our approach outperforms traditional dimensionality reduction techniques , naive random
projections as well as state-of-the-art subspace search
techniques , and provides enhanced quality for outlier
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review existing techniques in the areas
of outlier discovery and subspace mining. In particular, we
explain the differences of existing paradigms compared to our
novel subspace search approach.
a) Traditional Outlier Ranking: There have been different outlier detection paradigms proposed in the literature,
ranging from deviation-based methods , distance-based
methods , , to density-based methods , . We
focus on the density-based outlier ranking paradigm, which
computes a score for each object by measuring its degree
of deviation w.r.t. a local neighborhood. Thus, one is able to
detect local density variations between low density outliers and
their high density (clustered) neighborhood. However, all of
those traditional outlier mining approaches have one drawback.
They cannot detect outliers in subspaces, as their degree of
deviation considers only the full data space.
b) Subspace Outlier Ranking: Outlier detection in subspaces has ﬁrst been proposed by . Recent approaches have
enhanced subspace outlier mining by ranking objects based
on any possible subspace projection , , , ,
 . These techniques differ in their choice of subspaces. The
majority of approaches uses specialized heuristics for subspace
selection that are integrated into the outlier ranking , ,
 , . In general, all of these techniques use an integrated
processing of subspaces and outliers. This implies that scoring
functions and subspace selection are tightly coupled such that
none of these techniques would beneﬁt from a novel scoring
function or a novel subspace selection technique.
The only approach with a decoupled processing is considered as a baseline for our technique. It selects several subspace
projections randomly . Obviously, this random selection
does not guarantee high quality results. Selection of arbitrary
projections will result in random rankings just as in the full
data space. With our work we aim at a decoupled processing
with two steps as proposed in . In contrast to a naive
random selection of subspaces, we aim at an enhanced contrast
measure based on sound statistical foundations.
c) Subspace Search: Based on the general idea of subspace mining in arbitrary projections of the data, several preprocessing techniques for the selection of subspaces have
been proposed , , , . All of these techniques
focus on the related domain of subspace clustering. They
try to decouple the detection of clusters and the selection of
individual subspaces for each cluster. However, each of the
four subspace search models depends on a speciﬁc cluster
deﬁnition.
First, the Enclus approach proposes a selection based on the
entropy measure . Its quality measure for subspaces highly
depends on the subspace clustering algorithm CLIQUE . It
partitions the data space in equally sized grid cells. A subspace
is selected if it has low entropy, i.e., if it shows a large variation
in the densities of the grid cells. With our approach we follow
this basic idea of contrast, however, we do not rely on ﬁxed
grid cells. This is because they induce several drawbacks for
density estimation in high dimensional spaces.
Other techniques, i.e., RIS and SURFING , have
been proposed for the detection of density-based subspace
clusters based on the DBSCAN paradigm . For instance,
RIS counts the core objects in a subspace projection and
uses them as a measure for its subspace selection criterion.
Recently, a subspace search method has been proposed for
spectral clustering as well .
In general, all of the proposed subspace search methods focus on speciﬁc clustering tasks. Their selection highly depends
on the underlying clustering model. In contrast to this, our
technique is based on a more general analysis of conditional
dependence. Furthermore, we propose an instantiation of our
objective function that aims at high contrast w.r.t. densitybased outlier ranking, and thus, is tailored to detect low density
regions as required for many outlier models.
III. HIGH CONTRAST SUBSPACES (HICS)
The main idea of our HiCS approach is the statistical
selection of high contrast subspaces. We propose a processing
based on a series of statistical tests. Each test compares the
data distribution in a local subspace region to its marginal
distribution. Dependencies between attributes highlight the
high contrast of a subspace. Based on these statistical tests
and the detected dependence between attributes we derive our
contrast measure. It provides the means for high quality outlier
ranking in a selection of high contrast subspaces.
Overall, HiCS establishes a ﬁrst statistical subspace search
technique for density-based outlier ranking. In the following,
we will introduce the necessary notation in Section III-A, and
deﬁne the general objective for our high contrast subspaces in
Section III-B. We will introduce the notion of subspace slices
that specify local subspace regions in Section III-C, and deﬁne
the contrast measure in Section III-D. In Section III-E we will
show how different statistical tests can be used to instantiate
our contrast deﬁnition.
A. Notation
Let DB be a database containing N objects, each described
by a D-dimensional real-valued data vector ⃗x = (x1, . . . , xD).
The set A = {1, . . . , D} denotes the full data space of all
given attributes. Any attribute subset S = {s1, . . . , sd} ⊆A
will be called a d-dimensional subspace projection. We denote
the distance between objects ⃗x and ⃗y as distA(⃗x, ⃗y), which
can be instantiated for instance by the widely used Euclidean
Distance distA(⃗x, ⃗y) =
s∈A(xs −ys)2.
As general property of any outlier ranking method we have
to consider the underlying scoring function. It measures the
outlierness of an object. Traditionally, each object is sorted
according to a single outlier score score(⃗x) measuring the
degree of deviation in all given attributes A. Traditional
density-based outlier scores measure the density p(⃗x) of an
object and compare it to the density in the local neighborhood
of ⃗x. Local outlier ranking based on density deviation in
local neighborhoods has ﬁrst been proposed by LOF . In
recent years, this outlier mining paradigm has been extended
by enhanced scoring functions and efﬁcient outlier ranking
algorithms , , , , , , .
The problem with all of these full space approaches is introduced by the curse of dimensionality. As pointed out in , the
deﬁnition of a local neighborhood becomes meaningless for
a large number of attributes. Furthermore distances between
objects grow more and more alike, thus
⃗z∈DBdistA(⃗z, ⃗x) −min
⃗z∈DBdistA(⃗z, ⃗x) = 0
Since local outlier ranking calculates the density based on the
object distances, we observe the same effect for the minimal
and maximal value of score(⃗x). As a result, all mentioned
outlier score functions will suffer from a loss of contrast, i.e.:
score(⃗x) ≈score(⃗y)
∀⃗x, ⃗y ∈DB
Any outlier ranking obtained for a sufﬁciently high dimensional database will degenerate into a random ranking with
very similar scores for all objects.
Subspace outlier rankings address this problem by evaluating the score function in lower dimensional subspace projections. They simply restrict the distance computation to a
selected subspace S, i.e., compute distS. Thus, any outlier
ranking with score(⃗x) can be extended to a subspace score
scoreS(⃗x). The idea is to aggregate these scoreS(⃗x) values
over several subspaces. Each score provides some insights
about the deviation of ⃗x in a lower dimensional projection
S. The ﬁnal ranking is derived from the aggregation of these
Deﬁnition 1: Outlier Score
score(⃗x) =
scoreS(⃗x)
In the most basic approach , RS is a selection of
random subspaces that contribute to the overall ranking. A
major drawback of this approach is that irrelevant subspaces
in RS might blur the overall order of objects. To tackle this
challenge, we propose a novel method to select high contrast
subspaces only. Our subspace search technique excludes low
contrast subspaces, which inhibit a clear distinction between
outliers and regular objects.
For our experiments, we instantiate scoreS(⃗x) with the
commonly used local outlier factor . It has been used for
the subspace extension based on random projections as
well. However, our technique is not restricted to LOF only.
Any other density-based scoring function could be used for
scoreS(⃗x). This ﬂexibility w.r.t. the score function is a main
advantage of our method. We only consider the contrast of
subspaces and their selection as pre-processing step. Any
improvement in the area of outlier scoring can be applied
directly to our approach as well. In recent years several
extensions of LOF have addressed speciﬁc challenges for this
local outlier ranking , , , . While each of these
publications proposes an individual score function, they all
have an assumption in common: An outlier has low density
compared to its local neighborhood. Our technique relies
only on this general assumption.
To derive our criterion for subspace contrast, we treat the
attributes in DB as random variables. We use the notion of
probability density functions (pdf) to derive the formal background of our contrast criterion. We will adapt the notation for
subspaces as follows. For a given subspace S = {s1, . . . , sd},
we refer to the projected data vectors as ⃗xS = (xs1, . . . , xsd).
Notation 1:
The subspace data vector ⃗xS is distributed by
an unknown joint pdf of S:
ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd)
By integration over all attributes s ∈A \ si we obtain:
Notation 2:
The marginal pdf of attribute si:
(a) Dataset A – example of an uncorrelated joint pdf
(b) Dataset B – example of a correlated joint pdf
high vs. low contrast and the effects on outlier ranking
Please note that the marginal densities are simply onedimensional projections, independent from any subspace. Furthermore, we can require a condition on the attributes s ∈
S \ si, which leads to the following notion.
Notation 3:
The conditional pdf of attribute si:
psi | s ∈S\si (xsi | {xs : s ∈S \ si})
Thus, we express the probability density function of si w.r.t.
|S| −1 conditions on all other attributes in the subspace.
B. High Contrast Improves Outlier Ranking
Given the notion of probability density in any subspace
S, we measure the contrast by comparing conditional probability densities to the corresponding marginal densities for
all attributes si ∈S. This idea is based on the following
key hypothesis: the detection of non-trivial outliers is only
possible in a subspace S that shows high dependence between
all attributes si ∈S. The notion of non-trivial outliers is
a new concept and we will postpone the formal deﬁnition
for a moment. Intuitively, a non-trivial outlier is an outlier
in subspace S, but it is not visible as outlier in any onedimensional projection of S, i.e., all its one-dimensional
attribute values are located in regions of high density. Based on
the one-dimensional projections, a non-trivial outlier appears
to be a clustered object.
1) Motivation Example:
We illustrate the relationship between correlated subspaces
and non-trivial outliers by a toy example (cf. Figure 2). It
consists of two two-dimensional datasets. Both datasets were
generated from the same marginal distributions. In dataset A,
s1 and s2 are completely uncorrelated. As a result, this twodimensional subspace is ﬁlled by a random scattering of
objects in consistency with the marginal distribution. Nevertheless the dataset contains an outlier object o1. By considering
the one-dimensional projections of this subspace, the existence
of o1 is not a surprise: o1 could trivially be detected by the
examination of the one-dimensional distribution of attribute
s2. We call such an object a trivial outlier. In summary, the
evaluation of the two-dimensional subspace does not reveal
any new information for this dataset.
The other dataset features marginal distributions identical to
the ones of dataset A. The difference is that dataset B shows a
signiﬁcant correlation. The correlation allows the data objects
to form regions of varying or unexpected densities over the
total possible area that would be consistent with the marginal
distribution. We observe (a) cluster-like dense agglomerations
of objects and (b) sparse or even empty regions. Besides a
trivial outlier o1, the subspace also features an other outlier
o2. This time the outlier is hidden in all one-dimensional
subspace projections, where it even appears to be a clustered
object. We will call this type of objects non-trivial outliers.
For dataset B the evaluation of the two-dimensional subspace
was worthwhile and reveals signiﬁcant insight regarding the
data structure. Accordingly, we have found an example for a
high contrast subspace in this case.
Once we have found such a high contrast subspace we
can apply any density-based outlier ranking algorithm: for
instance in dataset B, o1 and o2 both exhibit a much lower
density compared to the local neighborhood. Thus, determining the outlierness in the two-dimensional subspace of
dataset B would result in a detection of o1 and o2, i.e.,
scoreS(o1/2) ≫scoreS(oi) for all other objects oi in the
We can also explain the essential idea of our approach
to identify high contrast subspaces using this toy example.
Depicted on top of each plot in Figure 2, we show two different
histograms for the s1 axis of both datasets. The ﬁrst one
(red) represents the full data sample, i.e., corresponds to the
marginal probability distribution ps1(xs1). The blue one shows
the conditional probability distribution that is generated by the
sample according to the selection range w.r.t. the s2 axis (blue
area). The comparison of the blue vs. the red histograms for
both datasets show a basic property of correlation: Whereas
the histograms for dataset A are in good agreement, we see
a signiﬁcant discrepancy between the two histograms for the
high contrast subspace B. The proposed HiCS algorithm is
based on the evaluation of this discrepancy.
Please note that we design our contrast measure as a
conservative subspace selection criterion. The set of selected
subspaces is a proper superset of the subspaces containing
non-trivial outliers. We will later show that high contrast is
a necessary condition for non-trivial outliers. Still, the result
may contain subspaces without any outliers.
In the following we will focus on non-trivial outliers only.
The reason is simple: A user might already know about the
existence of one-dimensional outliers; one can detect these
outliers by existing methods without difﬁculty. Moreover,
our subspace search can detect trivial outliers as a by-product
of the search for non-trivial outliers. For instance in dataset B,
we will always detect o1 as outlier as soon as attribute s2 is
part of any high contrast subspace. In any case, the detection
of non-trivial outliers will provide a much higher information
gain to the user. Therefore, we focus on the detection of
correlated subspaces containing such non-trivial outliers.
2) Contrast based on correlation of dimensions:
In probability theory, two events A and B are called independent and uncorrelated, if and only if the probability of
the combined event is given by the product of the individual
probabilities, i.e.:
p(A ∩B) = p(A) · p(B)
By putting the notion of correlation in the context of subspaces, we obtain:
Deﬁnition 2:
A subspace S is called an uncorrelated
subspace if and only if:
ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd) =
Please note that the formal distinction between statistical
dependence and correlation is not important for our purpose.
Strictly speaking, the term set of independent attributes would
be the appropriate expression. Instead we prefer to use the
more concise term uncorrelated subspace to express the statistical independence within a subspace.
To support the observations regarding Figure 2, we want to
examine the characteristics of outlier mining in uncorrelated
subspaces more formally. The observation of a high value of
scoreS(⃗x) implies that the object ⃗x is located in a region
with a low value of the joint pdf ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd). On
the other hand, we can evaluate the expected density for ⃗x
under the assumption of an uncorrelated subspace:
pexpected(xs1, . . . , xsd) ≡
We deﬁne the notion of trivial outliers over the comparison of
the expected density with the joint density:
Deﬁnition 3:
We call an object ⃗xS a non-trivial outlier
w.r.t. subspace S if
ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd) ≪pexpected(xs1, . . . , xsd)
Comparing the deﬁnition of an uncorrelated subspace (Eq. 2)
with the deﬁnition of non-trivial outliers leads to:
Theorem 1:
An uncorrelated subspace S does not contain
any non-trivial outlier.
For an uncorrelated subspace, the joint probability density
function ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd) is by deﬁnition equal to the
product of the marginal pdfs and thus, will never fulﬁll Eq. 4.
On the other hand, a correlated subspace allows signiﬁcantly
smaller values of ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd) compared to the
expected density. Thus, we deﬁne subspace correlation as
objective function for the subspace contrast.
3) Measuring Correlation:
We propose to quantify the subspace contrast by a comparison
of different probability density functions. To simplify the
notation, we will express all following conditional probability
densities only for s1 without loss of generality. In the case of
an uncorrelated subspace, Eq. 2 simpliﬁes the deﬁnition of all
conditional probability densities within the subspace, i.e.:
ps1(xs1|xs2, . . . , xsd) = ps1,...,sd(xs1, . . . , xsd)
ps2,...,sd(xs2, . . . , xsd)
= ps1(xs1)
This allows to measure the contrast of a subspace by determining the degree of violation of Eq. 5. In other words, we
have to compare a conditional pdf of s1 to the corresponding
marginal pdf, and we assign a high contrast to a subspace
if we observe a signiﬁcant deviation between the two pdfs.
Please note that the correlation analysis within subspaces
goes beyond classical correlation analysis approaches, since
we may be faced with high contrast subspaces with more
than two dimensions. In contrast to, say, the Pearson or
Spearman correlation coefﬁcient , the proposed approach
is not limited in the subspace dimensionality. Furthermore,
it is possible to detect any kind of non-linear correlation.
Above all, our approach does not require an evaluation of a
high dimensional joint pdf, but is based on one-dimensional
densities only. Hence, it does not fall prey to the curse of
dimensionality.
In the following sections we will discuss (1) how to empirically analyze the the conditional pdf by introducing the notion
of subspace slices, (2) how to compare the conditional pdf to
the marginal pdf by means of statistical tests, and (3) how to
instantiate these statistical tests in our contrast measure.
C. Evaluation of conditional densities
The main challenge for the proposed calculation of the
subspace contrast is the empirical analysis of the conditional
probability densities ps1|... ≡ps1|s2,...,sd(xs1|xs2, . . . , xsd).
Since we do not require any knowledge of the underlying
density functions, our goal is to obtain a sample of ps1|...
for a speciﬁc set of conditions.
Deﬁnition 4:
A set of |S| −1 lower and upper conditions
[li, ri] is called a subspace slice w.r.t. subspace S:
C = {xs2 ∈[l2, r2], . . . , xsd ∈[ld, rd]}
The selection of objects that satisfy a subspace slice condition leads to a subsample of DB with a sample size N ′. The
advantage of these subspace slices over any grid-based density
estimation is that we can construct the subspace slices in a way
that does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality. The goal
is to choose the intervals in the subspace slice C in such a way
that the expectation value for the selection sample size N ′ is
ﬁxed. We derive the construction of the intervals as follows:
Each condition in C can be associated with a certain selection
of objects. Starting with the full sample of |DB| objects, each
selection removes a certain fraction of objects from the current
sample. We denote the fraction of objects that will remain in
the sample by α1 ∈(0, 1). The sufﬁx emphasizes that α1 is
the selection probability for a single condition. By assuming
an uncorrelated subspace, the selections are independent from
each other. In this case the probability for a single object to be
selected after |C| equally sized selection steps is α|C|
the expectation value of the remaining sample size N ′ after
|C| selections is given by:
E [N ′] = N · α|C|
We can utilize this step-wise selection in the algorithm to
generate subspace slices that automatically adapt the selection intervals [li, ri] to provide a desired target statistic size
N ′, independent of the dimensionality of the subspace. The
implementation details are given in Section IV-A.
D. Quality criterion for the subspace contrast
As mentioned before, our subspace contrast deﬁnition is
based on the degree of violation of Eq. 5. Since we do not
require density functions explicitly given, we introduce the
following notation to emphasize that we refer to estimated
density distributions from a data sample:
• ˆps refers to the marginal density of some attribute s ∈S
w.r.t. the full dataset.
• ˆps|C refers to the density of xs w.r.t. the remaining dataset
that fulﬁlls a certain condition set C.
We are now looking for a function deviation
ˆps, ˆps|C
compares ˆps to ˆps|C, measures the discrepancy between the
two distributions and outputs a value that is proportional to
the deviation. There are many ways to deﬁne such a function.
With HiCS we focus on two different statistical tests, namely
Welch’s t-test and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which will
be described in Section III-E. We will call the two resulting
variants HiCSWT and HiCSKS.
In terms of statistical testing, we deﬁne the null hypothesis
as: Both samples originate from the same underlying pdf. In
other words, the null hypothesis states that the differences
between ˆps and ˆps|C are within the limits of statistical
ﬂuctuations. Due to these ﬂuctuations, the signiﬁcance of a
single statistical test is very limited. In order to achieve a
high statistical precision, the HiCS algorithm performs a large
number M of different tests. Thus, the deﬁnition of our quality
criterion of the subspace contrast is given by:
Deﬁnition 5:
Subspace contrast
contrast(S) ≡1
ˆpsi, ˆpsi|Ci
HiCS computes the subspace contrast with a Monte Carlo
approach. The algorithm performs M iterations. For each
iteration, we randomly pick an attribute si ∈S and generate a
random subspace slice Ci. The respective samples are passed
to the deviation function, i.e., a function that performs the
statistical test. We calculate the ﬁnal result of the subspace
contrast by averaging the deviations of all M statistical tests.
E. Statistical tests
Regarding the implementation of the deviation(ˆpA, ˆpB)
function, we have employed and examined two different
statistical tests.
The ﬁrst approach uses Welch’s t-test, which is a variation
of a Student’s t-test. The idea of this solution is to ﬁrst extract
estimations of statistical moments from both samples, and
then perform a comparison based on these characteristics. The
difference between Welch’s t-test over the classical Student’s
t-test is that it utilizes more statistical moments: While the test
statistic for Student’s t-test only requires the sample means,
Welch’s t-test also uses information from the estimated sample
variances. The test variable is deﬁned as:
Intuitively, the test variable t will have small absolute values
if both samples are taken from the same distribution, i.e. the
sample moments are similar. Strong discrepancies between
both samples will result in large values for |t|. In principle,
we could use this test statistic directly as measurement for
our deviation, but it has turned out to be preferable to convert
the t value into a probability pt as a means of normalization.
This can be achieved by considering the distribution of the t
values for a fulﬁlled null hypothesis. If the null hypothesis is
true, i.e., if both samples originate from the same probability
density, the test statistic t follows a t-distribution with a degree
of freedom which can be obtained by the Welch-Satterthwaite
equation . Based on the t-distribution, we can calculate
the probability pt by integration of the t-distribution.
Thus, the detailed steps to calculate the value of the
deviation function are:
• First, determine the required statistical moments for both
samples: ˆμA, ˆσ2
A, ˆμB, ˆσ2
• Calculate the test statistic t using Equation 9.
• Determine the degree of freedom of the underlying tdistribution ft(x). The problem of ﬁnding the degree of
freedom is solved by the Welch-Satterthwaite equation.
• Calculate pt by evaluating the area of the two-tail integral
over ft(x) for |x| > t. This means that pt is the
probability to observe a larger absolute value than |t| by
chance if the null hypothesis is fulﬁlled.
• Finally, we set deviation(ˆμA, ˆσ2
A, ˆμB, ˆσ2
B) = 1 −pt.
The second approach uses a two-sample Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test to compare the distributions . This test
operates on the data samples themselves and does not rely on
statistical moments. To calculate the deviation, we ﬁrst have to
build the empirical cumulated distribution functions for both
samples. The empirical cumulated distribution function of a
sample of xsi consisting of N objects is deﬁned by:
F(xsi) = 1
I[ysi < xsi]
where I[cond] is the indicator function, equal to 1 if the
condition [cond] is fulﬁlled and equal to 0 otherwise. In other
words, the value of F at a certain point xsi is the percentage
of objects in the sample that have a value less than xsi. After
the construction of FA and FB for the two samples, we can
calculate the deviation as:
deviation(ˆpA, ˆpB) = sup
|FA(xsi) −FB(xsi)|
Thus, the deviation value is deﬁned by the maximal difference
of the two empirical cumulated distribution functions.
Comparing the two approaches for the statistical test, the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test features two favorable properties
from a theoretical point of view. First, it uses the full information of the data samples and does not rely on the indirect
calculation of statistical moments. The other problem with all
types of t-tests is that the formal derivation requires Gaussian
distributed samples. On the other hand, the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test does not make any assumptions on the sample distributions. Nevertheless, our evaluation in Section V
shows that both approaches can achieve good results, even for
datasets that differ signiﬁcantly from a Gaussian distribution.
IV. HICS ALGORITHM
Our algorithm consists of three logically independent parts:
• The calculation of the subspace contrast takes a speciﬁc
subspace as input, and the output is its contrast.
• The subspace framework is responsible for the generation
of subspace candidates that should be evaluated. All
results are collected and will be ﬁltered and sorted in
a post-processing.
• The application of an outlier ranking on the list of high
contrast subspaces.
A. Contrast calculation
The algorithm operates according to the sampling formalism
in III-D. Besides the set of attributes that belong to the speciﬁc
subspace, the algorithm requires two parameters:
• The number of Monte Carlo iterations M, i.e., the number
of statistical tests to perform.
• The desired average size of the test statistic. In our
implementation we speciﬁed the size by a ratio α ∈(0, 1)
that determines the sample size dynamically in relation
to the total size of the database.
The idea of the adaptive subspace slices is implemented as
follows: instead of deﬁning the condition intervals [li, ri]
directly in the domain of the underlying variables xsi, we
precalculate one-dimensional index structures for all attributes
of the database. This allows to perform the selection over the
sorted indices. Thus, the adaptive selection of the subspace
slice can by implemented by selecting a block of index entries
with a certain size α1 · N. The value of α1 is determined by
the parameter α and the dimensionality of the subspace |S|:
The result of multiple selections can be obtained by a conjunctive boolean combination of the selection blocks. The adaptive
random selection process is followed by the comparison between the marginal and the conditional distributions to obtain
a deviation value.
In summary, the algorithm consists of these two steps:
(1) generate a random subspace slice and (2) determine the
respective deviation value using a statistical test. Finally, all
deviation results will be combined to obtain a single contrast
value for the subspace. The procedure is shown in Alg. 1.
Algorithm 1 calculation of subspace contrast
Input: S, M, α
Output: contrast(S)
for i = 1 →M do
Permute list of subspace attributes s ∈S
Initialize boolean vector selected objects for all objects: true
for i = 1 →|S| −1 do
Select random index block of attribute si with a size of
Mask index block with selected objects
Compare distributions: deviation
ˆpsi, ˆpsi|selected objects
remaining attribute with i = |S|.
Combine the results of all statistical test (cf. Deﬁnition 8).
B. Subspace framework
The subspace generation for HiCS works as follows: in each
step we evaluate the contrast of the current d-dimensional
subspaces. The subspaces that have a contrast above a certain
threshold will be used for the generation of (d+1)-dimensional
subspace candidates. This step-wise generation of higher dimensional subspace candidates resembles the principle of the
well-known Apriori algorithm . In contrast to Apriori, the
HiCS starts with two-dimensional instead of one-dimensional
subspaces, since the deﬁnition of a one-dimensional subspace
contrast would not be reasonable (no notion of correlation).
Another difference to Apriori is that it is not possible to
formally derive a monotonicity criterion for the correlation
of subspaces. To see this, we can construct a simple counterexample, such as the dataset shown in Figure 3. Each box
corresponds to a cluster and all four clusters have the same
density. In this example, the three-dimensional joint pdf is
not given as the product of the three marginal distributions,
i.e., the space is correlated. On the other hand, all twodimensional subspace projections are equally distributed and,
therefore, show no correlation at all. But this example also
demonstrates that the construction of such a case requires an
extremely speciﬁc setup. correlation is very likely to be visible
in lower dimensional projections. Thus, one can combine
lower dimensional subspaces to ﬁnd correlations in higher
dimensional spaces. Based on this heuristic, we can apply the
Apriori-like subspace generation to the search of correlated
subspaces.
High dimensional correlation
Like with other Apriori algorithms, the threshold for the
candidate generation – in our case a lower bound on the
contrast value – has a considerable impact on the results.
Setting the value too high will result in a very restrictive
subspace search, with only low dimensional subspaces or
possibly even an empty list of subspaces. In contrast, if the
value is much too low, the algorithm will consider almost
all possible attribute combinations, resulting in an exponential
runtime w.r.t. the total number of attributes.
Since our goal has been to design the algorithm in a way
that allows a direct application to unknown datasets, we have
solved this problem by means of an adaptive threshold. In contrast to conventional Apriori-like approaches, we postpone the
decision whether to keep a candidate or not to the point when
the contrast of all d-dimensional candidates is available. This
allows to sort all current candidates and to keep only a certain
number. We use the number of maximally retained candidates
as parameter. Setting this candidate cutoff parameter allows a
much more precise prediction of the runtime than specifying a
reasonable minimum contrast threshold for a speciﬁc dataset.
The subspace generation process terminates when the Apriori merge step produces an empty list for the (d + 1)dimensional subspace candidates. In the HiCS algorithm, the
subspace generation is followed by a pruning step. The idea is
to remove redundant subspaces from the output to ensure that
the ﬁnal subspace ranking contains only important subspaces
 . We remove a redundant d-dimensional subspace T if the
subspace list contains a (d + 1)-dimensional subspace S that
has a higher contrast score than T.
C. Subspace outlier ranking
As ﬁnal step, HiCS has to apply an external outlier ranking
algorithm to the list of detected subspaces and aggregate all
results. For our evaluation we use LOF as outlier score . As
aggregation functions we considered maximum and average.
In practice maximum is very sensitive to ﬂuctuations of the
outlierness and will lead to poor results especially if the
number of detected subspaces is large. Therefore we have used
the average of the outlier ranking values throughout our experiments (cf. Deﬁnition 1). This also ensures that the outlierness
is cumulative: If an object deviates in several subspaces, its
total outlierness will increase compared to objects that only
appear as outlier in a single subspace.
V. EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate the quality of our HiCS approach we perform
experiments on synthetic and real world datasets. We treat the
problem of outlier ranking independently from the selection
of high contrast subspaces. Thus, we evaluate HiCS against a
series of other subspace search algorithms as pre-processing
to a common outlier ranking algorithm. We focus on LOF
 as a widely used reference algorithm for full-space outlier
mining. We abstract from any enhancements by recent or
future techniques , , , , which can be used
as instantiations of the outlier ranking as well. We compare
HiCS against the following competitors:
• the full-space LOF outlier ranking 
• dimensionality reduction PCA + LOF 
• the baseline approach using random subspaces 
• state-of-the-art subspace search: Enclus and RIS 
For all subspace methods, we adapted LOF to measure
object distances only w.r.t. the given subspace, as proposed
by . To ensure comparability, we applied the same LOF
outlier model with identical parameter settings (i.e., the MinPts
value) for all competitors. We use only the best 100 subspaces
from the results of all subspace search methods, to enforce a
concise subspace selection.
We quantify the quality of the obtained outlier rankings by
calculating the area under curve (AUC) of the ROC curve. To
ensure comparability for runtime evaluation, we implemented
all algorithms in C++ and performed all experiments on an
Intel R⃝i3-550 Processor with 4 GB RAM. In addition, we
provide all datasets and parameter settings online1, to ensure
repeatability of our experiments.
A. Experiments on synthetic data
For scalability experiments, we have generated synthetic
datasets of different size and dimensionality. We randomly
selected 2-5 dimensional subspaces out of the full data space
and generated high density clusters in these subspaces. In
each subspace we picked 5 objects and modiﬁed them to
1 
Dimensions
Quality (AUC) of outlier rankings w.r.t. increasing dimensionality
deviate from all clusters in the selected subspace. To ensure
the challenge of non-trivial outlier detection, this deviation
was done in a way that the object will not be visible as
outlier in any lower dimensional projection. Please note that
this generation allows an object to be an outlier in multiple
subspaces independently. This fulﬁlls the real world observation of outliers hidden in multiple subspace projections (cf.
Section I).
1) Quality evaluation: To evaluate the quality of HiCS
we compare it with the competing algorithms in a series of
experiments based on AUC. We focus on the scalability of
all competitors w.r.t. the dimensionality of the data space. In
Fig. 4 we depict the average AUC and its standard deviation
for each algorithm (derived out of three randomly generated
databases). HiCS outperforms the competing approaches. In
particular, it scales with increasing dimensionality and shows
high quality results even for high dimensional databases. Only
Enclus shows similar scalability but with lower overall quality.
However, a detailed examination of the subspaces selected by
Enclus shows that it mainly found all two and some of the
three-dimensional subspaces. This is expected because the grid
based entropy measure is likely to fail for higher dimensional
subspaces. In contrast, HiCS is able to detect even a high
contrast in most of the ﬁve-dimensional subspaces. On the
other hand, full-space runs of LOF show a degradation with
increasing dimensionality, due to the curse of dimensionality.
Traditional dimensionality reduction techniques such as PCA,
should cope with the curse of dimensionality. However, as
shown, PCA fails as pre-processing technique for outlier
ranking. Please note that we have evaluated two strategies for
dimensionality reduction: PCALOF1 (reduction to 50% of the
total dimensionality) and PCALOF2 (constant reduction to 10
PCA-attributes). For the 10-dimensional datasets, the second
strategy does not reduce the dimensionality, hence it shows the
same quality as LOF. For all other cases PCA shows the worst
performance (with AUC values close to 50%). This means that
the resulting outlier ranking is equivalent to random guessing.
We exclude PCA from further consideration, as preliminary
experiments had indicated similar bad results for the following
experiments as well.
2) Runtime evaluation: In addition to the quality evaluation, we depict the runtime w.r.t. increasing dimensionality
in Fig. 5. All experiment runs are identical to the previous
experiment on quality evaluation, but we consider only the
competitors that are based on subspace rankings. We always
specify the total processing time, i.e., the time for both the
subspace search and the outlier detection. Overall, the results
show the scalable processing of HiCS. In particular we observe
almost no increase in runtime for more than 30 dimensions.
This results in a runtime comparable to the simple grid-based
processing of Enclus, which is the fastest algorithm in this
test but with drawbacks in terms of quality. This scalability
effect of HiCS is due to our candidate cutoff parameter in
the subspace generation framework. It is set to 400 in this
experiment. For the experiments with a dimensionality below
30, HiCS never generated more than 400 candidates. Thus,
the runtime increases with more dimensions and more possible
combinations of attributes. When we reach 40 dimensions, the
cutoff is applied for the ﬁrst time. It ensures both high quality,
by maintaining the top-400 highest contrast subspaces, and low
runtime, by pruning low contrast subspaces.
Runtime w.r.t. dimensionality D, with ﬁxed DB-size 1000
Besides the scalability w.r.t. data dimensionality, we have
been interested in scalability w.r.t. the database size. The
experimental results are shown in Fig. 6. The minimum
runtime of all competitors is determined by the runtime of LOF
and the number of selected subspaces. The latter one is ﬁxed
for all algorithms to the 100 most promising subspaces. Due to
the quadratic complexity of the LOF algorithm, we expect at
least a quadratic total processing time for all competitors. For
RIS we observe a cubic complexity w.r.t. the database size, and
accordingly this technique does not scale very well. For HiCS
and Enclus, the overhead for the subspaces detection is almost
negligible if the database is sufﬁciently large. If we compare
these two subspace search algorithms to the naive random
selection, we observe that RANDSUB actually consumes more
time. This is because it generates much larger subspaces on
average. This seems to have a bigger impact on the runtime
than the execution of a subspace search algorithm.
Runtime w.r.t the DB-size, with ﬁxed dimensionality 25
3) Parameters: In our comprehensive quality experiment
(cf. Fig. 4), we have noticed a high sensitivity w.r.t.
parametrization for our competitors. For RIS and Enclus in
particular, we have observed that ﬁnding good parameter settings is difﬁcult. Therefore we had run the whole experiment
with a large number of conﬁgurations for these two algorithms.
We have shown only the best values in the previous graphs. To
evaluate the robustness of our parameter settings, we describe
more detailed experiments in the following. We evaluate both
variants of our statistical instantiation HiCSWT and HiCSKS
as deﬁned in Section III-E, and we used HiCSWT as default
setting in all other experiments.
The ﬁrst parameter is the number of statistical tests M
that are performed for each subspace or, in other words, the
number of iterations of the Monte Carlo algorithm. This tradeoff between runtime and the inﬂuence of statistical ﬂuctuations
does not have a critical impact on the results. Fig. 7 shows the
AUC quality measure contingent on the number of statistical
tests. We recommend to use 50 as a default value for this
parameter, as used in all other experiments.
Furthermore, we evaluated the inﬂuence of the test statistic
size α as depicted in Fig. 8. The experiment shows that
the resulting quality is fairly robust w.r.t. the parameter α.
For very low values (α < 5%, i.e., less than 50 objects in
this experiment) we noticed a slightly increased ﬂuctuation
of the quality. This effect becomes more important when we
also reduce the number of statistical tests. Thus, having more
statistical tests helps to decrease the inﬂuence of α. For larger
α values, the statistical tests are less sensitive, resulting in a
minor quality reduction.
 
Dependence on the number of statistical tests (M)
Dependence on the size of the test statistic (α)
The last parameter candidate cutoff limits the number of
candidates in the bottom-up subspace processing. Thus, it
inﬂuences the total runtime and the maximal dimensionality in
the subspace ranking. To avoid any dataset dependence of this
parameter, we have evaluated the qualities on several synthetic
datasets. The following graphs always show average values.
In Fig. 9 we can see a peak in the quality at around 500.
For lower values, the quality is reduced, since the cutoff may
remove some good candidates from the subspace list. The
reason for this quality decrease can be found by analyzing
the resulting subspace ranking: We observed that the selection
starts to contain many redundant subspaces. This redundancy
leads to a slight quality loss in the resulting outlier score.
Please note that the ﬂuctuations introduced by this parameter
still are relatively small if we compare them to the results
in Fig. 4. In addition to the quality evaluation we depict the
inﬂuence of the cutoff parameter on the runtime in the lower
part of Fig. 9. We see that the candidate cutoff parameter
allows to control the total runtime precisely. In combination
with the previous quality experiments we conclude that not all
candidates are required and can be pruned without a signiﬁcant
quality loss.
B. Experiments on real world data
To evaluate HiCS in a real life situation, we chose eight real
world benchmark datasets from the UCI ML Repository :
Thyroid (ANN version), Arrhythmia, Breast Cancer, Breast
Cancer Wisconsin (Diagnostic), Diabetes, Glass, Ionosphere
(a) Ionosphere
(b) Pendigits
ROC plots for two real world experiments
Quality and Runtime w.r.t. candidate cutoff parameter
and Pendigits. Since outlier mining is conceptually similar to
detecting objects that belong to a rare class, we focused on
datasets where the class deﬁnitions featured a clear minority
class. We assume this class to contain the outliers in these
datasets. For the Pendigits dataset, all classes have equal
frequencies. In this case we reduced the number of objects
for one class (corresponding to the digit “0”) by a factor of
The results of all real world experiments are shown in
Fig. 11. The best AUC values are highlighted in bold, and high
quality results that are within 1% of the best are not grayed
out. The results demonstrate that HiCS achieves a very good
overall performance. It is the best algorithm for three datasets
and is close to the best result in four other experiments. Other
approaches achieve high quality only for a small subset of the
datasets and show a higher quality variation depending on the
dataset used. HiCS is the only algorithm with high quality on
most of the datasets. Considering runtime, HiCS is among the
fastest subspace search algorithms. Only Enclus shows similar
In addition, we show two ROC curves for the Ionosphere
and Pendigits datasets in Fig. 10. It is interesting to note that
the HiCS algorithm shows a tendency to reach the maximal
true positive rate earlier than other methods. Thus, it is perfect
for applications that require a high recall of outliers with best
precision of the outlier ranking. On the other hand, we observe
a minor weakness of HiCS if one is interested in very low
false positive rates: In the Ionosphere dataset for example,
the outlier ranking seems to miss some full space outliers.
This results in a reduced steepness of the ROC curve for low
false positive values. The reason for this might be the focus
on multi-dimensional subspaces. After all, we did not remove
any outliers that are trivially visible in one-dimensional projections. Therefore it might be possible to improve the quality
of HiCS even further by applying a pre-processing step that
takes care of the detection of trivial outliers. This would result
in even higher quality, while the overall results of all AUC
values show that we already obtain very good quality without
such a pre-processing. Overall, HiCS shows excellent results
on a broad variety of datasets, with robust and easy-to-use
parameters, and a scalable processing w.r.t. the dimensionality
of databases.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we developed an approach that is able to detect
subspaces for outlier mining in high dimensional databases.
We proposed the ﬁrst subspace search method that selects high
contrast subspaces for density-based outlier ranking. We focus
Experiment
Runtime [sec.]
Ann-Thyroid
Arrhythmia
Breast (diagnostic)
Ionosphere
Results on real-world datasets
on the detection of outliers that are neither visible in the full
space nor in a single attribute. These non-trivial outliers show
up in high contrast subspace with a strong correlation in the
selected dimensions. In our two-step approach, we measure the
contrast of subspaces and select the most promising ones for
outlier ranking. In this decoupled processing, we propose a
ﬁrst contrast measure based on correlation analysis. It uses
the difference between marginal and conditional pdf of a
subspace as a criterion for high contrast. The extensive set
of experiments shows that our HiCS approach outperforms
existing subspace search techniques, both on synthetic and on
real world datasets.
For future work, we aim at further evaluations with other
outlier scores such as ORCA or OUTRES . Both
seem very promising extensions of LOF with enhanced outlier
scoring. ORCA would improve the efﬁciency from a quadratic
to a linear runtime in the outlier ranking step. OUTRES might
improve the quality of our outlier ranking due to its adaptive
density scoring in subspace projections. Due to the decoupled
processing, our subspace search can be applied directly to
these or other outlier scores.
Furthermore, we would like to extend the research on
subspace selection and enhance our subspace search based
on other outlier ranking paradigms. Although HiCS would
be applicable to these paradigms, transferring some speciﬁc
properties out of the underlying deﬁnition into the subspace
search might result in further quality improvements. Overall,
the ﬂexible two-step processing opens a wide range of research
challenges in the domain of subspace outlier mining.
Acknowledgment: This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the Research Training Group
GRK 1194 “Self-organizing Sensor-Actuator-Networks”.