Dietary quality and tree cover in Africa§
Amy Ickowitz *, Bronwen Powell, Mohammad A. Salim, Terry C.H. Sunderland
Center for International Forestry Research, Jalan CIFOR, Bogor 16115, Indonesia
1. Introduction
The contribution of forests and tree-based agricultural systems
to human nutrition remains poorly understood . As more and more of the world’s forests are
cleared in large part with the aim of providing more food to a
growing human population , the
need to better understand the entire range of the contributions
that forest make to human diets takes on increasing urgency.
Several recent papers suggest that forests might have beneﬁcial
impacts on human nutrition , but there is as yet scant empirical evidence to
support these claims. This paper investigates whether there is a
statistical association between tree cover and the nutritional
quality of children’s diets using data from 21 African countries.
It is increasingly recognized that nutrition is a vital dimension
of food security . In 2012, the
Food and Agricultural Organization estimated that 868 million
people in the world did not consume sufﬁcient food energy
(calories), but that micronutrient deﬁciency affected over 2 billion
people . Micronutrient deﬁciency is often called
the ‘‘hidden hunger’’ because it can occur even when diets include
an adequate amount of energy (calories). Iron, vitamin A, iodine
and zinc are the micronutrients most commonly deﬁcient in diets
around the world .
We create a new dataset by combining dietary intake data for
over 93,000 children from 21 Demographic Health Surveys from
across the African continent with GIS data from the Global Land
Cover Facility on tree cover (as well as data from other datasets).
We use this dataset to empirically examine whether there is a
relationship between tree cover and three key indicators of dietary
quality which are known to be associated with micronutrient
intake: dietary diversity, consumption of fruits and vegetables, and
consumption of animal source foods .
How might tree cover affect the nutritional quality of children’s
diets? There are at least three possible pathways. First, people
living near forests could have greater access to nutritious wild
foods than people living in other ecosystems; such foods might
include wild fruits, leafy greens, grubs, snails, and bush meat.
Second, households that plant or harvest agro-forests on their land
may beneﬁt from increased access to fruits and nuts from trees.
Third, it is possible that the agricultural techniques used in more
forested areas, particularly shifting cultivation, might be more
conducive to diversiﬁed and nutritious diets since such practices
often involve complex mosaics of multiple crops. For any of these
possible pathways to result in differences in diets and nutrition,
however, there would also have to be some accompanying market
imperfection that prevents people in all places from having the
same market-mediated access to nutritious foods.
Global Environmental Change 24 287–294
A R T I C L E
Article history:
Received 30 January 2013
Received in revised form 24 November 2013
Accepted 2 December 2013
Food security
Dietary diversity
Dietary quality
A B S T R A C T
The relationship between forests and human nutrition is not yet well understood. A better
understanding of this relationship is vital at a time when the majority of new land for agriculture is
being cleared from forests. We use Demographic Health Survey data on food consumption for children
from 21 African countries and Global Land Cover Facility tree cover data to examine the relationship
between tree cover and three key indicators of nutritional quality of children’s diets: dietary diversity,
fruit and vegetable consumption, and animal source food consumption. Our main ﬁndings can be
summarized as follows: there is a statistically signiﬁcant positive relationship between tree cover and
dietary diversity; fruit and vegetable consumption increases with tree cover until a peak of 45% tree
cover and then declines; and there is no relationship between animal source food consumption and tree
cover. Overall our ﬁndings suggest that children in Africa who live in areas with more tree cover have
more diverse and nutritious diets.
 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
§ This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +62 251 8622 070; fax: +62 251 8622 100.
E-mail addresses: , (A. Ickowitz).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Global Environmental Change
jo ur n al h o mep ag e: www .elsevier .co m /loc ate/g lo envc h a
0959-3780/$ – see front matter  2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 
There are two ways that a household can access nutritious food:
either by direct production (or collection) or by purchase. If
markets operate perfectly, then there should be little difference in
consumption related to vegetation cover unless the vegetation
cover affects productivity (and thus income) because people would
be able to purchase nutritious food no matter their location. If
markets are imperfect, however, then there could be differences in
consumption associated with tree cover if any of the three
pathways described above hold.
If markets function well and we assume that nutritious foods
are ‘normal’ goods (a normal good is a good whose consumption
increases as income increases), then we would expect that people
with lower income would be less likely to consume more
nutritious foods. There is considerable evidence that people living
in forested areas tend to have lower incomes than those in other
areas .
Therefore, we would expect people living in forested areas to have
poorer quality diets, ceteris paribus, since they tend to have lower
incomes. If markets for nutritious foods are imperfect, however,
and people living in more forested areas have better access to
nutritious foods unmediated by markets, then it is possible that
they could have more diverse and nutritious diets through one, or
more, of the three pathways described above.
There is reason to believe that markets for many nutritious
foods in the rural areas of developing countries are likely to be
imperfect . As with many agricultural goods
produced in rural areas of developing countries, imperfections in
labor, land, insurance, and credit markets all have impacts on the
agricultural output produced and sold by small farmers . In addition to these difﬁculties, however,
fresh meat, fruits, and vegetables are highly perishable, resulting in
high transaction costs in getting them to market, thus creating a
gap between the buying and selling price of these nutritious foods
 . The larger the gap, the less likely the household
is to participate in the market. Many households may therefore
only produce/collect such goods for their own consumption. If this
is the case, then we would expect to see greater consumption of
certain types of nutritious foods in areas where they are more
available.
Demographic Health Surveys are nationally representative
household surveys developed by the United States’ Agency for
International Development for the collection of data on health and
fertility in many developing countries. These surveys use model
questionnaires and standardized data formats to ensure that data
are comparable across countries. We use the data from 21 country
surveys that were completed during the period 2003–2011. Fig. 1
shows the location of the communities included in the analysis.
As a component of these surveys, female respondents are asked
detailed questions about the diets of their children born in the last
ﬁve years. The Demographic Health Survey data (and thus this
paper) focus on children under ﬁve years because they are the most
nutritionally vulnerable members of a community. We focus on
children between the ages of 12 and 60 months because before
12 months children are still heavily dependent on breast milk or
formula and thus have limited diets. While many African children
continue to breastfeed after 12 months, complementary foods take
on an increasing importance in their diets . The most
recent rounds of Demographic Health Surveys include questions
on whether a child ate foods from various food groups in the
previous twenty-four hours. From this information we created two
types of indicators of dietary quality: dietary diversity and
consumption of nutritionally important foods (fruits and vegetables; and animal source foods).
2.1. Dietary diversity
A diverse diet is more likely to contain adequate amounts of all
essential nutrients and less likely to contain large amounts of any
one potential toxin. Dietary diversity is increasingly accepted as an
essential component of healthy diets and is associated with
nutrient intake. Adequate nutrient intake has been shown to be
closely associated with physical and cognitive growth of children
as well as lower morbidity and mortality .
We created a dietary diversity score by adding up the number of
food groups represented in the child’s diet of the previous twentyfour hour period. The Demographic Health Survey data collection
follows recent efforts to standardize dietary diversity scores and
data collection methodologies . Despite these efforts, there remain different opinions on the
number and types of food groups that should be included in dietary
diversity scores in part due to data availability and to
differing local contexts .
The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and the Food and
Nutrition Technical Assistance Project (FANTA) guidelines for
creating an individual dietary diversity score recommend using the
following 14 food groups: cereals; vitamin A rich vegetables and
tubers; white roots and tubers; green leafy vegetables; other
vegetables; vitamin A rich fruits; other fruits; organ meat; ﬂesh
meat; eggs; ﬁsh; legumes, nuts and seeds; milk and milk products;
oils and fats. We create a dietary diversity score based on these
guidelines, but only include ten of the fourteen food groups. About
half of the countries from the Demographic Health Surveys that we
use do not disaggregate the animal source foods, so we combine
‘ﬂesh meat’, ‘organ meat’, ‘ﬁsh’, and ‘eggs’ into one category:
animal source foods. In addition, the Demographic Health Surveys
combine ‘other fruits’ and ‘other vegetables’ into one group.
2.2. Intake of fruit, vegetables and animal source foods
Since the dietary diversity score gives each food group equal
weight and all food groups are not equally important for nutrition
 287–294
deﬁcient in African diets), we also look at fruit and vegetable and
animal source food consumption separately. Fruits and vegetables
are important sources of vitamin A, vitamin C, folate, iron, and
phytochemicals. Adequate consumption of a diverse range of fruits
and vegetables is widely accepted as one of the most important
aspects of diet associated with health and nutrition . Although
minerals are less bio-available in plant foods than in animal foods,
vegetables provide a large proportion of minerals such as iron and
calcium consumed by rural populations in developing countries.
Many animal source foods are good sources of highly bioavailable iron, zinc, vitamin A and vitamin B12; their low
consumption results not only in low intake of protein but also
in inadequate intake and low bioavailability of many micronutrients . Limited consumption of animal
source foods in Africa diets is considered to be an important
constraining factor for meeting nutritional requirements.
2.3. Spatial data
The Demographic Health Surveys use a ‘cluster’ as the
geographical sampling unit. This corresponds to a village, a part
of a village, or a small group of villages (depending on population
size) in rural areas and usually a city block in urban areas . Thus we think of the term ‘cluster’ as roughly representing a
community and we use the two terms interchangeably. Since the
Demographic Health Surveys include longitude and latitude
information for all clusters, it is possible to spatially link this data
to other sources of available geographic information. Several other
sources of data were thus integrated with the Demographic Health
Survey data. Data on percentage tree cover based on MODIS (250 m
resolution) were obtained from the Global Land Cover Facility
 for the years 2003 and 2010. The
Demographic Health Survey does not report exact coordinates
for the clusters included in the survey, but displaces 99% of clusters
up to 5 km (and displaces 1% by up to 10%) to protect anonymity of
respondents. We, therefore, aggregate the tree cover data pixels to
create new pixels with average percentage tree cover for a 5 km
area. The aggregated data are then spatially joined with the
Demographic Health Survey data to extract the percentage of tree
cover in the 5 km pixel in which the cluster is located.
Information on road location was obtained from the National
Imagery and Mapping Agency’s Vector Map . Data on urban populations come from the
Gridded Population of the World Center for International Earth
Science Information Network . The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research’s global aridity
index at a resolution of 1 km was used to control for differences in
climate .
3. Methods
We run three different regressions which all take the following
basic form:
yi ¼ a þ bT þ gT2 þ dX1 þ uX2 þ mA þ #A2 þ pA3 þ rB þ tF
þ ’M þ vR þ sD þ e
where yi represents the various nutritional indicators that we
examine (dietary diversity, fruit and vegetable consumption,
animal source food consumption); T represents percentage of tree
cover in 2010 ; X1 is a vector of household characteristics; X2 is a
vector of community characteristics; A represents the child’s age; B
is a dummy equal to one if the child is a boy; F is a dummy equal to
one of the child is currently being breastfed; M represents the
month that the household was interviewed; R is a vector of
geographical characteristics; and D represents a vector of country
We control for both tree cover and tree cover squared to address
potential non-linearities in the relationship between tree cover
and our indicators of dietary quality. There are several household
level variables which we think may potentially have an impact on
diets. Parents’ education has been shown to affect child health
 ﬁnd that assets are
as good as, or a better predictor of child nutritional outcomes in
most cases compared with expenditure data. Following the
methodology outlined in a seminal paper by Filmer and Pritchett
 , we use principal component analysis to create an asset
index. Several studies have found that such indices are relatively
robust and give similar poverty rankings of households as
consumption or income measures . The index
is based on whether the household owns the following: radio,
television, bicycle, motorcycle, car, refrigerator, toilet, and has
access to piped water.
There are also several community characteristics which might
affect diets. We control for the following: rural vs. urban location
(since there are likely to be differences in market access and
infrastructure between the two types of locations); distance to the
nearest city with a minimum of 10,000 inhabitants as a proxy for
access to markets and distance to the nearest road since this will
likely affect transactions costs for purchasing food, for selling
output, and for the household’s access to health and nutrition
information. This is especially important for our analysis since it is
likely that areas with more tree cover are also further from roads.
In addition, we control for the child’s age, but also include a
squared and cubic term to allow for the possibility of a non-linear
relationship. We include a dummy equal to one if the child is a boy
to address possible gender differences in diets. Since children who
are currently being breastfed may eat less solid food, we include a
dummy equal to one if the child is currently being breastfed. We
use an ordered variable to represent the month that the interview
was conducted in order to address potential seasonal constraints
on food availability. In order to control for possible differences in
crop production driven by geographical differences, we include an
aridity index and elevation. Finally, we include country dummies
to control for unobserved national characteristics which might
affect nutritional quality of diets. These should capture some broad
geographical differences as well as differences in national levels of
development. Descriptive statistics for all variables used in the
regression are presented in Table 1.
Our model of choice for the dietary diversity regression is a zero
inﬂated negative binomial regression model. Because the dietary
diversity score is actually a count of the number of food groups
consumed and is bounded between zero and ten, a simple ordinary
least squares regression is inappropriate since the dependent
variable does not follow a normal distribution. In a negative
binomial regression, the dependent variable is assumed to follow a
discrete probability distribution, as is the case here. However,
there are also a substantial number of children who report having
consumed from zero food groups in the last twenty four hours; a
zero-inﬂated negative binomial regression model allows us to
model those children who consume zero food groups differently
from the rest of the group 287–294
status, month of survey, rural dummy, and wealth index). We also
run an ordinary least squares regression as a robustness check.
For the fruit and vegetable regression, the dependent variable is
a dummy equal to one for children who reported having consumed
any of the following in the last twenty-four hours: green
vegetables, vitamin A rich fruits and vegetables, or ‘other’ fruits
and vegetables. Since each of these groups may offer differ
nutritional beneﬁts, we also look at each group individually. The
animal source food regression uses a dummy equal to one if the
child was reported to have consumed meat, eggs, or ﬁsh in the last
twenty-four hours. Since these models have a dummy as the
dependent variable, we run logit regressions for these models.
4. Results
The main set of results reported is from regressions using the
2010 percent tree cover data, but since the Demographic Health
Survey data spans the years 2003–2011, we also run the
regressions using 2003 percent tree cover data. Results for the
latter regressions are reported in Appendix A. We ﬁnd that there is
a statistically signiﬁcant positive linear relationship between tree
cover and the dietary diversity score using both the zero inﬂated
negative binomial model and the ordinary least squares models
using both years of tree cover data. Table 2 presents the results of
the regressions for the different nutrition indicators with standard
errors clustered at the community level.
These results imply that a one standard deviation higher
percentage of tree cover is associated with between a 0.11 (using
the zero inﬂated negative binomial model results with all other
variables held constant at their means) and 0.16 (using the
ordinary least squares estimates) higher dietary diversity score.
The relationship between fruit and vegetable consumption and
tree cover is more complex; fruit and vegetable consumption ﬁrst
increases with tree cover up to a peak of 45% tree cover and then
declines. Since this category consists of several different components, we also run regressions for each of its components. A table
with results for the individual components can be found in
Appendix A. To summarize: we ﬁnd that there is a statistically
signiﬁcant positive relationship between tree cover and consumption of vitamin A rich fruits and vegetables; a similar linear
relationship between tree cover and consumption of ‘other’ fruits
and vegetables, and an inverted U shaped relationship between
tree cover and consumption of green leafy vegetables peaking at
about 43% tree cover. Since only 3% of the children in our sample
in communities with more than 43% tree cover, the
relationship is effectively linear for the majority of the sample.
And ﬁnally, there is no statistically signiﬁcant association between
tree cover and animal source food consumption.
Most of the independent variables have similar qualitative
impacts across indicators of the nutritional quality of children’s
diets. Both mother’s and father’s education are positively and
signiﬁcantly related to each of the indicators, although mother’s
education has 2–3 times stronger impact depending on the
regression. Children from wealthier households enjoy greater
dietary diversity, eat more fruits and vegetables, as well as animal
source foods. Children in rural households have signiﬁcantly lower
diversity in their diets and are less likely to consume fruits and
vegetables and animal source foods. While distance to road has a
signiﬁcantly negative impact on dietary diversity and fruit and
vegetable consumption, it does not have a statistically signiﬁcant
effect on animal source food consumption. Distance to the nearest
city does not have a statistically signiﬁcant association with any of
the dietary indicators.
All of the indicators of dietary quality have a statistically
signiﬁcant non-linear relationship with child’s age; ﬁrst increasing
with a child’s age, then decreasing, and then increasing again (we
chose this functional form because it best ﬁt the data). There are no
statistically signiﬁcant differences between boys and girls in
dietary diversity or in the consumption of fruits and vegetables or
animal source foods. Children who are currently being breastfed
have lower dietary diversity according to the zero inﬂated negative
binomial model. This relationship appears positive in the ordinary
least squares regression and in the individual logit regressions, but
this is because these regressions include children for whom zero
food groups were reported. When these regressions are restricted
to children who report dietary diversity scores greater than zero
(not reported here, available from authors upon request), the sign
becomes negative. The aridity index has a positive statistically
signiﬁcant effect on all three dietary quality indicators . The current study adds to this literature by using data for
multiple countries and a very large sample of children to
empirically examine the relationship between tree cover and
nutritional
children’s
supportive of a wider literature that posits why forests are likely
to play a positive role in food security . But while we have found clear
evidence linking tree cover and indicators of diet quality, we are
not able to determine the drivers of this relationship. Our data do
not allow us to distinguish between natural forests, old fallows,
and agro-forests; thus we cannot ascertain if people living near
forests are collecting more nutritious foods from the forest or if
they are cultivating them on farms and in agroforests, or a
combination.
The results of our analysis are likely to understate the beneﬁts
of forests and trees for nutritious diets since they only capture the
higher quality of diets for the children who live in the communities
in which the trees are found. They do not capture the indirect
beneﬁts that trees provide to food production outside their
immediate vicinity; such beneﬁts might include a variety of
ecosystem services including soil, nutrient regulation, hydrological
services, pollination services, and the conservation of genetic
Summary statistics – means with standard deviations.
Dietary diversity score
3.08 (2.23)
Fruit and vegetable consumption
0.57 (0.49)
Vitamin A rich fruit and vegetable consumption
0.28 (0.45)
Green leafy vegetable consumption
0.41 (0.49)
‘Other’ fruits and vegetables
0.24(0.43)
Animal source food consumption
0.46 (0.50)
Tree cover 2010
10.18 (11.99)
Tree cover 2003
10.87 (13.45)
Mother’s education (highest level)
0.735 (0.776)
Father’s education (highest level)
0.938 (0.883)
Wealth score
0.389 (1.309)
Rural dummy
0.779 (0.415)
Distance to road in km
5.616 (9.117)
Distance to city in km
33.50 (37.59)
Age (in months)
33.61 (13.75)
0.502 (0.500)
Currently breastfeeding
0.20 (0.398)
Month of survey
6.955 (3.088)
Aridity index
6549 (3958)
740.4 (627.0)
A. Ickowitz et al. / Global Environmental Change 24 287–294
resources . Also, our
results do not capture the beneﬁts to households who purchase
nutritious food that originates in forested areas, but is consumed
outside the community in which it is produced. These might be
quite substantial.
6. Conclusions
Until quite recently, there has been extensive focus on the
quantity of food produced and consumed in food security rhetoric
and in policy and decision making arenas and much less attention
given to the nutritional quality of foods and diets . Discussions centered on food security have often
implied that increased food production will need to come either at
the expense of forests or from intensiﬁcation of land located on
ecosystems other than forest . The deﬁnition of food
security adopted at the 1996 World Food Summit, however,
recognizes that food security involves more than calorie consumption: ‘‘food security exists when all people, at all times, have
physical and economic access to sufﬁcient safe and nutritious food
[emphasis added] to meet their dietary needs and food preferences
for a healthy and active life’’ .
When the importance of micronutrient consumption and
dietary diversity is recognized, the need to move beyond merely
increasing production area or yield of staple crops to achieve
food security becomes clear. If improving nutrition is viewed as
central to achieving food security, then the results presented
here suggest that landscapes that incorporate substantial tree
cover may themselves be important for food security. While
much of the concern voiced by scientists decrying the expansion
of agriculture into forests centers around loss of biodiversity
 , our study suggests that deforestation might also
have a long-term negative impact on nutrition. Recent evidence
that between 1980 and 2000, 95% of new land cleared for
agriculture in Africa came from land that had previously
been covered by forests suggests that
further research into better understanding the reasons for the
association that we ﬁnd between tree cover and nutrition is
imperative.
Acknowledgments
This work forms part of the CGIAR Research Program on Forests,
Trees and Agroforestry. We also gratefully acknowledge additional
support from USAID’s Biodiversity Fund.
Results from nutrition regressions with standard errors clustered at community level.
Dietary diversity score (ZINB)
Dietary diversity score (OLS)
Fruit and vegetable (logit)
Animal source foods (logit)
Tree cover 2010
0.00406***
 2
0.000255***
Mother’s education
Father’s education
Wealth score
Rural dummy
0.0807***
Distance to road
0.000911**
0.00294**
0.00373**
Distance to city
Age (in months)
0.00150***
0.00594***
0.00451***
0.00417***
1.43e05***
5.95e05***
4.50e05***
4.31e05***
Currently breastfeeding
0.0191***
Month of survey
Aridity index
3.04e06**
1.51e05***
1.96e05***
5.54e05***
0.000112***
0.000315***
0.000248***
0.000167***
Country dummies
R2 (Pseudo R2)
Observations
Robust z-statistics in parentheses.
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.
A. Ickowitz et al. / Global Environmental Change 24 287–294
Appendix A
See Tables A1 and A2.
Results from nutrition regressions using 2003 tree cover data with standard errors clustered at the community level.
Dietary diversity score (ZINB)
Dietary diversity score (OLS)
Fruit and vegetable (logit)
Animal source foods (logit)
Tree cover 2003
 2
0.000132**
Mother’s education
Father’s education
Wealth score
Rural dummy
0.0771***
Distance to road
0.000898**
0.00287**
0.00372**
Distance to city
Age (in months)
0.00150***
0.00596***
0.00453***
0.00417***
1.44e05***
5.96e05***
4.52e05***
4.31e05***
Currently breastfeeding
0.0189***
Month of survey
Aridity index
4.55e06***
1.91e05***
2.37e05***
5.48e05***
0.000112***
0.000316***
0.000254***
0.000167***
Country dummies
R2 (Pseudo R2)
Observations
Robust z-statistics in parentheses.
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.
Results from logit regressions for components of fruit and vegetables with standard errors clustered at community level.
Vitamin A rich fruit and vegetables
Green leafy vegetables
‘Other’ fruits and vegetables
Tree cover 2010
 2
0.000229***
Mother’s education
Father’s education
Wealth score
Rural dummy
Distance to road
0.00688***
Distance to city
0.00131***
Age (in months)
0.00287***
0.00391***
0.00354***
A. Ickowitz et al. / Global Environmental Change 24 287–294