The Dynamic Representation of Scenes
Ronald A. Rensink
Cambridge Basic Research, Nissan Research & Development, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA, USA
One of the more powerful impressions created by vision is that of a coherent,
richly detailed world where everything is present simultaneously. Indeed, this
impression is so compelling that we tend to ascribe these properties not only to
the external world, but to our internal representations as well. But results from
several recent experiments argue against this latter ascription. For example,
changes in images of real-world scenes often go unnoticed when made during a
saccade, flicker, blink, or movie cut. This “change blindness” provides strong
evidence against the idea that our brains contain a picture-like representation of
the scene that is everywhere detailed and coherent.
How then do we represent a scene?It is argued here that focused attention provides spatiotemporal coherence for the stable representation of one object at a
time.It is then argued that the allocation of attention can be co-ordinated to create
a “virtual representation”. In such a scheme, a stable object representation is
formed whenever needed, making it appear to higher levels as if all objects in the
scene are represented in detail simultaneously.
One of our most compelling impressions as observers is that we are surrounded
by a coherent, richly detailed world where everything is present simultaneously. Although our environment is certainly this way, this impression is so
compelling that we tend to believe these properties true of our representations
as well—that is, we believe that somewhere in our brain is a stable and detailed
representation of the stable and detailed world around us.
Please address all correspondence to R.A. Rensink, Cambridge Basic Research, Nissan Research & Development, Inc., 4 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142-1494 USA. Email:
 
I would like to thank Jack Beusmans, Dan Simons, Ian Thornton, and Carol Yin for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper. Portions of this manuscript were presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, May
11-16, 1997.
2000 Psychology Press Ltd
VISUAL COGNITION, 2000, 7 (1/2/3), 17–42
But does such a representation really exist? The gathering of visual information is done using a retina that has high resolution only over a few degrees
of visual angle. A complete representation of a scene therefore requires the
contents of individual eye fixations to be integrated via a high-capacity visual
buffer . But the inhomogenous
nature of retinal representation rules out a simple superposition of fixations, so
that any integration process would be less than straightforward . Furthermore, even if integration could be done, it is not clear
that it should be done—the computational requirements for representing our
surroundings with a detail equal to that of foveal vision are overwhelming,
even for human nervous systems . And even if all
this information could somehow be held in our brain, the sheer amount of it
would cause severe problems with its efficient access by processes at higher
levels .
These theoretical reservations are supported by several lines of experimental work, all of which fail to find evidence for an integrative visual buffer . For example, changes in an image of a
real-world scene become difficult to detect when made during a flicker, blink,
eye movement, movie cut, or other such interruption. This “change blindness”
suggests that little detailed information is being accumulated—otherwise,
change detection would be easy, either by comparing immediate visual input
with the contents of the buffer, or by detecting the anomalous structures formed
by superimposing the original and the changed images. The fact that change
blindness can be induced under a variety of conditions—together with the
strength and robustness of the basic effect—indicates that the failure to accumulate detailed information is not an aberrant phenomenon occurring only
under a special setof circumstances. Rather,it is central to the waywe represent
the world around us.
But if we are so bad at accumulating visual detail, how is it that we can see
change at all? And if we do not have representations that are everywhere
detailed and coherent, why do we have such a strong impression that these
kinds of representations underlie our visual experience?
This paper suggests some possible answers to these questions. It begins by
outlining a coherence theory of attention, which describes how focused attention can form a stable structure that enables the perception of change in an
object. The notion of a virtual representation is then introduced to explain how
attention can be co-ordinated so thata sparse set of stable structurescan give the
impression that scene representations are stable and detailed everywhere.
Finally, a triadic architecture is suggested, showing how a virtual representation could be created in a way consistent with what is known of visual
processing.
COHERENCE THEORY
If we are unable to accumulate visual detail, how is it that we can see change at
all? Why do some conditions induce change blindness, but not others? The
answer suggested here is based on the proposal that focused attention is needed
to see change . Under normalcircumstances, any change in the world is accompanied by a motion signal,
which attracts attention to its location . It is only when this local signal is swamped (via the transients associated
with a saccade, flicker, eyeblink, splat, etc.) that this guidance of attention is
lost and change blindness then induced.
This explanation, however, creates an apparent paradox. Attention is
thought to “weld” visual features into relatively long-lasting representations of
objects . It
is also thought to operate relatively quickly, at a rate of 20–40 items per second
 . But if this is so, why should the swamping of
motion signals induce change blindness? Why doesn’t attention simply weld
all the visible items within the first few seconds of viewing and thereby enable
the easy detection of change under all conditions?
The answer to this goes to the very heart of what it means to be attended. It is
proposed here that attentional effects are largely concerned with coherence. As
used here, this term denotes not only consistency in a set of representational
structures,
1 but also logical interconnection, that is, agreement that the structures refer to parts of the same spatiotemporal entity in the world. Thus, two
adjacent structures are spatially coherent if they refer to the same object,
extended over space. Likewise,two successive structures aretemporally coherent if they refer to the same object, extended over time.
Furthermore, rather than assuming that the structures formed by attention
last indefinitely, it may be that their lifetimesareactually quite brief. In particular, attention may endow a structure with a coherence lasting only as long as
attention is directed to it. Developing this line of thought leads to a coherence
theory of attention:
THE DYNAMIC REPRESENTATION OF SCENES
1Discussions of representation often fail to distinguish between two rather different usages of
the term. The first refers to the abstract coding scheme used when describing something, for example a Gabor function of a given frequency and orientation. The second refers to the particular instance used when describing something in the actual input, for example a Gabor function of a
particular frequency and orientation that describes a particular edge fragment at a particular location. This distinction is essentially that between “type” and “token”. To make clear which usage is
intended, “representation” will be used when referring to form (type), and “representational structure"—or just “structure"—when referring to instance (token). Note that representational structure should not be confused with “mechanism”, that is, the way in which representations are
implemented .
(1) Prior to focused attention, low-level “proto-objects” are continually
formed rapidly and in parallel across the visual field. These protoobjects can be fairly complex, but have limited coherence in space and
time. Consequently, they are volatile, being replaced when any new
stimulus appears at their retinal location.
(2) Focused attention acts as a metaphorical hand that grasps a small number of proto-objects from this constantly regenerating flux. While held,
these form a stable object, with a much higher degree of coherence over
space and time. Because of temporal continuity, any new stimulus at
that location is treated as the change of an existing structure rather than
the appearance of a new one.
(3) After focused attention is released, the object loses its coherence and
dissolves back into its constituent proto-objects. There is little or no
“after-effect” of having been attended.
According to coherence theory, a change in a stimulus can be seen only if it
is given focused attention at the time the change occurs. Since only a small
number of items can be attended at any time , most items in a scene will not have a stable representation. Thus,
if attention cannot be automatically directed to the change, the changing item is
unlikely to be attended, and change blindness will likely follow.
Limited coherence of unattended proto-objects
The lowest levels
2 of visual perception are generally believed to provide a
detailed map-like representation, or “sketch”, of the scene-based properties
visible to the viewer (Fig. 1). These representational structuresarethought to be
retinotopic, and formed rapidly (i.e. within a few hundred msec) and in parallel
across the image, without the need for focused attention . Given that focused attention is not
involved, coherence theory states that these structures have only limited coherence in space and time.
2As used here, “low-level vision” refers to those processes concerned with separating out the
various physical factors in the scene that give rise to the pattern of luminance intensities in the image. These processes are generally considered to be retinotopic, and carried out by a set of processors operating in parallel across the visual field. According to the theory proposed here, they are
also volatile, either fading away a few hundred milliseconds after the proximal stimulus disappears, or else being replaced by a new stimulus that appears in the same retinal location. Meanwhile, “early vision” refers to that aspect of low-level processing carried out regardless of higherlevel context, or perceptual set. Since context generally requires at least a hundred milliseconds of
viewing to get established, early vision can be equivalently defined as that aspect of vision that is
both low-level and rapid .
Schematic of low-level vision. Three main stages are distinguished here: (1) the transduction stage, where photoreception occurs, (2) the primary processing stage, where linear or quasi-linear filters measure image properties, and (3) the secondary processing stage of rapid non-linear interpretation. Operations at all
threestages are carriedoutin parallelacross the visual field.The transduction and primary stages obtain their speed at theexpense of complexity;in essence,they perform “quick and clean” measurements. The limits to these kinds of operations are given by the primary line. The secondary stage obtains its speed at the expense of
reliability, opting for “quick and dirty” interpretations that may not always be correct. The outputs of this stage are proto-objects that become the operands for
attentional processes.
Much of the evidence for limited spatial coherence comes from visual search
experiments. The results of early studies suggested that spatial coherence was
minimal, with non-attended structures limited to simple blobs and bars . But although this primary stage reflects the limits of reliable
measurement,it does not reflectthe limits of low-level processing. Later experiments showed the existence of a secondary stage, where local interactions
enable the “quick and dirty” recovery of various scene-based properties, such
as surface curvature , slant , and
shadows . But even in this stage, limits exist on
the extent over which information is collected—for example, rapid line interpretation fails for items larger than 4° .
Several types of rapid grouping have been found to occur at the secondary
stage , as has the rapid completion of occluded figures . Thus, it appearsthat low-levelprocesses areconcerned
not only with the recovery of scene-based properties, but also with their formation into “proto-objects”, that is, relatively complex assemblies of fragments
that correspond to localized structures in the world. Recent work also indicates
that proto-objects arethe lowest-levelstructuresdirectlyaccessibleto attention,
with much of their underlying detail being accessed only by deliberate effort
 . As such, proto-objects have a “two-sided”
nature, being not only the highest-level outputs of low-level vision, but also the
lowest-level operands upon which higher-level attentional processes can act.
Evidence for the limited temporal coherence of proto-objects comes largely
from studies of visual integration, which show that stimuli can be integrated
over time only if they are at the same retinal location and arrive within about
100msec of each other . Beyond these limits, it appears that
the details of successive presentations cannot be added, compared,or otherwise
combined . These results, together with those from changeblindness studies, provide strong evidence that early level structures are inherently volatile: They are either overwritten by subsequent stimuli or else fade
away within a few hundred milliseconds . Note that this volatility is at the level of proto-objects and not pixels—if a new stimulus has an empty space in its midst, the contents at that location will be part of the new proto-object, and so will still be overwritten . In summary, then, the sketch formedat any
particular fixation can be highly detailed, but will have little coherence, constantly regenerating as long as light continues to enter the eyes, and being
largely created anew after each eye movement.
3The creation of a new low-level description may not need to proceed completely from scratch
for proto-objects that are attended. As described in the section on attentional coherence, attended
structures have temporal continuity. Thus, there may be some carry-over when these structures are
re-formed at a new retinal location.
Extended coherence of attended objects
Given that unattended structures have only limited spatial and temporal coherence, it follows that focused attention must provide the coherence that knits
them into larger-scale objects and allows them to retain their continuity over
time. Note that this latter property
4 is particularly important in regards to the
perception of change, for continuity allows the appearance of a new stimulus to
be treated as the transformation of an existing structure rather than the formation of a completely new one.
In this view, then, focused attention is intimately involved with the perception of objects.
5 Essential properties of an object include the requirement that it
be discrete, be differentiated from its background, and have a coherent unity
across space and time. It must also be an individual, literally something that
cannot be divided without losing its integrity—if an object is taken apart, the
result is a set of parts rather than a set of objects similar to the original .
To capture these properties, coherence theory asserts that focused attention
is involved with the representation of only one object at a time. This limit is
taken from studies showing that for some tasks attention appears to operate on
just one object . Attentional interaction with lower-level structures is posited as taking
place via a nexus, a single structure containing a summary description of the
attended object, for example, its size, overall shape, and dominant colour.
Within the nexus, internal connections enable the computation of these summary properties, as well as providing a way to briefly store them.
THE DYNAMIC REPRESENTATION OF SCENES
4The property of temporal continuity could also be called “identity” . However, there are several problems with this term . Most prominent of these is its ambiguity—“identity” can also denote semantic recognition
(as in “identification” ), and so may cause connotations not wanted here. As such, “identity” will
not be used to denote spatiotemporal continuity; “semantic identity” will always be used when referring to issues of semantic recognition.
5Several effects (e.g. the improvement of performance when uncertainty is reduced) are believed to occur via attention that is allocated to particular feature spatial locations or—more
generally— feature “channels” . The relation between space-, feature-, and object-based attention is not yet clear. Available evidence suggests that different—but interacting— systems may be involved . The
account here is intended only for object-based attention.
6One meaning of the term “nexus” is connection or tie; another is connected series or group.
Both meanings apply to the concept of nexus proposed here. First, the nexus is characterized as the
sole connection between attention and the visual structures at lower levels. Second, the nexus can
have links to several proto-objects as well as having a differentiated internal structure, thereby
forming a connected series that is treated in many respects as a single entity (i.e. an object).
When a proto-object is attended, a link is established between it and the
nexus, enabling a two-way transmission of information between these structures (Fig. 2). Information going up the link allows the nexus to obtain descriptions of selected properties from the attended proto-object. Information going
down the link can in turn provide stability to the volatile proto-object, allowing
it to be maintained or to rapidly regenerate when it is briefly occluded or when
the eye moves. Among other things, links also enable a mapping between the
ever-changing retinotopic co-ordinates of the proto-object and the more stable
viewer- (or object-)centered co-ordinates of the nexus. When the link establishes a recurrent flow of information between the nexus and its proto-object,
the resulting circuit is referred to as a coherence field.
Experiments also indicate that for some tasks four to six items can be
attended at the same time .
In such a situation, the coherence field still contains a single nexus, but is now
expanded to include several proto-objects, with nexus properties determined
via links to these structures (Fig. 2). The recurrent flow of information
between the nexus and its proto-objects not only establishes coherence over
space, but also forms a type of memory, establishing coherence over time as
well. Describing this in a more metaphorical way, attention may be seen as a
hand that “grasps” the proto-objects with about four to six “fingers”, the
selected structures then forming a single coherent object as long as they are
Note that the nexus and its proto-objects form a “local hierarchy”, with only
two levels of description (object- and part-level). Such a hierarchy is an
extremely useful device, and is a natural way to represent objects . For example, a proto-object could be attentionally subdivided
and the links assigned to itsparts; this would correspond to a traversal down one
level of the part-whole hierarchy of that object. Conversely, the links could be
assigned to several widely separated proto-objects, forming a group that would
correspond to a (coarsely coded) object one level up. Thus, even though the
capacity of focused attention may be limited , the ability to quickly traverse a part–whole hierarchy gives it rapid
access to any aspect of an object’s structure.
The limited amount of information that can be attended at any one time
explains why observers can fail to detect changes in “attended” objects . When focused attention is directed to something in the
world, it will not generally be possible to represent all of its detail in a coherence field—only a few of its aspects can be represented in the nexus at any one
time. If one of the aspects being represented is one of the aspects changing in
the world, the change will be seen; otherwise, change blindness will still
Schematicof a coherence field.This structureis composed of three kindsof components: (1) a nexus,corresponding to a single object,(2) a setof 4–6 protoobjects, corresponding to object parts, and (3) bidirectional links between the nexus and the proto-objects. Coherence is established when a recurrent flow of information exists between the nexus andits proto-objects, as wellas within the nexus itself. Selected information is transmittedup the links to enter into the descriptionof
the object. Information from the nexus is also transmitted back down the links to provide stability (and perhaps refinement) to the proto-objects.
Lack of attentional aftereffect
The final part of coherence theory concerns the fate of the coherence field once
focused attention is removed. Given that only one object can be represented at a
time, a coherence field cannot be maintained if attention is switched to another
object. In such a case, the links are dissolved and the previously attended parts
revert to their original status as volatile proto-objects. To appeal to the hand
metaphor again: The release of focused attention is like the release of the items
held by the hand, with these items returning to the “primal ooze”, that is, the
flux of constantly regenerating low-level structures.
In this view, then, there is little or no aftereffect of having directed attention
to a structure, at least in termsof the ability to detect change. There is of course a
short-term memory (STM) for items that have been previously attended . But in the view taken here, STM is an abstract memory concerned with object types; in contrast, a coherence field is believed to embody
visual short-term memory(vSTM), a purely visual memory supporting the formation of object tokens, and so may contain little or no information after attention is withdrawn.
In the extreme, vSTM can be identified as the memory formed by a coherence field, which leads to the position that there is no vSTM apart from what is
attended. In other words, attending to an item is both necessary and sufficient
for it to be in vSTM. Evidence for this position is mixed . But physiological studies show that the mechanisms for short-term (or
working) memory are similar to those for focused visual attention—so similar,
in fact, that there may be no difference at all . Furthermore, psychophysical studies indicate that there may be a complete lack of memory for items previously attended in a visual search task
 . As such, there appears to be at least some degree of support for
this position.
Relation to other work
One of the most influential of early models of attention was that of Shiffrin and
Schneider . In their view, STM was an “activated” sub-set of LTM, with
attention selecting the particular LTM items to be activated. Coherence theory
differs from this in several ways. First, it views attention as concerned with the
formation of immediate spatiotemporal structures (or tokens) rather than the
activation of long-term categories (or types). Second, Shiffrin and Schneider
believed that any process could operate without attention after sufficient practice, whereas coherence theory asserts that the perception of change always
requires attention. Finally, the activation posited by Shiffrin and Schneider can
last after attention is withdrawn, whereas a coherence field collapses as soon as
this occurs. It is important to note that according to coherence theory such lasting activation is still possible for STM. The proposal here is that this is not
possible for vSTM (or visual working memory), a rather different system concerned entirely with spatiotemporal structure.
The notion of a coherence field is closer to the proposal of Kahneman et al.,
 that spatiotemporal structures are represented by “object files” in which
various properties are bound together. Both views agree that an attended representational structure only needs to describe a spatiotemporal entity, and that it
does not need to be matched to stored descriptions in long-term memory. But
whereas object files may contain information on non-visual properties (such as
the appropriate response to make), nexus properties are limited to the purely
visual, or to abstract properties derivable from the visual (such as semantic
identity). More importantly, once set up, an object file may or may not be
attended, so that several files can be maintained at a time; in contrast, there can
be only one nexus (perhaps linked to several structures), and its associated field
collapses as soon as attention is withdrawn.
The idea of a coherence field—in particular, its set of links—also has some
similarity to the concept of FINSTs (“fingers of instantiation”) proposed by
Pylyshyn and Storm . FINSTs are pointers that provide access paths to
attended objects, continually informing higher-level processes of their positions; it is posited that about five FINSTs can be used at a time. Both FINSTs
and links provide higher-level processes with information about lower-level
structures, and both can stabilize these structures to get continuity over time.
But FINSTstransmit only the position of an itemtohigher levels, whereas links
transmit several kinds of visual information, and do so in a recurrent fashion.
Also, FINSTs are assigned to completely independent objects, whereas links
are brought into a nexus corresponding to a single object (although this object
may have several parts).
7 Because there are as many links as FINSTs, links can
potentially explain all the results explained by FINSTs, such as tracking and
subitizing . Furthermore,
the constraint of a single nexus explains why the tracking of isolated dots in a
display may be better interpreted as the tracking of corners of a single virtual
object .
Coherence theory is also compatible with studies showing that when observers attend to particular objects or events in a scene, they often fail to report the
appearance of other, unexpected items . Recent work
suggest that this may be not so much a failure to see these items as it is to
remember them . This interpretation is
consistent with a perceptual “here and now” in which volatile representations
THE DYNAMIC REPRESENTATION OF SCENES
7Each link is a finger in the metaphorical attentional hand, and so in some respects corresponds
to a FINST . To have a direct correspondence with the attentional hand
itself, FINSTs would need to be augmented by other mechanisms. This would presumably result
in a “HANST”.
of considerable detail and sophistication are continually built and rebuilt in the
absence of attention.
VIRTUAL REPRESENTATION
The theory of attention proposed previously has a rathercounterintuitive implication: Only one object in an environment, or scene, can be given a coherent
representation at any time. Moreover, this representation is limited in the
amount of information it can contain. But if this is so, why do we not notice
these limitations? Why do we feel that somewhere in our brain is a complete,
detailed representation of all the objects in the scene?
To answer this, consider how objects are used in everyday life. For most
tasks, only one object is in play at any time: A cup is grasped, a friend recognized, a speeding cyclist avoided. A detailed representation may be requiredfor
this “target” object, but it is not required for the others. Although there appear to
be tasks (e.g. juggling) that areexceptions to this, these tasks aregenerally handled by quickly switching back and forth, so that there is only a single target at
any one time. Thus, although we may need to represent various aspects of a
scene (such as the background), it would appear that we never need a detailed
representation of more than one of the objects in it at any particular time.
This realization gives rise to the idea of a virtual representation: Instead of
forming a detailed representation of all the objects in our surroundings, represent only the object needed for immediate purposes. If attention can be coordinated so that a coherent, detailed representation of an object can be formed
whenever it is needed, the representation of a scene will appear to higher levels
as if it is “real”, that is, as if all objects are represented in great detail simultaneously. Such a representation will then have all the power of a real one, while
requiring far less in the way of processing and memory resources.
Example: Accessing a computer network
To get a better feel for what is meant by virtual representation, consider the
problem of accessing the data contained in a large network, such as the World
Wide Web (Fig. 3). On one hand is the browser workstation, limited in the
amount of information it can hold in its memory. On the other is the network,
with informationheld by thousands of machines.Suppose now that we want the
workstation to access data contained at various sites. How should this be
Given sufficient memory, the workstation could contain a complete copy of
all the data contained in all the computers of the network. But the amount of
memory needed for this would be enormous. Furthermore, each time data was
added or deleted from one of the machines on the network, it would have to be
broadcast to all the others, resulting in huge transmission costs.
Virtual representation—Computer network. If a limited-capacity workstation can access information from the computer network whenever requested, it
will appear to contain all the information from all sites on the network.
Consequently, network designs generally favour a more dynamic approach
to data access. If we want to see the information at a particular site, our workstation checks to see if it is already in its memory. If so, nothing more needs to
be done. Otherwise, it sends out a request to the appropriate site and has the
requested informationloaded in (Fig. 3).Ifthis transfer can be done sufficiently
quickly, our workstation will appear to contain all the information in the network. But in reality, this information will have only a virtual representation: It
is not all present simultaneously in the workstation, but is simply accessed
whenever requested.
To see how this strategy can explain scene perception with a limitedcapacity attentional mechanism, consider the parallels between the two
A workstation can hold the contents of one (or at most a few)
Attention can hold the contents
of one (or at most a few)objects.
There are thousands of sites on
the network, containing enormous amounts of information.
There are thousands of objects
in the visible scene, containing
enormous amounts of information.
The workstation cannot hold all
of this information.
Attention cannot hold all of this
information.
Given the similar structure of the problems, a similar solution can be used
If the information from a site is
already held in memory, use it.
If the information from an object is already being attended,
Otherwise, locate required site,
and load in information.
Otherwise,
proto-objects, and make them
Result is a virtual representation
of the contents of the network.
Result is a virtual representation
of the contents of the visible
In the case of the computer network, competent co-ordination of network
requests makes it appear as if a low-capacity workstation (limited to one or two
sites) simultaneously holds all the information on the network. Similarly,
8A virtual representation is often used within an single computer to make it appear to have
more memory that is physically present. This is referred to as “virtual memory” (e.g. Tanenbaum,
Virtual representation —Human vision. If a limited-capacity attentional system can access information from the visible scene whenever requested, it will
appear to contain all the information from all objects in the visible scene.
competent co-ordination of attentional requests could make it appear to higherlevel processes as if a limited-capacity coherence field (limited to one or two
objects) simultaneously held allthe information about all objects in the scene.
Thus, even though our conscious minds may have the impression that all the
objects in front of us are simultaneously given a detailed, coherent representation somewhere in our brain, this need not be the case. Instead, this can result
from a much sparser “just in time” system that simply provides the right object
representation at the right time.
It is important to note that this feeling of completeness does not necessarily
mean that the representation really is complete, that is, that it represents all the
objects in view. It also does not mean that it represents them all correctly. Just
like a static “real” representation, a dynamic virtual representation may fail to
represent particular objects, or may represent them incorrectly. As such, the
extent to which a representation is virtual or real is unrelated to its accuracy or
completeness.
Conditions for successful operation
Although a virtual representation can result in an enormous savings of computational resources, these savings do not come for free. Virtual representations
reduce complexity in space by trading off for an increased complexity in time.
Only particular types of information-processing tasks can take advantage of
this trade-off. Is visual perception one of these?
The keys to the successful operation of a virtual representation are: (1) only
one (or at most a few) objects need to have a “real” representation at any one
time, and (2) detailed information about any object must be made available
when requested. The first requirement is easily met for most (if not all) visual
tasks. We usually need to attend to only one object at a one time, for example,to
grasp it, or to see where it is headed. Tasks where several target objects are
involved can generally be handled by “time-sharing”,that is, by rapidly switching attention back and forth between the objects.
The requirement of access on request is also met under most conditions of
normal viewing. Provided that there is a way to guide eye movements and
attentional shifts to the location of the requested object, visual detail can be
obtained from the stream of incoming light. Consequently, a high-capacity
visual memory for objects is not needed—the information is generally available from the world itself. As pointed out long ago by Stroud : “Since
our illumination is typically continuous sunlight and most of the scenery stays
put, the physical object can serve as its own short-term memory”. Stroud’s
insight has recently been revived, with several proposals further supporting the
idea that much of perception is best understood in terms of using the world as
its own best model perception
9, that is, the perception of
events over durations of several seconds. Since illumination is fairly constant
during the daytime, an object seen at one particular time will almost always be
illuminated a short time later. As such, fluctuation in illumination is highly
unlikely to interfere with short-term perception. Likewise, sudden occlusions
of previously seen objects are relatively rare over the span of several seconds.
As such, information about an object seen at one particular time is almost
always available several seconds later. Consequently, virtual representation
can be a reliable and effectiveway of handling the large amounts of information
contained in a real-worldscene, atleast for purposes of short-term perception.
General applicability
Virtual representation is a powerful information-processing strategy, one that
is central to much of modern computer and network design . Unfortunately, this form of representation was long neglected as a way
of explaining perceptual and cognitive processing—only recently has work
begun to explore its potential in this regard .
And even many of these studies do not focus on biological information processing, being instead demonstrations of its effectiveness in artificial systems.
At the most general level, work on virtual representation illustrates the
power of deictic (or indexical) representation. In deictic representation, there is
little memory of detailed information; instead, emphasis is placed upon the
extraction of a few key “aspects”, which then serve as pointers to entities in the
world . Interactions
betweensub-systems can also be handled this way, using a few key behavioural
aspects rather than a detailed representation of the goals or the information in
the other sub-systems . In all these cases, the power of a
deictic representation is jointly determined by the representational structure
and itscontext (i.e. the world itself, or the set of interacting sub-systems). Inthis
view, representations do not construct a copy of the world or of their neighbors—rather, they simply co-ordinate the actions of the various systems
THE DYNAMIC REPRESENTATION OF SCENES
9I thank Dan Simons for suggesting this term.
TRIADIC ARCHITECTURE
The successful use of virtual representation in human vision requires that eye
movements and attentional shifts be made to the appropriate object at the
appropriate time. But what directs these movements and shifts? How can the
location of an object be known before attention has been directed to it? And if
attention has no aftereffects, how can there be any memory of a scene after
attention has been withdrawn?
An unequivocal, detailed answer to all these questions would largely
amount to a complete theory of vision, something not yet in existence.
Consequently, this section will provide only a sketch of one possibility. This
sketch is not meant to be definitive. Rather, it is simply meant to show that an
answer can be given to these questions, an answer that allows virtual representation to be carried out in a manner compatible with what is known about
human visual processing.
The solution proposed here begins by discarding the assumption that all
visual processing passes through a single attentional locus. Although having
great intuitive appeal, such an “attento-centric” model of vision may not correspond to reality. Recent studies indicate that a single locus of attention may not
exist: Capacity-limited processes loosely identified as “attentional” may be
found at different levels of the visual system, and possibly even indifferentprocessing streams . Ifso, the attentional system used for object
perception would simply be one system among many, the others operating concurrently and largely independently of it.
Developing this view further leads to a triadic architecture with three
largely independent systems (Fig.5).The firstisa low-level system that rapidly
creates highly-detailed, volatile structures. The second is a limited-capacity
attentional system that formsthese structures into stable object representations.
These two systems are already part of coherence theory. What is now added is a
limited-capacity non-attentional system that provides a setting to guide
10. This “setting system” involves at least three aspects of scene
structure:
(1) Perception of the abstract meaning, or gist of a scene (e.g. whether the
scene is a harbour, city, picnic, barnyard, etc.). This could provide a
10Various systems have been proposed for guiding focused attention . But these tend to emphasize the mechanics of guidance, being concerned
with issues such as whether various features are selectively excited or inhibited, or whether selection can be done on groups or individual items. The system sketched here is not concerned with
such issues; rather, it involves a more functional perspective, investigating the kinds of information that could be used to direct a guidance mechanism, however implemented.
Triadic architecture. It is suggested that the visual perception of scenes may be carried out via the interaction of three different systems. System I: Earlylevel processes produce volatile proto-objects rapidly and in parallel across the visual field. System II: Focused attention acts as a hand to “grab” these structures; as
long as these structures are held, they form an individuated object with both temporal and spatial coherence. System III: Setting information—obtained via a nonattentional stream—guides the allocation of focused attention to various parts of the scene, and allows priorities to be given to the various possible objects.
useful way to prioritize attention, directing it to the objects that are most
important in that context.
(2) Perception of the spatial arrangement, or layout of the objects in the
scene. This could provide a non-volatile representation of the locations
of various structures, which could then be used when attention is to be
directed to particular objects in the scene.
(3) Invocation of an abstract scene schema stored in long-term memory,
presumably via gist or layout information. Once invoked, this could facilitate the perception of these two quantities, and ultimately—through
the associated interactions—facilitate the perception of objects.
This architecture is somewhat similar to early proposals that scene perception involves an initial extract of gist and subsequent refinement of detail . However, it differsfrom these in that a complete scene representation is never constructed—although the representation of gist and layout may
be improved over the course of viewing, there always remains only one coherent object represented at any one time. As such, this architecture embodies a
fundamental change of perspective: scene representations are no longer structures built up from eye movements and attentional shifts, but rather, are structures that guide such activities.
The most abstract aspect of a scene is its meaning, or gist. Thisquantity remains
constant over many different eye positions and viewpoints, as well as changes
in the composition and layout of objects in an environment. As such, it can provide a stable constraint on the kinds of objects expected, and perhaps even indicates their importance for the task at hand .
Gist can be determined within 120msec of presentation , a time insufficient for attending to more than two
or three items. Furthermore, it can be extractedfrom highly blurredimages, and
without attention—indeed, two different gists can be determined simultaneously . In accord with these findings, gist does not
appear to be determined by objects, which are perceived concurrently or even
afterwards . As such, it may be determined by simple
measures such as the distributions of line orientations or colours in the image
 , or other properties of the protoobjects that exist at low levels.
Another important aspect of scene structure is layout, the spatial arrangement
of the objects in a scene, without regard to visual properties or semantic identity
 . This quantity—at least from an allocentric frame of
reference—is invariant with changes in eye position; as such, it could be useful
for directing eye movements and attentional shifts.
The visual system appears to extract at least some layout information within
a few seconds of viewing, and to be able to hold it across brief temporal gaps
 . But the memory involved differs
from that of a coherence field—it holds spatial location rather than visual properties, and concerns an entire scene (or at least an array of objects) rather than
just a single object. It also appears to be non-volatile, enduring even in the
absence of attention . It is important to note that even if layout is held in a non-attentional memory,this does not
imply that it is obtained non-attentionally. It is possible, for example, that it is
extracted from the scene and entered into memory via a series of attentional
shifts or eye movements.
Scene schema
The invariance of gist and layout information not only allows these quantities to
provide a relatively stable context for other operations—it also facilitates the
long-term learning of scene constraints. Long-term memory for scenes appears
to involve not only the scene category, but also an associated collection of representations, or scene schema representations
with a limited lifetime, scene schemas are long-term structures that may last
indefinitely. This allows them to accumulate information, so that their contents
can be more detailed and sophisticated than the perceptual structures that
invoke them. For example, scene schemas are believed to include an inventory
of objects likely to be present in the scene, along with various aspects of layout,
such as the relative locations of the inventory objects . Items consistent
with the schema need not be encoded in detail, since verification may involve a
simple checking of expected features. In other words, objects only need to be
detected—a coherent representation of their structure need not be constructed
 . If an unexpected structure in the image is encountered,
THE DYNAMIC REPRESENTATION OF SCENES
more sophisticated (attentional) processes could form a coherent representation of its structure, attempt to determine its semantic identity, or re-evaluate
the gist. Meanwhile, the perceived layout of items could be used as a check on
the current interpretation, as well as helping to guide attention to a requested
This set of interactions therefore provides a way of creating a virtual representation of all the objects in the scene. It may also help explain not only why
we have an impression of all objects being present simultaneously (via the virtual representation), but also why we have a concurrent impression of detail at
all background locations (possibly via the volatile set of proto-objects).
It is also worth pointing out that several interesting effectsmay be explained
in terms of these interactions breaking down. For example, if focused attention
is occupied with the formation of an object, an unattended stimulus can cause
priming , or enter long-term memory , even though it is not consciously perceived. This can
be explained in terms of the attentional system “locking on” to a particular
object, with the unseen information travelling along other, non-attentional
streams. Indeed, if one of these non-attentional streamscan detect (but not support perception of) some kinds of change, it may explain how observers can
sometimes guess that change has occurred even though they have no explicit
awareness of it (Fernandez-Duque & Thornton, this issue). Another effect is
“mindsight”, where observers have a strong feeling that something is changing
but have no accompanying visual experience . Here,it may be
that the change is detected by a non-attentional sub-system, which then alerts
the attentional system. The information transmitted in an alert need not be
large, which may explain why observers have little idea of what or where the
change is. Note that this kind of explanation has a parallel with that proposed
for blindsight,
11 which relies on a similar separation of processing streams
 .
It is proposed that a dynamic representation underlies our perception of scenes.
One component of this proposal is a coherence theory of attention, which
asserts that unattended structures are volatile, and that focused attention
is needed to stabilize them sufficiently to allow the perception of change.
The other component is the assertion that vision makes use of virtual
11Although related, blindsight and mindsight are different phenomena. In blindsight, the observer has no conscious experience of the stimulus whatsoever, being completely surprised, for
example, when their hand is able to grasp an “unseen” object. In mindsight, the observer has no
conscious visual experience. But they still have a conscious “mental” (i.e. non-visual) experience—hence the name.
representation, a dynamic form of representation in which attention provides
detailed, coherent descriptions of objects that are needed exactly when they are
needed. A triadic architecture is proposed as one possible way to create such a
representation. This architecture uses representations that are stable and representations that contain large amounts of visual detail. But at no point does it use
representations that are both stable and contain large amounts of detail.
In this view, the impression of having representations that are both stable
and detailed is due to the careful co-ordination of attention. To the extent that
the resulting descriptions contain the information needed, our impression as
observers will be of a richly detailed environment, with accurate representation
of those aspects of greatest importance. It is only when low-level transients are
masked or are disregarded due to inappropriate high-level control that
attentional co-ordination will break down, causing the true nature of the virtual
representation to intrude into our perceptual awareness.