Competition Between Antiferromagnetic Order and Spin-Liquid
Behavior in the Two-Dimensional Periodic Anderson Model at
Half-Filling
M. Veki´c,1 J.W. Cannon,2 D.J. Scalapino,3 R.T. Scalettar,1 and R.L. Sugar3
1Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616
2Physics Department, Centenary College, 2911 Centenary Blvd., Shreveport, LA 71104
3Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
 
We study the two-dimensional periodic Anderson model at half-ﬁlling using quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) techniques. The ground state undergoes a
magnetic order-disorder transition as a function of the eﬀective exchange coupling between the conduction and localized bands. Low-lying spin and charge
excitations are determined using the maximum entropy method to analytically continue the QMC data. At ﬁnite temperature we ﬁnd a competition
between the Kondo eﬀect and antiferromagnetic order which develops in the
localized band through Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interactions.
PACS numbers: 75.20.Hr, 75.30.Et, 75.30.Mb, 75.40.Mg
Typeset using REVTEX
The periodic Anderson model (PAM) describes a localized f-band of strongly correlated electrons hybridized with a d-band of free conduction electrons. As the temperature, ﬁlling, and Hamiltonian parameters are varied, there is a competition between the
Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction and the Kondo eﬀect .
RKKY interaction favors ordering the magnetic moments of the localized f-band, while the
Kondo eﬀect screens the localized magnetic moments and quenches the magnetic interaction
through the formation of singlets between the two bands . The Kondo eﬀect is expected
to dominate for large exchange coupling between the conduction electrons and the local
moments. For smaller values of the exchange interaction, instead, the local moments order,
in most cases antiferromagnetically.
It is believed that this behavior qualitatively describes the competition between magnetic
ordering and singlet formation in a number of the heavy fermion materials. Additionally,
several small-gap semiconducting compounds involving either rare-earth or actinide metals
 can be well described by the PAM. These systems exhibit local moment behavior at
high temperatures. At low temperatures the hybridization of the local moments with the
conduction band leads to magnetic ordering and the formation of a small energy gap or, in
some cases, to a Kondo insulator with no long-range magnetic order.
The competition between the RKKY interaction and the Kondo eﬀect has been studied
within the framework of the two-impurity Anderson model , the one-dimensional PAM
 and the Kondo lattice , and in inﬁnite dimensions . Here we present QMC results
for the two-dimensional PAM at half-ﬁlling. This is an interesting model since it exhibits
various types of insulating states ranging from an antiferromagnetic insulator to a Kondo
insulator or, if the f-d hybridization dominates, a simple band-insulator.
The Hamiltonian for the two-dimensional PAM is
iσdjσ + d†
iσfiσ + f †
Here t is the hopping parameter in the d-band, V is the hybridization energy between the
bands, Uf is the Coulomb repulsion in the f-band, ǫf and ǫd are the energy levels of the dand f-band respectively, and nd
iσdiσ and nf
iσfiσ are the density operators for the
two bands. In the following we will set t = 1 and consider the symmetric case (ǫf = 0) at
half-ﬁlling (ǫd = 0).
The zero temperature behavior of the PAM along the Uf = 0 and V = 0 axes in the Uf-V
phase diagram is simple. In the former case, we have a “band-insulator” as the hybridization
V opens up a gap where the dispersionless f electron level crosses the conduction band. In
the latter case we have a set of individual local moments completely decoupled from the
conduction band. When V and Uf are both non-zero, a qualitative understanding of the
zero temperature order-disorder transition can be obtained from a comparison of the RKKY
energy scale JRKKY ∼J2/W and the Kondo energy scale TK ∼We−W/J, where J ∼V 2/Uf
and W is the bandwidth. For small values of J, long-range RKKY driven antiferromagnetic
order will set in. As the exchange coupling J is increased beyond a ﬁxed value, we expect
that the order will be quickly suppressed due to the formation of spin singlets between the
two bands. The above argument suggests a functional form of the phase boundary with
In order to determine whether the ground state of the PAM does have long-range antiferromagnetic order, we have carried out a ﬁnite size scaling analysis of the equal time
spin-spin correlations obtained with QMC to calculate the staggered f-orbital magnetization mf in the thermodynamic limit. When this quantity is non-zero, the ground state of the
PAM has long-range antiferromagnetic order. In addition, we have evaluated non-equal time
correlations to extract the dynamic f-orbital spin and charge susceptibilities as well as the
low temperature dependence of the total uniform spin and charge susceptibilities in order
to determine the spin and charge gaps. For an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator the charge
gap is ﬁnite but there are gapless Goldstone antiferromagnetic spin excitations. However,
in a Kondo insulator there are gaps for all excitations (with the charge gap larger than the
spin gap) and consequently no long-range order. In the PAM we expect the small exchange
interaction phase to be well described by a Mott insulator with antiferromagnetic order,
while the larger exchange interaction phase should be well described by a Kondo insulator
with spin-liquid behavior. In addition, in the limit of a large exchange interaction there is
a cross-over to a band-insulator regime where the spin and charge gaps become identical.
At ﬁnite temperature we ﬁnd two diﬀerent behaviors depending on whether the parameters are such that the ground state is in the order or disordered part of the phase diagram. For
small values of the exchange coupling we ﬁnd a metallic behavior, with a Kondo resonance
developing in the f-band density of states for temperatures below the Kondo temperature
TK. This resonance is then suppressed at a lower temperature, leading to insulating behavior, by the formation of a gap when the antiferromagnetic correlations reach the size of the
system. The staggered spin susceptibility tends to diverge at the same temperature at which
the charge gap forms in Nf(ω). The uniform spin susceptibility displays a maximum below
TK and tends to saturate at a ﬁnite value as T goes to zero. On the other hand, the uniform
charge susceptibility also displays a maximum but then decays quickly to zero, indicating
the existence of a charge gap. For large values of the exchange coupling the f-band density
of states shows an insulating gap for all ﬁnite temperatures and the absence of antiferromagnetic order. Both the uniform q →0 spin and charge susceptibilities decay to zero as
the temperature is lowered, indicating the presence of a gap.
In order to determine the Uf-V boundary separating the antiferromagnetically ordered
from the disordered phase we have calculated the f-band spin correlation function
cf(lx, ly) = 1
i↓, and the f-band antiferromagnetic structure factor
Sf(π, π) =
(−1)lx+lycf(lx, ly),
as functions of temperature and system size N. In particular, for a given lattice size, we
found that Sf(π, π) saturates for large values of β. We have used the saturated values along
with the spin-wave scaling forms
f = 3Sf(π, π)
to extract the staggered magnetization m2
f of the f-band. Figure 1 shows the results of
these calculations for two values of the hybridization V = 1.0 and V = 1.2 with Uf = 4.
The system sizes ranged from 4 × 4 to 8 × 8 lattices. For V = 1.0, the intercept of a linear
ﬁt to the points gives a ﬁnite value for m2
f in the inﬁnite system. However, for V = 1.2,
Sf(π, π) does not appear to scale with system size N and, as shown in Fig. 1, we conclude
f = 0. Similar conclusions can be reached by scaling cf(
N/2) according to
the spin-wave theory result. In Fig. 1 we show that the extrapolated value for m2
f obtained
from Eq.(5) is consistent with the value obtained from Sf(π, π) for V = 1.0. Again, for
V = 1.2 it appears that m2
We have carried out a similar scaling analysis for several values of Uf and in Fig. 2 we
show the Uf −V phase diagram obtained in this manner. The boundary is shown as a solid
line passing through the three points obtained from the QMC data at Uf = 2, 4, and 6.
For small values of J ∼V 2/Uf we have carried out a mean-ﬁeld calculation assuming that
2 (−1)i. The dotted curve in Fig.2 shows where the mean-ﬁeld mf vanishes.
The antiferromagnetic region obtained from MFT is signiﬁcantly larger than that found
from QMC due to the eﬀect of ﬂuctuations which are neglected in MFT.
In order to extract dynamic properties of the system, we have also calculated imaginarytime properties. Using a maximum entropy procedure to analytically continue the QMC
data, we have determined the density of states and the imaginary part of the spin and charge
dynamic susceptibilities. We have inverted the integral relation relating the single particle
Green’s function Gf
ij(τ) ≡−⟨Tτci(τ)c†
j(0)⟩to the density of states Nf(ω),
−∞dωNf(ω)e−τω
1 + e−βω .
In Fig. 3 we show Nf(ω) for several values of β for Uf = 4 and V = 0.75. As the temperature
is lowered from β = 4 to β = 12 we see a Kondo resonance peak developing at the Fermi level,
corresponding to the screening of the local moments by the conduction electrons. However,
for ﬁnite values of V , as the temperature is further lowered, we ﬁnd that the Kondo peak is
suppressed until at β = 20 a well developed gap is formed. On the same lattice size and for
the same range of temperatures we ﬁnd that the antiferromagnetic structure factor grows
rapidly before saturating to a ﬁnite value at around β = 20. Thus, we associate the gap
with the long-range antiferromagnetic order which sets in at the same temperature for this
lattice size. For larger values of V the behavior of Nf(ω) is quite diﬀerent, since we do
not ﬁnd any resonance peak at ω = 0 but rather an insulating gap is always present at all
temperatures. It is found that this gap grows with V for any ﬁxed Uf.
We have also analytically continued the imaginary-time f-orbital spin and charge correlation functions χf
ii(τ) ≡⟨Tτmf
i (0)⟩and Πf
ii(τ) ≡⟨Tτnf
i (0)⟩in order to calculate
the imaginary part of the dynamic spin and charge susceptibilities Imχf(ω) and ImΠf(ω),
respectively. It can be shown that Imχf(ω) is related to χf
−∞dωImχf(ω)e−τω
with a similar expression relating ImΠf(ω) to Πf
ii(τ). In Fig. 4(a) we show -Imχf(ω) for
several choices of V on a 6 × 6 lattice. The spin gap only opens for values of V above the
critical point, where there is no antiferromagnetic long-range order. In Fig. 4(b) we show
-ImΠf(ω) with the same parameters as in Fig. 4(a). In this case it is clear that the charge
gap ∆c is present also for values of V below the critical point. In the inset we report the
value of the ratio of the spin gap to the charge gap ∆s/∆c as a function of V . We ﬁnd that
∆c > ∆s for all values of V . However, for the larger values of V we can clearly see that
the two gaps tend to be equal. This behavior is an indication that the system crosses into
a band-insulator regime.
Evidence for charge and spin gaps can also be seen in the temperature dependence of
the uniform charge and spin susceptibilities. The spin susceptibility is deﬁned by
χtot(q = 0) =
0 dτ⟨m(τ)m(0)⟩,
and the charge susceptibility is similarly deﬁned by
Πtot(q = 0) =
⟨n(τ)n(0)⟩−⟨n⟩2i
i (ni↑−ni↓) and n =
i (ni↑+ ni↓), with niσ = nf
iσ. In Fig. 5 we
show χtot and Πtot versus temperature for several values of the hybridization energy V at
a ﬁxed Uf = 4. For smaller values of V we ﬁnd that Πtot becomes very small at a ﬁnite
temperature, while χtot peaks at a temperature close to the one at which we ﬁnd the Kondo
resonance in Nf(ω) and then approaches a ﬁnite value at T = 0. This behavior is consistent
with the fact that for V = 1.0, ImΠf(ω) has a gap but Imχf(ω) is gapless.
In conclusion, we have shown that for small values of V 2/Ut the ground state of the PAM
is an insulator with long-range antiferromagnetic order characterized by a ﬁnite charge gap
and gapless spin excitations. As V 2/Ut increases the long-range order is destroyed and the
system exhibits a spin-liquid behavior. The spin-liquid state is characterized by both a spin
gap and a charge gap with ∆c > ∆s. When the hybridization V increases further and V 2/Ut
becomes large, the system crosses over to a band-insulating state in which ∆s approaches
∆c. Work is currently in progress to determine the behavior of the doped system.
We thank M.P.A. Fisher, R.M. Fye, J. Freericks, M. Jarrell, and A.W. Sandvik for
helpful conversations. The numerical calculations were performed primarily on the Cray
C-90 at the San Diego Supercomputer Center. This work was supported by the National
Science Foundation under grants No. DMR92-06023 and No. PHY89–04035 (Institute for
Theoretical Physics) (M.V. and R.T.S.), the Los Alamos National Laboratory under the
LACOR grant No. UC-94-2-A-213 (M.V.), and the Department of Energy under grant No.
DE-FG03-85ER45197 (D.J.S. and R.L.S.).