Sequential Click Prediction for Sponsored Search
with Recurrent Neural Networks
Yuyu Zhang∗
Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
 
Hanjun Dai∗
Fudan University
 
Nankai University
 
Tsinghua University
 
Taifeng Wang
Microsoft Research
 
Jiang Bian
Microsoft Research
 
Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
 
Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research
 
Click prediction is one of the fundamental problems
in sponsored search. Most of existing studies took advantage of machine learning approaches to predict ad
click for each event of ad view independently. However,
as observed in the real-world sponsored search system,
user’s behaviors on ads yield high dependency on how
the user behaved along with the past time, especially
in terms of what queries she submitted, what ads she
clicked or ignored, and how long she spent on the landing pages of clicked ads, etc. Inspired by these observations, we introduce a novel framework based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). Compared to traditional
methods, this framework directly models the dependency on user’s sequential behaviors into the click prediction process through the recurrent structure in RNN.
Large scale evaluations on the click-through logs from
a commercial search engine demonstrate that our approach can signiﬁcantly improve the click prediction accuracy, compared to sequence-independent approaches.
Introduction
Sponsored search has been a major business model for modern commercial Web search engines. Along with organic
search results, it presents to users with sponsored search results, i.e., advertisements (ads) targeting to the search query.
Sponsored search accounts for the overwhelming majority
of income for three major search engines: Google, Yahoo
and Bing. Even in the US search market alone, it generates over 20 billion dollars per year, the amount of which
still keeps rising1. According to the common cost-per-click
(CPC) model for sponsored search, advertisers are only
charged once their advertisements are clicked by users. In
this mechanism, to maximize the revenue for search engine
and maintain a desirable user experience, it is crucial for
search engines to estimate the click-through rate (CTR) of
∗This work was performed when the ﬁrst three authors were
visiting Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c⃝2014, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1Source: eMarketer, June 2013.
Recently, click prediction has received much attention
from both industry and academia . State-of-the-art sponsored search
systems typically employ machine learning approaches to
predict the click probability by using the feature extracted
based on: 1) historical CTR for ad impressions 2 with respect to different elements, e.g., CTR of query, ad, user, and
their combinations ; 2) semantic relevance between
query and ad .
However, most of previous works take single ad impression as the input instance to predict the click probability,
without considering dependency between different ad impressions. Some recent research work pointed out that they
could achieve more accurate click prediction by modeling
spatial relationship between ad slots in the same query session. Inspired by them, we conduct further data analysis to
study other types of dependency between user’s behaviors
in sponsored search, through which we ﬁnd that user’s behaviors also yield explicit temporal dependency. For example, if a user clicks an ad, comes to the ad landing page,
but closes it very quickly, the click probability of her next
view of this ad will become fairly low; moreover, if a user
has previously submitted a query on booking ﬂight, he/she
will be with higher probability to click the ads under ﬂight
booking. These ﬁndings motivate us to advance the state-ofthe-art of click prediction by modeling the important temporal dependency into the click prediction process. Although
some kinds of dependency can be modeled as features, it’s
still hard to identify all of them explicitly. Thus, it is necessary to empower the model with the ability to extract and
leverage various kinds of dependency automatically.
In real-world sponsored search system, the event of any
ad impression, click, and corresponding context information
(e.g. user query, ad text, click dwell time, etc.) is recorded
with the time stamp in search logs. Thus, it is natural to
employ time series analysis methods to model sequential
dependency between user’s behaviors. Previous studies on
2We refer to a certain ad shown to a particular user in a speciﬁc
search result page as an ad impression.
 
time series analysis usually focused on
modeling trends or periodic patterns in data series. However,
the sequential dependency between ad impressions is so
complex and dynamic that time series analysis approaches
is not capable enough to model it effectively. On the other
hand, a few most recent studies leverage Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) to model the temporal dependency in data.
For example, RNN language model successfully
leverages long-span sequential information among the massive language corpus, which results in better performance
than traditional neural networks language model . Moreover, RNN based handwriting recognition , speech recognition , and machine translation systems
have also led to much improvement in the corresponding
tasks. Compared to traditional feedforward neural networks,
RNN has demonstrated its strong capability to exploit dependencies in the sequence due to its speciﬁc recurrent network structure.
In this work, we propose to leverage RNN to model sequential dependency into predicting ad click probability. We
consider each user’s ad browsing history as one sequence
which yields the intrinsic internal dependency. In the training process of RNN model, features of each ad impression
will be feedforwarded into the hidden layer, together with
previously accumulated hidden state. In this way, the dependency among impressions will be embedded into the recurrent network structure. Our experiments on the large scale
data from a commercial search engine reveal that, such RNN
structure can give rise to a signiﬁcant improvement on the
click prediction accuracy compared with the state-of-the-art
dependency-free models such as Neural Networks and Logistic Regression.
The main contributions of this paper are in three folds:
• We investigate the sequential dependency among particular user’s ad impressions, and identify several important
sequential dependency relationships.
• We use Recurrent Neural Networks to model user’s click
sequence, and successfully incorporate sequential dependency into enhancing the accuracy of click prediction.
• We conduct large scale experiments to validate the RNN
model’s effectiveness for modeling sequential data in
sponsored search.
In the following parts of this paper, we will ﬁrst present
our data analysis results to verify the potential dependency
which might affects click prediction. Then, we propose our
RNN model for the task of sequence-based click prediction.
After that, we describe experimental settings followed by the
experimental results and further performance study. At last,
we summarize this paper and discuss some future work.
Data Analysis on Sequential Dependency
To gain more understanding on why sequential information
is important in click prediction, in this section, we will discuss the effects of sequential dependency from multiple per-
Last Click Dwell Time (seconds)
Figure 1: Correlation between last click dwell time and current click-through rate.
spectives. We collect data for analysis from the logs of a
commercial sponsored search system.
Once a user clicks an ad, she will enter into the corresponding ad landing page and stay for a certain period of
time, which is referred to as the click dwell time. Generally,
longer dwell time implies better user experience. For a particular user, all the ad impressions can be organized as an ordered sequence along with the time. To explore the sequential effect of click dwell time, we ﬁrst pick up all the “ﬁrst
clicks” in each user’s sequence, and track whether each ad
will be clicked again in its consecutively next impression.
The correlation between the previous click dwell time and
the current click-through rate3 is shown in Figure 1. From
this ﬁgure, it is clear to observe an obvious positive correlation, i.e., the longer a user stays on an ad’s landing page, the
more likely she will click this ad right at the next time.
When the click dwell time is less than 20 seconds, we call
such ad click as a “quick back” one. From the data analysis above, we can observe that “quick back” can give rise to
rather lower click-through rate in the next impression, which
indicates that users tend to avoid clicking the ad once they
had an unsatisﬁed experience. However, it is not clear how
users behave if they experienced a “quick back” click long
time ago (e.g., half a month). To explore this, we collect all
the “quick back” clicks and calculate the click-through rate
after different time intervals, i.e., the time elapsed since the
“quick back” click, respectively. Figure 2 shows the result,
where the time interval is binning by half-days. As conjectured, along with increasing elapsed time, the overall clickthrough rate grows signiﬁcantly and then stay steadily in
a certain level, which implies that users tend to gradually
forget the unsatisﬁed experience with the time passing.
Besides studies on the sequential effect of dwell time,
we further analyze such effects from the aspect of query. In
sponsored search systems, ads are automatically selected by
matching with the user submitted query. Queries also form
a time ordered sequence, binding on that of ad impressions.
After categorizing the queries into topics based on our proprietary query taxonomy, we calculate users’ click-through
rate when they submit each query topic for the ﬁrst time, and
compare with their future CTR on subsequent queries of the
same query topic. Analysis results, as shown in Figure 3, il-
3In this paper, we present relative click-through rate to preserve
the proprietary information.
TimefElapsedfSincefLastf)QuickfBack)fClickf(half−days)
Figure 2: Click-through rate right after a “quick back” click
on the same ad.
First Submission
Subsequent Submission
Figure 3: Click-through rate on users’ ﬁrst and subsequent
submissions of a certain type of query.
lustrate that if a user has submitted a query belonging to a
certain query topic, he/she will become more likely to click
the ads under the same topic.
All the analysis results above indicate that user’s previous
behaviors in sponsored search may cause strong but quite
dynamic impact her subsequent behaviors. As long as we
can identify such sequential dependency between user behaviors, we can design features accordingly to enhance the
click prediction. However, since a big challenge to enumerate such dependency in the data manually, it is necessary to
let the model have the ability to learn such kind of dependency by itself. To this end, we propose to leverage a widely
used framework, Recurrent Neural Network, as our model,
as it naturally embeds dependencies in the sequence.
The Proposed Framework
The architecture of a recurrent neural network is shown in
Figure 4. It consists of an input layer i, an output unit, a
hidden layer h, as well as inner weight matrices. Here we
use t ∈N to represent the time stamp. For example, h(t)
denotes the hidden state in time t. Speciﬁcally, the recurrent
connections R between h(t −1) and h(t) can propagate
sequential signals. The input layer consists of a vector i(t)
that represents the features of current user behaviors, and
the vector h(t −1) represents the values in the hidden layer
computed from the previous step.
The activation values of the hidden and output layers are
computed as
h(t) = f(i(t)U T + h(t −1)RT ),
Feedforward
Backpropagation
Figure 4: RNN training process with BPTT algorithm. Unfolding step is set to 3 in this ﬁgure.
y(t) = σ(h(t)V T ),
where f(z) = 1−e−2z
1+e−2z is the tanh function we use for nonlinear activation, and σ(z) =
1+e−z is the sigmoid function
for predicting the click probability.
The hidden layer can be considered as an internal memory which records dynamic sequential states. The recurrent
structure is able to capture a long-span history context of
user behaviors. This makes RNN applicable to the tasks related to sequential prediction.
In our framework, i(t) represents the features correlated
to user’s current behavior and h(t) represents sequential information of user’s previous behaviors. Thus, our prediction
depends on not only the current input features, but also the
sequential historical information.
Feature Construction
In our study, we take ad impressions as instances for both
model training and testing. Based on the rich impressioncentric information, we construct the input features that
can carry crucial information to achieve accurate CTR prediction for a given impression. All these features can be
grouped into several general categories: 1) Ad features consist of information about ad ID, ad display position, and ad
text relevance with query. 2) User features include user ID
and query (submitted by user) related semantic information.
3) Sequential features include time interval since the last impression, dwell time on the landing page of the last click
event, and whether the current impression is the head of sequence, i.e., whether it is the ﬁrst impression for this user.
With all these diverse types of features, each ad impression can be described in a large and complex feature space.
In this paper, all of the click prediction models will follow this input feature setting, so that we can fairly compare
their capabilities of predicting whether an impression will
be clicked by user.
Data Organization
To effectively harness the sequential information for modeling temporal dependencies, the training process requires
large quantity of data. Luckily, the data in computational
advertising is big enough to make RNN tractable. To obtain the data for sequential prediction, we re-organize the
input features along with the user dimension (i.e., reordered
each user’s historical behaviors according to the timeline).
In particular, for the ads in the same search session, we rank
them by their natural display orders in the mainline and then
Loss Function
In our work, the loss function is deﬁned
as an averaged cross entropy, which aims at maximizing the
likelihood of correct prediction,
(−yilog(pi) −(1 −yi)log(1 −pi)),
where M is the number of training samples. The ith sample is labeled with yi ∈{0, 1} and pi is the predicted click
probability of the given ad impression.
Learning Algorithm (BPTT)
RNN can be trained in the
same way as normal feedforward network using backpropagation algorithm. In this way, basically, the state of the hidden layer from previous time step is simply regarded as an
additional input. With only one hidden layer, the network
tries to optimize prediction of the next sample given the
previous sample and previous hidden state. However, no effort is directly devoted towards longer context information,
which may hurt the performance of RNN.
A simple extension of the training algorithm is to unfold
the network and backpropagate errors even further. This is
called Back Propagation Through Time (BPTT) algorithm.
BPTT was proposed in , and has been used in the practical application of RNN
language model .
We illustrate the overall training pipeline that applies
BPTT to the RNN based click prediction models in Figure 4.
Such unfolded RNN can be viewed as a deep neural network
with T hidden layers where the recurrent weight matrices are
shared and identical. In this approach, the hidden layer can
actually exploit the information of the most recent inputs and
put more importance to the latest input, which is essentially
coherent with the the sequential dependency. In the following part, we use T to denote the number of unfolding steps
in the BPTT algorithm.
The network is trained by Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD). The gradient of the output layer is computed as
eo(t) = y(t) −l(t),
where y(t) is the predicted click probability, and l(t) is the
binary true label according to the ad is clicked or not. The
weights V between the hidden layer h(t) and output unit
y(t) are updated as
V (t + 1) = V (t) −α × eo(t) × h(t),
where α is the learning rate. Then, gradients of errors are
propagated from the output layer to the hidden layer as
eh(t) = eo(t)V ∗(⃗1 −h(t) ∗h(t)),
Test Samples (user behavior sequence)
Feedforward
Figure 5: RNN testing process with sequential input samples. The hidden state of previous test sample will be used
as input, together with the current sample features.
where ∗represents the element-wise product, and⃗1 is a vector with all elements equal to one.
Errors are also recursively propagated from the hidden
layer h(t −τ) to the hidden layer from previous step
h(t −τ −1), that is
eh(t−τ −1) = eh(t−τ)R∗(⃗1−h(t−τ −1)∗h(t−τ −1)),
where τ ∈[0, T). The weight matrix U and the recurrent
weights R are then updated as
U(t + 1) = U(t) −α
eh(t −z)T i(t −z)
R(t + 1) = R(t) −α
eh(t −z)T h(t −z −1)
Note that, in our practical experiments, we add the bias
terms and L2 penalty of weights to the model, and the gradients can still be computed easily based on a slight modiﬁcation to the equations above.
In contrast to traditional neural networks, RNN has a recurrent layer to store the previous hidden state. In the inference
phase, we still need to store the hidden state of previous test
sample, and feedforward it with the recurrent weights R.
Figure 5 illustrates the testing process. The test data is also
organized as ordered user behavior sequences. We feedforward current sample features, together with the hidden state
of previous sample to get the current hidden state. Then we
make the prediction and replace the stored hidden state with
current values. Here we only record the hidden state of the
last test sample, no matter how many unfolding steps there
are in the BPTT training process.
Experiments
This section ﬁrst describes the settings of our experiments,
and then reports the experimental results.
Data Setting
To validate whether the RNN model we proposed can really help enhance the click prediction accuracy, we conduct
a series of experiments based on the click-through logs of
a commercial search engine. In particular, we collect half a
Table 1: Statistics of the dataset for training and testing click
prediction models.
Ad Impressions
Table 2: Overall performance of different models in terms of
AUC and RIG.
month logs from November 9th to November 22nd in 2013
as our experimental dataset. And, we randomly sample a
set of search engine users (fully anonymized) and collect
their corresponding events from the original whole trafﬁc.
Finally, we collect over 7 million ad impressions in this period of time. After that, we use the ﬁrst week’s data to train
click prediction models, and apply those models to the second week’s data for testing. Detailed statistics of the dataset
can be found in Table 1.
Evaluation Metrics
In our work, there are multiple models to be applied to predict the click probability for ad impressions in the testing
dataset. We use recorded user actions, i.e., click or non-click,
in logs as the true labels. To measure the overall performance
of each model, we follow the common practice in previous
click prediction research in sponsored search and employ
Area Under ROC Curve (AUC) and Relative Information
Gain (RIG) as the evaluation metrics .
Compared Methods
In order to investigate the model effectiveness, we compare the performance of our RNN model with other classical click prediction models, including Logistic Regression
(LR) and Neural Networks (NN), with identical feature set
as described aforementioned. We set LR and NN as baseline
models due to the following reasons: 1) Quite a few previous studies have demonstrated
that they are state-of-the-art models for click prediction in
sponsored search. 2) LR and NN models ignore the sequential dependency among the data, while our RNN based
framework is able to model such information. Through the
comparison with them, we will see whether RNN can successfully leverage dependencies in the data sequence to help
improve the accuracy of click prediction.
Experimental Results
Overall Performance
For fair model comparison, we
carefully select the parameters of each model with cross validation, and ensure every model achieve its best performance
respectively. To be more speciﬁc, parameters for grid search
include: the coefﬁcient of L2 penalty, the number of training
epochs, the hidden layer size for RNN and NN models, and
the number of unfolding steps for RNN. Finally, we get the
best settings of parameters as follows: the coefﬁcient of L2
penalty is 1e −6, the number of training epochs is 3, the
hidden layer size is 13, and the number of unfolding steps
should be 3 (more details will be provided later).
Table 2 reports the overall AUC and RIG of all three methods on test dataset. It demonstrates that our proposed RNN
model can signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of click prediction, compared with baseline approaches. In particular,
in terms of RIG, there is about 17.3% relative improvement
over LR, and about 10% relative improvement over NN. As
for the metric of AUC, we can ﬁnd there is about 1.7% relative gain over LR, and about 0.5% relative gain over NN.
In real sponsored search system, such improvement in click
prediction accuracy will lead to a signiﬁcant revenue increment.
The overall performance above shows the effectiveness
of our RNN model, which clearly transcends sequence independent models. Next, we will conduct detailed analysis
on how the sequential information help to get more accurate
click prediction.
Performance on Speciﬁc Ad Positions
It is well-known
that the click-through rate on different ad positions varies a
lot, which is often referred to as the position bias. To further
check the performance of models within speciﬁc positions,
in our experiments, we separately analyze the performance
of RNN model and two baseline algorithms on different ad
positions: top ﬁrst, mainline and sidebar.
Figure 6 shows the evaluation results on different positions. In Figure 6(a), RNN outperforms NN and LR measured by AUC on all positions. In Figure 6(b), in terms of
RIG, RNN achieves impressive relative gain over NN and
LR, especially on mainline positions, where RNN beats NN
by 3.12%. According to our statistics on daily trafﬁc data,
most of revenue comes from the mainline ad clicks, where
RNN can achieve signiﬁcantly better performance. While
for sidebar positions, the ads shown there are easily to be
ignored by users, so that the clicks or positive instances are
very rare. This may drastically hurt the performance of LR
model. Nevertheless, the RNN model still performs the best,
which indicates that even in rare cases, sequential information can still help.
Effect of Recurrent State for Inference
We have shown
the inference method of RNN in Figure 5. To further verify the importance of utilizing historical sequences in the
inference phase, we remove the recurrent part of the RNN
model after training, and feedforward the testing samples as
a normal NN, which means that we just ignore the sequential dependencies in the testing phase. Finally, the AUC is
88.25% and RIG is 18.95%. Compared to Table 2, we can
observe a severe drop of the performance of RNN model,
which shows that the sequential information is indeed embedded in the recurrent structure and signiﬁcantly contribute
to the prediction accuracy.
(a) AUC on speciﬁc ad positions
(b) RIG on speciﬁc ad positions
Figure 6: Performance on speciﬁc ad positions.
Performance with Long vs. Short History
In this part,
we conduct experiments to check the model performance
with different length of history. We ﬁrst collect all available
user sequences whose length is larger than a threshold T.
In these sequences, the ﬁrst T samples in each sequences
are fed into model to serve as the “accumulation period”.
Then, we continue feeding and testing samples for the rest
part of each sequence, and calculate the AUC and RIG on
all those rest parts. In such setting, the user sequences which
are selected with a larger threshold T have longer history
to feed as “accumulation period”. By doing so, we aim to
verify whether our RNN model can maintain more robust
sequential information in longer sequences.
Figure 7 shows the results. Just as expected, it turns out
that our RNN model performs the best in all settings. Moreover, when the “accumulation period” gets longer, our RNN
model tends to achieve even more relative gain compared to
baseline models. This result validates the capability of RNN
to capture and accumulate sequential information, especially
for long sequences, and help further improve the accuracy of
click prediction.
Effect of RNN Unfolding Step
As described in the framework section, the unfolding structure plays an import role in
RNN training process with BPTT algorithm. Since unfolding can directly incorporate several previous samples, and
the depth of such explicit sequence modeling is determined
by the steps of unfolding, it is necessary to delve into the
effect of various RNN unfolding steps. This further analysis can help us better understand the property of the RNN
According to our experimental results, the prediction ac-
100 200 300 400 500
Sequence Length Threshold
Sequence Length Threshold
100 200 300 400 500
Figure 7: Performance with different history length T.
curacy surges along with the increasing unfolding steps at
the beginning. The best AUC and RIG can be achieved when
unfolding 3 steps, after which the performance drops. By
checking the error terms during the process of BPTT, we
discover that the backpropagated error vanishes after 3 steps
of unfolding, which explains why larger unfolding step is
detrimental.
With these observations, intuitively, our RNN based
framework can model sequential dependency in two ways:
short-span dependency by explicitly learning from current
input and several of its leading inputs through unfolding;
long-span dependency by implicitly learning from all previous input, accumulated or embedded in the weights of the recurrent part. Meanwhile, in sponsored search, user’s behavior is also affected by both the very recent events as explicit
factor and the long-run history as implicit (background) factor. This reveals the intrinsic reason why RNN works so well
for the sequential click prediction.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for click prediction based on Recurrent Neural Networks. Different from
traditional click prediction models, our method leverages the
temporal dependency in user’s behavior sequence through
the recurrent structure. A series of experiments show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art click prediction models
in various settings. In this future, we will continue this direction in several aspects: 1) The sequence is currently built on
user level. We will study different kinds of sequence building methods, e.g. by (user, ad) pair, (user, query) pair, advertiser, or even merge all users on the level of whole system. 2) We are going to deduce the meaning of dependency
learnt by RNN via deep understanding of RNN structure.
This may help up better utilize the property of the recurrent part. 3) Recently, some research work has been done on Deep Recurrent Neural Networks (DRNN) and shows good results. We plan to
study whether “deep” structure can also help in click prediction, together with the “recurrent” structure.