nature biotechnology volume 33 NUMBER 4 APRIL 2015
and then subdivides them into genomically
defined subsets, treating each subset with a
different targeted drug.
One looming question is whether to start
fresh or to form this huge cohort by building
from smaller medical study groups already in
place. “It’s often more efficient not to be saddled
with the old,” says workshop participant George
Yancopoulos, president and CSO of Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals in Tarrytown, New York, who
recommends dealing “prospectively” with the
“curating and cleaning” challenges that will be
needed when analyzing the
contents of forthcoming
NIH officials envision
a grand-scale data-gathering adventure aimed at
building the one-millionplus volunteer cohort. But the speed at which
genomics datasets are expanding and unresolved issues regarding participants’ consent
to their electronic medical records remain
major challenges. “We don’t know how to
design this cohort,” Collins adds.
One idea is to make volunteering easy
through use of social media software resembling Facebook. Another is to share the
­initiative’s design and development features
One million or more US citizens will be powering President Barack Obama’s Precision
Medicine initiative unveiled on January 20
during the State of the Union address. This
bold volunteer-driven move to collect and
link genotypic, phenotypic and lifestyle data,
including crowdsourcing and social media
tools, aims to accelerate biomedical discovery
with an initial focus on cancer. The patientparticipant cohort at the core of the initiative
will enable new approaches to prevention,
diagnosis and treatments tailored to individual patients. “It’s a new model for doing
medical research,” says National Institutes of
Health’s (NIH) director Francis Collins, who
spoke in February during a workshop held
to discuss the precision medicine approach.
President Obama is seeking an initial $215 million to launch the program,
$130 million to build a research cohort of
at least a million volunteers and $70 million
towards the narrower cancer-focused programs within the National Cancer Institute.
Another $10 million is earmarked for the
US Food and Drug Administration, and
the remainder to the Office of the National
Coordinator
Information
Technology, to enable the two agencies to
work on regulatory policies and bioinformatics capabilities.
This participant-empowered precision
medicine initiative is unprecedented, though it
builds on recommendations in a 2011 report
from the National Research Council (http://
www.nap.edu/catalog/13284/toward-precisionmedicine-building-a-knowledge-network-forbiomedical-research). The plan now is to take
two distinct approaches to finding personalized
treatments. The first recruits patients with all
types of cancer, then selects a targeted drug
based on the tumors’ genetic abnormalities. The
second recruits patients with one type of cancer
Obama catapults patient-empowered Precision Medicine
with volunteer participants, including data
management responsibilities and funding
decisions. If the initiative were to follow a
“crowdsourcing mentality to decide priorities,” says Anne Wojcicki, CEO of 23andMe in
Mountain View, California, with participants
owning, and thus controlling, their own data
from the outset, decisions about research protocols might move forward faster than with
conventional approaches, Wojcicki adds.
In a sense, the initiative launches where
genomics leaves off, and some have voiced
concerns that it starts
another data-driven race,
which could be heading in
many directions at once.
For now, plans for the
cohort at the core of the
proposed precision medicine initiative go to a subcommittee of the
Advisory Committee to the Director at NIH.
Perhaps a metaphor best describes the task
before that subcommittee. “What we’re doing
is different from architecture,” says workshop
participant Douglas Fridsma, president and
CEO of the American Medical Informatics
Association in Bethesda, Maryland. “It’s more
like city planning.”
Jeffrey L Fox Washington, DC
The President’s Precision Medicine Initiative aims to deliver genetics-based medical treatments.
Larry Downing/Reuters/Newscom
Mobile devices will accelerate medical research.
One idea is to make
volunteering easy
through use of social
media software
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.